Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Identity retention and sense of belonging : an examination of second generation Eritrean youth in Toronto
Semhar Zerat
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Race and Ethnicity Commons Recommended Citation
Zerat, Semhar, "Identity retention and sense of belonging : an examination of second generation Eritrean youth in Toronto" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 512.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

4- <J

A ,

,

IDENTITY RETENTION AND SENSE OF BELONGING: AN EXAMINATION OF SECOND GENERATION ERITREAN YOUTH IN TORONTO

by

Semhar Zerat, Hon. BA, University of Toronto, 2006

A Major Research Paper

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts

in the Program of Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009

© Semhar Zerat 2009

PB0WWY0F

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.
I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the
purpose of scholarly research.

IDENTITY AND SENSE OF BELONGING:

AN EXAMINATION OF SECOND GENERATION ERITREAN YOUTH IN TORONTO
Semhar Zerat

Master of Arts, 2009 Immigration and Settlement Studies
Ryerson University

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of
scholarly research.

ABSTRACT

This research examines identity perceptions of twelve Eritrean youth (aged 20 to 27) residing in Toronto, Canada. With the help of qualitative techniques, this research seeks to

investigate what it means to be Eritrean and Canadian as well as multiculturalism policy and how it all impacts the identity of Eritrean youth. The findings suggest an emphasis on primordial and
national Eritrean identity, while their Canadian identity is interpreted as a mindset and is embraced situationally. While youth accept a black identity, the results indicate the development

of a hyphenated Eritrean-Canadian identity with greater emphasis on the Eritrean identity.
Moreover, participants are critical of and view multiculturalism policy as ineffective in

promoting tangible results. Through an analysis of the debates in the existing literature on ethnic,
national and racialized identities, this research concludes that Eritrean youth develop a symbolic
identity towards being Eritrean and Canadian.

Key words:

Eritrea; identity; second generation; multiculturalism; race; ethnicity

in

Acknowledgments

This paper would not have been possible without the support of several individuals. First, I am grateful for the twelve participants who took the time to express their views on a wide variety of issues. Their participation provides critical insight and awareness into the Eritrean
immigration experience in Canada.

Table of Contents

Chapter 1: Introduction Research Problem..

.....1 1

Research Objective

....

4

Chapter Outline
Identity
Ethnic Identity

1'
:

4
6

I would like to express gratitude to my research supervisor Dr. Sutama Ghosh for the detailed feedback, insight and encouragement through each step of the research project. I would also like to thank Dr. Vappu Tyyska for her valuable advice and support throughout the academic year but
particularly for her feedback as a second reader.

Chapter 2: Literature Review

6
7
11

Nationhood and National Identity

Race and Racial Identity
Identity and Acculturation Through Migration....

13
17

I would also like to acknowledge CERIS - The Ontario Metropolis Centre, who supported my research through a Graduate Student Research Award as well as providing me with access to the
Permanent Resident Data System (PRDS).

Chapter 3: Eritrea: A History, an Identity and a Diaspora

20

History of Eritrea

20

Finally, I would like to thank my parents for always supporting me in every path I take.

Eritrea: It's People
Eritreans in Canada Chapter 4: Methodology
Qualitative and Quantitative Methodology

25
.....27 . 32
32

Sample and Recruitment

35

The Participants Positionality Limitations of the Study
Chapter 5: Findings: Acceptance and Belonging
Section 1: Nature and Characteristics of Eritrean Youth Identity

36 37 38
39
39

Section 2: Being Eritrean..../.
Section 3: Being Canadian

44
-52

Section 4: Discussion Chapter 6: Conclusion

60 67

Future Studies
Appendix 1: Key Informant Questions

69
71

Appendix 2: Focus Group Questions

72

Appendix 3: Survey Questions

74

References

77

IV

List of Figures

Chapter 1

Figure 3.1: Map of Eritrea
Figure 3.2: Number of Eritreans Landing in Canada (1980-2005).

20
28 30

Introduction

Figure 3.3: Eritrean Immigrants from 1980-2005 based on Permanent Resident Data System
(PRDS)

Canada is a country rich in immigration history. With the exception of the aboriginal
37

Figure 4.1: Demographic Profile of Participants

community, all members of Canada have arrived through migration at some point in their ancestral history. The tradition of immigration continues as Canada accepts approximately a
quarter of a million newcomers annually. In this respect, Canada may be described as an immigrant nation (Li, 2003). There are currently three main immigrant classes: economic, family
and refugee class.

Recent settlement trends indicate that immigrants gravitate towards large urban areas,

mainly in Toronto, Vancouver and Montreal. These three Census Metropolitan Areas (CMAs) account for a third of the country's population but attract nearly 70% of all recent immigrants to
Canada (Statistics Canada, 2008). Of the three CMAs, Toronto continues to be a large magnet for immigrants as a majority (68%) of Ontario's foreign born population resides in the City of Toronto (ElDakiky and Shields, 2009). Within this large diverse area, newcomers must negotiate their multiple identities and determine whether they should be fully expressed or suppressed.
Research Problem

Identity is frequently understood as a fluid production (Hall, 2003) evolving through

various socio-historical processes (Hier and Bolaria, 2006). Identity can encompass several
characteristics including gender, reljgio^^ elements

include ethnicity, nationality and "race"1. The final three elements continue to shape an
individual's identity and will thus be the focus of this paper as each identity enables a sense of
belonging and sameness among its members.

The terms "race", "black" and "white" are deliberately placed in quotation marks to signify the contentious
definitions.
VI

The proliferation of globalization and modernization may lead some to assume these identities would cease to play an active role. This assumption, however, fails to recognize the unbalanced power relations between groups which potentially lead towards fragmentation;

as a cultural bridge between their parents' way of living and Canadian expectations (Kobayashi,
2008). Given their generational location they must negotiate between a Canadian and the various
alternative identities within a multicultural society.

causing these identity markers to resist the pressures of modernization (Bariagaber, 1998) and
shape modern societies (Chiu, 2003). Through increased levels of migration ethnic, national and racial divisions are being transplanted into receiving countries with relevant consequences as these identities begin to develop new priorities (Berns McGown, 1999). An increasing body of literature is beginning to explore the importance of identity. Increased awareness of identity behaviours and attitudes allows receiving countries to comprehend their capability in integrating immigrants. Moreover, it allows for an understanding

The existing literature provides an extensive amount of studies measuring identity among
various immigrant groups and to lesser extent members of the second generation. When examining the African community in particular there are even fewer pieces of literature (Tettey and Puplampu, 2006) despite settling in Canada for several centuries. Therefore, this paper attempts to fill the gap in second generation identity on the "black^^mmuni^ by focusing on
identity among Erj

Based on the most recent census, there are approximately 10,000 Canadian residents of
Eritrean descent of which slightly over half reside in Toronto (Statistics Canada, 2006). Eritreans are relatively new to Canada as most began to arrive in the 1980s (Sorenson, 1990; Magocsi, 1999; Hassan, 2008). Overall, a limited literature examines the experiences of Eritreans

of belonging and which may facilitate social cohesion2. While the two terms are distinct they can
effectively be measured through an examination of identity. Understandin^jdentity and
belonging is valuable as it is an inte^rjd^ojriponent ofthe integratiorrgrqcess.

It is important and relevant to expand this discussion to include members of subsequent

in the diaspora. Most tends to focus on their strong transnational capabilities (Al-Ali, et al 2001; Bernal, 2004; Hepner, 2008). Specifically, in the Canadian context, Sorenson (1990; 1991) as
well as Matsuoka and Sorenson (1999; 2001; 2005) provide important insight into the experiences of newly arriving Eritreans participating in long-distance nationalism and identity while attempting to integrate into Canadian society. Literature on Eritreans in the diaspora relies heavily on the experiences of first generation

generations, particularly for one and a half3 as well as second generation4 immigrants. First, it
provides an understanding of the long term effects of migration not as a static event experienced solely by initial immigrants but as acquiring a relevant impact on subsequent generations.

Second, it brings insight into the second generation's ability to incorporate into the dominant society. Since the one and half and second generations are socialized in Canada it is assumed that their identity reflects the dominant views. Rather these generations can be understood as acting

immigrants. Few studies examine second generation youth in any capacity5. Specifically,
experiences of retention of identity among second generation Eritrean youth in Toronto - a city

2 Belonging refers to an affective sense of "homeness"; social cohesion promotes egalitarianism through cultural
sameness and institutional structures (Hedetoft, 2007).

4 Refers to children of first generation immigrants. The term is controversial for some scholars (Ali, 2008;
Kobayashi, 2008; Sykes, 2008) as it assumes a difference from the native born population despite being born in
Canada.

J Refers to individuals who are not born in Canada but arrived at a young age.

5 Notable exceptions include: Andall (2002) who examines citizenship and belonging among youth of various
African descent in Milan, Italy. A draft paper by Conrad (2006) uniquely outlines the experience of EritreanGerman youth as they travel through Eritrea. Meanwhile, in the Canadian context Hassan (2008) examines the
educational and labour market integration of second generation Eritrean youth.

with the largest number of Eritreans in Canada - is yet to be examined. By concentrating on this

comprehending the broader Eritrean experience allows for a framework in gaining insight to the findings. The fourth chapter presents the merth^dologyj^ It provides a

topic in the Canadian context the existing findings on identity by Matsuoka and Sorenson (2001)
can be updated and expanded.
Research Objective

rationale for selecting a mixed-method approach and outlines a synopsis of the key characteristics of the participants. Findings regarding the level of acceptance and belonging are presented and discussed in the fifth chapter. This chapter demonstrates the characteristics of an Eritrean and Canadian identity as well as how they interact. It also engages with multiculturalism
policy and its impact on identity. The paper concludes with a summary of the main findings and a discussion of opportunities for future research.

The key objectives of this study are to determine what it means to be Eritrean in Canada as well as how Eritrean identity is constructed among the second generation. Specifically, this

paper seeks to determin£Jfy^uAjnamtain their Eritrean identity or adopt a Canadian culture and

bdiaviour. The answer to these questions may bring insight into the characteristics of an Eritrean
identity in the post-independence period in Toronto. Moreover, it assists in determining if
Canada is truly an inclusive society in which its citizens can freely choose their identity. To assess identity this study will measure both its behavioural and affective attributes. Behavioural manners are determined through activities such as ties with the community and

language acquisition. While, affective characteristics of identity are measured by understanding

the attitudes of what it means to be Eritrean and Canadian. Conducting the study in Toronto is
well suited for this research as it is where most Canadians of Eritrean descent are located. As

well, since Toronto is one of Canada's most multicultural cities it provides insight into how
Entrcanjd^ntity can be r£tained in a mujt^-ejM^andmulti-cultural atmosphere.
Chapter Outline

This research paper begins with an outline of the current literature on the understanding

of ethnic, national and racialized identities. It presents debates of each form of identity. From this it will specifically discuss the history, migration and diasporic identities of Eritreans. The aim of
this chapter is to provide context of the Eritrean experience and outline a demographic profile of Eritreans in Canada. While the focus of this research is on secwid^generation youth,

Chapter 2
Literature Review

is also important to comprehend its social and historical context. Despite its complexity identity
remains an important discussion topic as it allows for greater knowledge in the process of
becoming (Hier and Bolaria, 2006).

This chapter begins with a brief discussion of identity in general. The aim is to present

the current literature on ethnic, national and racialized identities. Each of these forms of identity is fundamental in the development of an Eritrean identity among youth in Toronto. This chapter
concludes with a brief discussion of how identity ma^jshifH^

The negotiation of identity is frequently understood as an individual task however there
are also collective identities which develop out of a shared and rooted experience. These

collective identities may become powerful especially when members seek to realize themselves
in a political form. In this respect, the concept of collective identity is not only an opportunity to share a common experience but has transpired into an object of political thinking (Gilroy, 2007). While there are several points in which collective identities may be established this paper will
examine ethnic, national and racialized identities.
Ethnic Identity

based on the assimilation, segmented assimilation and acculturation model.
Identity

Identity is a complex term frequently used in academic literature and everyday

conversations. Generally speaking it provides a sense of self and attempts to describe the core

elements of an individual. Hall (2003) states thatjdenjfty^hould be understood as a 'production'
whjchi&xon^^^^

The term 'ethnic' derives from two Greek words. The first word 'ethnos' describes a number of people living together. The second word 'ethnikos' refers to people 'who are not like us' such as pagans and heathens (Isajiw, 1999 p. 17). As a collective identity, an ethnic group can be defined as a group of individuals bonded with a distinct culture and a shared sense of peoplehood based on presumed shared sociocultural experience, ancestry, history and/or similar physical characteristics (Driedger, 2003; Isajiw, 1999). The inclusion of a racial element in

Identity markers can, among other characteristics include a person's "race", ethnicity,

nationality, class, gender, and/or sexual orientation. These categories are not independent variables rather they interact with each other to shape an individual's overall identity. Since

identities can be understood as situational and may vary over time, they are often described as

fluid and socially constructed. In this respect, the fluid nature of social identities may cause
individuals to negotiate and carry several identities. In other words, identities do not exist independently of time, place or circumstances but is a socio-historical construction (Hier and Bolaria, 2006). In addition, identity can be shaped by the marketplace, cultural industries and local institutions (Gilroy, 2007). Finally, through migration individuals' identities become

sharing certain physical characteristics is a concept developed in the 19th century (Eriksen,
2005). In turn, this has caused difficulties in understanding ethnicity as it is often used as a euphemism for "race" (Ratcliffe, 2004). Ethnicity provides individuals with a sense of identity and belonging. According to

increasingly complex. For instance, dia^poric identities are constantly reproducing themselves
through transformation and difference (Hall, 2003). Therefore in order to understand identities it

Driedger (2003) ethnic identity occurs when an individual believes s/he has a common ancestry

with a particular group based on their shared characteristics and an assumption of difference
from others.

belief of its existence is critical (Allahar, 2006). Overall, primordial elements of identity can be understood as an initial and foundational aspect of ethnic identity. In turn, it allows individuals to gain awareness of their ethnicity and develop a sense of belonging. A key criticism of
primordialism is its^inabilityJtaincorDorate thejrole of individuals and societies in developing an
iu, 2003).

Through recent large movements of people and the rise of globalization one may assume the disappearance of ethnic identities. The belief is that global interaction leads to integration and
a decreased salience of difference. Nonetheless ethnicity continues to play a role in mobilizing

groups. This is evident through diasporic communities which disrupt the fundamental power of territory to determine identity. In other words, diasporas break the link between location, place

The simplistic form of primordialism steers the discussion towards a symbolic form of
identity (Chiu, 2003). Under this conception, ethnic identity is associated solely for the purposes

and consciousness (Gilroy, 2007). Yet despite these assumptions ethnic identity has continued
through the growth of migration and globalization. In order to determine why ethnic identity
persist it is first important to understand how it develops.
Ethnic Identity Formation

of identifying with a particular ethnicity while lacking formal or informal participation in ethnic organizations (Eid, 2007). This form of ethnic identity is frequently observed in individuals who are acculturated and assimilated into the dominant culture (Isajiw, 1993) in receiving countries.
In this sense, when discussing the identity of second generation, symbolic identity is a relevant. Moreover, it also illustrates a degree of choice in selecting certain aspects of an ethnic identity.

Ethnic identity is a topic of great discussion in the literature, yet there is a lack of
consensus on how it is formed. At a broad level, there are two main debates. First, theorists view

The second set of theories continues to fill the inability of primordialism in examining the

^thnkidentity as ascribed and stable, while others describe it as fluid and determined by

role of the individual. The pojst^sjxuxluxali^^
approaches each follow this approach. First, the post-structuralist perspective argues against the

individuals. The following discussion outlines key arguments and criticisms of both perspectives.
Primordial theorists are key proponents of the ascribed element of ethnicity. For

perception that ethnic communities are unified, homogenous and stable. Rather ethnic identity is understood as developing from a "series of choices, decisions, creative transformation and adaptation" (Eid, 2007, p. 19) established by the individual. With the ability to recognize the
----.--j

primoridialists, also referred to as essentialists, ethnic identity is credited at birth. Specifically, it is a stable as well as fixed entity established and inherited from ancestors who share a common
history and descent (Chiu, 2003; Isajiw, 1993; Matsuoka & Sorenson, 2001). Given its assumed innate nature, primordial attachment can be understood as natural, thus not requiring social

adaptive nature of ethnic identity, the post-structuralist perspective does not account for the networks and material gains to be obtained from strong links within an ethnic group.
Expanding from the limitations of the post-structuralist argument, instrumentalists

interaction to acquire these attributes. Despite the final postulation primordial attachment can be
socially constructed through the people, places and things that surround an individual. Therefore, it can be argued that the existence of blood ties is irrelevant to an ethnic identity, however the

interpret ethnic identity as a vehicle through which political, economic and social materials can be acquired. The achievement of these resources is only established through affiliation with the

ethnic group. In other words, an ejhmcjdejni^^ individual. In this perspective, identity is shaped by the position of one's group in the socioeconomic power structure. Ethnicity is also interpreted through a strategic lens, in which it is manipulated for personal gain while neglecting the social and emotional attachments (Chiu,
2003). In turn, this illuminates the structural constraints in society (Eid, 2007). The instrumentalist perspective is somewhat similar to the epiphenomenon approach. In this perspective, ethnicity is created or maintained due to an uneven economy or a product of

are more fluid in nature. Nonetheless, each perspective offers a unique and focused analysis while simultaneously neglecting other elements of identity. It seems there is no comprehensive
widely accepted perspective which encompasses several elements of ethnic identity. Rather when

speaking of identity one may use several perspectives to analyze identity among a particular
group.

Nationhood and National Identity

The ability for ethmxnt^/^^

together and realize itself in a political form

economic exploitation (Isajiw, 1993). This originally derives from a Marxist perspective which
argues that ethnicity as well as "race" is a by product of class relations (Isajiw, 1999). While this approach tends to focus on the structural and group aspects of identity it is important to
understand as it plays a role in the historical development of an Eritrean identity. Constructionist theory is the final perspective used in defining ethnic identity. Under this

can allow for the establishment ofa nation^^orjiatira^tate. According to Jackson and Penrose
(1994) through the course of history there have been three main methods of interpreting the term nation. Its initial usage somewhat follows an understanding of ethnicity. In this respect, nation is understood as a cultural entity defined by attributes such as language, religion, customs, traditions and occasionally used as a euphemism for "race". It later went on to describe 'a

approach identity is negotiated and constructed through daily activities and interactions by individuals (Isajiw, 1993). In this sense, ettoicjdentity is viewed as fluid (Sorenson, 1991) and

people', as a set of natural units of humanity. In the second understanding nation is signified as a political entity embodied in a state. In this sense, culture plays a role but is subordinate to the state. Finally, nation is often used to define a recognizable territory and used as a synonym for country. The various usages of the term nation illustrate its constructionist element as the
definition has shifted. A nation is not simply a political entity but also produces a system of cultural representation (Hall, 2006). National cultures provide the ability to construct identities which in turn define the components of the nation. These cultural representations include images,

cailtingen^ugon m^h^e^fectorsjiicluding location,^PY^o^r^ac^n^Ji^c^j^iQd^s well as
gen£radojiSm(Cliiu, 2003). Thus, ethnicity becomes a multi-dimensional concept. Given the fluid nature, ethnic boundaries are maintained when individuals maximize their interactions within

their ethnic group and minimize relations with outside groups. Critics of constructionist theory argue the flexible nature renders difficulty in developing a systematic understanding of the
identity (Chiu, 2003).

The above stated formations of identity provide a contextualization of group experience. Overall, perspectives regarding ethnic identity formation present identity from varying vantage points. These perspectives include an ascribed innate interpretation while other interpretations

symbols, and narratives which being to represent a shared experience regardless of if there are
multiple ethnic groups within a country. Therefore a nation has an assumption of a foundational myth and long-lasting tradition (Hall, 2006).

10

Nations and national identity share three main similarities with ethnic identity. First, the core elements of national identity are frequently represented as primordial, meaning natural and
inherited. Moreover, it is understood as essential to the national character, as well as pure and original. Despite the primordial nature, the definition presented by Jackson and Penrose (1994) indicates that national identity has the ability to transform over time is based on historical events. Second, national identity offers membership and recognition within the national culture (Hall,
2006). Lastly, national identities are formed in relation to 'others' and assume that others are not

ethnic groups and has the ability to capture the identities of individuals within the various ethnic
groups. This is established through a common culture, language or experience. Yet even in this situation Eriksen (2005) acknowledges primordial values are capable of mobilizing its members and shifting attention away from the supra-ethnic community as there is a shared foundational
myth which provides a sense of belonging

The shift towards increased global interaction would assume an increase in shared identities and fewer cultural distinctions. Yet similar to ethnic identity, nationalism continues to
play an impact in identity.
"Race" and Racial Identity

part of the nation. With this, nationalists argue that political geographical boundaries should be
enclosed within cultural boundaries. This final point is unique from ethnic groups who do not necessitate territorial acquisition (Eriksen, 2005). Therefore, while a nation is frequently.,based
ion, it is also a symbolic community which has the power to develop a

This section outlines a definition of "race", blackness and a racialized identity in the context of migration. The above discussion of ethnic and national identity simply provides a

sense of identity and allegiance (Hall, 2006). Overall, each element of national identity brings

broad understanding of identity. "Race" is as equally important to discuss as it is an alternative designation of difference placed on individuals particularly as they migrate. Through migration, immigrant minorities may lose their ethnic or national identity and reconstruct it as "race"
(Brown and Rong, 2002). "Race" is a broader category which encompasses a multitude of ethnic
groups and nationalities. Despite its expansive interpretation, "race" is difficult to clearly define

forth a sense of belonging and community. Given the emotions of pride and belonging espoused
towards an individual's nation, national identity can have a profound and powerful effect. Benedict Anderson (1991) conceives of a nation as an imagined community. For

Anderson (1991), the nation is territorially limited, sovereign and with a sense of community

based on camaraderie and fraternity. This sense of community is imagined because its members will never know everyone in their community however they understand they belong to the same
group of people. Thus, while a nation is culturally varied it attempts to unify all people, whereas,

as it has had various designations throughout history. Given these historical shifts "race", similar
to ethnicity and nation, can be understood as socially constructed. Nevertheless, many continue
to use "race" to imply biological differences based on visible physical differences such as skin
colour, facial features and hair texture (Waters, 1999).
Blackness

ethnicil^

within an area (Hall, 2006).

In nations with multiple ethnic groups, a shared ethnicity is not necessary to build

nationhood rather there is a supra-ethnic community which develops above existing ethnic
groups (Eriksen, 2005). In these situations, the supra-ethnic community is distinct from all other

To gain a greater appreciation of "black" identity it is important to comprehend blackness and its roots. The term "black" and the concept of blackness emerged in part due to the forced

12

13

migration of West Africans to the newly discovered lands in the Americas. Typically, "blacks" in their native land define themselves based on their shared common history and ancestry, in other
words ethnicity, not "race". This is due to the alternate spectrum upon which "race" is classified.
Thus, it is through mjgratiojiihaiWac^^ part, becomes a racial category, which is not

Racial Identity Formation

Through the process of migration, racialized immigrants and subsequent generations must decide to accept or reject racial categories promoted by receiving countries. When
accepting racial categories immigrants may feel comforted and drawn towards members of the same racial group (Waters, 1999). This sense of belonging derives from an establishment of 'otherness' which creates a feeling of togetherness and a perception of a common threat or
injustice (Dei and James, 1998). Alternatively, communities have the ability to create their own

limited to a particular national, cultural or linguistic border. Through migration, in this environment, individuals of African descent must negotiate between the dominant and minority
cultures. Specifically, African migrants must navigate their identity between an emphasis on

group identity (hypercollective) and a hyper-individual identity, in which emphasis is placed on
the self (Wright, 2004). Consequently through blackness, indiyjdujils_ai£_j^^

racial categories. In either scenario, identifying with a particular label requires individuals to internally examine personal meanings and adopt those meanings into their identity. Choosing a group or label consists of selecting qualities which arej^ejceiy^dioj)^ social and poJilicaLenvironment. Consequently, in developing a racial identity, individuals must
continuajyh^j^nx^^ (Thompson and Carter, 1997).

ethnic differences whilej^ojitinui^^

commojiality,. Yet, in

practice the differences within the "black" community are overlooked by the Western dominant society and an emphasis is placed solely on physical differences. Since "race" is not integral in defining one's social identity in Africa, with the exception of South Africa (Ibrahim, 2004), blackness is a concept that has generally been taken up in discourses in the Western world. This argument limits the contributions of "black" immigrants and therefore does not expand the
experiences and interpretations within blackness.

According to Thompson and Carter (1997) when developing a racial identity, "blacks" in undergo four steps beginning with pre-encounter status and ending with internationalization. In the first phase, "blacks" contend their "race" and culture as inferior to their white counterparts.

The second phase in racial identity formation develops when members of the pre-encounter stage
recognize their inability to gain full status within the white society. Through the ejioojinter phase,

For Ibrahim (2004), blackness is not a category based solely on physical ascriptions such

as skin colour or hair texture. Rather it is a set of norms and narratives preformed daily. Thus
similar to gender, "race" is not a category in which an individual is automatically suited in,

the individual seeks to ^i^SR^^^^lJ^^^^^^ allows them to enter into the immersion
category. In this phase the individual attempts to immers^within the discourse of blackness. Furthermore, in the complete opposite of the pre-encounter individuals, members in this stage,

instead it is a performed identity and becomes a choice. What Ibrahim (2004) fails to clearly
outline is that individuals do not always have a choice to perform an identity.

idealize "blacks" and Africans while rejecting the culture of whites. Lastly, the internalization phase is reached when an individual is able to merge their fully developed understanding of blackness into their repertoire of being.

14

15

The formulation of racial identity through various phases indicates its fluid nature and
ability to shift based on interactions with the dominant and "black" community. The above pattern of racial identity however, assumes a straight line approach where the final, presumably positive objective, is to internalize "black" culture into an individual identity. The authors fail to
outline the performative elements consisting within a^'black" identity. Nor do they specify the implications of attaining or rejecting the final phase of intemalization. To balance the discussion of racial identity formation, an interpretation of the acceptance of racial labels can provide
greater insight into the current identity of "blacks".

imposed "black" label placed upon individuals. The decision of "blacks" to focus on their national or ethnic heritage rather than a racial identity may be causje^by_^de^ij^Jo_gajn upward
social mobility which ijy^ejxej^d^ and Lalonde, 2000).

The current literature provides a substantial amount of information to understand various forms of identities. While the focus of the paper is not to present all aspects of identity, it has
outlined elements of ethnic, national and racial identities. A key recurring theme through these

perspectives is the fluid nature of identity and its ability to provide a sense of belonging. **
Identity and Acculturation through Migration

The primary method upon which immigrants can challenge the binary "black/white" illustration of "race" is to refuse its construction (Merenstein, 2008). In Cana^^bl^ks^Jiay£a
greater opportunity to be ^^led^jtto^tiinic^LmtiondmpimciiaXcategories especially for those who reside in Canada for ten generations or less (Boatswain and Lalonde, 2000). A desire to

Through the process of migration levels of ethnic, national and racial identities begin to
shift based on various priorities. While individuals may hold a strong ethnic identity in their
home country, attachment may be altered in receiving countries. In these countries the process of

distance oneself from the "black" label arises from a perceived distinction immigrants have from
"black" Americans. The descendants of slaves are interpreted as different because certain immigrants view them as not taking advantage of opportunities and the lack of a common culture
(Waters, 1999). For immigrants these differences become an adequate basis for distancing from

developing an identity is understood under the main models of assimilation, segmented
assimilation and Berry's (2006) acculturation model. The first and longest standing theoretical approach has been the assimilation model (Gordon, 1964). In general terms, assimilation is defined as a

"black" Americans. In turn, "black" immigrants receive a hostile reception from "black" Americans who are afraid they will take away their employment opportunities (Waters, 1999). Nonetheless, some "black" immigrants sympathize with the experiences of "black" Americans
and admire the persistence of civil rights leaders (Brown and Rong, 2002). In the short term the repudiation of the "black" label allows immigrants to be comforted

another social grpup to the extent that an individual or group no longer has the characteristics which identify him or her with their previous culture. For Gordon (1964) assimilation occurs
over time and through^seven key phases. In this specific order, the phases of assimilation are: cultural or behavioral, structural, marital, identificational, attitude receptional, behaviour receptional and civic assimilation. Briefly, cultural assimilation involves the change of cultural patterns to mimic the attributes of receiving countries. The second phase, structural assimilation, occurs through an individual's involvement in clubs and institutions of the receiving country.

with their national or ethnic identity. However the term "black" conceals the similarities among it members and the existence of racial discrimination. Moreover, it does not reconcile the

16

17

The third phase involves intermarriage which then leads to a sense of peoplehood with the
members of the receiving country. The final three phases involve the elimination of prejudice, discrimination and power conflict. Through these phases an individuals becomes increasingly
acculturated with the dominate society. Unique to the constant acculturation model, both the first
and second generation undergo upward mobility at an equal pace (Eid, 2007).

maintenance or interaction with the dominant groups. Each of these strategies becomes associated at the larger society level with the melting pot, segregation, multiculturalism and
exclusionary policies respectively (Berry et al., 2006).

From each of these theories we are able to understand how identity is formed and

influenced. Acculturation_ is not a process that rapidly occurs in the receiving society; instead it is
a process which is multifaceted, variable and assists in the development of an identity.

Critics of this straight line form of assimilation argue that integration into a society can

be segnented (Zhou, 1997), particujarij^fortiie^econd generation. According to Zhou (1997) the
path of assimilation for second generation immigrants is dependent on, the human and financial
capital of their parents, the social condition of their family as well as their cultural patterns. Moreover, Zhou (1997) is aware that the family or ethnic community plays an importantrale in
ty. Segmented assimilation also recognizes the unequal

Interestingly for second generation youth, as presented by Zhou (1997) the straight line

assimilation model is not directly applicable. As an alternative, youth fuse selected elements of their ethnic and receiving society's culture to develop a novel identity. An understanding of
identity formation and acculturation will assist situating the case of Eritrea and provide context
to the study of second generation youth.

possibilities offered to various immigrant groups. In turn, these opportunities limit the integration
process and may move away from Gordon's (1964) straight line model.

Recently the discussion regarding the concept of assimilation has shifted towards a

dynamic and multi-faceted understanding of the adaptation process of immigrants particularly
among members of the second generation. For Berry et al. (2006), acculturation is described as

"the process of cultural and psychological change that follows intercultural contact" (p. 305) and is comprised of four strategies. The first acculturation strategy is the assimilation approach. Similar to assimilation it refers to a relinquishing of ethno-racial identity and an incorporation of

the dominate culture. Alternatively, the second strategy is described as separation and involves, retaining cultural identity while avoiding interaction with others. The third strategy, integration is officially adopted in Canada and occurs through the maintenance of one's original culture and
the involvement with the larger society. Lastly, marginalization arises when there is no cultural

18

19

Chapter 3

The Eritrean state was formally established in 1993 following a thirty year armed

Eritrea and Eritreans: History, Migration, and Diasporic Identities In the previous chapter the debates in the literature regarding ethnicity, nationalism and

struggle of independence from Ethiopia. Prior to Ethiopian rule, between the 16th and the 19th
centuries Eritrea was occupied by several foreign powers particularly along the Red Sea
coastline. Occupiers include the Turkish Ottoman Empire, the Egyptians, and the Italians. Italian dominance originated in 1869 when an Italian priest, Giuseppe Sapeto purchased the port of Assab from a sultan. Italy formally consolidated its rule as a result of an agreement with the

"race" were broadly illustrated in the context of identity. The aim of this chapter is to develop an
awareness of the context in which Eritrean youths negotiate their identity in the Toronto CMA.

Towards this goal, first, a brief history of Eritrea is outlined. This includes a discussion on the

development of Eritrean identity as a national identity. Second, information is presented of the
pattern of Eritrean outmigration and the development of the Eritrean diaspora, both globally and

Ethiopian Emperor Menelik II (Abbay, 1998; Wrong, 2005)7. During I|alian~CQkmLzatk)n (from
1890 to 1941), while economically Eritrea began to industrialize, socially it became segregated
through the imposition of strict racial laws (Wrong, 2005). These were key issues that led
Q

particularly in Canada. Finally, a demographic profile of Eritreans in Canada is created, based
on two secondary data sources: the 2006 Canadian census data and records from the Permanent

Eritreans to develop a distinct identity. Although with the end of the Second World War a number of African states were able to gain self-determination, Eritrea did not gain independence during this phase. In its place Eritrea was under British administration until 1952 when the federation with Ethiopia was implemented. In Article 3 of the United Nation's Resolution 390A(V) passed in December 1950, it indicates that "Eritrea shall constitute an autonomous unit federated with Ethiopia under the sovereignty of the Ethiopian crown" (as cited in Abbay, 1998 p.56). Even though the United Nation's federation agreement ensures Eritreans retain a significant level of autonomy, in 1961 Ethiopia violated the
terms of the federation and annexed Eritrea. The injdependence^ Initially Eritreans were led by the Eritrean Liberation Front (ELF), however, in 1971 a splinter group entitled the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) emerged. While

Resident Data System (PRDS)6.
History of Eritrea

An awareness of Eritrean political history is critical towards understanding how Eritrean

identity has emerged as a national identity over time. Eritrea - a country of 5.6 million people
(CIA Factbook, 2009), is located along the coast of the Red Sea in the Horn of Africa and is one
nations.

Figure 3.1: Map of Eritrea

Source: BBC News on the Web, (2007, August 13). US moves to shut Eritrean mission. Retrieved August 6, 2009, from http://news.bbc.co.Uk/2/hi/africa/6944846.stm

for all immigrants who arrived between 1980 and2QQSJ)ata was obtained from CERIS - Thepntario Metropolis
20

6 The dataset was formerly named Landed Immigrant Data System (LIDS). It contains landing record information

7 The new colony was named "Eritrea" deriving from the Latin term "Mare Erythraeum" meaning Red Sea (Abbay, 8 This was most prominent during Fascist rulej^ost-1935) and included the physical and social distance of the two
racial groups. For instance, radaJixin^j^dj^^
1998).

21

objectives of both groups were to create an independent nation, the EPLF's additional goal was to transform Entreans socially and create a new civil society (Hepner, 2003)JnJ^91_after tne
death of an estimated 65,000 EPLF fighters (Bernal, 2004) and the displacement of thousands of

Ethiopia share a common identity based on a joint history and culture between the TigrayTigrinya groups neglects all other ethnic groups in both states and the strong political ties that

each group has towards their state.
The Eritrean identity has been mainly established on a shared historical oppression (Sorenson, 1990; Tronvoll, 1999) experienced bjjll^mn££tMcjmups. For Eritreans, historical oppression derives predominantly from Italian colonization (Tronvoll, 1999; Woldemikael,
2005). The impact of Italian colonization is experienced in three ways. First, Italian colonizers

Eritreans, Eritrea was victorious in^^)mgjnd^i£ndm^^o^"^^ov^' A referendum on May
24, 1993 formalized independence and allowed Eritreans to develop a real sense of nationhood.
The Historical Development ofan Eritrean Identity

Although the brief historical overview indicates that Eritreans have been under the rule of foreign and neighbouring powers for several decades, it is the political struggle of Eritreans to

developed a rg^isjjdej^^^

(Eritreans)

gain independence which marks the foundation of Eritrean identity. Eritreans, in Eritrea and abroad, have struggled to defend their distinct identity to the international community. Abbay
(1998) indicates that Eritreans, particularly those from the highland region (Kebessa) share a

and those who were not (Ethiopians) (Tronvoll, 1999). More specifically, Italian colonialists
distinctively referred to those within their colony as "Eritreans" while Ethiopians were referred to as "Natives" (Ogbagzy, 1999). Second, colonization enabled Eritrea to experience strong levels of economic growth incomparable with their southern neighbour. An emphasis on economic differentiation follows the epiphenomenon perspective of ethnic identity formation described earlier. Lastly, 50,000 Eritreans fought alongside Italians in an attempt to expand

common history, culture, political economy, language and an acceptance of intermarriage with

those from the Ethiopian province of Tigray. Through a historical examination of Eritrean as well as Ethiopian politics and social behaviours, Abbay (1998) concludes that the Eritrean identity is imagined and invented through nationalism. This parallels Benedict Anderson's
(1991) perspective of a nation which is an "imagined political community.-andiniagined as

colonial domination into Ethiopia (Tronvoll, 1999). The battle and bloodshed further solidified
an Eritrean identity and its uniqueness from Ethiopia. Thus, Italian colonization fajd1j1^i£d_an

both i^SXS^lj^^i^^^RiMIS^M^ (P-6).
Abbay's (1998) conclusion is based on the lack of primordialJiistory among Eritreans
particularly between Muslims and Christians. The difficulty with Abbay's (1998) argument is that it primarily focuses on examining two groups, the Tigrayan in Ethiopia and the Tigrinya in Eritrea. While it may be argued that both groups share a common language and culture, the Tigrayan group is only one out of several in Ethiopia (Matsuoka and Sorenson, 2001) while in
Eritrea there are an additional eight ethnic groups. Therefore, the argument that Eritrea and

^^

more developed and therefore distinct from the

Ethiopian Empire. Aware of these elements of historical distinction based on territorial
development, liberation leaders used this to form a basis for self-determination (Tronvoll, 1999). The Ethiopian annexation entailed a denial of the Eritrean flag, languages and federation powers. Additionally, Eritreans faced derogatory statements and discrimination in the labour market by the Amhara Ethiopian ethnic group (Abbay, 1998). These examples illustrate the inability to openly express an Eritrean identity. Nevertheless, a positive aspect of the constant

22

23

external denial and repression of Eritrean identity is its capacity in allowing Eritreans to further
strengthen their identity (Soresnson, 1990).

create a primordialist, essentialist and naturalized identity (Woldemikael, 2005). Despite the observed pride, Woldemikael (2005) argues that Eritrea is continuing to search for its identity
and attempting to justify its independence.
Eritrea: It's People

During the struggle for independence the EPLF was critically aware of the cultural, linguistic and religious differences within Eritrea and thus discouraged these distinctions as a basis for creating social, political or economic disruptions. Instead the establishment of new symbols and a focus on the nation were promoted as identification markers (Sorenson, 1990). In order to further conceive an Eritrean identity several steps were taken to indicate inclusivity

Eritrea is a multicultural state which is home to nine official ethnic groups and two dominant religions. Eritrea's diversity arises from a combination of indigenous and migrant populations as well as a blending of people. This leads some scholars to posit that Eritreans have an ethnic and racial identity unique from other groups in sub-Saharan Africa (Woldemikael,
2005).

within Eritrea. For instance, a prominent Christian liberation leader, Wolde-ab Woldemariam shared a meal with a Muslim (Abbay, 1998), crafts from various ethnic groups were jointly celebrated, radio messages were conducted in all languages and cultural shows from all ethnic
groups were preformed (Sorenson, 1990). Through these efforts the EPLF's mission was to

Eritrea's nine ethnic groups each carry their own distinct culture and language. The largest group, Tigrinya^encompasses 50%ofthepo£uJ_a^n. Meanwhile, the second largest ethnic group, JTigre^comprises of 30% of the population. The remaining 20% consist of Saho, Afar, Beja/Hedarib, Bilen, Kunama, Nara, and Rashida groups (CIA Factbook, 2009;

create ajan-ethnic_nationalist movement which Ymrmrj^&du^rn^^SQrQj^ces (Sorenson, 1990,
p.301). This parallels Eriksen's (2005) discussion of a supra-ethnic group. The Eritrean state

itself occasionally acts as the supreme ethnic group in the country, with its own symbols and cultural representations. Thus, the supremacy of the nation and its proceeding national identity
may be at the core of Eritrean identity. Through a discussion of identity creation, Eritreans recognize that their national identity is shaped by history and evolved out of repression,

Woldemikael, 2005). The final three ethnic groups illustrate Eritrea's oldest and newest

inhabitants. The Rashida are Arab migrants who arrived in the 19th century. Meanwhile both the
Kunama and Nara have settled in Eritrea for several centuries. Each of these groups are considered at the periphery of Eritrean society with the Rashida having distinct appearances and cultural goods at one end of the spectrum while the Kunama and Nara are typically described as having more 'African' features (Woldemikael, 2005). The remaining ethnic groups remain in
between this continuum.
There are two main religions in Eritrea: Christian^ are

resistance and exile rather than a pre-existing identity (Matsuoka and Sorenson, 2001). Despite the historical emphasis, Eritreans are united through their struggle and are proud to have gained
independence in spite of the obstacles.

Following independence Eritreans continue to emphasize their uniqueness from other

African nations based on their perceived advanced state and_dtagni^.?raas well as the cleanliness and crimeie^mess-e^^ By emphasizing on its uniqueness, Eritreans are seeking to

equally dryjdecyun^

the various linguistic groups however, a

majority of the Tigrinya and fragments of the Bilen and Kunama are Christians while the

24

25

remaining population follows Islam. More specifically, Tigrinya speaking Eritreans who practice Islam are commonly referred to as Jeberti. It is important to understand these divisions among
Eritreans as religion almost functions as a subnational ethnicity seeing that the two religious identities live socially separate and intermarriage is unusual (Woldemikael, 2005). Despite the internal cultural, linguistic and religious diversity, Eritreans are able to live together in relative harmony. This has been facilitated by the government's insistence of se£ulanzaji^^
unity may be understood through a fervent Eritrean identity.
The Formation ofan Eritrean Diaspora

educational credentials to assist Eritrean citizens upon their return and become ambassadors for
the Eritrean cause (Arnoe, 2008; Koser, 2003).

In the third phase, there are two distinct subgroups of migrants-^Eritrean; youth who seek

t0 ei!£aE?J£mtary seryjcjs 1^

Many migrants in

this group also carry opposing political opinions to the current government (Arnoe, 2008). Little
is known about the migration experience of this most recent group of emigrants.

The rationale of

It is difficult to determine the precise number of Eritreans who settled in the diaspora

during these three phases of emigration. Some of the difficulties arise from the categorization of
Eritrean migrants as Ethiopians prior to 1993 by both receiving countries and the United Nations.
However, estimations can be made from the voter registration documents at the 1993 referendum on independence. Approximately 85,000 votes were cast by Eritreans abroad. The most

A segment of Eritrea's inhabitants historically settled in Eritrea after migrating from

various parts of Africa and the Middle East. Simultaneously, Eritrea's recent conflicts have
caused a large level of emigration and with it a strong and vibrant diaspora. There are three

significant countries outside of Africa include Saudi Arabia (37,785) North America (USA and

distinct phases of Eritrean emigration-- a) Ethiopian federation phase in the early 1950s, b) during the thirty year civil war with Ethiopia (196K1991) and c), between 1998 and 2000 during
the most recent border conflict with Ethiopia.

Canada 14,941) and Gennan3H^994)10 (Al-Ali et al., 2001b; Koser, 2003). Currently, it is
estimated that the diaspora comprises between a third and a quarter of the total Eritrean
population (Hepner, 2008).
Eritreans in Canada

Eritreans who emigrated during the first period were predominately students settling in

the United States to pursue education.9 In the second phase, Eritreans primarily migrated to the
Middle East, Eastern Europe, the United Kingdom (Arnoe, 2008). Few Eritreans migrated directly to Western Europe, the United States or Canada instead many settled in transitional
countries such as Ethiopia, Sudan, Djibouti and parts of the Middle East. In this phase migrants sought both political security and aspired to fund the national struggle. Most of them pursued

Eritreans are a recent addition to Canada's cultural mosaic. Although Eritreans first

arrived in Canada during the 1970s and 1980s (Sorenson, 1990) it is difficult to estimate the precise number of Eritreans in Canada during this period. As indicated earlier this is primarily

due to their classification as Ethiopians. Key informants estimates however indicate that prior to Eritrean independence there were 6,000 Eritreans in Canada (Magocsi, 1999). According to the

million for the Eritrean nationalist cause (Hepner, 2003).

9 These students went on to launch the Eritreans for Liberation in North America (ELNA) which raised nearly $1
26

These figures only include eligible voters, 18 years of age or older. Consequently, the actual number of Eritreans
in the diaspora is much higher.

.'

27

2006 Canadian census there are slightly over 10,000 individuals of Eritrean origin in Canada. Of these, about one half (5,335) reside in Toronto (Statistics Canada, 2006)11.

are single and 47% are married/common law. Although a large number of immigrants to Canada
settle in Montreal and Vancouver, a plurality (37%) of Eritrean newcomers select the Toronto

The PRDS data indicates that between 1985 and 2005, 2,071 Eritreans arrived in Canada.
1 O

CMA as their intended destination. Data for Eritrean immigrants is summarized in Table 3.L
Eritrean Identity in Canada

Although a sizable number of Eritreans settled in Canada after independence in 1993,

a significant number (73%) have migrated bet\^^200g^d2QQ5,^asJndicated^Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Number of Eritreans Landing in Canada (1980-2005)
450 400 350 300 -

The demographic profile above simply outlines the statistical characteristics of Eritrean newcomers; it does not present their reception in Canada nor the impact on their Eritrean
identity. A prominent effect on identity can be examined through the classification of Eritreans

Year of Landing

as Ethiopians by Canada. This denial not onlyJias_SYmbolic^ importaGQcejut also carries relevant practical influences. For instance, Eritreans were frequjmtl^jg^ agencies to receive newcomer information. As such, Eritreans were expected to gain services

250 200 150 -

100 50 0

uUul

#of
newcomers

from individuals they held responsible for their migration (Matsuoka and Sorenson, 2005). The insensitivity to the conflict in Eritrea indicates a lack of awareness and concern not only by
Canada and by the general public.

g

Eritreans in Canada were also viewed as the 'other', classified as blacks (Ogbagzy, 1999)

While it is difficult to determine the ethnicity of Eritreans, three-quarters (74%) speak Tigrinya, thus they may comprise of the largest Eritrean ethnic group in Canada. More than one
half of all Eritrean immigrants to Canada between 1985 and 2005 are refugees (59%)13 and a slightly over a third (35%) arrived under the family class designation. Most (70%) Eritrean
migrants have an educational level of secondary school or less. More than half (54%) were

and faced racism (Matsuoka and Sorenson, 2005). Yet within the black community, some

activists rejected the Eritrean independence movement and were in favour of a pan-Africanist
ideology (Sorenson, 1990; Obgabzy, 1999). This further illustrates a denial of the Eritrean
identity and the inability to be accepted in various communities.

between the ages of 20-34 upon arrival. The marital status of migrants is equally divided as 46%

be included in the generic category of "Black".
Ethiopians.
asylum refugees (12%).

1 These figures may be an underestimation of the Eritrean population in Canada given that some respondents may

*f The figures for Eritreans who arrived prior to 1993 are an underestimation as most Eritreans were classified as

13 This includes: privately sponsored refugees (26%), Government Assisted Refugees (GARs) (21%) as well as
28

29

Table 3.1: Eritrean Immigrants from 1980-2005 based on Permanent Resident Data System (PRDS)
Count Place of Birth
Recent Immigrants %
100

Despite the clear rejection of'Eritreaness', Eritreans remained dedicated to their

Eritrea

2071
1535

nationalistic cause through various volunteer organizations.15 The associations allowed Eritreans
to develop personal relationships with members of the community, erase feelings of neglect for
emigrating and provide informal immigration settlement information. Moreover, these
organizationLSjjreJ;^^ (S orenson,

2001-200614
Refugee

n/a
59 26
21
12

1219

Privately Sponsored
Immigrant Class
Family Other
None Secondary or Less

533 443 243 719
133

Government Assisted Refugees

Asylum Refugees

35 6
12

1990) during the pre-independence phase. This chapter traces the foundation of Eritrea through a historical overview beginning with Ottoman occupation and ending with independence. The sense of Eritrean identity is rooted in history and becomes a method in consolidating unity among its ethnically diverse citizenry. Furthermore, this chapter outlines the establishment of three migratory periods leading to the formation of a diaspora. Understandably, many of the newcomers arrived to Canada as refugees.
Diasporic communities as a whole continue to support Eritrea, particularly during the struggle for independence. This strong sense of support is based on an identity rooted in Eritrean nationalism. Yet, ascribing to an Eritrean identity was not easily accepted and was frequently

255. 1445 81 73
114

70 4
4

Formal Trade Cert, or Apprenticeship Education

Non-University Certificate or Diploma
Bachelor's Degree
Master's or Doctorate Degree

6
2

47
56 757
273

Some University/ Post Graduate - No Degree
Toronto

3 37 13

Winnipeg Intended Destination Census Metropolitan Area
(CMA)

Calgary Ottawa

136 116
HI

7
6
5 5

Edmonton
Vancouver

101
577

Elsewhere in Canada

28
74

Tigrinya
Mother Tongue Amharic

1536 180 254
101

9
12 5 4 12

denied. It is under these circumstances that members of the 1.5 and secondjggn^ration cultivate a_
sense of ^&itre^^ a historical understanding of Eritrea, Eritrean identity

Other African Languages Other Languages
0-9 years old

81 249
774

and the composition of Eritreans in Canada we are able to gain context into how Eritrean youth
negotiate their identity.

10-19 years old 20 - 29 years old
Age 30 - 39 years old 40 - 49 years old

37 26 10 6
5

547 210

50 - 59 years old 60-104 years old

114
96 943 980 147

Single
Marital Status Married/Common Law

46
47
7

Widowed/Divorced/Sepafated

14 Source: Statistics Canada, 2006 Census http://wwwl2.statcan.ca/census-recensement/2006/dp-pd/hlt/97557/T404-eng.cfm?Lang=E&T=404&GH=4&GF= 1 &SC= 1 &S= 1 &O=D

15 These include: Eritrean Relief Association in Canada (ERAC), National Union of Eritrean Women (NUEWmn)
and Research and Information Centre on Eritrea (RICE).

30

31

Chapter 4
Methodology

Interpretive Social Science (ISS) approach (Neuman, 2006). This perspective will be used to
understand Eritrean identity and seeks to provide meaningful social action through existing

Previous chapters have examined the current understanding of ethnic, national and racial identities as well as the shifting of identity through acculturation. The remainder of this paper seeks to explore identity among Eritrean youth in Toronto, Canada. Specifically, the objective is to analyze issues related to how youth interpret and express an Entrcanjdentity, the role of the
Canadianjdentity and the i
The

Eritrean associations or through policies such as multiculturalism. Following the tenets of the
ISS approach this study will not provide a definition of Eritrean identity, instead it will allow

participants to construct their own designation. While acknowledging some of the ascribed and fixed elements of Eritrean identity, the aim is to provide participants with the agency to create
their own definition. Unlike quantitative instruments, interviews provide an opportunity to

key research questions are: what is Eritrean identity for youth in Toronto? What does it mean to be Canadian? Lastly, how are these identities are expressed? These questions will provide an understanding of the foundational elements of an Eritrean identity while residing in Canada. This chapter will specifically outline the method in which data was collected. First, this chapter presents the rational in selecting a primarily qualitative approach (individual interviews and

devejorjjn-depth folk>w-iip^questions. Allowing participants to self-define identity brings forth
various interpretations without pre-judging their beliefs.

Through this research qualitative data was collected through two key informant interviews and two focus groups. The relevance of key informant interviews derives from their

frequent contact and communication with Eritrean youth. Through their community outreach and
networks, key informants provide insight at a wide level which may not be captured through focus groups. The questions posed to key informants are available in Appendix 1. The second qualitative instrument involved two focus groups. This instrument allows for a semi-structure£grou£^is£U£sion on the topic of identity. Given the construction of this major research paper over a relatively condensed period, focus groups allow for the gathering of large
data efficiently. In summation, the focus groups' ability to allow it a feasible and valuable methodological

focus groups) as well as quantitative methodology through the analysis of two datasets: PRDS and brief surveys at the beginning of interviews. The second section outlines the recruitment
procedure as well as the characteristics of participants. Third, this chapter outlines my postionality as an Eritrean youth in Toronto and its possible implications on the study. The
chapter closes with a brief outline of the limitations of the study.
Qualitative and Quantitative Methodology
Qualitative Approach

There are two main methodological options when conducting empirical research: qualitative and quantitative. The exploratory, interpretative and in-depth approach of qualitative research allows for a detailed investigative stance upon which one may understand the complex

option. The questions as part of the moderator's guide are available as Appendix 2.
Qualitative Methods: Limitations

Similar to all other research instruments, qualitative methods carry certain disadvantages.
In all face-to-face interviews regardless of the formant, participants may read cues by the

issue of identity. Most qualitative research including the proposed study, stem from an

32

33

investigator and choose to provide specific responses in order to support the research (Neuman,
2006). Focus groups in particular have two key shortcomings. First, given the group nature,

study is on Eritrean youth raised in Canada, the PRDS provides demographic characteristics of immigrants which is critical in setting a foundation in which youth have the ability to navigate
their identity. The significant findings based on PRDS have been presented in chapter three. Secondly, quantitative data was collected through a brief survey distributed at the onset of each individual interview and focus group to all participants (questions are available in Appendix 3). The results of the concise survey provide a demographic profile of the participants
which is presented in Figure 4.1.
Sample and Recruitment

participants may not be comfortable in discussing their opiniojisj^

This concern

may develop out of shyness or fear of being negatively labeled by other participants. Consequently, participants may embellish or twist their responses. A further limitation is the researcher's-inability to ensure c^mjQleje^^onyjnnjty as participants may identify each other when

in the community. The confidentiality of participants is important given the relatively small size
of the Eritrean community in Toronto.

Aware of these limitations, steps were put in place to reduce the impact of these

In total, KZXajradi^

as individual key informant

shortcomings. First, in all interviews the investigator did not openly interfere in the discussion, thus allowing participants to fully engage in the topic without interruption. Second, to ensure confidentiality the researcher ensured personal information remains undisclosed.
Quantitative Approach

interviews while the remainder participated in two focus groups. Given the dual qualitative instruments, two sets of criteria were established to recruit key informants and focus group
participants.

First, key informants had to be active members in the Toronto^Eritrean community and
As outlined earlier, their involvement in the community

A mixed method approach can frequently add credibility to a study as it is able to work
against any weakness inherent in both research approaches. To balance the heavy emphasis on qualitative data, elements of this study utilize quantitative data to compliment the research. For

allows for a broader understanding of issues facing youth and identity. Meanwhile, greater parameters were set in place for focus group participants by which they must fulfill three requirements. First, atje^t^nejparent had to have been bominEn^Qa. Second, participants must have been JtornjnjC^^^
between the ages of 18-30 at the time of the research.

the purposes of this study, there are two quantitative datasets. These instruments include the
P«ei2nanj^y^ as well as ademo^raphicprofile submitted by all

participants must be

participants at the commencement of all key informant interviews and focus groups.
PRDS is a comprehensive dataset which contains detailed information on immigrant

As outlined in chapter three a number of Eritreans immigrants are recent arrivals to Canada. Consequently, there are only a few Eritreans above the age of 18 and born in Canada. Therefore, members of the one and a half generation were included to expand the sample size. Since several studies have concluded that members of the one and half as well as the second

landing records. The variables in the dataset include immigration class, country of birth, country of last permanent residence, year of landing as well as several other categories. These variables
are available for each immigrant entering Canada from 1980 to 2005. While the focus of this

34

35

generation have similar characteristics (Skyes, 2008) including both sets of generations should

seven participants are able to speak in one of the Eritrean languages, although most can

not impact the results of the study16. Lastly, the composition of the focus groups will attempt to
incorporate members of Eritrea's various religious and ethnic groups.

communicate in it occasionally. Therefore, all key informant interviews and focus groups were
conducted in English; The following table summarizes the main characteristics of participants:
Figure 4.1: Demographic Profile of Participants Name
Gender Place of Birth Age Age at

Participants were initially recruited through^rgo^iy^jajngling (Neuman, 2006) from
titfeeJEriMai^ Announcements regarding the study were conducted

Religion

Ethnic
Group

at events held by these organizations as well as through their email lists. Due to difficulties in

Arrival in
Canada

recruitment during the initial phase, a snowball^jamplia&^MflJiS (Palys, 2003) was also
implemented to increase the sample size. While preliminary recruitment began with support from Eritrean youth organizations, most participants were referred to the study by a friend.
The Participants

Key Informants

Yonas17
Dawit
Focus Groupl

Male Male Female Female Female Female Male
Female

Canada

24

n/a
8
4

Christian

Tigrinya

Saudi Arabia

27 23 20 25 20 25 23
22

Christian Muslim Christian Christian Muslim Christian Christian Christian Muslim Christian Christian

Tigrinya

Zaineb
Adiam

Saudi Arabia
Sudan Sudan Saudi Arabia Saudi Arabia Canada
Germany

Jeberti18
Tigrinya

<1

Samrawit
Hana

6
2 7

Tigrinya Jeberti Tigrinya Tigrinya
Bilen

Participants of the study had various differing characteristics however there are some
similarities. Most participants were born in countries such asrFSudin^and Saudi Arabia.

Berhane Lemlem
Focus Group 2

n/a
5 5

Nardos

Female Female Male Female

Interestingly, none of the participants were born in Eritrea, although some indicated going there on travels. All participants reside in Toronto, however, two participants spent a number of their

Muna

Saudi Arabia
Canada
Germany

23 25
23

Tigre Tigrinya Tigrinya

Faniel Rahwa
Positionality

n/a
7

formative years in Ottawa, Ontario while an additional participant was raised mostly in London, Ontario. Nearly half (five) of the participants settled injbranskional countries prior to arriving in
Canada. This explains why most participants were not born in Eritrea or Canada. Despite the multiple migrations, participants have spent most of their time in Canada as all arrived by the age of eight. The majority of participants are either Christian or a member of the Tigrinya speaking

Positionality is commonly determined by an individual's relation to 'the other' (Merriam et al, 2001). In any research, it is important to understand one's social location as it may

influence the outcome of the study. While conducting the investigation I am acutely aware of my
own position. As an Eritean^ojilhJDO^ arriving in Canada at the age of

ethnic group. The predominance of this group is perhaps due to the snowball sampling technique
or my positionality (to be discussed further in the subsequent section). The initial demographic measurements indicate Eritrean youth have a limiiejdLi^ to an Eritrean identity.

four, I share a number of similarities with the participants. My status as an insider most likely aided in the recruitment process and may have enabled participants to project forthright and candid responses. Positivists argue that researchers as insiders provide thoughtful meanings of

For instance, only four participants have Eritrean Identity (citizenship) cards. Moreover, merely

17 To ensure confidentiality -a&^anissjar^^sejj^^ 18 As indicated in Chapter 3, Jeberti are Muslim members of the Tigrinya speaking ethnic group who view
themselves as distinct. Jeberti are not officially recognized as a separate ethnic group by the Eritrean government, as
they are amalgamated into the Tigrinya category.

16 For this study, the term second generation will also include the one and half generation .
36

37

experience (Merriam et al, 2001). On the other hand, myjemale Christian Tigrinya background deems me an outsider to those who do not espouse the same characteristics, which in turn may
have limited sample options.

Chapter 5

Findings: Acceptance and Belonging

The previous chapter outlined the methodological process in which the data has been
completed. In this chapter the key findings of this research paper are analyzed based on

Understanding and fairly representing the participants' perspectives is a key element of
any research. Conversely, through the analysis I am reflective of any assumptions I carry and

information collected from two primary data sources: a) the focus group discussions with ten Eritrean youths and b) semi-structured interviews held with two key informants. The research
findings are presented in four sections. The first section deals with the nature and characteristics of Eritrean youth identity. In this regard, the specific role played by^m]ejils^^gn^_and the Eritrean community as facilitatorsj^ is highlighted. The

accordingly there is constant aspiration to be impartial and objective. Regardless of my perceived insider position it is recognized that no research carjjpejid^^
various assumptions.
Limitations of the Study

are subject and carry

In all research there are shortcomings, this investigation of Eritrean youth is no different. Briefly there are three main limitations of this study: a) the sample size of twelve is small; b) a

second section examines the characteristics of "being an Eritrean youth" in Canada. Under this

theme are discussed three important issues--first, how Eritrean youths express their Eritrean identity in Toronto, their racialized identity and their struggles in retaining certain aspects of their Eritrean identity based on struggles experienced with parents and the community as well as the political and religious divisions. The third section outlines being Canadian. Under this topic
there is also a discussion of an I^txejir^Cajr^ well as observations of
identity. The chapter ends with a

^

female and; c) this study lacks a proportionate

distribution of participants from various religious and ethnic groups. Incorporating greater diversity in the sample size may provide richer and varied data. Moreover, these weaknesses do not enable the study to be generalizable to the Eritrean second generation population in Toronto.
Rather it is exploratory and seeks to discover major themes within the topic of identity.
In brief, this chapter has presented a rationale in selecting

discussion of the main themes in conjunction with the existing literature.
Section 1: Nature and Characteristics of Eritrean Youth Identity

understanding of identity as well as achieving a demographic profile through a quantitative approach. While most of the participants were born outside of the Canada, all arrived prior to the

During both the focus groups and key informant interviews, most participants interpreted

age of eight. The remainder of this paper will present the findings and explore its contribution to
the existing body of literature.

identity as a vital component of the self as it imparts a sense of acceptance and provides the
ability to shape one's future. When discussing identities, focus group participants frequently

alluded to its ability in allowing an attachment.toja^cpjmmunity. In other words, it permits for a
sense of belonging. Focus group participant Nardos indicated that identity allows individuals to

38

39

be part of a larger collective and assumes an acceptance within that particular group. This sense

that you are not always born where you come from and I think that works in both directions. I can go to a bush right now and collect land... even though
they will laugh at me and maybe think I'm a foreigner - I still have certain legitimacy there [Eritrea]. If you are British in Kenya, Afrikaner in South

of belonging enables participants to be anchored in their sense of self. Additionally, it provides
sojdajjnetwoj^Jhrough which one may gain a«s£n^ja£^uprjort and obligation from its members.

Africa or Italian in Eritrea I do not believe that you will be fully accepted nor
do I necessarily think you should. There's no hostility, I've seen Italians

When specifically examining an Eritrean identity, many participants said they were proud
to be Eritreans. Yet several found difficulty in providing a definition of an Eritrean identity.
Zaineb for example stated that being Eritrean is: Something that we know is there but it's something hard to define. And then

speak wicked Tigrinya with much better injera19 hands than myself but I
something that you don't necessarily have access to.

don't think that you can erase history and start over in one generation to earn

For the participants Eritrean identity is difficult to define. Nevertheless at the basic level
it can be understood as rootedj^nce^y^^n^ajce^ Given that Eritrean youth have not lived in

you run into issues when you try to define it. So what makes you Eritrean,

because YQiL^SSJLJCigrinja^Or if you don't then you're not Eritrean? I don't know, I find that question really hard to define.
As outlined, participants exhibited difficulty in providing a clear definition as it may
create a situation in which some are denied their Eritrean ancestry. Perhaps due to the inability to place clear parameters, there seems to be a tendency among the second generation Eritrean

Eritrea, expressing their identity is facilitated by parents, friends and the community. Facilitators ofEritrean Identity: The Role ofParents Undoubtedly parents are vital in fostering a cohesive Eritrean identity as none of the

participants have resided in Eritrea and only a few have been there on their travels. Through their lived experienced in Eritrea, parents have the ability to transfer the characteristics, morals, values
and traditions of what it means to be Eritrean to their children. In a sense parents become the

youths to focus on primordial elements of their identity - an identity placed upon them through
birth. As Berhane pointed out:

Aren't you Eritrean because you are born Eritrean? You can be raised in any way your parents want to but you are Eritrean because both your parents are
Eritrean.

teachers and facilitators oj[dejcjj^^

requirements of being Eritrean.

Without parents, the Eritrean identity of youth would be solely based on racial and physical
appearances. As Nardos stated:

Nearly all participants agreed that an individual outside of the Eritreanjmcestry is unable to

ir own, regardless of their capacity to embrace the culture. This primordialism seems to be rooted in "race" as Rahwa pointed out:
Let's say a white man says he wants to be Eritrean, he will never ever be

If my parents gave birth to me and they disappeared, the only thing that
makes me Eritrean are my phenotypical features -1 look like an Eritrean girl
and then everything else is them.

Berhane echoed Nardos's comment by further acknowledging the significant role of parents:
I'm almost certain that if I wasn't raised by my parents, Eritrean to Eritrean people, I would be a completely different person. I can be sure of that An active role from parents is critical in exposing members of the second generation to the Eritrean identity. Thus far it seems youth continue to identify with being Eritrean for two

Eritrean. He can learn the Eritrean culture and Eritrean traditions and
language - he can learn, but he can never be born Eritrean.

"Race" is not the sole component of an Eritrean identity, a sense of ancestry and connection to a

specific geographical location is also reinforced as a necessary element as suggested by Faniel:
It's this thing of interchangeability that undermines the importance of land and ancestry and the connection. I was born in Canada, but I always believe

19 A staple type of thin bread eaten at most meals without utensils.
40
41

main reasons. First, it is part

^ anc* second the main tenets of their

While parents and friends play a regular role in shaping Eritrean identity, the community
of Eritreans is also influential in showcasing the identity through activities and expectations.
Facilitators ofEritrean Identity: The Role ofthe Community

identity have been facilitated through its inheritance from parents. Facilitators ofEritrean Identity: The Role ofFriends Following the critical role of parents, friendships play a secondary role in developing an Eritrean identity. Nationality is an irrelevant marker in the selection of friendship. However

As focus group participants emphasized the relevant role of parents and friends, key informants primarily stressed the importance of the Eritrean community in assisting youths in
discovering their identity:

sharing similarities or following a parallel immigration path often attracts participants when
developing friendships with certain individuals.

What keeps identity strong is the community and how well they are
organized, and that's what keeps identity going (Dawit).

Your friends are your chosen family. You don't get to choose who your family is but your friends support you with anything regardless if they're Eritrean or not. They help solidify your identity, they help make up your
identity, reinforce it. So they play a role. (Zaineb)

As a result, youth may turn to the community to grasp a broader awareness ofEritrean identity.
Through various community gatherings such as^estiy^^ Eritrean national

Friends, in addition to family play an important role in bringing an awareness of one's identity.

holidays, youth have the opportunity to engage with their Eritrean peers and gain a collective sense of being Eritrean. Yonas is aware that community events in Toronto allow individuals to
get a sense ofEritrean culture, particularly if they do not have established roots with Eritrea.

Although mosjtof lh^^

for manxrjarti^^^
, this core group often emerged from social networks

established by parents during their socialization as indicated by Nardos:
I've never consciously looked for Eritrean friends. If my parents took me to

Nevertheless, Dawit further stated that a community cannot be sustained without a strong
identity:

a Jamaican girl's house every Christmas, Thanksgiving and Easter I think I would be best friends with her but they didn't - they took me to Eritrean
people's house. I never was like I need more Eritrean friends let me go look

In order to build a strong community together we need to have a strong sense of identity. Without an identity I don't think the community can be built.
Thus,

for them. They were always kind of around me or through family friends.

Thus, while parents play a role in transferring the Eritrean cultural traditions they also assist in

Jdtentity^^ejnlertv^ned. While youth utilize it to gain awareness of

the development of long-lasting friendships. All of this influences the participants' vision of an
Eritrean identity.

their identity, the very same identity is necessary in order to foster an effective community.
Based on the above research findings it seems Eritrean youths characterize identity as an element at the core of an individual's sense of self which provides the ability to belong to a
group. Meanwhile Eritrean identity in particular is based on a primordial sense - ancestry and "race". For the participants, Eritrean identity is viewed and understood through three prisms.

Among Eritrean friends, identity can be strengthened as it provides an opportunity to

further learn nuances of being Eritrean. Meanwhile, the experience of non-Eritrean friendships
offers an opportunity in which their Eritrean difference can be emphasized and performed.

First, parents are the main facilitators in developing an identity, while friendships - although
developed serendipitously as the participants did not actively seek Eritrean friends - also play a
42

43

PROHWfY OF

significant role in the development and maintenance of Eritrean identity. Lastly, key informants highlight the importance of the community in strengthening Eritrean identity.
Section 2: Being Eritrean

While some youth may occasionally participate in community activities, many indicated that
although important, participation in cultural activities in addition to speaking a language were

not deemed as essential aspects of being Eritrean, but is rather an element of choice. As Lemlem
suggested:

Defining an Eritrean was difficult for several focus group and key informant participants, however, 'being Eritrean' was slightly easier to outline. The key elements in expressing an
Eritrean identity are through language and frequent participation in community activities. Language was consistently mentioned by focus group participants and key informants as

I personally believe that if your bj^o^imJ^En!^mU^ you are Eritrean but if you don't choose to identify yourself as Eritrean that's your choice.
No one can enforce that on you.

The element of choice also exists with respect to speaking the language, consuming traditional food and partaking in traditional customs such as listening to music as outlined by Zanieb:
I know people who are proud Eritreans but they don't speak Tigrinya or necessarily live in an Eritrean household. They don't eat the food or really

a key element of the Eritrean identity. Yet despite its significance merely a handful noted their
ability to comprehend or communicate in one of the Eritrean languages. Rather, English was the primary language used when communicating to all individuals. Perhaps being mindful of this

like the music or any of those labels that we put on culture - that it's like
music, food and dance - but if you ask them, they'll say "I am an Eritrean". Given that there seems to be an element of choice in being an Eritrean there remains a

issue Nardos did not view language as a requirement in establishing an Eritrean identity:
I think sj^Q^hig^n^j}Llh£^hngmgQs of Eritrea doesn't make you more

Eritrean but it hpipgj^ deeply immerse in Eritr^ajQJIllIfo^^

strong sense of pride. Thus, it seems being jritrean is also rooted in a national identity. Participants continually indicated pride in being Eritrean while disregarding their ethnic affiliation. It is through the influence of parents, friends and the community, Eritrean second
generation youth are able to understand what it means to be Eritrean.
A Racialized Identity

When you go there you can do more, when you go to an Eritrean crowTyou
can communicate better and make more relationships but I don't think it

makes you any more or less Eritrean. Speaking about Eritreans in Toronto I don't think it makes you Eritrean. I don't think it's the rule that Eritrean kids speak Tigrinya or a language. I think its sort of the exception: 'oh you speak Tigrinya that's amazing'. And speaking Bilen is definitely not expected of
any Eritrean Bilen person.

There seems to be a general acceptance of low levels of language acquisition without it impacting an individual's ability to express their Eritrean identity. If language is not an identity
marker, engaging in community activities can be an alternative option in articulating that

A clear re-emerging theme throughout the interviews, particularly in the focus groups is the impact of "race" on identity. As outlined in the literature review, "race" is frequently understood as socially constructed thus carrying various interpretations pending on the time period and geographical location. In the focus groups, participants openly acknowledged their "black" identity. This seems to be a generational shift, as parents for the most part, focus on their
dissimilarity from other blacks.

identity. Nonetheless there were no clear indications of the specific ways in which Eritrean
youths actively performed their identity in Toronto.

We have omJnd^&rid^cQ^^^j^^^^uY ]^tyj^sJDajMevent. We hold events as Eritreans but it's not conscious. Its not like, 'I'm going to an event today because I want to practice my Eritreanness'. You just go because you want to be around other Eritreans on that day and support. (Samrawit)

44

45

Our parents try to make the distinction and say 'they're black, you're

Eritrean' but I mean at the end of the day you're black I don't know what other way to explain it (Hana).
While participants indicated the first generation' sin^ as a

Based on the above research findings, it seems Eritrean youths have a symbolic attachment to Eritrea. The participants attend large annual events while lacking tangible identity markers such as a large social network, active participation in the community, political engagement and language acquisition. As noted earlier, although important, participation in
various cultural functions and traditional rituals, comprehension of one of the Eritrean languages

segment of the "foack" iitortkyrfee generational shift arises with the participants who unanimously acknowledged Eritreans as members of the "black" community. Their rationale for acknowledging Eritreans as "black" arises from multiple factors including skin colour, lineage, and a connection to Africa as well as other disaporic countries. Most significantly through blackness and the "black" struggle participants feel they are legitimized in Canada. I find that I'm more black than anything else in terms of color...I find that's why we are considered black because we have the same struggles, we share
the same experience of slavery or racism and that's why we can relate to Caribbean people or somebody who looks black and why we would say we are the same...I find that their struggle and being black and blackness and where black people get in terms of hierarchy or the black right to vote, that
affects me....blackness does affect who I am. (Nardos)

and shared experience were not identified as essential aspects of an Eritrean identity. These
findings suggest that choice is reserved primarily among tangible and observable cultural methods of measuring Eritrean identity. Moreover, the element of choice implies a poststructuralist form of identity in which parjic^ajit^ ;:ada£tation£j(Eid, 2007). Since observable markers of identity are not vital to expressing an
Eritrean identity, national identity seems to be at the core of the identity.

The research findings also reveal that for the participants there does not seem to be a
conflict between being "black" and Eritrean. While participants and key informants

In spite of the belief that an acceptance of "black" identity provides recognition in the Canadian society participants felt their blackness was being denied by other membersjofthe
acknowledged that some youths in Toronto maintain the same perspective as first generation

"black" community. Adiam demonstrated the denial of her "black" identity began at an early
immigrants from Eritrea that they are not "black", most view themselves to be a part of the
age:

"black" community. Through blackness, the Eritrean youth are able to relate to slavery, racism Some black people don't see us as black though. I remember when I was a little younger I had a lot of black friends... some of them didn't really see me as black, they joke around and say you're not black. Participants speculate this perception arises from their li
^

and settling in a "white" colony. Similar to being occasionally denied a "black" identity, youth face struggles in retaining an Eritrean identity due to expectations by parents and the community
as well as through existing political and religious divisions. Struggles in Retaining Eritrean Identity: Role ofParents and the Community

Following on the experiences of a "black" identity,

participants indicate a denial of their African status. These designations make it difficult for members of the Eritrean second generation to feel welcomed within the broader "black" identity
thus lacking a sense of belonging.

Various organizations, discussion groups and community activities allow Eritrean youths

in Toronto to retain their national identity. Nonetheless struggles in developing the identity may

occur primarily through two methods. First, ^^q^^1^£&1^^^^^^^ on youth to maintain

46

47

a specific form of identity. Second, judgments made within the Eritrean community create difficulties for youth to develop their individual identity. Perhaps these difficulties arise due to
culture conflict over practical issues such as living independently and dating. Nonetheless,
parents and the community insist youth follow an identical path as they did in Eritrea regardless
of their migration as illustrated by Zaineb:

Perhaps based on these expectations Eritrean youth decide to remove

themselves from the community and limit their Eritrean identification.

Simultaneously, key informant Dawit outlines the inabilityjrftii^^

to

engage youth through regujarjicdwtie^besides sporting events. Several participants remarked

on the existence of two community centers in Toronto which does not allow for a single platform
in disseminating ideas or delivering solid successful activities such as Tigrinya classes. In other
words, there does not seem to be a sufficient amount of effort put forth by the community to

They [parents] expect you to be a certain way and their children to be a certain way. It's just, "okay we're going to migrate from here to here to here but our kids are going to grow up the just the way we did at their age."

Youth find it unrealistic that parents expect a sjmila£upbringing and behaviourfrom them given

develop an identity. Despite this postulation, youth continue to feel a sense of being Eritrean.
To summarize, many second generation Eritrean youth indicated that parents and the

thatjheyjire_beii^^

continued to indicate that the Eritrean community

can be critical of youth who do not follow an accepted path.

community are the optimum vessels in acquiring Eritrean identity. Yet simultaneously, at times the rigid expectations of the aforementioned groups may have the capability of pushing youth
away from further exploring their identity and participating in the community. Struggles in Retaining Eritrean Identity: Political and Religious Divisions

The identity is beautiful but the community can be judgmental at times. Because of that some people might ruin themselves for the community. And than by default they are kind of loosing their ability to practice or be around
Eritreans.

These judgments refer 'to just about everything' (Hana) including clothing attire, education as

well as tone of voice when speaking to elders. Muna illustrated her personal example of dating:
I think there's a conflict with what is expected from me as an Eritrean and what I want to do.. .For instance my boyfriend is not Eritrean.. .and that's not accepted within the Eritrean community as being okay.

Political divisions and to a limited extent religious division seem to implicitly affect the development of an Eritrean identity among participants. A number of events organized by
community members in Toronto are often affiliated with either one of the two Eritrean political

Expanding from Muna's case, it seems parents insisLyjouthmarryanjndiyjdual of

parties. Thejiiajn^jjoj^^

include those who support the current ruling People's Front

&itremid£scent. Eritrean youth interpret this as an idealistic goal on the part of parents.
Samrawit pointed to the different perspectives and expectations parents and the second
generation have within the topic of dating and marriage:

for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ)20 government (commonly referred to asJShaheia^uor the main
opposition grouped frequently referred to as Jebha. _

While focus group participants did not indicate any direct involvement with either of the parties, the political divisions are clearly observable in the community and may have an

I think our parents want us to marry Eritrean and it sort of not realistic here. It would be nice but it's not the end all be all thing. And that's how they make it out to be sometimes.
It seems that regardless of the issue - whether it be clothing attire or dating choices - the

unbeknownst impact on Eritrean identity among youth. A handful of participants described themselves as not involved in Eritrean political affairs yet they are critically aware of the divide
20

community is constantly imposing their opinion, leading Faniel to refer to the community as 'the
48

This is the name assumed by the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) following independence.
49

in the community. Given their apolitical behaviour, the divisions do not play an obvious impact
on their identity as illustrated by Rahwa:

misinformed they don't want to disobey or go against the teachings of their
parents.

I am apolitical. I'm not indulged in the political issues in Eritrea I know what I hear, but I don't know if it's correct or not. I have my views on the government but... I don't think it affects my identity.

Political and religious divisions seem to be tied together as a result of the as a result of the historical division during the struggle for independence. As the political divisions continued
post-independence, religious divisions, as argued by Faniel, remain prevalent and are experienced in the diaspora:

Although a few participants may feel the political divisions do not impact their identity,
others such as Zanieb were vocal about the clear impact of those divisions:

When I saw the divisions and when I saw people trying to pull you in different ways - if you go here you are this or if you don't attend than you're this. You try to work together and work with people but they are stuck in their mentality it kind of makes you think that maybe you shouldn't go to that event because the connotation is that you are member of this group or
that.

If you look at the revolution it started by lowlander Muslim, J^J^Jgx
least or whatever ethnic groups. And because of all the political divisions

and those hostility EPLF/ELF divisions with highlander Christian Tigrinya
dominated, they've all been connected and politicized and when you come here those play out, I find. Religious divisions between Cbrist^^^ Muna indicated that she had the opportunity to interact with members of both faiths yet she acknowledges the existence of religious divisions:
I've been around Eritrean Muslims who only stick to each other. I've been to Eritrean Muslim weddings where I've never seen them before because they

The above quote highlights a possible reason for Eritrean youths to be reluctant in attending
community functions. As key informant Yonas stated:

I think there were more kids involved in the community before. In the nineties there was Eritrean soccer and all that and I don't see those same people there anymore. I try to talk to them about it and they are just like "don't talk to me about it, that's yesterday's news". Nevertheless participants recognized the practical impact of political divisions in the

don't go outside their group of Eritrean Muslims.
Initially Eritrean second generation youth stated that political or religious divisions do not impact their overall identity however after some deliberation Berhane conceded an impact on

future. For instance, if participants choose to contribute towards an initiative, whether in Eritrea
or Toronto, there is an awareness of implicitly supporting a

identity:
As I sit here and think about it, it definitely would, [impact your identity]

I don't feel right now it [political divisions] affects my identity but I think that if I was to start contributing to Eritreans back home the method that I would do so has a political undertone whether I'd like to think so or not
(Nardos).

because you don't see the collective group of Eritreans in Toronto.

If you

don't see them as a strong group but you see the division, than you are not going to have all the wanting or willingness to participate in Eritrean events

The focus group discussions further suggested that not only do parents play a role in
shaping their children's overall perspective on Eritrean identity but they also play a role in the development of a political identity as noted by^yJnJornianjLDawit:
Youth do listen to their parents for the most part. They will defend what their parents believe. And at the end of the day even if their parents are

because you see the division and you don't really want be a part of that.
Expectations from parents, the community as well as political and religious divisions

seem to have created an atmosphere in which the second generation may find difficulty in
maintaining and expressing an Eritrean identity. With these difficulties Eritrean youth face a

denial of their Eritrean identity within the community. There are a multitude of factors which can

50

51

be used to deny the second generation of their identity; this is most succinctly illustrated by
Nardos:

legitimate historical culture to be Eritrean.

To me it's simply political. I'll

put on a hat when I need to and then take it off and eat injera. This straight forward discussion of Canadian identity illustrates the high value participants place

[My Eritrean identity is denied] by people who speak better Tigrinya than me, people who've been there (I've never been there), people who are part of some group that have a strong connection to back home like Shabeia group or something, they might say I'm less Eritrean than them. I've been denied that way, but that has never shaken my internal identity.

on culture and their perceDtion that Qanaj^JacJ^

In summation, participants stated that anyone residing in Canada can be considered Canadian without acquiring any of the Canadian values, culture or even language. This makes it
difficult to clearly define a Canadian identity. In turn, Lemlem indicated this causes obstacles

These everyday struggles faced by youth impact the formation of their identity. In order to solidify their identities these struggles need to be acknowledged and amended by parents and

the Eritrean community. Regardless, youthwill continue (for the most part) to identify with
being Eritrean based on their primordial roots and national pride.
Section 3: Being Canadian

with the first generation as they perceive themselves as Canadian even though youth interpret
their Canadian attributes as distinct from their parents' identity.

While any individual may become Canadian, participants stress that the conventional
image of a Canadian does not reflect the diversity of the population. Eritrean second generation youth perceive a pro£o^£c£l^amdi^ij[S jjVMte^^n^J^^axon^Accordingly, participants
express difficulty in being accepted as they do not carry the same image:

Similar to the initial difficultly in defining an Eritrean identity, youths found it equally
complex to grasp the Canadian identity. For many it is vague, elusive and lacks primordial uniqueness. Participants limit the Canadian identity as referring simply to a dejure
understanding of identity.

I think ideally I would like to say that how you look doesn't reflect whether
you're Canadian or not. It's your experience, where you live, your environment that makes you Canadian. life I feel you're Canadian.
everybody's view is. (Muna)

Anyone with a citizenship is Canadian. The thing about Canada is that it's a c^iiritr^lLim^^ there is not really one identity. (Samrawit)
As Samrawit indicated any individual carrying Canadian citizenship is capable of

If you've lived in Canada all your

But realistically I don't think that's what

Muna continued to illustrate the variance between internal and external identity. Internally, Eritrean youth focus on their experiences within Canada to identify as being Canadian. Yet the participants acknowledged the same experiences are not regularly recognized
among the Canadian population as being Canadian. Rather it appears an emphasis is placed on their (extemal)j2£kdj^ identity.

identifying as Canadian. With this broad definition there is a limited sense of shared experience
or commonality among citizens. Popular thought assumes Canadian identity is based on a love of

hockey, the emblematic maple leaf and enjoying winter. However participants repeatedly
asserted the inability to partake in any tangible aspects of "being Canadian" thus making it a
hollow identity as passionately stated by Faniel:

Despite the assertions that a Canadian identity is indefinable, participants have developed
a Canadian mindset based on an acceptance of freedoms and Canadian values. In addition to the differences established within a lived Canadian experience, participants acknowledged

It's a hollow fake ass identity propped up on land that doesn't belong to

whatever the Canadians today say they are. It's cultural-less to me to almost.
I have so much more respect and I think there's so much more richness in

52

53

recognizing their Canadian status when among Eritrean first generation immigrants as well as
when traveling abroad. This observation is concisely summarized by Zaineb who stated:
I identify with being Canadian but only in a context. I don't walk around thinking "I'm Canadian great!" but if you're in a different country then I'm Canadian or if you're in a roomful of Eritreans, like older people, then yeah
I'm Canadian, you guys are different.

acknowledged that their mindset and viewpoint coincides with "Canadian" expectations, even though they are not characterized as the prototypical Canadian.
Eritrean-Canadian or Canadian-Eritrean?

Eritrean second generation youth have a dual exposure to the Eritrean and Canadian

When travelling outside of Canada, being Canadian often arises. Through travels

cultures and histories. It appears knowledge about Eritrea has been acquired through the transfer of culture by parents while Canadian values have been grasped formally through the education
system as well as informally during their experience living in Canada. Based on their dual familiarities participants have established a hyphenated identity. The importance of placing one
identity over the other is difficult for a few participants to select. I don't know if I would put one before the other but I would say I am both because both countries and both cultures have created who I am (Samrawit). Meanwhile others recognize their multiple identities, including their Canadian, Eritrean, religious and gender identities as all playing an important role. Nonetheless, there is a clear

participants are truly able to decipher their Canadian attitude and acknowledge their difference from others. ^ejsejis£j^^ Lemlem explained,

socialization in Canada leads to a sense of difference even when among country mates in Eritrea:
Even when I was in Eritrea it was like I'm not Eritrean, I'm Canadian. I just could not identify myself with these people. It was so different.

During their travels if they are asked by locals about their origin participants indicated their
residence as Canada but significantly did not identify as being Canadian.

Overall, identification with the Canadian identity seems to be situationally embraced. At

times Pjartidrji^

particularly during their travels in

emphasis of an Eritrean identity as the majority of participants identify precisely as Eritrean(^ana^ian. As Hana illustrated, an emphasis of the Eritrean identity may be rooted in their sense
of self:

order to gain security. This is poignantly illustrated by Faniel:

I will be the first person to put their hand up and say 'I'm Canadian' when I've got a passport - when I get on a plane, for protection and diplomatic
reasons. That is the extent of my attachment.

I feel like Eritrea is the backbone to my identity. The first thing I think about
is Eritrea; so Eritrean first and then Canadian.

In summation, it seems Canada's history and slogan as being a nation founded on

While the majority of participants willingly carry a hyphenated identity, members of the
second focus group as well as key informant Yonas acknowledged the external pressures in
espousing that identity. Specifically, participants indicated that they do not express complete liberty in choosing their own identity. In other words, aJiyj^l^a^^ second generation as a reminder of their difference and inability to be any more Canadian than

multiculturalism and diversity has not translated into the dominant representation of being Canadian. Only a handful of participants identify as being Canadian, while most use the identity
for convenience purposes in instances such as trayj^^

Moreover, due to a perceived lack of physical features encompassing a prototypical Canadian

there is a sense that they are not true Canadians. Based on this, it may be understandable that
participants have a weak attachment to the Canadian identity. Nonetheless, participants
54

they are Erjlceaa,

55

"We are the Canadian, you are a visitor." So you can feel at home but not
too at home and get too comfortable because you're Eritrean-Canadian. It's
such a common story. It's usually people of colour and not just Eritreans but

they do not physically represent the typical Canadian. As Lemlem indicated, "I don't look Canadian and all that but I still consider myself Canadian". Remarkably, the perceived inability
to be described as a prototypical Canadian has not shaken their internal identity, as some

we fall within that group and that's why the hyphen is there and that's why
Eritrean comes first (Faniel). Faniel stated that racialized communities are not fully recognized as Canadian and thus a hyphenated identity is thejbejrt^^ to Eritreans and all other racialized

participants continue to classify themselves, at least partially, as Canadian.
Multiculturalism: An Ineffective Policyfor Eritrean Youth The aim of multiculturalism is to allow individuals and communities to retain their ethnic identity, to take pride in their ancestry and to have an open sense of belonging (Canadian

There is a perception of difference promoted by the general Canadian society has perhaps emphasized through a hyphenated identity. Conceivably multiculturalism policy creates an environment in which a hyphenated identity is expected. The practice of these identities seems to be rooted in relation to whiteness. A few participants remarked that ";wtate^'j^ required to develop a hyphenated identity.

Heritage, 2008). In popular culture, multiculturalism is often described as Canada's identity. It is
associated with equality, acceptance of diversity, ethnic understanding, harmony and a
facilitation of the overall integration process.

Those community members can easily blend into being Canadian without being further probed for their "real" ancestry. Since a hyphenated identity is a reminder of difference there is a desire for nearly all participants to place their Eritrean identity ahead of their Canadian identity. There may be a number of explanations for this postulation which are outside the scope of this paper, however due to the large parental influence and Canada's encouragement of individuals retaining
their cultural, ethnic and national identities, it is not surprising that youth select an Eritrean-

A plurality of focus group participants are aware of Canada's multiculturalism policy and

are able to define it as a policy which seeks to accept all cultures while simultaneously celebrating its diversity. As most clearly outlined by key informant Dawit, multiculturalism

entails a value and welcoming of different cultures in Canada. Perhaps following popular conceptions, mujticju^^
for CanadiarHiisJttr^^

focus group participants and key informant Yonas, is the basis

Canadian identity over an African-Canadian identity, despite identifying with being "black" and
African.

Since Canadian history generally lacks a bloody revolution, a common ancestry or any other basis of a primordial identity, participants acknowledged the ability of multiculturalism policy to

External groups continue to play a role in the^e^gnaiiojijiLa^

not

unite Canadians based on their commonality within their ethno-racial difference. Overall, a handful of participants recognized the positive aspects of multiculturalism while the majority is critical of how it is enacted on a daily basis. The migration of Eritreans through several transitional countries prior to arriving in Canada, led many to suppress their

only within the society but also among Eritreans. The fact that the Eritrean community did not accept them as "Full Eritreans" - as they were perceived as "Canadians" during their travels to Eritrea, as well as in Canada by those who were born in Eritrea - may be a further reason as to why participants ascribe to a hyphenated identity to acknowledge their dual experiences. Participants assume the external designation of hyphenated identity is based on their "race" as
56

identity and quickly assimilate to the dominant culture. Conceding the difficulties faced in those

57

countries leads participants to be grateful for CanadajmJ>emgj^^
democratic and inclusive values. This is particularly indicated by key informant Yonas: Those policies [multiculturalism] that they set up are good principles to work from so people know that they don't have to suppress their identity. When Eritrean people go to different countries like Saudi Arabi^j^uie not

its

particular week. Upon the completion of the 'spectacle' (Bramadat, 2001) individuals are
expected to revert to the 'Canadian' norms in clothing and dietary practices.

^B23iJP ..practiae^yaur religious sentiments ,openjy in public or
even cultural celebrations. So they're coming from places where they're

unable to do that. For Canada to be able to do that they are most definitely
showing that they are a democratic country open to other people's cultures. So it most definitely enables people to retain that sense of Eritreanness. Perhaps since multiculturalism policy facilitates anjintegrationistjDbjective, participants interpret it as being most effective for newcomers. Regardless of a formal written policy, Eritreans will continue to hold events and express the culture as outlined by Hana:
With or without that act we're still going to have our events, we're still going to see each other, we're still going to express our culture and do everything
that we normally would do.

You have a week to wear your colourful clothes and then anytime after that if you wore your zuria to school every day being multicultural you would kind of be questioned.. .But on multicultural day if you came in your normal clothes and you were clearly not Canadian, as in not Caucasian, they would say: 'how come you're not wearing your country clothes?" That is what multiculturalism is - wearing your multicultural clothes on the one day and every other day there is an expectation of assimilation. (Nardos)

While it appears multiculturalism does not facilitate the development and retention of an

Eritrean identity it does however provide an opportunity for the general (Anglo-Saxon) Canadian population to demonstrate their tolerance and approval of different cultures. The ability of
"whites" to legitimize cultures is outlined by Nardos:

You're different from Canadians and you have a different culture but that

Given key informant Dawit's emphasis on the importance of the community in fostering an identity, establishing a policy such as multiculturalism is presumed to be irrelevant so long as the
community is organized.

culture is kind of seen as low. But whenjghilsjBsgp^^ ""> restaurant orIndian restaurant they are cultured ...But if you^reactually^from >
that culture eating with your hands its not high culture. J

'

Expanding from the cultural spectacles and commodified aspects of multiculturalism in

Canada, participants outlined the policy's shortcoming in its inability to be evident in a
stated that,multiculturalism does not contribute in the retention of

consistent daily approach. While the goal of multiculturalism may include a fostering of
inclusiveness it does not lead to the elimination of perceived racism and discrimination among
participants as stated by Samrawit:

their Eritrean identity. Rather expressing a sense of 'Eritreanness' is understood as innate and not dictated by Canadian policies. Instead, it is a policy which facilitates the commodification of Eritrean culture. This occurs through various mechanisms including the current proliferation of
the shemagh scarf and the popular trend in consuming 'ethnic' food such as sushi or burritos.

To be honest I don't really think that act means anything because even though Canada is multicultural and pretty accepting there are still issues with

racism. You still do feel different, and there are still stigmatizations in
institutions.

Commodification most commonly occurs through the celebration of multiculturalism week established in several institutions such as schools. As Nardos simplistically illustrated individuals
are encouraged to publicly celebrate their difference through clothing, food and dance during one

Participants outlined that multiculturalism provides an opportunity to conceal and promote

racism which exists in various areas including educational institutions and the workplace.

In order for Eritrean youth to be less critical of multiculturalism they requested tangible

methods in which the policy can be utilized to benefit both newcomers and the Canadian-born
58

59

population. Without this anchoring, multiculturalism becomes a far fetched aspiration remaining

final section of the chapter will explicitly discuss the various elements of these identities in
conjunction with the existing literature.

in an idealistic world. The sentiments of Faniel succinctly and bluntly summarize the viewpoints
of several participants by stating:

The gartidrjants^

In turn,

If you want to aspire towards that [multiculturalism] and be realistic in the
sense that we haven't achieved it that's one thing. But in saying this is how

these primordial ties enable a sense of belonging to the broader Eritrean community. Simultaneously, the lack of clear Canadian primordial markers makes it difficult for youth to feel part of the Canadian community. Interestingly, the primordial identification of Eritrean youth
does not lead to an active engagement in the various aspects of being Eritrean. In the clearest

the nation will operate from this day onward when you have Tacismj you dispose the First Nations, you can't acknowledge slavery, you deport the
Japanese and all of a sudden you write stuff on paper and from that day

onward we're going to treat people differently?
kidding yourself.

Nah man, you guys are

Multiculturalism is a positive strategy as it indicates (and potentially facilitates) the acceptance of all individuals. In theory the policy enables acceptance and belonging within the

sense, the limited number of participants who have the capability in speaking one of the Eritrean

languages illustrates the symbolic nature of their identity. Language is a critical benchmark in
measuring ethnic identity retention and is a medium of identity performance (Giampapa, 2001). The lack of language comprehension coupled with the participants' limited community

broader Canadian culture however participants are critical of multiculturalism and do not
recognize its existence as essential in retaining an Eritrean identity nor facilitating a Canadian

identity. Alluding to assimiliationist policies in parts of Europe, participants indicated the ability of Eritreans to maintain their cultural identity regardless of the receiving country's policies. Therefore, if the Eritrean identity can continue to manifest itself in Europe then surely similar
steps can be taken in Canada.

involvement leaves few avenues in actively showcasing an Eritrean identity. As youth lack these performative aspects of identity it may widen thejpierational gap betweenpa^ejtsjndjhe^

cmnmunity; which may explain some of the difficulties expressed by youth when interacting
with parents or the community.

Perceptively, participants are attentive to the acceptance of commodified cultures by the

The inability to perform identity is also evident in the Canadian identity. While they all spoke fluent English, one of Canada's official languages, only one participant outlined

dominant 'white' society. Yet the dominant group lacks that acceptance when cultural rituals are
conducted by members of the cultural community. Perhaps this illustrates the existence of white

involvement in Canadian community activities. Few participants were able to define what being
Canadian means. All participants, however, acknowledge having a Canadian perspective and

privilege in legitimizing cito£aj__bejiaj^u^s^n short, it seems that without a concrete procedure in acknowledging the history and struggles of Canadians, multiculturalism- while good on paper
- is incapable of positively impacting the identity of Eritrean youth.
Section 4: Discussion

mindset in attaining goals and carrying certain expectations. On the surface, it does not seem that
acquiring a symbolic Canadian identity impacts their interactions with other Canadians.
The Canadian and particularly Eritrean identities seem to be a sy

The findings outlined in this chapter illustrate elements of primordial, symbolic,

stated in the literature review a symbolic ethnic identity is frequently observed when individuals

situational and national forms of identity both in the sense of being Eritrean and Canadian. This
60

61

become acc^

1993). Conversely, this

of Eritrea as an independent country and are a recent occurrence in the lives of the participants. Thus, the conception of national identity explains the participants' frequent attendance of Eritrean events based on nationalist gatherings such as Independence Day celebrations as well as
Martyr's Day remembrance and less involvement in non-patriotic activities.

research indicates that individuals may equally carry a symbolic identity towards the dominate

culture, in addition to their ancestral identity. Therefore, the identity among second generation
youth should not simply be understood as accepting the dominant culture in favor of the

individual's original culture or vice versa. Rather, it is conceivable that individuals, particularly
members of the second generation, do not sense full incorporation into either group. The situational element of both identities is evident in a number of areas. The most

The influence of parents is critical given that participants have no direct link to build

upon their Eritrean identity. Youth have been socialized in an environment in which a number of
parents,have vivid memories of Eritrea and were most likely actively engaged in supporting the independence struggle. This atmosphere may have facilitated youth to develop an Eritrean

pertinent example is apparent in the dovQ[g^m^^of±^QY^igdAd£l)M^. While most

participants demonstrated an Eritrean-Canadian identity, the decision to place one particular identity over the other is frequently determined on place or audience. In this situational approach
participants may strategically utilize their identity in instances that they are less likely to be
'othered'. The interchangeable element of identity is most prominent within the Canadian

identity, not based on the internal divisions, but on the unifying aspects. Thus, youth define the
Eritrean identity in juxtaposition to the values they receive primarily from their parents.

Meanwhile, peers are an important pathway towards identity formation, as they provide valuable
support and feedback (Tyyska, 2001). Finally, the community provides a platform to gain
awareness of, and perform elements of identity.

identity. Despite its perceived faults as lacking a tangible definition, a few participants choose to
identify as being from Canada for the positive political opportunities they stand to gain. The multiple types of identities including primordial, symbolic and situational elements
question the primacy of form of identity. In the case of being Eritrean, there seems to be an

Participants, however, do not adhere to their parents' identity in all respects particularly in the formation of a "black" identity. While members of the first generation tend to define
themselves based on their^o^r^ri^history^jnembers of the second gene^

emphasis on its primordial nature without actively engaging in traditional rituals distinctive to their ethnic group. Instead there is an emphasis on being from Eritrea. In this respect, the true
sense of Eritrean identity seems to restjvjthjiationalism and a national identity. It seems
<·"" ~~~--------- --~---------------~~--!----

blacknessjE^

of a much larger "black" identity and

community. The participants follow Brown and Rong's (2002) postulation by sympathizing with
the experiences of "blacks" and admiring the persistence of civil rights leaders. Through

participants have embraced Eriksen's (2005) concept of supra-ethnic community in which there

blackness Eritrean youth are emphasizing their hpercollective identity by referring to the "black"
diaspora according to Wright's (2004) form of racialized identity. Given that Eritrean youth are

is an emphasis on distinct Eritrean rituals rather than the ethnic customs within the country. This emphasis may be grounded in Eritrea's revolutionary history which led to independence as well
as the repeated rejection of an Eritrean identity. All of these events are critical to the foundation

raised in Canada and are influenced by an American atmosphere in which there is an existence of
the binary "black/white" classification it is perhaps easier for youth to develop a racialized

62

63

identity; whilst their parents developed an identity in which "race" is not integral in defining
one's social identity (Ibrahim, 2004).

not neglect aspects of Eritrean culture. Therefore, it is difficult to determine if they have fully embraced this first stage of assimilation. Moreover, this study can not speculate on the remaining
six steps towards assimilation as participants are in the early stages of their adulthood. Overall, it is difficult to determine the incorporation level of participants as they seem to
lack active and regular participation in both the Canadian and Eritrean communities.

According to Thompson and Carter (1997) Eritrean youth may be in the 'encounter
phase' of their racial identity in which there is recogiition_ofj^

y^^^^^^JodetyvMlQ seeking to develop a black identity where they can immerse
within blackness. Despite carrying a strong attachment and belief in being part of the "black"

Nevertheless, using Berry et al.'s (2006) acculturation postulation, participants can most closely
be associated with following the integration strategy. Eritrean youth maintain national pride in their primordial culture while simultaneously espousing a Canadian mindset. None of the participants rejected the influence of being Eritrean and Canadian. In this respect, the two
identities are intertwined and meshed. Policy Interpretation: Multiculturalism In popular conversations, multiculturalism is often described as Canada's identity. It is associated with equality, acceptance of diversity, ethnic understanding and a facilitation of the

identity, participants did not select an African-Canadian or "Black-Canadian" identity. Instead
there is an explicit focus on their

When examining the integration of Eritrean youth into Canadian society it seems they

have relinquished a number of the performative aspects of the Eritrean identity and have integrated into the Canadian values and mindset. Yet there continues to be minimal public

ian- This may be due t0 Perceived racism in which although it was
not explicitly experienced, it frequently arose during interviews. Due to the existence of

perceived discrimination its elimination or reduction is important in order to gain a greater sense of cohesion and inclusion among Canadians. The struggle immigrants face with inequality emphasizes the importance of Canadian diversity policies and highlights the limits of current
initiatives (Sykes, 2008).

integration process. One of its goals is to allow individuals to retain their ethno-racial identity,
while simultaneously fostering a Canadian sense of belonging. It seems Eritrean youth have been

able to retain patriotic zeal for being Eritrean and have developed a Canadian mindset without

fully acknowledging the role of multiculturalism policy. As indicated in the findings-participants

When examining assimilation and acculturation, it seems too early in the lives of the

£^^
an e

participants to fully determine their level of integration into Canada. Participants can be

j££njh^^

considered Canadian as they admit to carrying a mindset and aspiring to "Canadian" goals such as pursing education and delaying marriage. Based on the participants' behaviour it is difficult to

through avenues such as history in schools and diversity in the labour market. Thus, echoing the words of several critics of multiculturalism policy including Bissoondath (2002).

distinguish them from their Canadian peers. In this respect, they may begin Gordon's (1964) first
stage of assimilation (cultural/behaviour assimilation). It is important to note that participants do

Multiculturalism presents immigrants and their descendants as exotic without acknowledging the
richness which may exist in Canadian culture.

64

65

Multiculturalism is identified as a

icy among Eritrean youth. This may be

Chapter 6
Conclusion

further illustrated through an examination of the Annual Report on Multiculturalism Act 2006-

2007 (Canadian Heritage, 2008), there is little discussion of direct funding towards ethno-racial communities or its impact on the formation of identity among the second generation. Given the
acculturation process of second generation youth, it is important for government to support

This paper has outlined a number of relevant points in the discussion of identity and

belonging among second generation Eritrean youth. Following the work of a variety of theorists,

identity can be understood as fluid as it encompasses several forms of identity including, ethnic, national and racialized identities. For the twelve key informant and focus group participants their
identity is fluid and includes various elements of their Eritrean and Canadian perspectives.

ethno-racial communities to ensure that cultural loss is limited or prevented. As acknowleged by

Berry et al, (2006) there are psjc]wlo|^

a opposed

to marginalization and exclusion. If cultural retention and identification is shifted towards the

Examining identity through an ethnic, national and racialized framework brings forth various

private sphere, Canada will not be able to foster a truly multicultural society (Woods, 2008). The
tendency for government officials to simply focus on educational and labour market integration
is not sufficient in outlining a comprehensive form of integration. Given the shift away from

results. Participants are aware of the ethnic groups and the richness in the Eritrean various cultures, however, it is not their forefront identity. Rather national and^agialjdenti^s play

larger roles and a£e nrtejrtwjrjed Overall, Eritrean identity seems to be based on patriotism for
their ancestral homeland and thus develop a strong attachment to being Eritrean.

overt discrimination and towards subtle negative stereotypes (Gill, 2007) it is important to focus on cohesion indicators outside of the education and labour market stream. Increasing social
integration, promotes the development of inter-ethno-racial relationships which in turn has a
positive psychological factor and plays a role in the creation of identity (Kymlicka, 1998). Without strengthening cohesion among Eritrean second generation youth they may continue to
identify as outsiders.

For the participants, an Eritrean identity is based on roots to back home, the diasporic

community and national pride. When developing this identity parents are the key players as they set the benchmark in determining what it means to be Eritrean. Moreover, friends and members
of the community also play an active role. Each party has been able to bring forth a new element in terms of what it means to be Eritrean. These groups are important given that youth have a
limited regular interaction with Eritrea.

Through the two focus groups and two key informant interviews a wide range of topics were discussed including outlining the Eritrean identity and what it means to be Eritrean in
Canada. Second generation Eritrean j^mitl^^ identity instilled mainly by

When examining the Canadian identity, youth are not able to provide a clear definition. It is mostly through travels abroad that participants recognize their Canadian mindset.

parents. Simultaneously, they have established a Canadian mindset but only strategically identify
as being Canadian.

Acknowledging this mindset illustrates the existence of some form of Canadian identity despite its difficulty in forming a clear definition. Perhaps, greater public attention should be placed on

66

67

outlining as well as reinforcing the unity which binds all Canadians. Nonetheless, the main
critique of Canadian identity is its lack of cultural richness.

Future Studies

This major research paper has outlined various forms of identity and how they interact with Eritrean youth in Toronto. While this fills a gap in existing literature there continues a
number of research avenues which require further examination. The remainder of this paper will
outline five major opportunities for research.

Through each facet of their identity, including their Eritrean, Canadian, and "black"
identities, participants expressed a ljadL°j^

Specifically, youth are not viewed as "full" Eritreans by their parents, the community and those

residing in Eritrea. This is mainly due to their Canadian mindset. Meanwhile, participants feel their Canadian identity is not entirely accepted due to their "race". Lastly, certain members of the "black" community do not perceive Eritreans as "black" as a result of their unique features.
Remarkably, despite these occasional rejections of their identities, participants continue to embrace and associate with each of those identities. Nevertheless, youth need to bear in mind

First, conducting a study which incorporates a wider variety of participants and a larger
sample size will lead to greater diversity and possibly distinctive responses; for instance,

involving an incrcaj^ji^

this study's reliance

on females and Christians, it would be valuable to gain the insight of other members of the community in order to provide a broader understanding of Eritrean identity in Canada.
Second, conducting this study in smaller Canadian cities may provide distinct

that they are members of all these communities. In this respect, they have influence in

determining what may be deemed as acceptable. Eritrean youth can use this power to shift any
community to incorporate their perceptions, particularly within the Eritrean community. Given

conclusions. While Toronto is home to nearly h^fofal^ritreansjnd their descendants, other cities have smaller a community which may reduce opportunities to express an Eritrean identity.
Moreover, given the diasporic nature of the discussion, it would be beneficial to determine the

this possibility, it is important to recognize that any form ofjdentitx, whether it is ethnic,

natfooalo^

shifting.

forms of Eritrean identity throughout the diaspora. This allows for a comparison of how second generation youth express their Eritrean identity. It may also illuminate various policies which are incorporated by receiving countries which attempt to stimulate positive identity growth.
Third, it is important to track how identity is practiced through adulthood. Since all participants are in their twenties a number of issues such as education, career choices, investment selections and dating/marriages are increasingly playing a prominent role in their identity. These

When residing in Canada, multiculturalism is frequently presented as a policy developed

for immigrants. While multiculturalism may help build cohesion it may weaken the Canadian identity. The recurrent criticism of multiculturalism policy from the participants and writers
(Bissoondath, 2002; Bramadat, 2001) brings into question whether or not the state should be

jiij^

other words should sense of belonging and other social

integration factors be considered a private responsibility and not incorporated into Canadian
policies? This requires further discussion and interpretation in determining the role of the state in
multiculturalism and identity formation.

decisions can be life-changing and may be measurable aspects of Eritrean identity retention and
integration. For instance, according to Gordon's (1964) postulation of assimilation if Eritrean
youth begin to enter mixed marriages they will be further along the assimilation path. An

68

69

awareness of integration into the dominant society will bring insight to the possible shifts in
identity and the acceptance of the dominant society.

Appendix 1

Key Informant Questions

Fourth, several participants referred to carrying a "double life". Presumably this refers to one life among Erifreans (the community and possible peers) while living a separate lifestyle
amongjnon-Eritreans. Undoubtedly, juggling these two 'lives' plays an impact on identity.

Ice breaker question: Tell me a little about yourself and your connection to the Eritrean community. Tell me about your immigration journey (if you immigrated here).
1. Who is an Eritrean?

a.
2.
3.

What elements comprise of an Eritrean identity?

What does it mean to be Eritrean?
Do you consider yourself Eritrean?

Further research needs to capture the role of "double life" in identity formation. Lastly, research on both Eritrean youth and members of the first generation are needed.

a.

How do you consider yourself Eritrean?

4.

What does being an Eritrean mean to you?

5.
6.

Do you feel you belong in the Eritrean community?
a. How? Can you become Eritrean?

As recent arriving African migrants continued research and awareness of their social as well as

economic and political integration is needed particularly as the number of immigrants continue
to grow.

a.

How do you become Eritrean?

7.

What does it mean to be Eritrean in Canada? a. How do you become Eritrean while in Canada?
b. Can you be Eritrean and Canadian?
If yes, how?

This additional research will assist in further determining the elements of identity and

8.

Do you feel that being Eritrean is accepted in Canada?
a.

how they evolve through the process of migration. This form of research is relevant to Canada as

b.

If no, what should be done?
How?

9.

Does Canada's multiculturalism policy assist Eritrean youth in their identity?
a.

it continues to accept a large number of immigrants annually; thus impacting the sense of who is
a Canadian.

10. What allows Eritrean youth in Toronto to be Eritrean? 11. What are some of the difficulties youth face in developing an Eritrean identity?

70

71

Appendix 2

Focus Group Questions

a.

Could you please explain in detail what they specifically did--if you could recall
some incidents from your childhood that would be great!!

In terms of our discussion topic, I'd like to first ask you a few general questions about Eritrean
identity.

17. Did your friends have a role in creating your Eritrean identity?
a. Could you please explain what they specifically did that--if you could recall some
incidents that would be great!! 18. Do you have Eritrean friends?

1.

When I use the word 'identity' what first comes to mind? a. Can it comprise of person's job status, ethnicity, gender, race? b. Is it important to have an identity?

a.
b.
c.
a.

If yes: Is your relationship with your Eritrean friends the same or different from your
non-Eritreans? (i.e., do you feel closer to them) If yes: Do you have more Eritrean or non-Eritrean friends?
If no: Why?
How?

Now I will ask you some questions about being Eritrean

2.
3.
4.
5.

Could you please suggest some specific/particular characteristics that make a person
Eritrean?

19. Does the nationality of your friend impact your own Eritrean identity?

Based on these criteria, would you consider yourself an Eritrean?
a. What makes you say that?

Now I will ask you some questions about being Canadian and about having an Eritrean
identity in Canada.

Are you proud to be an Eritrean in Toronto? a. What makes you say that? Is someone born an Eritrean?
Can you 'become' an Eritrean?

20. Who is a Canadian?
a.

6.

Do you see yourself as Canadian? / Are you Canadian? Why?
Do you feel this policy helps you retain your Eritrean identity? Why? Do you feel you are Eritrean? Why? Do you feel you are Canadian? Why? Do you feel you are Eritrean-Canadian? Why?

a. If yes: how does an Eritrean who has not been to Eritrea become Eritrean? 7. What role does a person's regional location in Eritrea have on him/her being an Eritrean? 8. As an individual do you 'practice' an Eritrean identity in Canada? 9. What about communication? How important is it to communicate in an Eritrean language in
order to 'be' Eritrean?

21. Have y

a. a. b. c.

22. How do you describe your identity?

a. b.

What language do you communicate with your parents? What language do you communicate with your friends?

d.

Does your identity shift depending on who you are with (i.e., Eritrean with Eritreans,
Canadian with Canadians...)?

Now I will ask you some questions about how you retain and express Eritrean identity in
Canada

23. Is there a conflict with being Eritrean in Canada? 24. How do you feel others judge you?
a. Are you "black"? Why/How?

10. Could you please tell me some of the ways in which you 'practice' your Eritrean identity? 11. Do you attend Eritrean festivals, recreational activities and/or associations?
a. What made you say that?

b.
c.

Do you think non-Eritreans view you as black, foreigner or Eritrean?
Are Eritreans "black"?

i.

How does this affect your identity?

b. If yes: How frequently do you attend these events? 12. Do you go to Eritrean restaurants? Why or why not? 13. Do you attend religious activities held by Eritreans?
a. Why?

25. Is there a difference between being Eritrean and being black? 26. Is there a difference between being Eritrean and being Canadian? Are there any other issues about being Eritrean in Canada that is important to you that we have
not mentioned? \

b. If yes: How frequently do you attend these activities? 14. Is it important to retain and express an Eritrean identity in Canada? 15. What are some of the difficulties youth face in retaining their identity?

We're almost finished but before we end I'd like each one of you to make one final comment about what it means to be Eritrean in Canada. Let's just go around the table.

Now I will ask you some questions regarding the role of your family and friends in creating
your identity.

16. Do you think your parents had anything to do with the creation of your Eritrean identity?

72

73

Appendix 3
Survey

8.

Do you speak in any of the Eritrean languages?
1. 2. Yes No

1.

Where were you born?
1. Canada

2. 3.

Eritrea Other (please specify):

9.

Do read in any of the Eritrean languages?
1. Yes

2.

No

2.

If bom outside of Canada, how old were you when you arrived in Canada?
1.
2. 3.
4.

Less than 1 years old
1-5 6-10
11-15

10. Do write in any of the Eritrean languages?
1. Yes

2.

No

5.

16 or older

11. If applicable, please use a check mark to indicate which of the Eritrean languages you can speak, read and/or write.
Speak Afar Arabic
Bilen

3. If bom outside of Canada, please specify the country or countries which you resided in
before coming to Canada?

Read

Write

4.

Were any of your parents born in Eritrea?
l.Yes 2. No

Hiderab
Kunama

Nara

Saho
Tigre

5.

Do you have an Eritrean Identity card (citizenship)?
1.
2.

Yes
No

Tigrinya

12. How frequently do you communicate in one of the Eritrean languages?
1. 2. 3.
4.
5.

6.

To which age group do you belong?
1.
2. 3.
4.

Always Almost always Sometimes
Almost never
Never

17 or less
18-24 25-30
31+

7.

To which Eritrean ethnic group do you belong?
1.
2.

13. Please indicate one of the religions that you practice or identify with:
1. Christianity
a. b. c. Catholic Lutheran Protestant Orthodox

Afar
Bilen

3.
4.
5.

Beja/Hiderab
Kunama
Nara

d. 2.
a.

Other (please specify):
Shi'ite

6.
7.

Rashida
Saho

Islam b. c. Sunni Other (please specify): :

8.

Tigre

*

9.

Tigrinya

10. Jeberti

3. 4.

Other (please specify): Do not identify with any religion.

74

75

14. What is your current employment status? 1. Employed Full-Time 2. Employed Part-Time 3. Full-Time Student
4. Part-Time Student

References

Abbay, Alemseged. (1998). Identity Jilted or Re-imagining Identity?: The Divergent Paths of the Eritrean and Tigrayan Nationalist Struggles. Lawrenceville. New Jersey: The Red Sea
Press Inc.

5.

On social assistance looking for a job

6.

On social assistance not looking for a job

Al-Ali, Nadje, Richard Black and Khalid Koser. (2001). Refugees and transnationalism: the experience of Bosnians and Eritreans in Europe. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies,
27(4),p.615-634.

15. In 2008, what was your personal income before taxes? 1. Less than $20,000 2. $20, 001 to $40,000

Ali, Mehrunnisa. (2008). Second Generation Youth in Toronto: Are we all multicultural?
Canadian Diversity, 6(2) p.87-89.

3.
4.

$40,001 to $50,000
$50,001 to 75,000

5. 6.

$75,000 to $100,000 $100,000 and above

Allahar, Anton. (2006). The Social Construction of Primordial Identities. In Hier, Sean P. and Bolaria, B. Singh (eds). Identity and Belonging: Rethinking Race and Ethnicity in Canadian Society. Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press Inc. p.31-42.
Andall, Jacqueline. (2002). Second-generation attitude? African-Italians in Milan. Journal of
Ethnic and Migration Studies, 28(3), 389-407.

Anderson, Benedict. (1991). Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of
Nationalism. New York: Verso.

Arnoe, Anna. (2008). Journeys to Exile: The Constitution of Eritrean Identity Through Narratives and Experiences. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 34(2), p.325-340. Bariagaber, Assefaw. (1998). The politics of cultural pluralism in Ethiopia and Eritrea: trajectories of ethnicity and constitutional experiments. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 21(6),
p. 1056-1073.

BBC News on the Web, (2007, August 13). US moves to shut Eritrean mission. Retrieved August
6. 2009. from http://news.bbc.co.Uk/2/hi/africa/6944846.stm

Bernal, Victoria. (2004). Eritrea Goes Global: Reflections on Nationalism in a Transnational Era
Cultural Anthropology, 19(1), p.3-25.

Berns McGown, Rima. (1999). Muslims in the Diaspora: The Somali Communities of London and Toronto. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Berry, John W., Phinney, Jean S. Sam, David L., Paul Vedder. (2006). Immigrant Youth: Acculturation, Identity, and Adaptation. Applies Psychology: An International Review
24(3) 303-332.

1

fBissoondath, Neil. (2002). Selling Illusions: The Cult ofMulticulturalism in Canada (Revised

Edition) Penguin Books.

76

77

Boatswain, Sharon J. & Lalonde, Richard N. (2000). Social Identity and Preferred Ethnic/Racial
Labels for Blacks in Canada. Journal ofBlack Psychology, 26(2), p.216-234.
Gordon, Milton. (1964). Assimilation in American Life. New York: Oxford University Press
Chapter 3, p. 60-83.

Bramadat, Paul. (2001). Shows, Selves, and Solidarity: Ethnic Identity and Cultural Spectacles in
Canada Canadian Ethnic Studies, 33(3), p. 78-98.

Hall, Stuart. (2006). The Future of Identity. In Hier, Sean P. and Bolaria, B. Singh (eds). Identity and Belonging: Rethinking Race and Ethnicity in Canadian Society Toronto: Canadian
Scholars' Press Inc. p.246-269.

Brown, Frank and Rong, Xue Lan. (2002). Socialization, culture and identities of Black immigrant children: What Educators need to know and do. Education and Urban Society 34(2) p.247-273. y Canadian Heritage. (2008). What is multiculturalism? Retrieved November 24, 2008 from
http://www.pch.gc.ca/progs/multi/what-multi e.cfm

Hall, Stuart. (2003). Cultural Identity and Diaspora. In Braziel, Jana Evans and Mannur, Anita (eds). Theorizing diaspora: A reader Maiden: Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p.233-246.
Hassan, Fatma. (2008). Resilient teens: social exclusion ofparents and impact on the second
generation Eritreanyouth. Major Research Paper, Ryerson University, Toronto.

Chiu, Shirley S. (2003). Ethnic Identity Formation: A Case Study of Caribbean and Indian Hakkas in Toronto. Master's of Arts Thesis, York University, Toronto.
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). (2009). The World Factbook: Eritrea Retrieved July 23,

Hier, Sean P. and Bolaria, B. Singh (eds). (2006). Identity and Belonging: Rethinking Race and
Ethnicity in Canadian Society Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press Inc.

2009 from https://www.cia.gov/librarv/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/er.htmi

Hepner, Tricia M. Redeker. (2008). Transnational governance and the centralization of state
power in Eritrea and exile Ethnic and Racial Studies, 31(3), p.476-502.

Conrad, Bettina. (2006): When a Culture of War Meets a Culture of Exile: 2nd Generation Diaspora Eritreans and their Relations to Eritrea (Draft). In: Abdoulaye Gueye (guest
ed.). Revue Europeenne des Migrations Internationales (in print)

Hepner, Tricia Redeker. (2003). Religion, Nationalism, and Transnational Civil Society in the
Eritrean Diaspora. Identities, 10(3), p.269-293.

Eid, Paul. (2007). Being Arab: Ethnic and Religious Identity Building among Second Generation
Youth in Montreal. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press.

Hedetoft, Ulf. (2007). Social Cohesion and Ethnic Diversity: Are they Compatible? Metropolis
World Bulletin. 7 p.5-6.

ElDakiky, Magdy and Shields, John. (2009). Immigration and the Demographic Challenge: A
Statistical Survey of the Ontario Region. Policy Matters 38.

Ibrahim, Awad. (2004). One is not Born Black: Becoming and the Phenomeono(ology) of Race.
Philosophical Studies in Education, 35.

Erkisen, Thomas. (2005). Ethnicity and Nationalism. In Spencer, Philip and Wollman, Howard (eds). Nations and Nationalism: A Reader. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

Isajiw, Wsevolod W. (1999). Understanding diversity: Ethnicity and Race in the Canadian
Context, Toronto: Thompson Educational Publishing Inc.

Dei, George J. Sefa & James, Irma Marcia. (1998). 'Becoming Black1: African-Canadian youth and the politics of negotiating racial and racialised identities. Race, Ethnicity and
Education, l(l),p.91-108.

Isajiw, Wsevolod.W. (1993). "Definitions and dimensions of ethnicity: A theoretical framework" In Gustave Goldmann and Nampeo McKenny (eds.), Challenges ofMeasuring an Ethnic World: Science, Politics and Reality. Ottawa and Washington D.C.L Statistics Canada
and the United States Bureau of the Census, p. 407-427.

\

Driedger, Leo (2003) Race and Ethnicity: Finding Identities and Equalities (Second Edition)
Toronto: Oxford University Press.

Jackson, Peter and Penrose, Jan. (eds) (1994). Introduction: Placing 'race' and nation. In
Constructions ofrace, place, and nation. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press
p.1-19.

Giampapa, Frances. (2001). Hyphenated identities: Italian-Canadian youth and the negotiation of ethnic identities in Toronto. International Journal ofBilingualism, 5(3), p.279-315.
---^   . .

Kobayashi, Audrey. (2008). A Research and Policy Agenda for Second Generation Canadians:
Introduction. Canadian Diversity, 6(2) p.3-6.

Gilroy, Paul. (2007). Identity, Belonging and the Critique of Pure Sameness. In Das Gupta, Tania et al. (eds). Race and Racialization Essential Readings. Toronto: Canadian Scholars'
Press Inc. p.280-292.

78

79

Koser, Khalid. (2003). "Long-Distance Nationalism and the Responsible State: The Case of Eritrea" in Eva 0stergaard-Nielsen(ed) International Migration and Sending Countries: Perceptions, Policies and Transnatioanl Relations New York: Palgrave Macmillan

Statistics Canada. (2006). Ethnic Origin (247), Single and Multiple Ethnic Origin Responses (3) and Sex (3) for the Population of Canada, Provinces, Territories, Census Metropolitan Areas and Census Agglomerations, 2006 Census - 20% Sample Data. In Canadian Census 2006 Government of Canada. Retrieved February 19, 2008 from
http://wwwl2.statcan.ca/english/census06/data/topics/RetrieveProductTable.cfm7ALEV EL=3&APATH=3&CATNO=&DETAIL=0&DIM=&DS=99&FL=0&FREE=0&GAL=0

Kymlicka, Will. (1998). Finding our Way: Rethinking Ethnocultural Relations in Canada.
Toronto: Oxford University Press.

Li, Peter S. (2003). Destination Canada: Immigration Debates and Issues Don Mills: Oxford
University Press.

&GC=99&GK=NA&GRP=1&IPS=&METH=0&ORDER=1&PID=92333&PTYPE=889
71 &RL=0&S=1 &SUB=0&ShowAll=No&StartRow= 1 &Temporal=2006&Theme=80&V ID=0&VNAMEE=&VNAMEF=&GID=837928

Magocsi, Paul R . (ed). (1999). Eritreans. In Encyclopedia ofCanada's Peoples Multicultural History Society of Ontario, (pp.488-491). Toronto: Published for the Multicultural
History Society of Ontario by University of Toronto Press

Satistics Canada. (2006). Place of birth for the immigrant population by period of immigration, 2006 counts and percentage distribution, for Canada, provinces and territories - 20%
sample data. In 2006 Census: Data Product, Retrieved July 22, 2009. http://wwwl2.statcan.ca/census-recensement/2006/dp-pd/hlt/97-557/T404eng.cfm?Lang=E&T=404&GH=4&GF=l&SC=l&S=l&O=D

Matsuoka, Atsuko and Sorenson, John. (2005). Ideas of the North: The Eritrean Diaspora in
Canada. Eritrean Studies Review, 4 p.85-114.

Matsuoka, Atsuko and John Sorenson. (2001). Ghost and Shadows: Construction ofIdentity and Community in an African Diaspora Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Matsuoka, Atsuko and Sorenson, John. (1999). Eritrean Women in Canada: Negotiating New Lives. Canadian Woman Studies, 19(3), p. 104-109. Mdrriam, Sharan B.; Johnson-Bailey, Juanita; Lee, Ming-Yeh; Kee, Youngwha; Ntseane, V_y Gabo; Muhamad, Mazanah. (2001). Power and positionality: negotiating insider/outsider status within and across cultures. International Journal ofLifelong Education 20(5)
p.405-416.

Sorenson, John. (1991). Politics of Social Identity: "Ethiopians" in Canada. The Journal of Ethnic Studies, 19( 1), p.67-86. Sorenson, John. (1990). Opposition, Exile and Identity: The Eritrean Case. Journal of Refugee
Studies, 3(4), p.298-319.

Sykes, Stuart. (May 2008). Life on the Reef in the Canadian Ocean: The "New" Second
Generation in Canada (Discussion Paper) Government of Canada Policy Research Initiative Project Cultural Diversity.

Tettey, Wisdom and Puplampu Korbla P.(eds.) (2006). Continental Africans in Canada:

Merenstein, Beth Frankel. (2008). Immigrants and Modern Racism: Reproducing inequality.
London: Lynne Rienner Publishers.

Exploring a Neglected Dimension of African-Canadian Experience. In The African diaspora in Canada: negotiating identity & belonging. Calgary: University of Calgary
Press p.3-24.

Neuman, W.L. (2006). Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches Sixth Edition. Toronto: Pearson / Allyn and Bacon.

Thompson, Chalmer E. & Carter, Robert. (1997) "An Overview and Elaboration of Helms' Racial Identity Development Theory". In Thompson, Chalmer E. & Carter, Robert (eds)

Ogbagzy, Rahel Araya. (1999). The Construction ofEritrean Women }s Identity in the Canadian Context. Master's of Arts Thesis, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the
University of Toronto, Toronto.

Racial Identity Theory: Applications to Individual, Group and Organizational Interventions. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates p. 15-32. Tronvoll, Kjetil. (1999). Borders of violence - boundaries of identity: demarcating the Eritrean

Palys, Ted. (2003). Research Decision: Quantitative and Qualitative Perspectives - Third
Edition. Canada: Simon Fraser University.

nation-state. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 22(6), p. 1037-1060.

Tyyska, Vappu. (2001). Long and Winding Road. Adolescents and Youth in Canada Today.

Ratcliffe, Peter. (2004). 'Race \ Ethnicity and Difference: Imaging the Inclusive Society. New
York: Open University Press.

Toronto: Canadian Scholars Press, Inc.

Waters, Mary C. (1999). Black identities: West Indian Immigrant Dreams and American

Statistics Canada. (2008). Ethnic Diversity and Immigration. In Canada Yearbook. Retrieved

Realities. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

August 15, 2009 from http://www41.statcan.ca/2008/30000/ceb30000000-eng.htm.
80

81

Woldemikael, Tekle M. (2005). Eritrea's Identity as a Cultural Crossroads. In Paul Spickard (ed). Race and nation: ethnic systems in the modern world. New York : Routledge p 337353.

Woods, Eric. (2006). Multiculturalism and Identity in Canada: A Case-study of UkrainianCanadians. Master's of Arts Thesis, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon.
Wright, Michelle M. (2004). Becoming Black: Creating identity in the African Diaspora.
Durham and London: Duke University Press.

Wrong, Michela. (2005). "I Didn't Do Itfor You": How the World Betrayed a Small African
Nation. New York: Harper Collins Publishers.

Zhou, Min. (1997). Segmented assimilation: Issues, controversies and recent research for the
new second generation International Migration Review, 31 (4), 975-1008

82

