Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Criminal predictors and protective factors in a sample of young offenders : relationship to offending trajectories
Ashley Ward
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Psychology Commons Recommended Citation
Ward, Ashley, "Criminal predictors and protective factors in a sample of young offenders : relationship to offending trajectories" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 522.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

r <

CRIMINAL PREDICTORS AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS IN A SAMPLE OF YOUNG OFFENDERS: RELATIONSHIP TO OFFENDING TRAJECTORIES

by

Ashley Ward

Bachelor of Science in Psychology, Nipissing University, North Bay, Ontario 2007

A thesis

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the

requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts

in the Program of
Psychology

Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2009
© Ashley Ward 2009

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the
purpose of scholarly research.

Author's signature:

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other
means, in total or part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of
scholarly research.

Author's signature:

u

Abstract

Criminal Predictors and Protective Factors in a Sample of Young Offenders: Relationship to
Offending Trajectories

Ashley Ward

Master of Arts in the Program of Psychology, 2009
Ryerson University

Although the predictors of delinquency are well-documented in the psychological and

criminological literature, an understanding of their relationship with longitudinal criminality in
an offender sample has not been achieved. The purpose of this thesis was to examine the

relationship between childhood and adolescent criminal predictors and protective factors and the four criminal trajectories identified by Day et al. (2008). Results revealed differences in predictor
items among the trajectory groups within the individual, family, and peer domains during
childhood and adolescence. A backward stepwise procedure found that the following childhood variables, broken home and involvement with alternative care, differentiated the low rate

trajectory group from the other three groups. Significant predictors in adolescence were criminal
family members, familial abuse, poor peer relations, broken home, and involvement with alternative care. Identifying the factors influencing the onset and maintenance of criminality can inform prevention and intervention programs that target antisocial and delinquent behaviour.

111

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank my thesis supervisor, Dr. David Day, for his strong and consistent guidance, feedback, support, and encouragement since I arrived at Ryerson University. Dr. Irene Bevc of The Hincks-Dellcrest Centre, Dr. Thierry Duchesne of Laval University, and Dr. Ye Sun are thanked for their helpful consultations regarding my methodology and statistical analyses. Data collection could not have been organized without the assistance of Alfredo Tinajero, Ernie Blunt, and Jayanti Devi. Gratitude is expressed to the faculty and my peers in the Psychology
Department at Ryerson University; being among the first cohort of graduate students in the

clinical psychology program is both an honour and a privilege! A special thank you goes to Tara
Stallberg, whose efforts in assisting faculty and graduate students in the Psychology Department at Ryerson University do not go unappreciated. Finally, I am grateful for the helpful input and

support provided by my mother, Heather Ward, and my partner, Katelyn Ott.

IV

Dedication

I would like to dedicate this thesis to my mother, who always believed in me.

Table of Contents

Author's Declaration
Abstract

,,

ii
iii

Acknowledgements
Dedication Table of Contents

:..

iv
v vi

List of Tables. List of Appendices
Introduction 1.1 Introduction

,,

ix xi
1 1

1.2
1.3

Organization of the Thesis
Developmental Criminology.

3
3

1.4

Predictors of Delinquency in Childhood and Adolescence
1.4.1
1.4.2 1.4.3 1.4.4

5
6
7 7 ,, 8

Individual Factors
Family Factors Peer Factors School Factors

1.5

Protective Factors 1.5.1 1.5.2 Individual Factors Family Factors

8 9 9

1.5.3

Peer and School Factors

9

1.6

Criminal Trajectories: The Criminal Career
1.6.1 Onset

10
10

vi

1.6.2
1.6.3
1.6.4

Course
Desistance
How Many Criminal Trajectories Are There ?

10
11
11

1.7

The Toronto Criminal Career Study 1.7.1 1.7.2
1.7.3

12 12 12
13 15 16

Sample Characteristics Criminal Offence Data
The Four-Group Model

1.8 1.9

Theoriesof Trajectory Group Etiology Predictive Factors and Trajectory Group Membership

1.10 1.11

The Current Thesis Project Anticipated Outcomes

18 18

Method
2.1 Design and Rationale of the Thesis

19
19

2.2

Sample Characteristics

19

2.3

Procedure......
2.3.1
2.3.2 2.3.3

19
20
21 21

Development ofthe Coding Schemes
Childhood Criminal Predictors Childhood Protective Factors

2.3.4 2.3.5 2.3.6 2.3.7

Adolescent Criminal Predictors Adolescent Protective Factors The Coding Process.... Inter-Rater Reliability

22 22 23 23

2.4

Plan of Analysis

24

vn

Results

36

3.1 3.2 3.3

Preliminary Analyses Hypothesis Testing Cross Tabulation Analyses 3.3.1
3.3.2

36 36 39 39
40 41

Childhood Predictors
Adolescent Predictors

3.4

Multinomial Logistic Regression Analyses

3.4.1 3.4.2
Discussion

Childhood Criminal Predictor Model Adolescent Criminal Predictor Model

41 43
46

4.1
4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5

Differentiating the Four Trajectory Groups
Predictors of Trajectory Group Membership... Limitations of the Thesis Policy and Practice Implications Future Directions for Research

46
49 53 54 55

References

66

vm

List of Tables

Table 2.1: Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Childhood Criminal

Predictors
Table 2.2: Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Childhood Protective

25

Factors

·

·

29

Table 2.3: Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Adolescent Criminal

Predictors

·

30

Table 2.4: Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Adolescent Protective

Factors
Table 3.1: Cross Tabulation of Information Source across the Four Trajectory

34

Groups



37

Table 3.2: Cross Tabulation of Childhood Criminal Predictors across the Four

Traj ectory Groups
Table 3.3: Cross Tabulation of Childhood Protective Factors across the Four

40

Trajectory Groups

·

41

Table 3.4: Cross Tabulation of Adolescent Criminal Predictors across the Four

Trajectory Groups
Table 3.5: Cross Tabulation of Adolescent Protective Factors across the Four

42

Trajectory Groups

·

43

Table 3.6: Backward Stepwise Analysis of Trajectory Group Membership as a Function of Childhood Criminal Predictors (Base Reference Group is the

Low Rate Trajectory Group)
Table 3.7: Backward Stepwise Analysis of Trajectory Group Membership as a

44

IX

Function of Adolescent Criminal Predictors (Base Reference Group is the Low Rate Trajectory Group). 45

List of Appendices Appendix A: Childhood Criminal Predictor Coding Scheme 57

Appendix B: Childhood Protective Factor Coding Scheme Appendix C: Adolescent Criminal Predictor Coding Scheme Appendix D: Adolescent Protective Factor Coding Scheme

60 61 65

XI

Introduction

The occurrence of crime is associated with a number of negative individual, social, and economic consequences (Conklin, 1975). The individual costs of crime incurred by the victim may include physical injury, psychological trauma, and fear of crime, while society as a whole experiences heightened feelings of insecurity. Youth who engage in delinquency and antisocial behaviour are at risk for various short- and long-term negative consequences, such as psychiatric problems, early and severe alcohol and/or substance use and abuse, school failure and dropout,
adult criminal behaviour, low occupational status and low income, unemployment, poor marital adjustment and stability, and impaired offspring (Jessor, 1998; Perry, 2000; Werner & Smith, 1992). Crime's enormous impact on the economy extends from the costs of the offences themselves to the responses to criminal activity, such as police intervention, court proceedings,
and the application of correctional and rehabilitative measures. The total number of federal stays

in Canada in 2003 was approximately $4,626,606 (CAD), while the average daily cost of each inmate was $240.18 (CAD) (Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, 2005). The average

individual cost of non-fatal pain and suffering from crime victimization is $72,000 (CAD)
(Leung, 2004).

For a certain number of individuals who offend, crime is not a one-time event, nor is it limited to one type of offence or a constant frequency of engagement. Longitudinal studies completed in Canada, the United States, Puerto Rico, Scotland, England, Denmark, Sweden,

Finland, Switzerland, China, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, using community, high risk,
and offender samples, have provided strong support for the continuity and variability of criminal

behaviour over the life course (Piquero, 2008). Insight into the study of offending across
development also has been gained using the trajectory analysis procedure, which accommodates

1

the changes and continuities of offending through the use of a group-based framework (Nagin, 1999; Piquero). This methodology assumes that distinct groups of offenders (e.g., low rate, moderate rate, and high rate) exist within the aggregated age-crime curve, which results from the influence of different factors (e.g., biological, individual, familial, peer, situational) at different developmental stages of the life course. The results of studies utilizing the trajectory analysis method have identified significant distinctions among groups of offenders, and mounting research evidence supports the notion that certain factors occurring at specific developmental 1?eriods differentiate the offending groups. Discovering the factors in childhood and adolescence linked to the onset and maintenance of criminal behaviour and their effects at different developmental stages is of great interest to researchers, policy makers, and the general public, given their implications for the prevention and intervention of antisocial behaviour and delinquency. For example, Cohen and Piquero (2009) estimated that the fmancial cost saved by effectively intervening on the antisocial behaviour of a 14-year-old high risk adolescent is estimated to be between $2.6 to $5.3 million (USD). At the present time, the factors in childhood and adolescence related to the onset of delinquency are well-documented in the psychological and criminological literature, using both cross-sectional and prospective longitudinal designs (Borum, 2000; Farrington, 2004; Farrington

& Welsh, 2007; Hawkins et aI., 1998; Leschied, Chiodo, Nowicki, & Rodger, 2008; Lipsey &
Derzon, 1998). What is missing, however, is an understanding of the relationship between the factors linked to the onset and maintenance of offending and patterns of criminal behaviour across the life course. While some research has examined this association in community and high risk samples, few studies have utilized an offender-based population. Additionally, little is known about the influence of protective factors on longitudinal criminality, an area of focus that

2

has been understudied in criminal trajectory research. The aim of this thesis was to expand on the

body of knowledge about the relationship between criminal predictors and protective factors and
offending trajectories using the four trajectory groups identified by Day, Bevc, Theodor,
Rosenthal, and Duchesne (2008).
Organization ofthe Thesis

The current thesis is divided into four main sections. The first section introduces the area
of developmental criminology and broadly reviews the psychological and criminological

literature on the causes and correlates of criminal behaviour in childhood and adolescence.
Factors that have been found to prevent or reduce engagement in antisocial behaviour and delinquency also are reviewed, and an overview of the notion of the criminal trajectory is provided. The precursor study of this thesis, authored by Day et al. (2008), is briefly described and the results of their criminal trajectory analysis are summarized. Also, the anticipated outcomes of the current study are outlined. The second section describes the study's design and rationale, characteristics of the sample, and the procedures followed for data collection. The plan

of analysis is then discussed. The third section provides the results of the analyses, including hypothesis testing and exploratory analyses. The fourth section of this document reviews the
study's findings in the context of the broader literature, as well as the limitations of the study, policy and practice implications, and future directions for research in the field. The coding

schemes used to code the data are found in Appendices A through D following the fourth section
of the thesis.
Developmental Criminology

Developmental criminology is defined by three key issues: 1) the development of antisocial and offending behaviour; 2) the risk factors for antisocial and offending behaviour at

different ages; and 3) the influence of life events on development (Loeber & LeBlanc, 1990;
LeBlanc & Loeber, 1998; Farrington, 2006). Understanding the developmental characteristics of offending, such as the age of onset, frequency, prevalence, specialization across age groups, and

desistance from criminal activity, is of interest. Studying within-individual changes over time is
emphasized (Loeber et al., 1993) as it is believed that the factors related to criminal behaviour

change according to an individual's stage of development. For example, hyperactivity and
impulsivity may motivate a child of age 7 to shoplift, but, some years later, at the age of 26, the same individual may commit burglary out of a need for money to purchase alcohol or drugs. Engagement in crime is considered to be part of a larger syndrome of antisocial behaviour that begins in childhood and continues throughout adolescence and adulthood (West & Farrington, 1977). Empirical evidence has shown that there is strong continuity in antisocial behaviour across time, with the behavioural expressions of antisociality changing according to the individual's capacities and environmental contexts (Farrington, 1990,2006). Of interest to many researchers is answering the question of whether there are different trajectories of offending that these individuals follow and whether these trajectories are related to specific
factors occuring early in life.

Developmental criminology seeks to identify the factors at different ages that relate to

criminal behaviour. Generally, the factors are classified within the biological, individual, family,
peer, school, neighbourhood and community, and situational domains (Farrington, 2006). The

factors within the individual, family, peer, and school domains will be reviewed and described in
a later section of the literature review. The results of research on the impact of these factors on

delinquency have been consistent, regardless of whether the outcome measure was officially recorded or self-reported delinquency (Farrington, 1992), and the risk factors for offending have

been replicated using cross-sectional and prospective longitudinal designs (Borum, 2000;
Leschied et al., 2008).

There appears to be a cumulative effect of risk, independent of the type of risk factors involved. That is, the greater the number of risk factors present in an offender's life, the more

likely his criminal behaviour is to persist (Farrington, 2002). As well, children who experience several disruptions in their development are at risk for stable and persistent involvement in the
youth and adult criminal justice systems (Leschied et al., 2008). However, it is important to note

that, while the presence of certain factors may have greater predictive power than others, the

presence of even the strongest factors are not so certain that all youth who have one or some of
these factors will engage in delinquent behaviour. Additionally, recent research has discovered that specific factors present at certain developmental periods influence the likelihood and type of offending. Understanding the factors that influence the onset and maintenance of antisociality
and delinquency at each developmental stage is important for the advancement of effective
prevention and intervention programs that reduce the likelihood of antisocial and delinquent

outcomes. An understanding of the factors protecting against antisociality and delinquency also
may be useful for designing prevention and intervention models since the effects of these factors
remain unclear at this time.

Predictors ofDelinquency in Childhood and Adolescence

At present, the causes and correlates (collectively termed "predictors" for the purpose of this thesis) linked to the onset and maintenance of delinquency, occuring in childhood and
adolescence, are well-documented in the psychological and criminological literature (Borum,

2000; Farrington, 2004; Farrington & Welsh, 2007; Hawkins et al., 1998; Howell, 1997;
Leschied et al., 2008; Lipsey & Derzon, 1998; Loeber & Stouthamer-Loeber, 1998; Rutter,

Giller, & Hagell, 1998). Prospective longitudinal studies are particularly important in this line of research, as they follow infants or young children into their adult years to precisely measure the changes in relationships between predictors and criminal behaviour. The predictors occurring in childhood and adolescence that play a role in the onset and maintenance of delinquent behaviour

are found within the domains of the individual, family, peer, and school. Predictors within the
neighbourhood and community and situational domains are important to consider when

contextualizing delinquency; however, these factors are not reviewed as they were not measured
in the current study.

Individualfactors. Individual factors in childhood and adolescence that have been found

to influence delinquency are low intelligence, measured using a low verbal, nonverbal, or overall
IQ score or a learning disability, and school problems including low academic achievement, low
interest in education, dropout, and academic difficulties (Farrington, 1989; Lipsitt, Buka, & Lipsitt, 1990; Maguin & Loeber, 1996; Stattin & Klackenberg-Larsson, 1993). Hyperactiveimpulsive-inattentive behaviours, such as attention or concentration deficits, attention deficit

disorder, and hyperactivity, have been implicated in the development of delinquency (Barkley,
Fischer, Edelbrock, & Smallish, 1990; Blackburn, 1993; Pratt, Cullen, Blevins, Daigle, &

Unnever, 2002; Satterfield, Hoppe, & Schell, 1982; Satterfield & Schell, 1997), as well as substance use (Loeber & Dishion, 1983; Loeber & Stouthamer-Loeber, 1987; Dembo et al., 1995) and antisocial overt (e.g., aggression, bullying) and covert (e.g., animal cruelty, vandalism, break and enter) behaviours (Farrington, 1991; Tremblay, Masse, Vitaro, & Dobkin, 1995; White, Moffitt, Earls, Robins, & Silva, 1990). The onset of antisocial behaviour between the ages of 10 and 12 years is strongly predictive of a lengthy and diverse pattern of criminal
behaviour (Loeber & Farrington, 1998). Callousness traits, such as a lack of guilt or remorse,

low empathy, and shallow emotions, have predicted antisocial and delinquent behaviour (Barry
et al., 2000; Hill, 2003).

Familyfactors. The psychological and criminological literature has linked a number of family-related factors occurring in childhood to subsequent delinquency (Arseneault, Tremblay,

Boulerice, Seguin, & Saucier, 2000; Herrera & McCloskey, 2001; Juby & Farrington, 2001). Having an antisocial or a criminal parent or sibling, or having a parent with an addiction or other
mental health problem, are two important predictors of delinquency and violence (Farrington, 1989; Farrington, Barnes, & Lambert, 1996; McCord, 1977). Familial relationship difficulties, characterized by discord, low levels of communication, and poor bonding, as well as inappropriate child-rearing methods such as poor supervision, harsh and punitive, lax, or inconsistent discipline, have been implicated in adolescent criminality (Capaldi & Patterson, 1996; Elliott, 1994; Farrington & Welsh, 2007; Hawkins, Arthur, & Catalano, 1995; McCord). Children and adolescents who have been physically, sexually, or verbally abused or neglected
are at a high risk for criminal behaviour (Malinosky-Rummell & Hansen, 1993; Smith &

Thornberry, 1995; Widom, 1989). Broken homes, family transitions, or disrupted families, have been found to have a causal relationship with delinquency (Farrington, 1992; McCord, 1982), as well as frequent changes in parent figures (Capaldi & Patterson, 1991; Mednick, Baker, &
Carothers, 1990), and mothers aged 17 or younger at the time of childbirth (Loeber, Farrington,
Stouthamer-Loeber, & van Kammen, 1998).

Peer factors. In addition to the above-noted family factors, peer factors are among some

of the strongest predictors of delinquency, particularly in adolescence (Brendgen, Vitaro, &
Bukowski, 1998; Farrington & West, 2007; Moffitt, 1993). These include peer rejection, low popularity and difficulty relating to peers (Coie, Lochman, Terry, & Hyman, 1992; DeRosier,

Kupersmidt, & Patterson, 1994), and negative or criminal peer association (Dishion & Loeber,
1985; Elliott, Huizinga, & Ageton, 1985; Patterson & Dishion, 1985).

Schoolfactors. According to Maguin and Loeber (1996), a lack of interest in academics, truancy, suspensions, and expulsions have been linked to the development of criminal behaviour. Adolescents with a high frequency of discipline problems at school have been found to engage in delinquent behaviour (Loeber & Farrington, 1998). As well, youth who drop out of school have been found to be at high risk for delinquency (Fagan & Pabon, 1990; Fagan, Piper, & Moore,
1986; Farrington, 1989; Wolfgang, Thornberry, & Figlio, 1987).
Protective Factors

Successfully prevailing over adversity is broadly termed as resilience (Masten, Best, &

Garmezy, 1990; Rutter, 1987). As such, resiliency includes risk factors and factors that protect against risk. Protective factors are "individual characteristics or environmental conditions that help children and youth resist or otherwise counteract the risks to which they are exposed"
(Richman & Fraser, 2001, p. 4). They delay, suppress, or neutralize negative outcomes such as antisociality and delinquency (Benard, 1991; Kirby & Fraser, 1997; Rutter) by exerting

compensatory or buffering effects on the factors associated with offending (Fraser, Richman, &
Galinsky, 1999).

While some researchers have defined factors as either purely related to risk or protection, others refer to them as opposite poles of the same variable (Stouthamer-Loeber et al., 1993; White, Moffitt, & Silva, 1989). Farrington (1992) suggested that, rather than simply being opposing ends of a spectrum, risk and protective variables may differ in terms of the magnitude of their relationship to an outcome. In support of this notion, Stouthamer-Loeber et al. found that some variables of study were more likely to show risk and protective influences than either

8

concept alone, while others exerted a risk-specific effect only. Protective and risk variables did

not have a uniform effect across different levels of delinquency. For the purpose of this thesis, four domains of protective factors will be reviewed: individual, familial, peer, and school. Individualfactors. Intellectual ability has been one of the most salient protective factors in the literature, with average to high IQ benefitting children at risk for maladaptive outcomes (Werner, 1986; White et al., 1989). Effectively structuring a child's leisure time with prosocial activities and hobbies can act as a protective mechanism (Jenkins & Smith, 1990), particularly
activities for which the child receives positive recognition for. Emotional stability and social

maturity also are important individual protective factors (Carr & Vandiver, 2001; Stattin,
Romelsjo, & Stenbacka, 1997), as well as efficient use of problem-solving skills and selfreliance (Parker, Cowen, Work, & Wyman, 1990). Additionally, a positive response to authority

has been linked to lower levels of delinquency (Hoge, Andrews, & Leschied, 1996).
Familyfactors. Children who grow up in cohesive families and who have good communication with their parents have displayed good adaptation in adolescence (Grossman et al., 1992). As well, the presence of supportive and nurturant relationships with at least one parent has been shown to ameliorate the effects of adversity (Fergusson & Lynskey, 1996; Werner,
1989).

Peer and schoolfactors. Positive peer relations, including positive associations with and

being well-liked among peers, are an important source of protection for children at risk. Schoolbased competencies, such as conduct, sociability, and good academic achievement, have shown
protective effects (Cowen & Work, 1988; Rutter, 1985; Werner, 1989). For example, Werner

(1993) illustrated that children who had normative achievement in communication in elementary
school had nurturant, responsible, and achievement-oriented attitudes in adolescence.

Criminal Trajectories: The Criminal Career

The term "developmental trajectory" has been used to describe the course of a behaviour or outcome over the life course (Nagin & Tremblay, 2005). The notion of the criminal trajectory,

or criminal career, relates to "the longitudinal sequence of offences committed by an offender
who has a detectable rate of offending during some period" (Blumstein, Cohen, & Farrington, 1988, p. 2). The general definition of the term "career" is described by two specific concepts, including a course in progress through life and a way of making a living. In terms of delinquent behaviour, "career" refers to the succession of criminal offending during a period of an

individual's life. This should not suggest that the offender earns a living through his criminal
behaviour, though some may engage in criminal activity as a means for survival (Blumstein et

al., 1988). All criminal trajectories have an onset, a termination, and a total career length. During
the period of time from onset to termination, it is important to determine the characteristics of the
career, such as the rate of offending and patterns of offence types.

Onset. Thornberry (2005) described offending as a commonplace trait; that is, more

individuals than not within the population are inclined to, and partake in, delinquent behaviour at

some point in their lives. Generally, this behaviour is thought to occur in adolescence (Moffitt, 1993). While many individuals engage in some degree of criminal behaviour, the majority will not involve themselves in a lengthy or substantial criminal career. This has been illustrated when

criminal trajectory features such as frequency, duration, seriousness, and an interaction of all of
these factors, are examined (Thornberry). Therefore, few individuals will persist in committing crimes. The onset of a criminal career may occur in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood.
Course. There is a range of possible criminal careers that offenders could experience

during their active offending periods. Some careers will be limited in type of offending, or

10

specialize, while others will display flexibility, or versatility, in committing crimes. Farrington

(1999) found that offenders primarily engage in versatile rather than specialized offending,
particularly in adolescence. Those partaking in a longer criminal career may involve frequent

offending while others commit crimes in fewer numbers (Thomberry, 2005). Given the predominance of heterogeneity in offending behaviour, individual patterns of offending are not well represented by the age-crime curve, although it is implied in some theories of criminality.
For example, Gottfredson & Hirschi (1990) argue that low self-control is the lone risk factor that

explains crime at all ages. Regardless of the criminal career trajectory, however, it should be
noted that, despite the various patterns an individual's career could display, the pathway is not random. Developmental life events, such as getting married or gaining employment, impact the
shape and length of the criminal career.

Desistance. Research on criminal trajectories suggests that, after a period of time, the

majority of offenders desist from criminal activity and that this inactivity is stable (Thomberry,

2005). Desistance is generally comprised of two developmentally-related processes. The first
process involves a decreasing participation from the peak level of criminal activity to the

beginning of criminal inactivity, while the second process consists of the maintenance of
noncriminal activity at a zero or near-zero rate (Thomberry). Termination may occur abruptly or

gradually, though the latter behaviour is more prevalent. Further, although there is a high likelihood for those who begin criminal activity sooner in life to desist from offending behaviour later rather than sooner, it is possible for some to desist earlier and faster.
How many criminal trajectories are there? The question of the number of distinct

offence trajectories remains a matter of debate in the literature (D'Unger, Land, McCall, & Nagin, 1998; Tolan & Gorman-Smith, 1998). Key researchers in the field have proposed two-

11

group (Moffitt, 1993; Patterson & Yoerger, 1993), three-group (Livingson, Stewart, Allard, & Oglivie, 2008), four-group (D'Unger et al., 1998; Blokland, Nagin, & Nieuwbeerta, 2005), fivegroup (Wiesner & Capaldi, 2003), and eight-group (Thornberry, Huizinga, & Loeber, 2004)

models. In the Toronto criminal career study, Day et al. (2008) have identified a four-group
model that includes moderate rate, low rate, high rate adult-peaked, and high rate adolescence-

peaked offending groups. This study and the trajectory groups are subsequently described.
The Toronto Criminal Career Study

Day et al. (2008) investigated the nature and pattern of offending in a sample of male
young offenders. The study analyzed for changes and continuities in offending across adolescence and early adulthood and examined the relationship between crime-related events in

adolescence (e.g., rate of offending, receiving a custody disposition) and the rate of offending in
adulthood.

Sample characteristics. The sample consisted of 378 male young offenders who were sentenced to one of two Phase II open custody facilities operated by a children's mental health centre in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. This was a 50% random selection of all of the young

offenders who resided at both facilities between January 22,1986 and April 22,1996. The Toronto sample served a mean of 124.6 days (SD = 109.8, Median = 92, Mode = 122, range = 1
- 1,087) in open custody, and the majority of the youths were within a range of 16 and 18 years

of age (94.2%; M= 17.6, SD = .85, range = 16.1 - 24.4 years) at the time of their admission into one of the open custody facilities. This sentence was not the first open or secure custodial
placement for approximately one quarter of the sample (26.7%).

Criminal offence data. The sample's criminal offence data were extracted from four

official sources of information, including the Ontario Ministry of Community and Social

12

Services (MCSS), the Ontario Ministry of Correctional Services (MCS), the Canadian Police Information Centre (CPIC), and predisposition or presentencing reports on file at the children's mental health centre. A coding scheme was created to record detailed information about the dimensions of their criminal careers, including the rate, type, severity, versatility, and duration of offending. Types of court contacts that were included in the study were: 1) those that resulted in a conviction and disposition (e.g., secure or open custody, fine, etc.), including a suspended sentence; 2) those that resulted in a finding of guilt but not a conviction (e.g., absolute or
conditional discharge); and 3) those that resulted in either a withdrawal of charges, stay of

proceedings, or determination that the person was unfit to stand trial (e.g., due to cognitive competence). Court contact that resulted in a withdrawal of charges accounted for only 5.7% of the total number of court contacts. The sample's court contacts were tracked for an average of
12.1 years (SD = 3.0, range = 4.9 - 22.8), beginning in late childhood or early adolescence and continuing into adulthood, with 73% of the sample followed for a minimum of 10 years. The Toronto sample was, on average, 27.6 years of age at the time of the last follow-up (SD = 2.6,
range = 22.2 -- 33.5 years).

The four-group model. The trajectory analysis identified four unique groups of offenders. The first group, labeled the moderate rate (MR) group, comprised 21.7% of the total sample. Their criminal career was an average of 12.0 years in length. The group's average age of first court contact was 15.1 years, and, at the time of their last court contact, their average age was 27.1 years. The average number of court contacts (corrected for time-at-risk) accumulated by the
MR group was 7.6 in adolescence and 23.6 in adulthood, averaging 31.2 court contacts across

then- entire criminal career. Members of this group spent an average of 3.7 years in closed

13

custody. Additionally, compared to the other three groups, they accumulated the greatest number of drug offenses, such as trafficking and possession. The second group, the low rate (LR) group, comprised 65.1 % of the total sample. This group had the shortest criminal career length compared to the other three groups, lasting only 6.7 years. Their average age of first court contact was 15.9 years, and their average age at the time of their last court contact was 22.5 years. This group incurred the least amount of (corrected) court contacts in adolescence (M = 4.5) and adulthood (M = 4.8) and engaged in the fewest types of offences. This group spent an average of less than one year (M = .9) in closed custody. It is interesting to note that this group had the greatest average number of psychiatric disorders (M = 1.33) compared to the MR (M = .95), high rate adult-peaked (M = .48), and high rate adolescence-peaked (M = .81) groups. The third group, labeled the high rate adult-peaked (HRADL) group, was 7.7% of the total sample. This group had the longest average criminal career length, which spanned 12.1 years. The group's average age offrrst court contact was 14.1 years, and their average age at the time of their last court contact was 26.6. They amassed the greatest average (corrected) number of court contacts in adulthood (M= 73.3) and overall (M= 84.7). Additionally, this group committed the greatest number of violent and property offenses (although not significantly so compared to the high rate adolescence-peaked group) and served the greatest number of years in closed custody (M = 13.3) compared to the other three trajectory groups. The fourth group, the high rate adolescence-peaked (HRADOL) group, comprised 5.6% of the total sample. The average criminal career length for members in this group was shorter relative to the MR and HRADL groups, averaging 9.8 years. Their first court contact occurred, on average, at age 14.3 years, while their average last court contact occurred at an average age of

14

24.1 years. Individuals in this group accumulated the largest number of court contacts in

adolescence (M= 21.5) and had an average of 56.5 (corrected) total court contacts. They spent an average of 5.1 years in secure custody. This group is characterized by a large number of property and breach offenses and a sharp decline in offending around age 18.
Theories of Trajectory Group Etiology

Several theories of offending initiation have proposed that distinct factors and life processes uniquely predict membership in specific trajectory groups. These theories are based on
two assumptions: 1) that there exist at least two unique patterns of offending, and 2) that the different trajectories possess distinct etiologies (Fergusson, Horwood, & Nagin, 2000). Gerald Patterson and colleagues, as well as Terrie Moffitt, have proposed two main theories of criminal trajectory group etiology. Patterson and colleagues' (Patterson, DeBaryshe, & Ramsey, 1989;

Patterson, Forgatch, Yoerger, & Stoolmiller, 1998; Patterson & Yoerger, 1993) theory involves
two etiologically unique groups, one group characterized by an early onset of antisocial behaviour that continues in adolescence and adulthood. The early onset of delinquency is caused

by antisocial behaviours learned from maladaptive family processes, such as inappropriate discipline, low parental supervision, and a lack of problem solving skills. The other offending group possesses a level of risk greater than nonoffenders but less than that of early onset
offenders, engaging in antisocial behaviour in adolescence. In this group, delinquency results

from social reinforcement by negative peers. Moffitt's (1993) developmental taxonomy theory also posits that offenders belong to one of two offending groups. The first group, the life-course-persistent (LCP) offending group,
displays antisocial behaviour early in life that persists throughout the course of their development. They have neuropsychological functioning deficits that include a difficult

15

temperament and compromised cognitive functioning. These deficits are exacerbated when combined with an adverse family and social environment that promotes anti sociality. The second group, the adolescent-limited (AL) offending group, participates in criminal behaviour primarily in adolescence as a result of mimicking negative peer influence. This mimicry results from a need to assert independence and maturity. Predictive Factors and Trajectory Group Membership The relationship between criminal predictive and protective factors and offending trajectories continues to remain unresolved in the literature. Some studies have found common predictors across offender trajectories that differentiate the groups by the level of exposure. For example, Fergusson et al. (2000) reported that nonoffenders, adolescent-onset offenders, moderate offenders, and chronic offenders were differentiated by a single factor that included social disadvantage, family dysfunction, and individual difficulties, differing in level of risk exposure. The only factor to uniquely differentiate the groups was deviant peer affiliation. Similarly, in a study by Chung, Hill, Hawkins, Gilchrist, and Nagin (2002), a set of predictors that included aggressiveness, deviant peer association, and drug availability predicted various trajectories of offending, showing limited evidence of trajectory-specific predictors. However, several studies have provided support for trajectory-specific predictors (Farrington & Hawkins, 1991). For example, Bartusch, Lynam, Moffitt, and Silva (1997) demonstrated that individual childhood factors (i.e., verbal ability, hyperactivity, and impulsivity) were strongly associated with offending in adolescence. In another study, Simons, Wu, Conger, and Lorenzo (1994) found that inadequate parenting accounted for early involvement in delinquency, while deviant peer association was predictive of later-onset offending. Moffitt, Caspi, Dickson, Silva, and Stanton (1996) reported that LCP and AL

16

offenders differed in terms of personality characteristics, school dropout, and family bonds.

Additionally, Piquero, Brame, Mazerolle, and Haapanen (2002) showed that local life
circumstances exerted different effects across distinct offender trajectories and offence types. Recently, Livingson et al. (2008) found between-group differences in Indigenous status and sex for trajectory group membership, with Indigenous and male offenders more likely to belong in their chronic offender group than non-Indigenous and female offenders. Additional investigations have found that certain factors uniquely predict trajectory group membership while other factors are more common across trajectory groups. In one study by

Loeber, Stouthamer-Loeber, van Kammen, and Farrington (1991), the correlates of initiation
(i.e., social withdrawal, deviant peer association) of delinquency were distinct from those of
escalation (i.e., school functioning, family functioning) but similar to the correlates of desistance

(i.e., low social withdrawal, low disruptive behaviour). Smith and Brame (1994) demonstrated that some factors had the same effect on the initiation and continuation of offending (i.e., demographic factors, alcohol use, deviant peer association), whereas others had specific effects (i.e., living in rural areas, moral beliefs, negative labeling). Also, Ayers and colleagues (1999) andNagin, Farrington, and Moffitt (1995) identified common and specific correlates of different

offender trajectory groups. Last, White, Bates, and Buyske (2001) discovered overlap in
correlates that distinguished nonoffenders from offenders and escalators from persistent offenders, but only one factor discriminated AL- from LCP-type offenders, hi reviewing the

literature on predictive factors and criminal trajectories, it is clear that further investigation is
warranted to clarify the type and degree of influence predictive factors exert on trajectory group
membership.

17

81

in Sxnxmooo suiaji ssnqB jbijiuibj jo jaqumu i3A\oj b pire stuajx jopipsid jo jraqumu jsjbsjS b sabij oj pspipaid sbm. dnoiS -gq sip 'dnoiS lavaH 9tlJ

·sdnoaS Xjopafejj 1OOVHH P116 '"fflAf '^19X:IJ °J pa-reduioo stasii jopxpsid ssnqB lBi|Tx
ptre 'uoiju3^.Bin-X;xAis{ndTin-i{;iAT;oBJ9dXq 'juatusAaiqoB oruiapBOB jood jo aousSin9^ MOI J°
^sjS b sabi{ ppoAV dnojg lav^IH 91C[J 'siopjpaid pooqptxiio aqj jo 'pinjl "aonaossppB

pooiipjiqo ssoiob siopipsjd |butuiuo pBOiq jo jaquinu jssmsj 9tp 9ABq o; pspadxs sba\
dnoi§ ^j sip 'puooss -sdnoiS Ajopafej} asjqj isqjo sqi oj psjBduioo aousossppB pire

ssojob gmxmooo sjopipsid |butuiuo pBOiq jo isqumu isjbsjS b 9ABq ppoM dnoaS pspipsjd sbm. ji 'jsjtj -ApAipadssj 'sdnoiB <j3q pxre qy (£66t) stwgjo]AT pajusssjdai sdnoiS

Wl (8003) VF3 J3 ^Ba l^P psumssB sba\ jt 'sasaqjodXq ^b oj piB§3i qji^
sduiooinQ pdjvdpijuy

·jb p Xbq Xq paxjTjuapi sauopafeaj

iuiuo moj axp qjiAv diqsuoijBpi xpvp. Suraxxnexa puB sjopbj SAipsjoid puB sjoptpsjd
[butuiuo ;u9ossppB ptre pooqpjnp ioj Apojsno usdo raoij sa^ij jusxp st9|duiBS jpip Suiaiurexa

Xq (8003) 'lB ^ ^BG J° ^I^^- 9M^ u0 psptredxs sisaqj siqi 'os Sinop iq -gxnpuajjo jo
lBUipTi;i§UO| pUB 'SIOPBJ 9Aip9JOjd '90U30S3|OpB piIB pOOqp|Tl{O UI SJOpipSld jBUIUIUO

diqsuoi;Bpj sqj jnoqB sSps^AvoiDi jo Xpoq sip uo piredxs o% sbav Xpnjs sip jo asddmd
jodfouj si

Method Design and Rationale of the Thesis

To identify relationships between childhood and adolescent predictors of offending and
criminal trajectory group membership, a retrospective chart review of the client files of 362 male

young offenders from the Toronto criminal career study (Day et al., 2008) was conducted.
Sample Characteristics

The client files of a sample of young offenders who resided in one of two open custody facilities operated by a children's mental health centre in Toronto, Ontario, Canada were

examined. Criteria were not specified for inclusion in the study. Of a possible 378 client files,
362 files were reviewed and coded. The remaining 16 files could not be located at the children's mental health centre, possibly due to lost or incomplete files or an alternative storage location. Documents that were reviewed for coding included intake forms, predisposition or presentencing reports (PDR), psychological reports, psychiatric reports and notes, Youth Management Assessments (YMA), Plan of Care reports, discharge summaries, and other pertinent information sources on file such as case notes, social work reports, and police synopses. For the purpose of

this study, the PDRs, psychological reports, and psychiatric reports were considered important documents for coding, as they typically contained a broad range of information about the youth,
such as their developmental and family history, current familial and peer relationships,
significant life events, and performance in school.
Procedure

Prior to data collection, the study was approved by Ryerson University's Psychology Department and Research Ethics Board, and agreement to access the sample's client files was obtained from the children's mental health centre. As well, to preserve the sample's

19

·S90U9tl|JUI 9AUOUIOjd pUB A0U9IJJS9J UO S9iptUS UIOJJ

-(£003 'W^i. 3* 'P^S 'umjog -A"aAVS) MJnoA m. ^F jo jusrasssssv psmptujs 3H1 P118 '(lOOS '3U9A9t; 3> 'l§so^[ 'jgjsqgyft. 'uaunSnv '3 uoxs
SOZ T3VH) s^°a J0J juauisssssy isiq ^spj XyiBg sip '(S66I 'qjrauo^ ^> 'Bjuoa 'SMSipuy '"HO
"ISl) «OISTA3-a OUBJUO-AiOJlI9AUI 30TAI3S JO J9A3q Sip SB qOTlS S}tI9UmflSUI p33U/5{SU |BXnUIUO

UO UOTJBUUOJUT SB JJ3M SB SSipniS pUiptUX§UO| SAtpadsOjd pUB JBUOIJ03S-SSOJ0 psptipUT AV3TA3J

sinjBisjTj 9X{x 'Xouanbtnpp ui ju9ta3A]0Aiix jsuibSb p9;oid jBqj siojobj sb jjsm sb jnoiABqsq
TBUTUIUO JO S3JBt9JJ00 pUB S3ST1B0 9l[J UO SltUBIS;!] 3*P JO AV3TA9I B UO p9SBq p9p9J3S 9i9A\

9xp joj siopipgid 9qj 'S9|g p||BJBd gqj ui 3|qB^BAB uoijbxujojut sq; Butjou o\iq/^
·(suiBuiop ]ooqos puB load 'Xjx

'jBtlpIAipUI 3V[l UIO^ SJOJOBJ '^-l) pSJOU 3J9AS. S9|IJ 9qj UT g^B^TBAB SJOJOBJ JO S9dA} 9UX "STS lugxrno gqj joj pgpoo sbm vstp. uotjbuuojui s^idures aqj oj 9jqBJBdraoo 9i9A\ s9^tj tsqjnoX
UI P9UIB1U00 UOIJBUUOJUT 9UJ JO 9JTUBU pUB 9dAj 9UJ 'qOT\S Sy "XptllS 9XJJ UI SI9pU9JJO 29£ 3qi JO

sb pgpnjoui jou 9J9av jnq gjdures jugxino gxp sb pougd gunj gures suj Suunp saTj^P^J ^pojsno
usdo oau sqi jo 3uo o; p3#raipB 3J9a\ sqinoX ssaqx ·sjjuso ipjBaq |b;u9IU s^ugjpjrqo gqj ib S9jij

q^noX ooi jo squibs p|[ejed b SuairaiBxg Xq pgureS sbav sapj jugxp gq; in uoiibuuojui

puB AjrjuBtib 9qj jo uoissgiduii uy sduidtps Suipoo aytfo judiudop\dQ
·AtUO BJBp p9JB§9I§§B qitM S9SX|BUB UIOJJ p9UIBjqO 9J9M SIS9qi JU9JJT10

ui

jboijsiibis gqx -sisXibub jboiisijbis jo sssodrnd gqi joj jgqumu uoijBoijiiugpi
gnbum b pau§issB sba\ gjij qoB3 pxre sjjuso qjTBsq |bju3ui s4u9jp[iqo sq; jb ihooj pgpnjoas

b ui soB^d 5[ooi uoipsnoo BjBp sq; 'Ajpuspi st9TduiBS gqi pajojd Jaq^mj ox 'aJiuso q;|B3q

stu9jp{iqo gqi qjiAV uuoj A^qBijugpijuoo b p9U§is jo;b§iis9aui jBdiouud

Based on the parallel sample file review and literature review, dichotomized (i.e.,

present/absent or yes/unknown) checklist-style coding schemes were developed and utilized to
extract the data for the childhood and adolescent criminal predictors (see Appendices A through
D). To capture changes in predictive influences over the two developmental stages, separate

coding schemes for childhood (i.e., birth to age 12) and adolescence (i.e., 13 to 19) were created.

Dichotomization was considered to be the most appropriate method for gathering the predictor data. Given the type of sources and styles of information contained in the files, dichotomization
represented an efficient and objective method of extracting the data and was best suited for the

analyses with the outcome variable. As well, the results provide statistics that are meaningful and
uncomplicated for many audiences to interpret (Farrington & Loeber, 2000).

Childhood criminal predictors. A total of 17 broad predictor categories, comprised of 88
specific items, were selected for the childhood criminal predictor coding scheme. The broad predictors fell within four domains: 1) individual, 2) family, 3) peer, and 4) school. The broad predictors for the individual domain were: 'low intelligence or poor academic achievement,'

'hyperactivity-impulsivity-inattention,' 'antisocial behaviour,' 'alcohol and/or drug use,' 'health problems,' 'low self-esteem,' and 'extra-familial sexual abuse.' The broad predictors within the family domain included: 'criminal family members,' 'parental psychopathology,' 'poor childrearing methods,' 'familial abuse,' 'relationship difficulties,' 'broken home or family

transitions,' 'involvement with alternative care,' and 'biological mother was age 17 or younger at the time of childbirth.' Additionally, the peer and school domains were represented by a single
broad predictor termed 'peer factor' and 'school factor,' respectively.

Childhoodprotective factors. A total of 8 broad predictors, made of 13 specific items,
were included for the childhood protective factor coding scheme. The broad predictors fell

21

Suuegj-pjiuo sAijisod, /goirejnpnu reiugjed, isjopipgjd pBOjq Suimojioj 9tp paurejuoo ureuiop

/suoipe joj %\mS jo 9sjoui9j pgou9U9dx9, puB /XjuoipnB o; gsuodsgj 9Aiiisod, t'9un}
' rapBOB 10 aouaSijpjui uSiq oj 9§bj3ab, :sj3m ureuiop

ptipiAipin atp ioj siopipgid pBOiq (X 9qj uiqjiM. \pj sspoSgjBO pBOjq

"suiBuiop jooqos (f pire '

X

(

i oijiogds ^i jo pgsudraoo 9J9M xw\i s9uo§9}bo
SUU91 tq SU0}0V/9A.lJ3d)0Ud JU30SdJOpy

6 9J9AV 9J9ip 'SIOJOBJ 9AXJ09J0jd

'surexnop poqos pire J99d gqi joj
9I9M tJOj0Bj |ooi|os, pire 4

iAV JU9UI9AJOAUT, pUB /SUOTJtSXIBJl X[TOtBJ JO 9tUOq U95[Ojq, t'

t'9snqB iBitiurej, /spoqpra 3uuB9J-p]Tqo jood, /
praiuuo, ipgpnpur mBtaop A^iure; aqj uiqiTA\ ss
/asnqe

pxre s'ui99js9-jps avo|, t'sra9|qojd ipiBgq, 4'9sn §tup

jo

jood jo 90U9§T|pjin mo|, :p9pnpxii urexuop

joj sjopxpgjd pBOjq gqx -sureuiop poqos (p pxre cJ99d (£ 'A|thiej (3 '|mpTATpin (

S9tjo§9Jbo pBOjq 9qx ·auigqos Snrpoo jopxpgjd punnuo ltraosgjopB 9qi p9sxjdxiioo 'sxiigji ogxogds
011 jo gpBtu 's9uo§9Jbo jopipgjd p^ojq 81 jo jbjoj y suoioipdudpuiuiuo luaosdjopy
·jC[9ATp9dS9J 'SUIBUIOp JOOqOS pUB J99d

9qj ;u9S9jd9J Xxpsojq oj pgpnxoui 9J9M jooqos joj pJB§9J 9Aijxsod, pue .suoTrejgj J99d 9aijtsoj, o A"nurej, pUB t'spoqpra §utre9J-p|iqo 9Aiiisod, s'90UBjnijnu |Bju9JBd, :9J9av sjopipgjd
9ip 'ureuiop Ajiurej gqj joj /AuouitiB o; gsuodssj SAiiisod, pire t'3unj smspi jo ssn
3AIP3JJ3, /JU9UI9A3I110B OIUISpBOB JO 90U9§I]|9;UI q§iq OJ 9§BJ9AB, :p9pnpUI SUIBUIOp |BnpiAIpUI

9i[j joj sjopipsjd pBOjg -xooi|os (p ptre 'J99d (£ 'XyraiBj (z 'renpiAipux (\ :sureuiop moj uiqjTM.

methods,' and 'family cohesion.' 'Positive peer relations' and 'positive regard for school' broad
predictors represented the peer and school domains, respectively.

The coding process. All documents in each client file were reviewed for the presence of the specific items. If an item was present or highly suspected in the document being reviewed,

the specific item was checked on the age-appropriate coding scheme as 'Yes/Suspected' and
assigned a value of' 1.' Factors that were not noted as present in the file were considered 'Unknown' and assigned a value of '0.' If one or more items were checked under a broad predictor, the broad predictor was assigned a value of' 1.' For example, if information in a youth's PDR stated that he was physically abused at age 9 by his father, the specific item

'physically abused' was checked as 'Yes/Suspected,' as well as the broad predictor 'familial
abuse,' on the childhood coding scheme. Once the coding was completed, the data were entered
into a database for statistical purposes.

Inter-rater reliability. For all factors on the childhood and adolescent coding schemes,

inter-rater reliability, as measured by Cohen's Kappa (Cohen, 1960), was obtained on two

occasions by two independent raters. Of the variables with computed Kappa values, the average
Kappa values for all specific items and broad predictors contained on the childhood criminal predictor coding scheme at Times 1 and 2 was .79 and .64, indicating overall good reliability (Landis & Koch, 1977). Table 2.1 summarizes the Kappa values for the childhood criminal predictors. The average Kappa values for the specific items and broad predictors on the

childhood protective factor coding scheme at Times 1 and 2 was .63 and 1.00, which suggested
good and excellent reliability, respectively. The results of the Kappa values for all the broad
protective factors and specific items in childhood are displayed in Table 2.2.

23

For all of the broad predictors and specific items on the adolescent criminal predictor coding schemes, inter-rater reliability at Times 1 and 2 yielded average Kappa values of .76 and .59, indicating good and moderate reliability, respectively. Table 2.3 summarizes the Kappa values for the adolescent criminal predictors. Finally, the average Kappa values for the adolescent protective specific items and broad factors at Times 1 and 2 were .84 and .54, suggesting excellent and moderate reliability, respectiVely. Table 2.4 displays the Kappa values for all adolescent broad protective factors and specific items.
Plan ofAnalysis

The study's analyses were performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) Version 16. The study's hypotheses were examined using oneway analysis of variance (ANOV A) tests. Cross tabulations were performed to further explore the differences in predictor frequency among the trajectory groups. To determine the predictive relationships between the criminal predictors and trajectory groups, a backward stepwise multinomial logistic regression procedure was used. This procedure is useful when important predictors have not been identified and when the association between the predictors and outcome variables are not well understood (Hosmer & Lemeshow, 2000). As well, given the large number of predictors that were collected for the analyses, the stepwise procedure provided an effective method for selecting the most appropriate predictors and creating the most parsimonious multinomial logistic regression models for each set of predictors. Predictor variables with zero cell counts and base rates of 10% or less were not included in the backward stepwise analyses. Given the overall low base rate of protective factors in both childhood and adolescence, as well as zero cell count occurrences, the protective factors were not included in these analyses. For all of the multinomial logistic regression models, the independent

24

Table 2.1
Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Childhood Criminal Predictors.

Criminal Predictor Low intelligence or poor academic achievement Low intelligence Learning disability Enrolled in special education classes Failed or repeated a grade General academic-related difficulties Hyperactivity-impulsivityinattention Attention or concentration difficulties/easily distracted Restless Cannot wait or take turns Hyperactive/very active/energetic Difficulty planning ahead Acted on impulse Attention-deficit disorder diagnosis Attention-deficitlhyperactivity disorder diagnosis Antisocial behaviour Uses inappropriate language Defiant toward set rules or authority figures Quick to anger Temper tantrums Verbally aggressive Physically aggressive Sexually precocious Engaged in inappropriate sexual behaviour

Time 1 (No. of cases: 40) (No. of raters: 2) Generalized Level of Kappa Agreementa
.85 1.00 .81 Excellent Excellent Excellent

Time 2 (No. of cases: 31) (No. of raters: 2) Generalized Level of Kappa Agreement
.85 .00 .80 Excellent
b

Good Good Good Moderate
Moderate
b b b

.94 .83 .48
.77

Excellent Excellent Moderate
Good

.67 .72 .46
.53

.79 1.00 .00 .88 .00 .47 .79 .00 .89 .00 .79 .72 1.00 .64 .91 .66 1.00

Good Excellent
b

.00 .00 .00 .65 .00 .35 .00 .47 .64 .00 .43 -.033 .00 .71 .54 .00 .65

Excellent
b

Good
b

Moderate Good
b

Fair
b

Excellent
b

Moderate Good
b

Good Good Excellent Good Excellent Good Excellent

Moderate Poor
b

Good Moderate
b

Good

25

Table 2.1 continued
Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Childhood Criminal Predictors.

Criminal Predictor Lying Manipulative Runs away Harmful towards animals Vandalized Stealing Break: and enter Fire-setting behaviour Gang member Poor behaviour not specified Alcohol and/or drug use Alcohol Drugs Health problems Traumatic head injury Seizures Early ear infections Enuresis Encopresis Obesity Hygiene problems Other health problems Low self-esteem Extra-familial sexual abuse Criminal family members Criminal mother Criminal father Criminal sibling Parental psychopathology Mental health difficulties mother Mental health difficulties father Psychiatric hospitalization mother

Time 1 (No. of cases: 40) (No. of raters: 2) Level of Generalized Kappa Agreementa .72 Good Good .77 Good .63 Excellent 1.00 Good .66 Good .69 Excellent 1.00 Excellent 1.00 b .00 Moderate .59 Excellent 1.00 Excellent 1.00 Excellent 1.00 .92 Excellent 1.00 Excellent b .00 1.00 Excellent b .00 b .00 b .00 b .00 Excellent .88 .66 Good Excellent 1.00 Excellent 1.00 b .00 1.00 Excellent 1.00 Excellent Excellent .93 .00 1.00 .00
b

Time 2 (No. of cases: 31) (No. of raters: 2) Generalized Level of Kappa Agreement .78 Good 1.00 Excellent .52 Moderate b .00 .78 Good 1.00 Excellent b .00 1.00 Excellent b .00 .41 Moderate .64 Good .48 Moderate .48 Moderate b .00 b .00 b .00 b .00 b .00 b .00 b .00 b .00 b .00 b .00 1.00 Excellent .48 Moderate b .00 .65 Good b .00 .73 Good .48 .47 .00 Moderate Moderate
b

Excellent
b

26

Table 2.1 continued
Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Childhood Criminal Predictors.

Criminal Predictor Psychiatric hospitalization father Alcohol and/or drug use mother Alcohol and or drug use father Prenatal drinking or drug use Poor child-rearing methods Authoritarian or harsh discipline Lax discipline Inconsistent discipline Poor parental supervision Poor parental management skills Abandonment of child Familial abuse Physically abused Sexually abused Verbally or emotionally abused Neglected Witnessed physical abuse Witnessed sexual abuse Witnessed verbal or emotional abuse Relationship difficulties Poor relations among family members Family discord Low family cohesion/stability Broken home or family transitions Parental separation Parental divorce

Time 1 (No. of cases: 40) (No. of raters: 2) Level of Generalized Kappa Agreementa .00 .00 1.00 .00 .65 .75 .75 .45 .69 .50 1.00 .84 .87 1.00 1.00 .69 .64 .00 .00 .39
b

Time 2 (No. of cases: 31) (No. of raters: 2) Generalized Level of Kappa Agreement .00 .47 .76 1.00 .54 .79 .00 .78 .64 .67 .00 .66 .83 .00 .35 .48 .52 .00 .00 .74 .63 .67 .00 .79 .55
b

b

Moderate Good Excellent Moderate Good
b

Excellent
b

Good Good Good Moderate Good Moderate Excellent Excellent Excellent Excellent Excellent Good Good
b b

Good Good Good
b

Good Excellent
b

Fair Moderate Moderate
b b

Fair Poor Moderate Fair Excellent Excellent Excellent

Good Good Good
b

.13
.47 .29 .94 .85 .83

.71

Good Moderate Good

27

Table 2.1 continued

Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliabilityfor the Childhood Criminal Predictors.
Timel
(No. of cases: 40) (No. of raters: 2)

Time 2
(No. of cases: 31)

(No.. of raters: 2)

Generalized
Criminal Predictor Single parent Parental remarriage
Kappa .71 .42 .72 .77 .90 .95 1.00 1.00 .55 .00 .94

Level of

Generalized
Kappa .54

Level of
Agreement Moderate Moderate
Fair

Agreement3
Good
Moderate

.59
.24 .45 .87 .81 .63

Frequent change in parental
figures Good Good
Excellent

Frequent moving
Involvement with alternative
care

Moderate
Excellent

Child welfare agency Foster care

Excellent Excellent Excellent
Moderate
b

Excellent Good Excellent
Moderate
b

Adopted

1.00
.45

Other institutional
involvement Biological mother was age 17 or younger at childbirth Poor relations with peers Poor ability to socialize with
peers

.00
.52 .65 .00 .00 .00

Excellent

Moderate

.80 .00 1.00
.36 .00 .88 .00 .63 .68

Good
b

Good
b

Difficulty relating to peers Peer rejection Easily influenced by peers

Excellent Fair
b

b
b

Unwilling to associate with prosocial peers
Negative peer association Criminal peers Poor regard for school

.00
.47 1.00 .71 .00

b

Excellent
b

Moderate Excellent
Good
b

Good

Lack of academic motivation
or interest
Truant

Good
Moderate

.59
.66
.00

.83 .00
.00

Excellent
__b b

Suspended Expelled

Good
b

Note. aBased on the Kappa ranges as determined by Landis & Koch (1977), >.2O is considered a poor strength of

association while .21-.40 is fair, 41-.60 is moderate, .61-.80 is good, and .80-1.00 is excellent. 'Kappa reflects
skewed data due to a dichotomous response category with almost all of the responses in one category.

28

Table 2.2

Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliabilityfor the Childhood Protective Factors.
Time 1
(No. of cases: 40)

Time 2
(No. of cases: 31)

(No. of raters: 2)

(No. of raters: 2)

Generalized
Protective Factor
Average to high intelligence or
academic achievement

Level of

Generalized
Kappa
.00 .00 .00 .00

Level of
Agreement
b b
b

Kappa .48
.64 .00 .45 .00 .66 .66 .00 .00 .77

Agreement1
Moderate

Average intelligence Superior intelligence

Good
b

Reasonable academic
achievement

Moderate
b

b

Superior academic
achievement Effective use of leisure time Involvement in sports Involvement in other prosocial activities
Positive response to authority
Parental nurturance

.00
1.00

b

Good

Excellent

Good
__b b

1.00
1.00 .00 .00 .00 .00

Excellent

Excellent
b b b
b

Good Good

Positive child-rearing methods Authoritative discipline
Use of other appropriate

.66
.00

discipline techniques
Family cohesion

.66
.78 .78

Good
Good

.00 1.00 .00

b

Excellent
b

Family members are close
Family members express good communication Family participates in

Good
b

.00
.00 .00

.00
1.00

b

activities together
Positive peer relations

b b b

b

.00 .00
.00

b
b

Positive peer association Well-liked by peers Positive regard for school

.00
.00

b

b
b

Fair .00 .38 Note. "Based on the Kappa ranges as determined by Landis & Koch (1977), >.2O is considered a poor strength of

association while .21-.40 is fair, 41-.60 is moderate, .61-.80 is good, and .80-1.00 is excellent. bKappa reflects
skewed data due to a dichotomous response category with abnost all of the responses in one category.

29

Table 2.3
Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Adolescent Criminal Predictors.

Criminal Predictor Low intelligence or poor academic achievement Low intelligence Learning disability Enrolled in special education classes General academic-related difficulties Dropped out of school Hyperactivity-impuisivityinattention Attention or concentration difficulties/easily distracted Restless Cannot wait or take turns Hyperactive/very active/energetic Difficulty planning ahead Low self-control Acted on impulse Attention-deficit disorder diagnosis Attention-deficitlhyperactivity disorder diagnosis Antisocial behaviour Uses inappropriate language Defiant toward set rules or authority figures Quick to anger Verbally aggressive Physically aggressive Engaged in inappropriate sexual behaviour Lying

Time 1 (No. of case~: 40) (No. of raters: 2) Level of Generalized Kappa Agreementa

Time 2 (No. of cases: 31) (No. of raters: 2) Generalized Level of Kappa Agreement

.70 .88 .48
.39 .61 .95

Good Excellent Moderate Fair Good Excellent Good Good
b b

1.00 1.00 .43
.51 .21 .71

Excellent Excellent Moderate Moderate Fair Good Good Fair Good
b

.80
.63 .00 .00 .54 .63 .56 .80 .00 .00 .53 .48 .75 .78 .80 .85 1.00 .63

.60
.30 .65 .00 .26 .00 .00 .61 .00 .35 .00 .33 .21 .63 .61 .72 .84 .60

Moderate Good Moderate Excellent
b b

Fair
b b

Good
b

Fair
b

Moderate Moderate Good Good Good Excellent Excellent Good

Fair Fair Good Good Good Excellent Moderate

30

Table 2.3 continued

Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliabilityfor the Adolescent Criminal Predictors.
Time 1
(No. of cases: 40) (No., of raters: 2) Time 2 (No. of cases: 31) (No. of raters: 2)

Generalized
Criminal Predictor Manipulative
Runs away Kappa .73

Level of

Generalized
Kappa .81

Level of
Agreement

Agreement21
Good Excellent
Excellent

Excellent
Good
b

.86
1.00 .44 .64 1.00 1.00

.67
.00 .35

Harmful towards animals
Vandalized Stealing Break and enter

Moderate Good
Excellent

Fair Moderate Excellent Excellent
b

.46
1.00

Fire-setting behaviour Gang member

Excellent Excellent
Moderate Good

1.00 .00
.47

1.00
.44 .80 .70 .64

Poor behaviour not specified
Callousness

Moderate
Good
b b

.79
.00

Shallow affect
Lacks empathy Lacks remorse or guilt
Lacks responsibility or accountability

Good Good Good
Good
Excellent

.00
.79

.79 .61
.93 .90 .90 1.00

Good
Moderate

.56
.53
.74

Alcohol and/or drug use

Moderate

Alcohol
Hallucinogens Stimulants

Excellent Excellent
Excellent Excellent Excellent

Good Excellent Excellent
b
L

.93 1.00 .00 .00

Opiates
Depressants

1.00
1.00 1.00 .63 .84

D

t

Other drugs
Drugs not specified
Health problems

Excellent

.00 .63
.43 .00

O

Good
Excellent

Good
Moderate
b

Traumatic head injury Seizures

.66
.00 .00 .00

Good
b

Enuresis
Encopresis Hygiene problems

b
b

.00
.00 .00

b
b

b

.79 .00 .76 1.00 .76
1.00

Good
b

.85 .00 .63
.00 .00

Excellent
i_

Other health problems
Low self-esteem

D

Good
Excellent

Good
b b b

Extra-familial sexual abuse Criminal family members

Good

Criminal mother Criminal father Criminal sibling

Excellent
Excellent

.00
.00 .00

1.00 .73

b b

Good

31

Table 2.3 continued
Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Adolescent Criminal Predictors.

Criminal Predictor Parental psychopathology Mental health difficulties mother Mental health difficulties father Psychiatric hospitalization mother Psychiatric hospitalization father Alcohol and/or drug usemother Alcohol and or drug use father Poor child-rearing methods Authoritarian or harsh discipline Lax discipline Inconsistent discipline , Poor parental supervision Poor parental management skills Abandonment of child Familial abuse Physically abused Sexually abused Verbally or emotionally abused Neglected Witnessed physical abuse Witnessed sexual abuse Witnessed verbal or emotional abuse Relationship difficulties Poor relations among family members Family discord

Time 1 (No. of cases: 40) (No. of raters: 2) Generalized Level of Kappa Agreementa 1.00 Excellent

Time 2 (No. of cases: 31) (No. of raters: 2) Generalized Level of Kappa Agreement .52 Good

.00 .00 .00 .00 1.00 1.00 .75 1.00 .72 .38 .36 .49 .79 1.00 .79 1.00 .66 1.00 .00 .00 .00 .59 .67 .69

b b

1.00 .00 .00 .00 .65 .61 .44 .62 1.00 .52 1.00 .21 .00 .51 .87 .00 .43 -.03 -.03 .00 .00 .55 .59 .57

Excellent
b

b b

b b

Excellent Excellent Good Excellent Good Fair Fair Moderate Good Excellent Good Excellent Good Excellent
b b

Good Good Moderate Good Excellent Moderate Excellent Fair
b

Moderate Excellent
b

Moderate Poor Poor
b b

b

Moderate Good Good

Moderate Moderate Moderate

32

Table 2.3 continued

Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliabilityfor the Adolescent Criminal Predictors.
Time 1
(No. of cases: 40) (No. of raters: 2)

Time 2
(No. of cases: 31)

(No. of raters: 2)

Generalized

Level of

Generalized
Kappa
.48 .50 .63

Level of
Agreement

Criminal Predictor Low family cohesion/stability
Broken home or family transitions

Kappa .38

Agreement*1
FanModerate

Moderate
Moderate

.46 .64
.00 .79

Parental separation Parental divorce Single parent Parental remarriage Frequent change in parental figures Frequent moving
Involvement with alternative
care

Good
__b

Good

.65
-.03 .45 .00

Good
Poor

Good Excellent
b

1.00 .00 .49
1.00 .94

Moderate
_ b

Moderate Excellent Excellent Excellent

.39 .68
.68 .61

FanGood

Child welfare agency Foster care

Good Good
__b

.90
1.00 .84 .70

Adopted Other institutional
involvement Poor relations with peers Poor ability to socialize with
peers

Excellent
Excellent
Good

.00
.49

Moderate
Good Excellent
Poor

.66
.82 -.03

.90
.38

Excellent
Fair
b

Difficulty relating to peers Peer rejection Easily influenced by peers

.00 .70 .00 .54 .83 .60 .54 .75

.38
1.00 .00

Fair

Good
__b

Excellent
b

Unwilling to associate with prosocial peers
Negative peer association

Moderate Excellent
Moderate

.71 .63 .69 .45 .74
.76

Good
Good
Good

Criminal peers
Poor regard for school

Lack of academic motivation or interest
Truant

Moderate Good
Good

Moderate
Good Good

Suspended

.73

Expelled .64 Good .71 Good Note. "Based on the Kappa ranges as determined by Landis & Koch (1977), >.20 is considered a poor strength of

association while .21-.40 is fair, 41-.60 is moderate, .61-.80 is good, and .80-1.00 is excellent. ''Kappa reflects
skewed data due to a dichotomous response category with almost all of the responses in one category.

33

Table 2.4 Time 1 and Time 2 Inter-Rater Reliability for the Adolescent Protective Factors. Time 1 (No. of cases: 40) (No. of raters: 2) Generalized Level of Kappa Agreementa Time 2 (No. of cases: 31) (No. of raters: 2) Generalized Level of Kappa Agreement .52 .43 .00 .65 .00 .69 .24 1.00 .53

Protective Factor Average to high intelligence or academic achievement Average intelligence Superior intelligence Reasonable academic achievement Superior academic achievement Effective use of leisure time Involvement in sports Involvement in other activities Positive response to authority Experienced remorse or guilt for actions Parental nurturance Positive child-rearing methods Authoritative discipline Use of other appropriate discipline techniques Family cohesion Family members are close Family members express good communication Family participates in activities together Positive peer relations Positive peer association Well-liked by peers Positive regard for school

.87 .88 .00
1.00 .00 .80 .83 .88 .00 .72 .77 1.00 .00 1.00 .66 .66 1.00 .00 .66 .00 .66 1.00

Excellent Excellent
b

Moderate Moderate
b

Excellent
b

Good
b

Good Excellent
Excellent
b

Good Fair
Excellent Moderate

Good Good Excellent
b

.63 .20 .00 .00
.00 .00 .33 .00 .00 .30 .00 1.00 .00

Good Poor
b b

Excellent Good Good Excellent
b

b

Fair Fair
b

b

Good
b

Fair
b

Good Excellent

Excellent
b

Note. aBased on the Kappa ranges as determined by Landis & Koch (1977), >.20 is considered a poor strength of association while .21-.40 is fair, 41-.60 is moderate, .61-.80 is good, and .80-1.00 is excellent. ~appa reflects skewed data due to a dichotomous response category with almost all of the responses in one category.

34

variables were the criminal predictors in childhood and adolescence and the dependent variable was trajectory group membership. The backward stepwise models were formed based on the procedure outlined by Hosmer

and Lemeshow (2000). In brief, all criminal predictor variables with no zero cell counts and a base rate frequency greater than 10% were assessed for appropriateness in the model by carefully examining the impact of their presence and absence on the overall goodness-of-fit and the chisquare Likelihood Ratio Test statistic. A predictor variable was not included in the model if the

corresponding chi-square Likelihood Ratio Test statistic reached a significance level of .25 or
greater. The backward stepwise procedure individually removed variables with large standard

errors and those with the largest/? values while assessing the model at each step of removal for
significant change. The removal criterion was set atp < .1 (Hosmer & Lemeshow).

35

Results
Preliminary Analyses

The four trajectory groups were tested for differences in frequency of information source. Table 3.1 shows the percentage of information source by trajectory group based on cross tabulation analyses. A significant difference was found for the number of YMAs across the traj ectory groups. Specifically, the LR group had the greatest number of Youth Management Assessments (YMAs) (31.7%) compared to the HRADOL group (19.0%), the MR group (12.2%), and the HRADL group (6.9%). Since there were no significant differences among the trajectory groups for all other sources of information, this difference was unlikely to affect the results of the study's analyses.
Hypothesis Testing

For all tests related to the study's hypotheses, trajectory group membership represented the independent variable and the sum total of a broad predictor's specific items was the dependent variable. The first research question examined was whether Day et al. 's (2008) HRADL group accumulated more broad criminal predictors across childhood and adolescence compared to the LR, MR, and HRADOL groups. The results of three oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA) tests revealed that, across the four trajectory groups, there were no significant differences in the total number of broad criminal predictors in childhood (F(3, 358) =
1.54,p = .21), in adolescence (F(3, 358) = 1.06,p = .37), or for childhood and adolescence

combined (F(3, 358) = 1.62,p = .18). Therefore, contrary to prediction, the number of broad criminal predictors in childhood and adolescence were equal across the four trajectory groups. The second research question addressed whether the LR trajectory group had the fewest number of broad criminal predictors in childhood and adolescence compared to the MR,

36

Table 3.1

Cross Tabulation ofInformation Source across the Four Trajectory Groups.
Trajectory Group

MRa
Information Source Predisposition report Psychological report Psychiatric report
Psychiatric notes
Youth Management
Assessment

LRD
(n = 246)
70.3

HRADLC
(/i = 29)
82.8 10.3

HRADOL"
(n = 21)
57.1 4.8
0.0

Total
71.4

(n = 82) 74.4
12.2

4.42(3)

12.4 9.3
3.4

13.4 8.1
2.4

1.47(3)
6.95(3) 2.60(3) 18.60(3)
*

15.9
6.1 12.2

6.9
3.4

4.8
19.0 33.3 66.7

24.9 46.8
72.2

31.7 48.4 75.6

6.9
44.8 69.0

Plan of care report
Discharge report

46.3
64.6

1.83(3)
4.24(3)

1.00(3) 38.1 27.6 32.9 29.3 32.0 Other sources Note. aMR = Moderate rate offender group. bLR = Low rate offender group. CHRADL = High rate adult-peaked offender group. dHRADOL = High rate adolescence-peaked group. > *><.O1, "*p<001

HRADL, and HRADOL trajectory groups. Since the previous three ANOVA tests did not reach statistical significance, the LR group did not differ from the other three groups on the total
number of broad criminal predictors in childhood and adolescence.

The third research question examined whether the HRADL group would have a greater

number of items in the following predictor categories, low intelligence or poor academic
achievement, hyperactivity-impulsivity-inattention (HIA) and familial abuse items, in childhood

compared to the other three trajectory groups. It was noted that the distribution of two predictors,
low intelligence or poor academic achievement and HIA, were positively skewed. A log
transformation was applied to these two predictors and the oneway ANOVA tests were

performed. However, the results of the ANOVAs with transformed data were similar to the
results without the transformation. As such, the results of the analyses without the transformation
were reported.

A oneway ANOVA test showed significant differences among the trajectory groups for low intelligence or poor academic achievement items (F(3, 358) = 3.40, partial r\ = .028,/? =
37

.02). Since the Levene's Test of Equality of Error Variances was significant (p = .001), a

Dunnett's C was used to determine the differences among the trajectory groups. The Dunnett's C

test did not identify any significant differences among the four groups. However, in support of
the hypothesis, the HRADL group had the largest mean number of items (M= 1.14, SD = 1.27)

relative to the MR group (M= 59, SD = .93), the LR group (M= .59, SD = .97) and the HRADOL group (M= .35, SD = .75). For the number of HIA items, a oneway ANOVA test did
not find a significant relationship among the trajectory groups (F(3, 358) = 1.65,/? = .18). As

well, significant differences were not found among the trajectory groups for the number of
familial abuse items in childhood (F(3, 358) = 30, p = .82). Therefore, while low intelligence or

poor academic achievement items significantly differentiated the four trajectory groups, HIA and
familial abuse items did not. Although the specific group differences could not be confirmed, the

group means for the low intelligence or poor academic achievement items showed a trend in the
direction of the expected outcome.

The fourth research question sought to determine whether the LR trajectory group was

characterized by a greater number of peer-related criminal predictor items and fewer familial abuse items in adolescence compared to the HRADL trajectory group. A oneway ANOVA test

revealed significant differences among the four groups for the peer-related items (F(3, 358) =

3.73, partial t\2 - .30,p = .012), and a Tukey's post-hoc multiple comparisons tests showed a
significant difference between the LR and MR groups (p < .05). Specifically, the LR group had a

greater number of peer-related items (M = .99, SD = .99) than the MR group (M= .67, SD = .78).
To test for differences in the number of familial abuse items in adolescence, a oneway

ANOVA was performed and was statistically significant (F(3, 358) = 2.72, partial t\2 = .022,p =
.045). Since the Levene's Test of Equality of Error Variances was significant (p < .001), a

38

Dunnett's C post-hoc multiple comparisons test was used to examine group differences. The Dunnett's C test showed significant differences between the LR, HRADL, and HRADOL groups (p < .05); in particular, the LR group (M= .25, SD = .60) had a significantly greater number of
familial abuse factors than the HRADL group (M= .035, SD = .19) and HRADOL group (M=

.050, SD = .22). Therefore, contrary to the predicted outcome, the number of peer-related items in adolescence did not differ between the LR and HRADL groups. However, compared to the MR group, the LR group had a greater number of peer-related items. Additionally, there was a

significant difference between LR and HRADL groups for familial abuse items, although the
difference was in the opposite direction of the anticipated outcome.
Cross Tabulation Analyses

Childhoodpredictors. Table 3.2 shows the frequency of the broad childhood criminal

predictors across the trajectory groups based on cross tabulation analyses. Significant differences
were found among the four groups regarding antisocial behaviour. Specifically, 72% of the
HRADL group engaged in antisocial behaviour in childhood compared to 54.4% of the MR group, 44.4% of the LR group, and 40% of the HRADOL group (p = .02). A greater prevalence

of relationship difficulties was found among the HRADL group (41.4%) compared to 26.6% of the MR group, 20% of the HRADOL group, and 17.9% of the LR group (p = .02). Additionally, involvement with alternative care was statistically significant, occurring in 62.1% of the HRADL group, 60.0% in the HRADOL group, 43.0% in the MR group, and 34.6% in the LR group (p <
.006).

Table 3.3 displays the cross tabulation analyses of the childhood protective factors across

the four trajectory groups. Within this set of factors, none of the analyses reached statistical
significance.

39

Table 3.2

Cross Tabulation of Childhood Criminal Predictors across the Four Trajectory Groups.
Trajectory Group LRb HRADLc (n = 246) (n = 29)

Criminal Predictor r(df) Low intelligence or poor academic achievement 35.4 36.3 51.7 25.0 4.06(3) Hyperactivity-impulsivity25.0 inattention 25.3 22.2 37.9 3.53(3) 9.87(3)* 40.0 54.4 44.4 72.4 Antisocial behaviour 6.3 6.0 10.3 Alcohol and/or drug use .89(3) 5.0 11.5 13.8 5.0 1.96(3) Health problems 7.6 .42(3) Low self-esteem 2.5 3.8 5.0 3.4 Extra-familial sexual abuse 7.6 4.7 6.9 1.69(3) 10.0 10.1 10.7 10.3 Criminal family members .65(3) 5.0 30.3 20.7 Parental psychopathology 32.9 2.47(3) 20.0 Poor child-rearing methods 38.0 34.2 34.5 35.0 .38(3) 25.0 1.51(3) Familial abuse 39.2 38.5 37.9 9.65(3)* 41.4 20.0 Relationship difficulties 26.6 17.9 Broken home or family 53.0 62.1 45.0 7.13(3) 68.4 transitions Involvement with 12.34(3)** 43.0 34.6 62.1 alternative care 60.0 Biological mother was age 17 or younger at .0 1.32(3) childbirth 2.5 4.3 3.4 Poor relations with peers 10.1 10.3 6.9 10.0 .33(3) Poor behaviour towards school 21.5 19.7 27.6 35.0 3.26(3) Note. aMR = Moderate rate offender group. bLR = Low rate offender group. cHRADL = High rate adult-peaked offender group. dHRADOL = High rate adolescence-peaked group.
·~.05, ··p':::'Ol, ·"p.::;.OOl

MR (n = 82)

a

HRADOLd (n = 21)

Adolescent predictors. The results of the cross tabulation analyses for the adolescent
broad criminal predictors across the four trajectory groups are shown in Table 3.4. Criminal family members was found to be significant (p = .028), with an occurrence of25% in the HRADOL group, 20.7% in the HRADL group, 20.3% in the MR group, and 9.8% in the LR group. Broken home or family transitions was marginally significant (p = .053), occuring in

40

Table 3.3

Cross Tabulation of Childhood Protective Factors across the Four Trajectory Groups.
Trajectory Group

MRa
Protective Factor

LRb
(n = 246)
8.1 7.7
2.1

HRADLC
(» = 29)
3.4 3.4
.0 .0 .0 .0 .0

HRADOL0
(ft = 21)
10.0 .0
.0 .0

(n = 82) 7.6 2.5 2.5 5.1

Average to high intelligence or academic achievement Effective use of leisure time
Positive response to

.94(3) 4.60(3) 1.17(3) 2.64(3) 3.62(3) 1.53(3) 1.10(3)

authority Parental nurturance

3.0 1.7
3.8

Positive discipline methods Family cohesion Positive peer relations

.0
2.5

5.0
5.0

.0

.9

.0

5.04(3) .0 3.4 .4 Positive regard for school .0 Note. aMR = Moderate rate offender group. bLR = Low rate offender group. CHRADL = High rate adult-peaked

offender group. dHRADOL = High rate adolescence-peaked group. *p<.05, **p<.01, **><.001

51.7% in the HRADL group, 44.3% in the MR group, 38.5% in the LR group, and 15% in the HRADOL group. As well, poor peer relations was marginally significant (p = .059); this factor
was present for 65% in the LR group, 55.2% in the HRADL group, 50.6% in the MR group, and
45.0% in the HRADOL group.

Table 3.5 shows the results of the cross tabulation analyses of the broad protective factors

in adolescence across the trajectory groups. Positive response to authority was found to vary
significantly across the groups. Specifically, this predictor occurred in 17.9% in the LR group, 10.3% in the HRADL group, 3.8% in the MR group, and 0% in the HRADOL group.
Multinomial Logistic Regression Analyses

Childhood criminal predictor model. Table 3.6 displays the results of the backward stepwise multinomial logistic regression procedure using childhood criminal predictors. After eliminating variables based on the aforementioned criteria, four criminal predictors were entered

41

Table 3.4
Cross Tabulation ofAdolescent Criminal Predictors across the Four Trajectory Groups.

Criminal Predictor Low intelligence or poor academic achievement Hyperactivity-impulsivityinattention Antisocial behaviour Callousness Lacks responsibility or accountability Alcohol and/or drug use Health problems Low self-esteem Extra-familial sexual abuse Criminal family members Parental psychopathology Poor child-rearing methods Familial abuse Relationship difficulties Broken home or family transitions Involvement with alternative care Poor relations with peers Poor behaviour towards school
'p:::,05, ·p~.Ol, ···~.OOl

MR (n = 82)
68.4 32.9 91.1 26.6 48.1 70.9 10.1 26.6 3.8 20.3 8.9 30.4 11.4 44.3 44.3 50.6 50.6 67.1

a

Trajectory Group LRb HRADLc (n = 246) (n = 29) 60.7 31.2 85.0 32.9 44.9 57.3 13.2 26.9 3.0 9.8 13.7 35.0 16.7 43.6 38.5 45.3 65.0 59.8 72.4 51.7 89.7 41.4 51.7 75.9 13.8 27.6 .0 20.7 13.8 31.0 3.4 41.4 51.7 65.5 55.2 58.6

HRADOLd (n = 21) 50.0 35.0 85.0 45.0 40.0 65.0 15.0 20.0 .0 25.0 10.0 20.0 5.0 45.0 15.0 60.0 45.0 40.0

r(d.!)

4.04(3) 4.92(3) 2.18(3) 3.70(3) .93(3) 7.32(3) .66(3) .47(3) 1.75(3) 9.13(3)* 1.42(3) 2.27(3) 5.91(3) .09(3) 7.71(3) 5.50(3) 7.44(3) 5.02(3)

Note. aMR = Moderate rate offender group. bLR = Low rate offender group. cHRADL = High rate adult-peaked offender group. dHRADOL = High rate adolescence-peaked group.

into the childhood model to test their relationship to the four criminal trajectories, including antisocial behaviour, relationship difficulties, broken home or family transitions (or "broken home"), and involvement with alternative care. The overall model was significant ('1.:(6) = 20.14,
p = .003), with broken home and involvement with alternative care significantly contributing to

the modeL The proportion of variance in trajectory group membership, as measured by the Nagelkerke pseudo R2 statistic, was 6.3% and the classification accuracy of the model 64.6%.

42

Table 3.5

Cross Tabulation ofAdolescent Protective Factors across the Four Trajectory Groups.
Trajectory Group

MR1
Protective Factor
Average to high intelligence

LR5
(ft = 246)

HRADL0
(w = 29)

HRADOL0
jn = 2\)

(71 = 82)

or academic achievement Effective use of leisure time
Positive response to

15.2 29.1 3.8 5.1 15.2
3.8 3.8 2.5 13

15.0 38.5 17.9 9.8 16.7
2.6 10.7 6.8 8^5

17.2 31.0 10.3 3.4 6.9
.0 3.4 .0 63

10.0 20.0 .0 5.0 10.0
.0 5.0 5.0 5i)

.51(3) 4.62(3) 13.90(3) 3.05(3) 2.36(3)
1.82(3) 5.04(3) 3.97(3) 5.15(3)

authority

Experienced remorse or

guilt for actions Parental nurturance
Positive child-rearing

methods Family cohesion Positive peer relations Positive regard for school

Note. aMR = Moderate rate offender group. bLR = Low rate offender group. CHRADL = High rate adult-peaked

offender group. dHRADOL = High rate adolescence-peaked group.

The LR trajectory group served as the base reference group for this analysis.
In childhood, when broken home was present, the offenders were more likely to belong to

the MR group than the LR group (OR = 1.82, CI = 1.03 - 3.22). In the presence of involvement

with alternative care, offenders were more likely to belong to one of the high rate offending

groups, specifically either the HRADL group (OR = 3.14, CI = 1.33 - 7.39) or the HRADOL
group (OR = 3.82, CI = 1.40 - 10.49).

Adolescent criminal predictor model. Table 3.7 shows the results of the backward stepwise procedure using adolescent criminal predictors. After eliminating predictors that did not

meet criteria for the analysis, seven criminal predictors were entered into the adolescent model, including HIA, criminal family members, familial abuse, broken home, involvement with
alternative care, poor peer relations, and poor behaviour towards school. The backward stepwise

procedure generated a significant model (^(15) = 43.12,;? = .001) comprised of the following
43

Table 3.6 Backward Stepwise Analysis of Trajectory Group Membership as a Function of Childhood Criminal Predictors (Base Reference Group is the Low Rate Trajectory Group).

Comparison MRavs. LRb

HRADevs. LRb

HRADOLa vs. LRb

Criminal Predictor Broken home or family transitions Involvement with alternative care Intercept Broken home or family transitions Involvement with alternative care Intercept Broken home or family transitions Involvement with alternative care Intercept

B .60 .16 -1.50 -.04 1.14 -2.62 -.81 1.34 -2.70

SE
.29 .28 .23 .44 .44 .36 .51 .52 .38

Odds Ratio 1.82 1.17

Wald 4.22* .30 43.84 .01 6.85* 53.61 2.49 6.74* 49.37

.96 3.14

.45 3.82

Note. aMR = Moderate rate offender group. ttJR = Low rate offender group. cHRADL = High rate adult-peaked offender v.0up. dHRADOL = High rate adolescence-peaked group.
*=p:S.05, *=PSOl, *'*=PSOOI

predictors: criminal family members, familial abuse, broken home, involvement with alternative care, and poor peer relations. The Nagelkerke pseudo ~ statistic showed that the proportion of variance in trajectory group membership accounted for by these variables was 13.1 %, and the overall classification accuracy ofthe model was 65.2%. The LR trajectory group served as the base reference group for this analysis. In the presence of criminal family members, offenders were more likely to belong to the MR group (OR = 2.83, CI = 1.37 - 1.5.87), the HRADL group (OR = 3.09, CI = 1.08 - .8.82), or the HRADOL group (OR = 4.51, CI = 1.39 -14.62). Poor peer relations predicted membership in the LR group compared to the MR group (OR = .50, CI = .30 - .86) and the HRADOL group (OR = .38, CI = .15 - 1.00). When offenders experienced involvement with alternative care, they were more likely to belong to one of the high rate offending groups, specifically either the 44

Table 3.7
Backward Stepwise Analysis of Trajectory Group Membership as a Function ofAdolescent Criminal Predictors (Base Reference Group is the Low Rate Trajectory Group).

Comparison MRavs. LRb

p Odds Ratio Criminal Predictor SE Wald Involvement with .25 .28 1.28 .81 alternative care .42 Familial abuse -.67 .51 2.56 7.86** 2.83 Criminal family members 1.04 .37 Broken home or family .30 .28 1.35 1.14 transitions 6.43* Poor relations with peers -.69 .27 .50 .25 Intercept -.99 15.96 HRADUvs. Involvement with LRb 4.08* 2.38 alternative care .87 .43 4.07* -2.12 1.05 .12 Familial abuse 4.45* .54 3.09 Criminal family members 1.13 Broken home or family .51 .42 1.66 1.48 transitions -.54 .41 .58 Poor relations with peers 1.73 -2.45 .42 33.59 Intercept Involvement with HRADOLa 4.10* vs. LRb 2.76 alternative care 1.02 .50 .21 Familial abuse -1.57 1.08 2.11 6.31 ' Criminal family members 1.51 .60 4.51 Broken home or family 4.13* -1.35 .66 .26 transitions 3.84' Poor peer relations -.97 .49 .38 -2.23 .43 Intercept 26.30 Note. RMR = Moderate rate offender group. bLR = Low rate offender group. cHRADL = High rate adult-peaked offender group. dHRADOL = High rate adolescence-peaked group.
'=pS05, ··p~.Ol, "'PSOOI

HRADL group (OR = 2.38, CI = 1.03 - 5.53) or the HRADOL group (OR = 2.76, CI = 1.037.37), relative to the LR group. Offenders were more likely to belong to the LR group, compared to the HRADL group, when familial abuse occurred in adolescence (OR = .12, CI = .02 - .94). Last, when youths experienced a broken home, they were more likely to be in the LR group compared to the HRADOL group (OR = .26, CI = .07 - .95).

45

ju3JBd-9j§ms pire 'uotreanpa 'jioddns Xjxurej 'a"xtuiej axji jo azxs Suxpnpux 'spajja lourai

saxpttis yjsu aAtrexnumo ux pamsisaTii siopBj jo Ajiiofeui b j.mp. paAiasqo (6002) 3§^ab§
"SdnOjS JTIOJ 311} SSOiOB SJOpBJ 5[SU

jo 9JBJ 9S^q q§iq [pjsAO tie uiojj psipsai 3abi{ Xbui sdnoiS Ajopsfeii moj aqj ssojob siopipajd
joj uoxjBiiusjagip jo 3pej sqj 'uoyjBpdod ispuajjo st^ uiojg psydures Xpnjs juaxmo sip jmp uaAir)
·SupioBl sx sajdures 5[su qSiq puB Xjiununaoo usaA^aq 5jsu 9AijB]Traino xn saouaaajjip stp no ptre

S3|dures 5[sij ngiq m ^su 3Ai;B]numo jo pajja sip uo qojBsssj '(S861 '^wn^ -3002 '
ss^dttres AjTimuraioo xrajjiM Suipuajjo jugisisiad pxre snouas jo pooqr|a5{i{ aiji

siop^j 5[su jo uoi}BjTuotiooB W2 jBip uot;ou 9ip poddns oj qoicasaj st aiaqj q§noq;p^
patnquioo aouaosajopB

pxre pooqp^Tqo ux pue 'gougosappB ui 'pooifpjKjo m sraa;i jopipajd |butuiuo jo jaqumu \ts\oi aq;

joj sdnoiS inoj aqj Suouib saouaiajjip ou 9iaA\ ajgqj 'uoijBjogdxa oj ajbj^uoq -sdnoiS laqjo aqj oj
aouaosappB pire pooqpjiqo m sjojoipajd jmnuiuo pBOjq jo jaqranu iaA\aj

dnoiS ^TL 3V& JaqjaqM auiuuapp o; ;i{Snos sisaqiodXq puooas axjx 'sdnoiS
pxre '^qat '~aq aqj o; paiBduioo aouaosajopB pxre pooqptxi[o ssojob sjopipaid jraraiuo

aaoui XpuBoijiuSts pBq dnoiS Aiojoafej} laVHH 9Xll -i9qi3HM psjsaj sxsaipodAx{ jsjtj aqx
sdnouQ tQoiodfoAX unojj ar/; Sui}vt}Ududffi(j

·sdnojS AVropafejj moj aip jo uoipxnjsip aqj ioj yoddns papiAOid Xpnjs aqj jo sjjnsai aqj 'j^jaAO *paio|dxa sbav osje sauopafejj ibututijo s^-p ja

puB sjopbj aAipajoid ;uaosajopB pire pooijpjTip uaaA^aq uoijBpossB aqx '(8002) 'V3
paijrjnapx sauopafejj §mpuajjo moj aqj ptre aouaosajppB pire pooqp|iqo m Suxxmooo

|Bxiraiuo jo siopxpaid uaaAvjaq diqsuorrejai axp auiurexa oj sbav sisaq; sxip jo asodmd
uoxssnosiQ

families. While it is intuitive that an increased number of risk factors results in a higher likelihood of criminality, an accumulation of weak factors causing a serious disturbance in
psychosocial functioning, or criminal behaviour, is not. Rather, significant life events, such as neurological damage, severe trauma experiences, or extreme social adversity, may have an

impact on whether a youth develops serious and persistent offending behaviour. Further
investigations utilizing clear operational definitions and quantifications of criminal predictors are

required to confirm whether this is the case, however. Also, this effect needs to be examined in both community and high risk samples of youth who engage in delinquent behaviour. Another possible explanation for the aforementioned finding is that certain factors only
have a specific effect when in the presence of, or in combination with, other factors. For example, Rutter (1985) found that, individually, family discord, parental mental disorder, and

other factors did not relate to psychiatric risk. However, when the factors were combined with one another, a relationship to psychiatric risk occurred. The current study did not measure the strength of each predictor, or the timing of and relationship between predictors, which may have
resulted in a loss of information and, consequently, an effect on the outcome variable.

The third research question addressed whether the HRADL group would have a greater number of low intelligence or poor academic achievement, hyperactivity-impulsivity-inattention
(HIA), and familial abuse predictor items in childhood compared to the other three trajectory groups. Although testing found significant differences among the trajectory groups for the

number of low intelligence or poor academic achievement items, post-hoc analyses did not locate
differences among the groups. This finding may have been due to small sample sizes in some of

the trajectory groups. However, the HRADL group means were larger than those of the LR group, which showed a trend in the direction of the expected outcome. In applying Moffitt's

47

(1993) theory of developmental taxonomy, the results of the HRADL group are comparable to the life-course-persistent (LCP) offender group who experience compromised cognitive
functioning. Other studies have found that school problems (Maguin & Loeber, 1996;

Farrington, 1989) predict subsequent delinquency and adult offending. Since group differences
were not confirmed, however, the above analyses should be replicated with trajectory groups
larger or more equivalent in sample size.

No differences were found among the trajectory groups for the number of HIA and

familial abuse items. This finding is inconsistent with Moffitt's (1993) theory, which states that individuals in the LCP offender group experiences neurological deficits and family adversity, including child maltreatment. However, Leschied et al. (2008) noted that childhood factors only modestly related to future offending and that, the older a child is at the time of experiencing a risk factor, the more reliably the factor related to adult criminality. Similarly, Thornberry et al. (2004) found that maltreatment occurring in adolescence was a stronger and more substantial
predictor of subsequent criminal behaviour compared to its presence in childhood only. More research is needed to understand low intelligence, poor academic achievement, and familial
abuse in the context of an offender-based population.

The fourth research question examined whether the LR group had a significantly greater

number of peer-related items and fewer familial abuse items in adolescence compared to the HRADL trajectory group. The LR group was found to have a greater number of peer-related items compared to the MR group, but not the HRADL group, and the LR group had a greater
number of familial abuse items than the HRADL group.

Although the MR group differed from the HRADL group in frequency of offending (M= 32.1 and M= 84.7, respectively), the persistence in offending between the two groups was very

48

similar. The mean criminal career length for the MR and HRADL groups was 12 and 12.1, respectively (Day et al., 2008). Therefore, given the similarity between the MR and HRADL groups, the MR group may resemble Moffitt's (1993) LCP offender group. This similarity may

explain the differences in peer items between LR and MR groups since the LR group is
representative of Moffitt's adolescent-limited (AL) offending group. The finding that familial abuse differentiates the LR group from the HRADL group may

suggest that the LR group is at risk for mental health problems rather than criminal behaviour. This group was found to have the greatest number of psychiatric disorders (M= 1.33) compared to the MR (M = .95), HRADL (M = .48), and HRADOL (M= .81) groups (Day et al., 2008),

and, as previously mentioned, the LR group did not differ from the other groups in the total
number of criminal predictor items. The relationship between child maltreatment and the development of mental health problems is well-supported in the literature (Kaplan, Pelcovitz, & Labruna, 1999; McCloskey & Walker, 2000; Wolfe, Scott, Wekerle, & Pittman, 2000), and research has found that child maltreatment and psychiatric diagnosis are related to offending (Fergusson, Horwood, & Lynskey, 1997). However, the current study's findings are limited since the timing of the occurrence of familial abuse, relative to the onset of psychiatric disorder,
could not be confirmed. This relationship requires clarification in future research studies.
Predictors of Trajectory Group Membership

Among the childhood variables, the experience of alternative care predicted membership

in one of Day et al.'s (2008) high rate offending trajectories. Specifically, a youth was over three times more likely to be in the HRADL group and nearly four times more likely to be in the HRADOL group if he was involved with alternative care as a child. A similar effect was found for those who experienced child welfare contact in adolescence; offenders were over twice as

49

likely to belong to the HRADL group and nearly three times as likely to belong to the HRADOL group. These findings converge with the results of a study by Ryan and Testa (2005), who found that children placed in substitute care, relative to those who stayed in the family home, had an increased likelihood of engaging in delinquency. These findings are also in line with Moffitt's (1993) LCP offender group in terms of the experience of family adversity and high rate offending. Children are often removed from the family home as a result of experiencing frequent and severe abuse, previous (lack of) response to services, and a higher likelihood of recurrence of abuse (Britner & MossIer, 2002). It is thought that the severe conditions within the home environment impedes normative, healthy development in children and increases the likelihood of subsequent adverse outcomes. Belsky's (1980) theory of understanding child maltreatment considers the influence of both psychological and sociological factors on parenting practices. Parenting practices are said to be shaped by child, parent, and contextual factors. Similarly, Pecora, Whittaker, Maluccio, and Barth (2000) proposed an ecological theory for understanding maltreatment whereby the abuse or neglect of youths may be best conceptualized as an expression of an unraveling series of problems originating in the context of the family and in the broader environment of the child (e.g., in school, peer relations, community or culture). Also, from the set of childhood variables, broken home or family transitions was predictive of moderate rate offending. In particular, when a youth experienced a broken home in childhood, he was nearly twice as likely to belong to the MR offending group. Life-course theories explain the association between broken homes and delinquency by considering separation as a series of stressful events that may include marital conflict, loss of a parent, compromised economic circumstances, changes in parental figures, and poor family management

50

practices (Farrington & West, 2007). Empirical support for this theory was found by Juby and
Farrington (2001). In their study, boys from broken homes engaged in a greater amount of

delinquency than boys from intact homes, and boys who lived with their mothers after parental separation had the same delinquency rate as boys from intact low-conflict families. Additionally, boys who remained with relatives or other caregivers (e.g., foster parents) had high rates of
delinquency. During adolescence, the presence of criminal family members in a youth's life was predictive of moderate to high rate offending. Specifically, youths were nearly three times more

likely to be in the MR group, over three times more likely to be in the HRADL group, and four
and a half times more likely to be in the HRADOL group. Family criminality, as well as a positive familial attitude toward crime, has been shown to increase the risk of delinquency among adolescents (Baker & Mednick, 1984; Farrington, 1989). The processes underlying the transmission of familial criminality are unclear, however. Henggeler (1989) noted that, while modeling antisocial and aggressive behaviour is likely a part

of the offspring's socialization process, criminal parents rarely involve their children in their
offending. Henggeler suggested that criminal parents may have interpersonal and cognitive deficits that impact their parenting practices. The delinquent behaviour of the adolescent may be

related to ineffective parenting and poor relations between the parent and youth. Other research (Mednick, Gabrielli, & Hutchings, 1983) has found evidence of a genetic component in the transmission of criminality. According to Hawkins (1996), siblings may serve as a transmission of criminal
knowledge for one another. Similar to peers, siblings may be closer in age and interact more intimately. They may observe and learn delinquent acts from each other, or participate in

51

criminal acts together. Rowe and Rodgers (1989) reported that twins and siblings who were in frequent contact were more likely to offend with one another. While the processes of sibling influence on one another is not well understood, Patterson (1986) suggested that this process may begin with the siblings fighting and coercing one another, which increases their .antisocial behaviour. Rowe and Gulley (1992) have suggested that sibling co-offending may relate to a mutual imitation process that may be positively reinforced by one another. Although none of the childhood variables predicted low rate offending, the experience of poor peer relations, familial abuse, or a broken home in adolescence was associated with membership in the LR group. The finding that poor peer relations predicted low rate offending is congruent with Moffitt's (1993) AL group; however, the latter two fmdings are not. Research has found that child maltreatment occurring before age 18 is a risk factor for general maladaptive outcomes (Smith &Thomberry, 1995; Stouthamer-Loeber, Loeber, Homish, & Wei, 2001; Widom, 1989; Zingraff, Leiter, Myers, & Johnsen, 1993). As previously mentioned, given the high rate of psychiatric disorders and criminal predictors in this group, as well as the relatively short span of the LR group's criminal career (M = 6.7; Day et aI., 2008), the LR offenders may be experiencing significant problems with mental health rather than offending. With regard to the experience of a broken home, Wells and Rankin (1986) argue that, due to its complexity in definition, the variable should not be reduced to dichotomization. The authors comment that the literature on broken homes and delinquency is largely incomplete as a result of the oversimplification of its measurement. As such, further research carefully measuring this variable is needed to aid in its understanding with criminality. Leschied et aI. (2008) concluded that, in general, risk factors measured in adolescence are strong and reliable predictors of adult offending, while predictors occurring in childhood were

52

weaker predictors. The authors found that family structure variables, including parental separation, marital status, and child welfare involvement, were particularly strong predictors when they occurred in adolescence. Also, Leschied et al. noted that, based on the review by Borum (2000), their findings from the meta-analysis were in accordance with the cross-sectional
literature on the causes and correlates of criminality. Taken together, the results of previous research provide converging evidence and support for the findings in the present study. Limitations ofthe Thesis It is important to discuss the limitations of the present thesis. First, the criminal predictors

and protective factors were coded as either 'Yes/Suspected' or 'Unknown.' Whether a factor was
absent because the youth had not experienced it, or because the factor was not mentioned in the documents on file, could not be confirmed. Rarely, if ever, was a factor confirmed to be absent in a youth's life and, given the extremely low base rate, this occurrence was not measured. A

prospective longitudinal design may correct for this experience by measuring the occurrence of
and change in variables across time.

Second, the design of the study was cross-sectional, with the criminal predictors and

protective factors coded as present or absent across two developmental periods defined as childhood (i.e., age 0 to 12) and adolescence (i.e., age 13 to 19). Aside from the use of these two
coding schemes, the limited information available in the client files made it impossible to

measure any form of change in the criminal predictors and protective factors across time beyond an assignment of present or absent. Again, a prospective longitudinal study measuring criminal
predictors and protective factors at equal intervals across time would capture within-subject changes and determine the effects of different levels of risk and/or protective exposure.

53

Third, infonnation on the sample's demographic characteristics, such as socioeconomic status and ethnicity, was not readily available or clearly stated in the files. For example, while the skin colour of the offender was often stated on the open custody facility's intake fonn, the ethnicity of the youth was not. As well, females were not included in the thesis since the open custody facilities were male-specific. Blumstein, Cohen, Roth, and Visher (1986) noted that demographic factors, including age, ethnicity, and sex, have strong relationships to participation in crime but are weakly associated with individual crime frequency. Statistically controlling for demographic variables may result in a loss of effects of risk factors. As such, it is important to replicate this study with the addition of demographic variable measures. Fourth, alcohol and substance use occurring in adolescence neither differentiated the trajectory groups nor predicted group membership. Alcohol and substance use have been found in several studies as predictors of onset and maintenance for delinquency and adult criminality (Brook, Whteman, Finch, & Cohen, 1996; Dembo et aI., 1995; Loeber & Hay, 1997; Loeber & Stouthamer-Loeber, 1987). A lack of significant fmdings for this variable may have resulted from a limitation of the study's design. For example, frequency and persistence of alcohol and substance use could not be detennined, nor could abuse or dependence be confinned. Finally, significant life events (e.g., death ofa family member) and suicidal behaviour were not coded, although it appeared that these factors were somewhat common among the sample and may have related to either the criminal trajectories or psychiatric diagnoses.

Policy and Practice Implications
Although further investigations are required to confirm causal relationships between the variables and outcome measured in this study, the results suggest that there are, in the popUlation of young people at high risk for delinquency and criminality, subgroups of children and youths

54

who have distinct targets and needs for the prevention and intervention of delinquency. For

example, children at high risk for persistent delinquency and adult criminality may require interventions targeting the effects of a broken home, difficult transitions, or child welfare
contact. Adolescents who experience maltreatment, a broken home, or difficulties with peers appear to be at risk for lower rate offending. Interventions for this population may focus on building prosocial skills in the youths as well as on healthy interactions and parenting practices in the family unit. Day et al. (2008) noted that the intervention needs of adolescents with court

contact may be best served outside of the juvenile justice system. Future Directions for Research
A strong theoretical basis for the study of the development and persistence of criminal behaviour is lacking. In 1988, Farrington commented that investigators in the field had not

sufficiently attempted to understand the effect of life events on the course of development, or
with advancing and testing theories of the development of delinquency. The atheoretical approach to studying delinquency and criminality has continued to persist in the field. Additionally, many experimental interventions for antisocial behaviour and delinquency do not

have a solid theoretical grounding, as experimental predictions originating in theory are the

exception rather than the rule (Farrington). Developing and integrating biopsychosocial or socialecological theories into research on delinquency may provide a multidimensional perspective for understanding antisocial and offending behaviour.

An understanding of the processes behind the overrepresentation of relocated youths in the juvenile justice system is not well understood at this point in time. Little is known about their criminogenic needs, their trajectories of offending, and the factors related to the onset and
maintenance of their trajectories (Ryan, Hernandez, & Herz, 2007). The influence of criminal

55

·sun} ssoiob Xouanbuxpp pxiB moxABxpq

jbxoosx;tib no sioiobj assqj jo souanTjin sxp amsBaui pjnoxjs xpiB9S9i 9ixiinj -UAVoirsran si 's9axj

tstpnoA"-9tp m mooo jou pip Ajdraxs Agqi i9xj}9qA\ jo 'siopBj xpns §up[00Ti3A010 Sin
ipnoX sip §uiM3iAj3jxn asoqj jo ;psaj: b sb paunooo as^q a\oj

ss9{dures aqj ux ps;ou sbm. 9oxi3os3|opB pue pooqpjiip q;oq m sjojobj aAipsjoid jo sjbi 3SBq
' jiraxmo aqjjo snooj b ;ou sisav aouBjstssp jo siopbj sip sixq^ -poojsjapun \ptA jou sib

jbuiuiuo uioij soxibjstsqp oj psjBpj siojobj aqj 'XjiBirans -aousiadiuoo jo 'ssousnijin 9Ai;ouioj:d xo 9Atp9ioid 'Xou9iy]S9J jo s9insB9ui pgjBJodiooxn 9abx{ S9uo;o9fej; TBmuiuo jo
p -U0TJBSTJS9AUT J9l{ptyf 9Jinb9J A0U9IJXS9.I §mA|I9pUn STUSXXIBqO9XH 9qj 'H9M SV
·p9p99U 9JB S9|dU!BS 5JSTJ TJ§ni SllXStl S9ipnjS

TBXiTpnjxSuoj 9Aip9dsoid 'sxpnoA" A;xuimiuioo xxiojj igjjxp Xbui sxjinoA" 5[su qgni jo spggu ptre S5jsu sy 'moxABq9q xmnxnxio m 9§b§u9 Xpugisxsjgd oqA\ xpnoA" jo s9§bis pju9xudopA9p iu9J9jjxp

SSOJOB 99J§9p pXIB 9dAl XIX 9§XIBqO SIOJOBJ 9S9q; AVOq SB fl9A\ SB '(Z,003 ^FiW. V UO^UXIIBj)
Suxpugjjo jo uox;btbos9 pxiB 'Xou9nb9ij '90U9;sxsi9d sb qons 'Aiop9fBij xbuxuixio 9qjjo suoxsu9iuxp

ogxogds ioj 9ie siopbj 5jsu gqi jBqAV 9uxnii9j9p oj pgimbgi 9ib suoxjb§xis9aux I9qimj

·g^Bi mo[ b ib S9SU9JJ0 jxuixuoo oqM siu9OS9|opB pxiB U9ip|xqo 5jsu qSxq

jo siopBj 9xji piiBjsigpim o% pgpsgu sx xpiB9S9i 'X||BUOxjxppv ·Smpuajjo jugasxsigd o; dxqsuoxjBjgi
u9ax§ '|pA\ sb p9jB§x}S9Aux I9qiitij 9q pjnoqs Xougnbuxpp s4qinoX b uo s§m|qxs pxre

Appendix A
ID:

Date:

DOB:

Childhood Criminal Predictor Coding Scheme

Source(s) of information: Predisposition report:_
Psychological assessment(s):_ Psychiatric assessment(s):

Psychiatric notes:

YMA:

7

Discharge report:_ Other:

Plan of care:

Individualfactors

Yes/Suspected

Unknown

1.

Low intelligence or poor academic achievement
Low intelligence Learning disability Enrolled in special education classes General academic-related difficulties Failed or repeated grade (grade: )

2.

Hvperactivitv-impulsivitv-inattention Attention or concentration difficulties/easily distracted Restless Cannot wait or take turns Hyperactive/very active/energetic Difficulty planning ahead Acted on impulse ADD diagnosis ADHD diagnosis

3.

Antisocial behaviour Uses inappropriate language (e.g., swearing, sexual talk) Defiant towards set rules or authority figures

Quick to anger
Temper tantrums

Verbally aggressive

Physically aggressive Sexually precocious Engaged in inappropriate sexual behaviour Lying
Manipulative Runs away Harmful toward animals

Vandalized (e.g., destroyed property, graffiti) Stealing
Break and enter (e.g., buildings, cars) Fire setting behaviour
Gang member

Poor behaviour not specified

57

Yes/Suspected

Unknown

4.

Alcohol and/or drug use Alcohol

Drugs (specify:
Drugs unspecified

'

5.

Health problems Traumatic Head Injury (type:
Seizure(s)

Invasive surgery (specify: Early ear infections
Enuresis Encopresis Obesity Hygiene problems

Other health problem(s) (specify:_
6. Low self-esteem

7.

Extra-familial sexual abuse

Family factors

1.

Criminal family members Criminal mother
Criminal father Criminal sibling

2.

Parental psvchopathology Mental health difficulties - mother

Mental health difficulties - father Psychiatric hospitalization - mother
Psychiatric hospitalization - father

Alcohol and/or drug use - mother Alcohol and/or drug use - father
Prenatal drinking or drug use

3.

Poor child-rearing methods Authoritarian or harsh discipline
Lax discipline

Inconsistent discipline
Poor parental supervision

Poor parental management skills Abandonment of child

58

T
Yes/Suspected 4. Familial abuse
Physically abused Sexually abused

Unknown

Verbally/emotionally abused Neglected
Witnessed physical abuse

Witnessed sexual abuse
Witnessed verbal/emotional abuse
5. Relationship difficulties

^^

Poor relations among family members Family discord Low family cohesion/stability 6. Broken home or family transitions
Parental separation Parental divorce Single parent Parental re-marriage Frequent moving (i.e., residences, schools) Frequent change in parental figures or partners

7.

Involvement with alternative care
Child welfare agency
Foster care

Adopted

Other institutional involvement (specify: 8. Teenage mother Cage 17 or younger at childbirth")

)

Peerfactor

Poor relations with peers

Poor ability to socialize with peers Difficulty relating to peers Peer rejection Easily influenced by peers Unwilling to associate with prosocial peers Negative peer association
Criminal peers Schoolfactor Poor regard for school

Lack of academic motivation or interest
Truant

Suspended
Expelled

59

Appendix B
Childhood Protective Factor Coding Scheme

Individualfactors

Yes/Suspected

Unknown

1.

Average to high intelligence or academic achievement
Average intelligence
Superior intelligence Reasonable academic achievement Superior academic achievement

2.

Effective use of leisure time
Involvement in sports Involvement in other prosocial activities

3.

Positive response to authority ("e.g.. home, school")

Family factors

1.

Parental nurturance

2.

Positive discipline techniques Authoritative discipline Use of appropriate techniques (e.g., grounding, withdrawing privileges, etc.)

3.

Family cohesion Family members are close Family members express good communication

Family participates in activities together
Peerfactor

Positive peer relations Positive peer association
Well-liked by peers
Schoolfactor

Positive regard for school

60

Appendix C
ED: Date:

DOB:
Adolescent Criminal Predictor Coding Scheme

Source(s) of information: Predisposition report:_ Psychological assessment(s):
Psychiatric assessments):

Psychiatric notes:_
YMA:

Discharge report: Other:

Plan of care:

Individualfactors

Yes/Suspected

Unknown

1.

Low intelligence or poor academic achievement Low intelligence Learning disability
Enrolled in special education classes General academic-related difficulties Dropped out of school (last grade completed: )

2.

Hyperactivity-impulsivity-inattention
Attention or concentration difficulties/easily distracted Restless

Cannot wait or take turns
Hyperactive/very active/energetic Difficulty planning ahead Acted on impulse ADD diagnosis

ADHD diagnosis
3. Antisocial behaviour Uses inappropriate language (e.g., swearing, sexual talk) Defiant towards set rules or authority figures Quick to anger Verbally aggressive Physically aggressive Engaged in inappropriate sexual behaviour

Lying
Manipulative
Runs away

Harmful toward animals
Vandalized (e.g., destroyed property, graffiti) Stealing Break and enter (e.g., buildings, cars) Fire setting behaviour Gang member Poor behaviour not specified

61

Yes/Suspected 4. Callousness

Unknown

Shallow affect Lacks empathy

Lacks remorse or guilt 5.
6.

Lacks responsibility or accountability
Alcohol and/or drug use Alcohol

Hallucinogens (e.g., marijuana, psilocybin, LSD, MDMA, ketamine, mescaline, salvia, PCP) Stimulants (e.g., cocaine, crack cocaine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, methylphenidate, dexedrine) Opiates (e.g., oxycontin, percocet, codeine, morphine, heroin,

Other depressants (e.g., barbiturates, benzodiazepines, GHB) Other drugs (specify: )
Drugs not specified 7. Health problems

opium, methadone)

Traumatic Head Injury (type:
Seizure(s) Enuresis Encopresis Hygiene problems

Other health problem(s) (specify:
8. Low self-esteem

9.

Extra-familial sexual abuse

Family factors

1.

Criminal family members Criminal mother
Criminal father

Criminal sibling

2.

Parental psvchopathology Mental health difficulties - mother Mental health difficulties - father Psychiatric hospitalization - mother Psychiatric hospitalization - father Alcohol and/or drug use - mother Alcohol and/or drug use - father

62

Yes/Suspected

Unknown

3.

Poor child-rearing methods Authoritarian or harsh discipline Lax discipline
Inconsistent discipline Poor parental supervision

Poor parental management skills Abandonment of child 4. Familial abuse Physically abused
Sexually abused

Verbally or emotionally abused
Neglected

Witnessed physical abuse
Witnessed sexual abuse Witnessed verbal or emotional abuse 5. Relationship difficulties

Poor relations among family members
Family discord Low family cohesion or stability 6. Broken home or family transitions Parental separation Parental divorce

Single parent
Parental re-marriage Frequent moving (i.e., residences, schools)

Frequent change in parental figures or partners 7. Involvement with alternative care
Child welfare agency Foster care Adopted Other institutional involvement (specify:
Peerfactor

Poor relations with peers
Poor ability to socialize with peers Difficulty relating to peers Peer rejection Easily influenced by peers Unwilling to associate with prosocial peers Negative peer association Criminal peers

63

Yes/Suspected
Schoolfactor

Unknown

Poor regard for school Lack of academic motivation or interest
Truant

Suspended

Expelled

64

Appendix D
Adolescent Protective Factor Coding Scheme

Individualfactors 1. Average to high intelligence or academic achievement Average intelligence

Yes/Suspected

Unknown

Superior intelligence Reasonable academic achievement
Superior academic achievement 2. Effective use of leisure time

Involvement in sports Involvement in other prosocial activities 3.
4.

Positive response to authority (e.g., home, school)
Has remorse or guilt for actions

Familyfactors

1. 2.

Parental nurturance Positive discipline techniques Authoritative discipline Use of appropriate techniques (e.g., grounding, withdrawing privileges, etc.)

3.

Family cohesion Family members are close Family members express good communication Family participates in activities together

Peerfactor

Positive peer relations

Positive peer association
Well-liked by peers
Schoolfactor

Positive regard for school

65

References

Andrews, D. A., Bonta, J., & Wormith, J. S. (1995). Level ofService Inventory-Ontario

Revision: Interview and scoring guide. Toronto, Canada: Ontario Ministry of the Solicitor
General and Correctional Services.

Arseneault, L., Tremblay, R. E., Boulerice, B., Seguin, J. R., & Saucier, J. F. (2000). Minor
physical anomalies and family adversity as risk factors for violent delinquency in
adolescence. American Journal ofPsychiatry, 156, 917-923.

Augimeri, L. K., Webster, C. D., Koegl, C. J., & Levene, K. (2001). Early Assessment Risk List
for Boys: EARL-20B, version 2. Toronto, Canada: Earlscourt Child and Family Centre. Ayers, C. D., Williams, J. H., Hawkins, J. D., Peterson, P. L., Catalano, R. F., & Abbott, R. D. (1999). Assessing correlates of onset, escalation, deescalation, and desistance of
delinquent behavior. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 15, 277-306.

Baker, R., & Mednick, B. (1984). Influences on human development: A longitudinal perspective.
Boston, MA: Kluwer-Nijhoff.

Barkley, R., Fischer, M., Edelbrock, C, & Smallish, L. (1990). The adolescent outcome of
hyperactive children diagnosed by research criteria: I. An 8 year prospective follow-up

study. Journal ofthe American Academy ofChild and Adolescent Psychiatry, 29, 546557.

Barry, C. T., Frick, P. J., DeShazo, T. M., McCoy, M., Ellis, M., & Loney, B. R. (2000). The
importance of callous-unemotional traits for extending the concept of psychopathology to
children. Journal ofAbnormal Psychology, 109, 335-340.

Bartusch, D. R. J., Lynam, D. R., Moffirt, T. E., & Silva, P. A. (1997). Is age important? Testing
a general versus developmental theory of antisocial behaviour. Criminology, 35,13-48.

66

Belsky, J. (1980). Child maltreatment, an ecological approach. American Psychologist, 35, 320335.

Benard, B. (1991). Fostering resiliency in kids: Protective factors in the family, school, and
community. Portland, OR: Western Center for Drug-Free Schools and Communities. Blackburn, R. (1993). The psychology ofcriminal conduct. Chichester, England: Wiley. Blokland, A. J., Nagin, D. S., & Nieuwbeerta, P. (2005). Life span offending trajectories of a
Dutch conviction cohort. Criminology, 43, 919-954.

Blumstein, A., Cohen, J., Roth, J. A., & Visher, C. A. (1986). Criminal careers and "career
criminals". Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice. Blumstein, A., Cohen, J., & Farrington, D. P. (1988). Criminal career research: Its value for
criminology. Criminology, 26,1-35. Borum, R. (2000). Assessing violence risk among youth. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 56,
1263-1288.

Borum, R., Bartel, P., & Forth, A. (2002). Manualfor the Structured Assessment of Violence

Risk in Youth (SAVRY). Tampa, FL: University of South Florida.

Brendgen, M., Vitaro, F., & Bukowski, W. M. (1998). Affiliation with delinquent friends:
Contributions of parents, self-esteem, delinquent behavior, and rejection by peers. Journal ofEarly Adolescence, 18, 244-265.

Britner, P. A., & Mossier, D. G. (2002). Professionals' decision-making about out-of-home

placements following instances of child abuse. Child Abuse and Neglect, 26, 317-332.
Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics. (2005). Adult correctional services in Canada. Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 85-211-XLE. Ottawa, Canada: Author.

67

Capaldi, D. M., & Patterson, G. R. (1991). Relation of parental transitions to boys' adjustment
problems. Developmental Psychology, 27, 489-504.

Capaldi, D. M., & Patterson, G. R. (1996). Can violent offenders be distinguished from frequent

offenders? Prediction from childhood to adolescence. Journal ofResearch in Crime and
Delinquency, 33, 206-231.

Carr, M. B., & Vandiver, T. A. (2001). Risk and protective factors among youth offenders.
Adolescence, 36, 409-426.

Chung, I. J., Hill, K. G., Hawkins, J. D., Gilchrist, L. D., & Nagin, D. S. (2002). Childhood
predictors of offense trajectories. Journal ofResearch in Crime and Delinquency, 39, 6090.

Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20, 37-46.

Cohen, M. A., & Piquero, A. R. (2009). New evidence on the monetary value of saving a high
risk youth. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 25,25-49.

Coie, J., Lochman, J., Terry, R., & Hyman, C. (1992). Predicting early adolescent disorder from childhood aggression and peer rejection. Journal ofConsulting and Clinical Psychology,
60, 783-792.

Conklin, J. E. (1975). The impact ofcrime. New York, NY: Macmillan.

Cowen, B. L.s & Work, W. C. (1988). Resilient children, psychological wellness, and primary
prevention. American Journal of Community Psychology, 16, 591-607.

Day, D. M., Bevc, I., Theodor, F., Rosenthal, J. S., & Duchesne, T. (2008). Change and
continuity in criminal offending: The criminal careers ofthe Toronto sample. Toronto, Canada: Ministry of Children and Youth Services.

68

Dembo, R., Turner, G., Chin Sue, C, Schmeidler, J., Borden, P., & Manning, D. (1995).

Predictors of recidivism to a juvenile assessment center. InternationalJournal ofthe
Addictions, 30,1425-1452.

DeRosier, M., Kupersmidt, J., & Patterson, C. (1994). Children's academic and behavioral
adjustment as a function of the chronicity and proximity of peer rejection. Child
Development, 65,1799-1813.

Dishion, T., & Loeber, R. (1985). Adolescent marijuana and alcohol use: The role of parents and
peers revisited. American Journal ofDrug and Alcohol Abuse, 11, 11-25.

D'Unger, A. V., Land, K. C, McCall, P. L., & Nagin, D. S. (1998). How many latent classes of delinquent/criminal careers? Results from mixed poisson regression analyses. American
Journal ofSociology, 103,1593-1630.

Elliott, D. (1994). Serious violent offenders: Onset, developmental course, and termination - The
American Society of Criminology 1993 presidential address. Criminology, 32,1-21.

Elliott, D., Huizinga, D., & Ageton, S. S. (1985). Explaining delinquency and drug use. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage.

Fagan, J. A., & Pabon, E. (1990). Contributions of delinquency and substance use to school dropout. Youth and Society, 21, 306-354.

Fagan, J. A., Piper, E. S., & Moore, M. (1986). Violent delinquents and urban youth: Correlates
of survival and avoidance. Criminology, 24, 439--471.

Farrington, D. P. (1988). Advancing knowledge about delinquency and crime: The need for a coordinated program of longitudinal research. Behavioural Science and the Law, 6, 307331.

69

Farrington, D. P. (1989). Early predictors of adolescent aggression and adult violence. Violence
and Victims, 4, 79-100.

Farrington, D. P. (1990). Age, period, cohort, and offending. In D. M. Gottfredson & R. V.
Clarke (Eds.), Policy and theory in criminaljustice: Contributions in honour ofLeslie T.

Wilkins (pp. 51-75). Aldershot, England: Avebury.
Farrington, D. P. (1991). Childhood aggression and adult violence: Early precursors and later life outcomes, hi D. Pepler & K. Rubin (Eds.), The development and treatment ofchildhood aggression (pp. 5-29). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Farrington, D. P. (1992). Criminal career research in the United Kingdom. British Journal of
Criminology, 32, 521-536.

Farrington, D. P. (1999). A criminological research agenda for the next millennium. International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 43, 154--167. Farrington, D. P. (2002). Multiple risk factors for multiple problem violent boys. In R. R. Corrado, R. Roesch, S. D. Hart, & J. K. Gierowski (Eds.), Multi-problem violent youth: A
foundation for comparative research on needs, interventions and outcomes (pp. 23--34).

Amsterdam, the Netherlands: IOS Press. Farrington, D. P. (2004). Conduct disorder, aggression, and delinquency, hi R. M. Lerner & L. Steinberg (Eds.), Handbook ofadolescent psychology second edition (pp. 627-664). New
York, NY: Wiley.

Farrington, D. P. (2006). Childhood factors and risk-focused prevention, hi M. Maguire, R. Morgan, & R. Reiner (Eds.), The Oxford handbook ofcriminologyfourth edition (pp. 602-640). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

70

Farrington, D. P., Barnes, G., & Lambert, S. (1996). The concentration of offending in families.
Legal and Criminological Psychology, 1, 47-63.

Farrington, D. P., & Hawkins, J. D. (1991). Predicting participation, early onset, and later
persistence in officially recorded offending. Criminal Behavior and Mental Health, 1,133.

Farrington, D. P., & Loeber, R. (2000). Some benefits of dichotomization in psychiatric and criminological research. Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health, 10, 100-122.

Farrington, D. P., & Welsh, B. C. (2007). Saving children from a life ofcrime: Early riskfactors and effective interventions. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J., & Nagin, D. S. (2000). Offending trajectories in a New Zealand birth cohort. Criminology, 38, 525-551.

Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J., & Lynskey, M. T. (1997). Childhood sexual abuse, adolescent
sexual behaviors and sexual revictimization. Child abuse and neglect, 21, 789-803.

Fergusson, D. M., & Lynskey, M. T. (1996). Adolescent resiliency to family adversity. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 3 7, 281-292. Fraser, M. W., Richman, J. M., & Galinsky, M. J. (1999). Risk, protection, and resilience:

Toward a conceptual framework for social work practice. Social Work Research, 23, 131--
143.

Gottfredson, M. R, & Hirschi, T. (1990). A general theory ofcrime. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.

Grossman, F. K., Beinashowitz, J., Anderson, L., Sakurai, M., Finnin, L., & Flaherty, M. (1992).

Risk and resilience in young adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 21, 529550.

71

Hawkins, J. D. (1996). Delinquency and crime: Current theories. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

Hawkins, J. D., Arthur, M. W., & Catalano, R. F. (1995). Preventing substance abuse. In M.
Tonry & D. Farrington (Eds.), Building a safer society: Strategic approaches to crime

prevention. Crime andjustice series (Vol. 19, pp. 343^427). Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press.

Hawkins, J. D., Herrenkohl, T., Farrington, D. P., Brewer, D., Catalano, R. F., & Harachi, T. W. (1998). A review of predictors of youth violence. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violentjuvenile offenders: Riskfactors and successful interventions (pp. 106146). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Henggeler, S. W. (1989). Delinquency in adolescence. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Herrera, V. M., & McCloskey, L. A. (2001). Gender differences in the risk for delinquency
among youth exposed to family violence. Child Abuse and Neglect, 25,1037-1051.

Hill, J. (2003). Early identification of individuals at risk for antisocial personality disorder.
British Journal ofPsychiatry, 182, si 1--si 4.

Hoge, R. D., Andrews, D. A., & Leschied, A. W. (1996). An investigation of risk and protective factors in a sample of youthful offenders. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
37,419-424.

Hosmer, D. W., & Lemeshow, S. L. Applied logistic regression second edition. New York, NY:
John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

Jenkins, J. N., & Smith, M. A. (1990). Factors protecting children living in disharmonious homes: Maternal reports. Journal ofthe American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 29, 60-69.,

72

Jessor, R. (1998). New perspectives on adolescent risk behavior. In R. Jessor (Ed.), New perspectives on adolescent risk behavior (pp. 1-12). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

Juby, H., & Farrington, D. P. (2001). Disentangling the link between disrupted families and
delinquency. British Journal of Criminology, 41, 22-40.

Kaplan, S. J., Pelcovitz, D., & Labruna, V. (1999). Child and adolescent abuse and neglect

research: A review of the past 10 years, part 1: Physical and emotional abuse and neglect. Journal ofthe American Academy ofChild and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38, 1214-1222.

Kirby, L. D., & Fraser, M. W. (1997). Risk and resiliency in childhood. In M. W. Fraser (Ed.),
Risk and resiliency (pp. 10-33). Washington, DC: NASW Press.

Kolvin, I., Miller, F. J. W., Fleeting, M., & Kolvin, P. A. (1988). Social and parenting factors affecting criminal-offense rates: Findings from the Newcastle Thousand Family Study
(1947-1980). British Journal ofPsychiatry, 152, 80-90.

Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical
data. Biometrics, 33,159-174

LeBlanc, M., & Loeber, R. (1998). Developmental criminology updated. In M. Tonry (Ed.),
Crime andjustice series (Vol. 23, pp. 115-198). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Leschied, A., Chiodo, D., Nowicki, E., & Rodger, R. (2008). Childhood predictors of adult

criminality: A meta-analysis drawn from the prospective longitudinal literature. Canadian
Journal ofCriminology and Criminal Justice, 50, 435^467.

73

Leung, A. (2004). The cost of pain and suffering from crime in Canada. Research and Statistics Division Methodological Series. Ottawa, Canada: Research and Statistics Division,
Department of Justice Canada.

Lipsey, M. W., & Derzon, J. H. (1998). Predictors of violent or serious delinquency in adolescence and early adulthood: A synthesis of longitudinal research. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violentjuvenile offenders: Riskfactors and successful
interventions (pp. 86-105). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Lipsitt, P. D., Buka, S. L., & Lipsitt, L. P. (1990). Early intelligence scores and subsequent delinquency: A prospective study. American Journal ofFamily Therapy, 18,197-208.

Livingson, M. J., Stewart, A. N., Allard, T. J., & Ogilvie, J. M. (2008). Understanding juvenile
offending trajectories. Australian and New Zealand Journal ofCriminology, 41, 345-363.

Loeber, R., & Dishion, T. (1983). Early predictors of male delinquency: A review. Psychological
Bulletin, 94, 68-99.

Loeber, R., & Farrington, D. P. (1998). Serious and violentjuvenile offenders: Riskfactors and
successful interventions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Loeber, R., Farrington, D. P., Stouthamer-Loeber, M., & van Kammen, W. (1998). Antisocial
behavior and mental health problems: Explanatoryfactors in childhood and adolescence.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Loeber, R., & Hay, D. F. (1997). Key issues in the development of aggression and violence from
childhood to early adulthood. Annual Review ofPsychology, 48, 371-410.

Loeber, R., & LeBlanc, M. (1990). Toward a developmental criminology. In M. Tonry & N.

Morris (Eds.), Crime andjustice series (Vol. 12, pp. 375-473). Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.

74

Loeber, R., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (1987). Prediction. In H, C. Quay (Ed.), Handbook of
juvenile delinquency (pp. 325-382). New York, NY: Wiley.

Loeber, R., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (1998). Development ofjuvenile aggression and violence:
Some common misperceptions and controversies. American Psychologist, 53, 242-259.

Loeber, R., Stouthamer-Loeber, M. S., van Kammen, W. B., & Farrington, D. P. (1991). Initiation, escalation, and desistance in juvenile offending and their correlates. Journal of
Criminal Law and Criminology, 82, 36-82.

Loeber, R., Wung, P., Keenan, K., Giroux, B., Stouthamer-Loeber, M., van Kammen, W. B., et al. (1993). Developmental pathways in disruptive child behaviour. Development and
Psychopathology, 5, 101-131.

Maguin, E., & Loeber, R. (1996). Academic performance and delinquency, hi M. Tonry (Ed.), Crime andjustice series (Vol. 20, pp. 145-264). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Malinosky-Rummell, R., & Hansen, D. J. (1993). Long-term consequences of childhood physical
abuse. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 68-79.

Masten, A. S., Best, K. M., & Garmezy, N. (1990). Resilience and development: Contributions

from the study of children who overcome adversity. Development and Psychopathology,
2, 425-444.

Mednick, S. A., Gabrielli, W. F., Jr., & Hutchings, B. (1984). Genetic influences in criminal behavior: Evidence from an adoption cohort. Science, 224, 891-893.

McCloskey L. A., & Walker, M. (2000). Posttraumatic stress in children exposed to family
violence and single-event trauma. Journal ofthe American Academy ofChild and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 108-115.

75

McCord, J. (1977). A comparative study of two generations of native Americans. In R. F. Meier
(Ed.), Theory in criminology (pp. 83-92). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

McCord, J. (1982). A longitudinal view of the relationship between paternal absence and crime. In J. Gunn & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Abnormal offenders, delinquency, and the criminal
justice system (pp. 113-128). Chichester, England: Wiley.

Mednick, B. R., Baker, R. L., & Carothers, L. E. (1990). Patterns of family instability and crime:
The association of timing of the family's disruption with subsequent adolescent and young adult criminality. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 19,201-220.

Moffitt, T. E. (1993). Life-course-persistent and adolescence-limited antisocial behavior: A developmental taxonomy. Psychological Review, 100, 674--701. Moffitt, T. E., Caspi, A., Dickson, N:, Silva, P., & Stanton, W. (1996). Childhood-onset versus
adolescent-onset antisocial conduct problems in males: Natural history from ages 3 to 18
years. Development and Psychopathology, 8, 399-424.

Nagin, D. S. (1999). Analyzing developmental trajectories: A semi-parametric, group-based
approach. Psychological Methods, 4, 139-177.

Nagin, D. S., Farrington, D. P., & Moffitt, T. E. (1995). Life-course trajectories of different types
of offenders. Criminology, 33,111-139.

Nagin, D. S., & Tremblay, R. E. (2005). What has been learned from group-based trajectory modeling? Examples from physical aggression and other problem behaviors. The Annals
ofthe American Academy ofPolitical and Social Science, 602, 82-117.

Parker, G. R., Cowen, E. L., Work, W. C, & Wyman, P. A. (1990). Test correlates of stress
resilience among urban school children. Journal ofPrimary Prevention, 11,19-83.

76

Patterson, G. R. (1986). The contribution of siblings to training for fighting: A microsocial

analysis. In D. Olweus, J. Block, & M. Radke-Yarrow (Eds.), Development ofantisocial
andprosocial behavior: Research, theories, and issues (pp. 235-261). New York, NY:
Academic Press.

Patterson, G. R., DeBaryshe, B. D., & Ramsey, E. (1989). A developmental perspective on antisocial behavior. American Psychologist, 44, 329-335.
Patterson, G. R., & Dishion, T. (1985). Contribution of family and peers to delinquency.

Criminology, 23, 63-79. Patterson, G. R., Forgatch, M. S., Yoerger, K. L., & Stoolmiller, M. (1998). Variables that

initiate and maintain an early-onset trajectory for juvenile offending. Development and
Psychopathology, 10, 531-547.

Patterson, G. R., & Yoerger, K. (1993). Developmental models for delinquent behavior. In S.

Hodgins (Ed.), Mental disorders and crime (pp. 140-172). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Pecora, P. J., Whittaker, J. K., Maluccio, A. N., Barth, R. P., & Plotnick, R. D. (2000). The child welfare challenge. New York, NY: Aldine De Gruyter. Perry, C. L. (2000). Preadolescent and adolescent influences on health. In B. D. Smedley & S. L. Syme (Eds.), Promoting health: Intervention strategies from social and behavioral
research (pp. 217-253). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Piquero, A. R. (2008). Taking stock of developmental trajectories of criminal activity over the

life course, hi A. M. Liberman (Ed.), The long view ofcrime: A synthesis oflongitudinal
research (pp. 23-78). New York, NY: Springer.

Piquero, A. R., Brame, R.5 Mazerolle, P., & Haapanen, R. (2002). Crime in emerging adulthood.
Criminology, 40, 137-169.

77

'6VZ-LZZ

'M31A9H sdoiAJdg ytnoj puv udupimj -A}xjxqB;siix jusrasoBjd pra juauraoBjd jo ajai stp.

:AouanbuT|9p ajrasAtif pxiB }U9xujb3jiibxu pjno '(SOOS) 'I 'Vi '^l^l 3* 'd T

"£6~£8 '/T '
joj Suipuqjjo jo sgiiopgfeii ^u9indo|9A9Q -(LOOZ) 'Q 'Z-I3H ^ ''lAt "d '

'"d "f

(2661) "V '
' I £ £~91 £ 'Z £ '
fo piunof uvoudtuy ·
pxre 9ou9t]TS9J |Bi

'VI

'JM

't I9-86S
0} 90UEJSTS9I

i^tvit{oKsjfo puunof qsyug -sjgpiosxp
UI

ui

sdouvApy '('SPH)

'surepy £) uj -sgnssi pire suoxjnqujuoQ

'90TIBTA9P }U90S9J0pB 'S0TJ9U9§ JiOlAWpQ '(6861) "1 T 'SJ9§pO^ 1g '-J (J

·££Z-L\Z 'OS 'tSopuiwuj

jgp pxre 9sn goirejsqns uo spajja Suxiqig '(2661) 'Q '^3TInO V ''3 Q.

:doud\oi\ mnoiifa jxd^uoo din '('spH) -ras^xj ^ *]AI ^ uetmpr^ "jaj -f xq -uor

pue 5[su jo 9|oj aqx rpooxip^yqo ut aousijisa^ ;(i003) 'A\. 'Vi. '^^xd ^ ''Vi T '
"09£--b't'E V "JUdtudSvuvj^ puv doudiog doiiojfa puunof puoijvuudjuj
STSA"TmrB-Bptu y lAousnbmpp pire axuuo oj jspjosxp XjxAxpEjad^q jxotjsp uoxjus^ib jo

Satterfield, J., Hoppe, C, & Schell, A. (1982). A prospective study of delinquency in 110 adolescent boys with attention-deficit disorder and 88 normal adolescent boys. American Journal ofPsychiatry, 139, 795-798.
Satterfield, J., & Schell, A. (1997). A prospective study of hyperactive boys with conduct

problems and normal boys: Adolescent and adult criminality. Journal ofthe American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 1726--173 5. Savage, J. (2009). The development ofpersistent criminality. Oxford, England: Oxford

University Press.
Simons, R. L., Wu, C, Conger, R. D., & Lorenzo, F. O. (1994). Two routes to delinquency: Differences between early and late starters in the impact of parenting and deviant peers. Criminology, 32, 247-275. Smith, D. A., & Brame, R. (1994). On the initiation and continuation of delinquency.
Criminology, 32, 601'-629.

Smith, C. A., & Thornberry, T. P. (1995). The relationship between childhood maltreatment and adolescent involvement in delinquency. Criminology, 33, 451^81.

Stattin, H., & Klackenberg-Larsson, I. (1993). Early language and intelligence development and their relationship to future criminal behavior. Journal ofAbnormal Psychology, 102, 369378.

Stattin, H., Romelsjo, A., & Stenbacka, M. (1997). Personal resources as a modifier of the risk for future criminality. British Journal of Criminology, 37, 198-223.
Stouthamer-Loeber, M., Loeber, R., Farrington, D. P., Zhang, Q., van Kammen, W., & Maguin,

E. (1993). The double edge of protective and risk factors for delinquency: Interrelations and developmental patterns. Development and Psychopathology, 5, 683-701.

79

Stouthamer-Loeber, M., Loeber, R., Homish, D. L., & Wei, E. (2001). Maltreatment of boys and the development of disruptive and delinquent behavior. Development and
Psychopathology, 13, 941-955.

Thornberry, T. P. (2005). Explaining multiple patterns of offending across the life course and across generations. The Annals ofthe American Academy ofthe Political and Social
Sciences, 602,156-195.

Thornberry, T. P., Huizinga, D., & Loeber, R. (2004). The causes and correlates studies:
Findings and policy implications. Juvenile Justice, 10, 3-19.

Tolan, P. H., & Gorman-Smith, D. (1998). Development of serious and violent offending
careers. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violentjuvenile offenders: Riskfactors and successful interventions (pp. 68-85). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Tremblay, R. E., Masse, L. C, Vitaro, F., & Dobkin, P. L. (1995). The impact of friends' deviant behaviour on early onset of delinquency: Longitudinal data from 6 to 13 years of age.
Development and Psychopathology, 7, 649-667.

Werner, E. E. (1986). Resilient offspring of alcoholics: A longitudinal study from birth to age 18.
Journal ofStudies on Alcohol, 47, 34-40.

Werner, E. E. (1989). High-risk children in young adulthood: A longitudinal study from birth to
32 years. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 59, 72-81.

Werner, E. E. (1993). Risk and resilience in individuals with learning disabilities: Lessons

learned from the Kaui longitudinal study. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 8,
28-34.

Werner, E., & Smith, R. (1992). Overcoming the odds: High-risk children from birth to
adulthood. New York, NY: Cornell University Press.

80

West, D. J., & Farrington, D. P. (1977). The delinquent way oflife. London, England: Heinemann. White, H. R., Bates, M. E., & Buyske, S. (2001). Adolescence-limited versus persistent

delinquency: Extending Moffitt's hypothesis into adulthood. Journal ofAbnormal
Psychology, 110, 600-609. White, J. L., Moffitt, T. E., & Silva, P. A. (1989). A prospective replication of protective effects

of IQ in subjects at high risk for juvenile delinquency. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 57, 719-724.

White, J. L., Moffitt, T. E., Earls, F., Robins, L., & Silva, P. A. (1990). How early can we tell?: Predictors of childhood conduct disorder and adolescent delinquency. Criminology, 28,

507-535.
Wiesner, M., & Capaldi, D. M. (2003). Relations of childhood and adolescent factors to
offending trajectories of young men. Journal ofResearch in Crime and Delinquency, 40,
231-262.

Widom, C. S. (1989). The cycle of violence. Science, 244, 160-166.

Wolfe, D. A., Scott, K., Wekerle, C, & Pittman, A. L. (2000). Child maltreatment: Risk of adjustment problems and dating violence in adolescence. Journal ofthe American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40, 282-289. Wolfgang, M. E., Thornberry, T. P., & Figlio, R. M. (1987). From boy to man, from delinquency to crime. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Zingraff, M. T., Leiter, J., Myers, K. A., & Johnsen, M. C. (1993). Child maltreatment and
youthful problem behavior. Criminology, 31,173-202.

81

