NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

®

UMI
Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

FROM EOQ TO JIT WITH STORAGE CONSIDERATION: COORDINATING A TWO LEVEL SUPPLY CHAIN by Yohan Jeju John Bachelor of Technology in Mechanical Engineering University of Kerala, Thin ·" ananthapnram, Kerala, India 1994 Master in Business Administration University of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom 1997 A thesis

Presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Applied Science in the Program of Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004

© \ ohan Jeju John 2004

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

UMI Number; EC52940

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quaiity of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52940 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LEG. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

BORROW ER'S PAGE

Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

Ill

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

ABSTRACT

FROM EOQ TO JIT WITH STORAGE CONSIDERATION: COORDINATING A TWO LEVEL SUPPLY CHAIN by Yohan John Many organizations are faced with a decision to choose between two inventory systems namely JIT (Just in Time) and EOQ (Economic Order Quantity). This thesis models the cost drivers into the EOQ model and extends it to the JIT scenario. They include cost savings like space, synergy of coordination, and other cost factors like rework and penalty costs. It looks at the total cost of the supply chain with two players and calculates space in terms of storage spaces of equal capacity. Results sho wed that considering space in EOQ brought savings to the chain. It has brou^it down the order quantity closer to, and many times equal to JIT ordering quantities. Coordination in the chain has brought further savings. Moving to JIT (ordering daily supply of demand) from the point, where space is accounted and there is coordination between the two levels, did not require much reduction in ordering costs.

IV

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Author's Declaration........................................................................................... ii Borrower's Page.......................................................................... iii

Abstract................................................................................................................iv Table o f Contents..................................................................................................v List of Figures & Tables.................................................................................... vii Acknowledgments............................................................................................ viii Chapter l_Introduction and Literature Review..............................................1 1.1 Research Background............................................................................................ 1 1.2 Overview of Economic Order Quantity................................................................ 1 1.3 Overview of Just In Time (JIT)............................................................................. 2 1.4 EOQ/jrr Model Consideration of Inventory........................................................6 1.5 Coordination in Supply Chain............................................................................. 17 1.6 Profit Sharing....................................................................................................... 19 1.7 Objectives and Scope of Thesis...........................................................................20 1.8 Thesis Layout.......................................................................................................20 Chapter 2_Problem Description and Mathematical Model........................21 2.1 Problem Objectives............................................................................................. 21 2.2 Nomenclature...................................................................................................... 24 2.3 Mathematical Model........................................................................................... 25 2.4 Optimal Solution Procedure............................................................................... 41 Chapter 3_Numerical Results and Statistical Analysis...............................47
V

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

3.1 Numerical Example..............................................................................................47 3.2 Statistical Analysis....................................................................................... Chapter 4_Conclusion and Future Research............................................... 60 References........................................................................................................... 63 Appendices.........................................................................................................66 55

VI

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

LIST OF FIGURES & TABLES

List of Figures Number
Figure 2.1 : Two level supply chain matrix Figure 2.2: Inventory cycle of the retailer Figure 2.3 : Inventory cycle of the supplier Figure 2.4: Optimal solution procedure for no coordination Figure 2.5: Optimal solution procedure for coordination

Poge 23 27 31 42 42

List o f Tables Number Table 3.1 : Value of Q obtained for each X , from equation (2.2.4)
Table 3.2: Value of Q obtained for each X from equation (2.4.3) Table 3.3: Summary table of the total cost for all scenarios Table 3.4: Summary averages from computational trial

Poge 50 52 55 57

vu

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to thank Dr. M. Y. Jaber for his consistent and valuable input to this thesis. His patience, encouragement and guidance throughout the duration of tire thesis were substantial. His comments and suggestions were o f great importance and have helped me in the completion of the thesis. I would further like to sincerely appreciate Dr. Jaber for adjusting his schedule to meet with me out o f the way in order to help me complete this thesis.

I would also like to extend my gratitude to Dr. Greg Kawall, the Chair of the examining committee and its members. Dr. M. Y. Jaber, Dr. Ahmed El-Bouri and Dr. Saeed Zolfaghaii for their valuable suggestion to improve the thesis.

I would also thank my parents and my in-laws for the moral support, encouragement and valuable prayers for me during this time. The members of my church, "Zion Gospel Assembly", were particularly helpful when I needed their support and prayers. Many helped by taking care of my son Jonathan when my wife and I could not juggle our schedules. Most of all I would like to thank my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ who helped me in every situation and worked it for my good.

Finally, this thesis would not have come to completion but for the consistent and constant encouragement and prayers of my wife and dear friend Serene John and the delight that my son Jonathan brings me. Thank you.

vm

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

C hapter

1

INTRODUCTION AND LITERATURE REVIEW

1.1 Research Background In a competitive environment, corporations face many challenges to survive. They are constantly looking for ways to bring value to their share holders. Analysts judge the success o f an organization through various measures like earnings per share, net earnings before interest and tax, and a host o f ratios like the acid test or quick ratio, debt to equity, current ratio and the likes. Many of these ratios pertain to inventory like inventory turnover, receivables ratio, days in inventory and so on. Managing inventory and the associated costs properly can produce significant and positive impact on these ratios. When it comes to inventory, a few important decisions need to be made like, how much needs to be ordered and how often it needs to be ordered. A delicate balance needs to be struck between the cost o f carrying this inventory and the cost of ordering or setup (in case o f manufacturing). This quantity is referred to as the Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) or the Economic Manufacturing Quantity (EMQ). For the sake of consistency in this thesis, the term Economic Order Quantity will used. 1.2 Overview of Economic Order Quantity The EOQ model in its basic form has essentially two components, namely, the order costs and the holding costs. The order cost is often referred to as ordering cost when the context is that of retailer or buyer. This component of the total cost is the
1

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

cost incurred for a particular order or lot (in case of manufacturing). This is fixed and is incurred for every order, irrespective of the quantity ordered. Thus, if the quantity ordered is less, more orders need to be placed to fill the demand. This causes the order cost to increase. In order to reduce the impact o f setup on the cost, large quantities are ordered on each order and thus the number o f times it is ordered per year is reduced. However, this causes another problem, since large quantities increase the holding cost. The holding cost is cost associated with keeping inventory. This has many components to it like insurance on inventory, property tax, obsolescence, spoilage, shrinkage, utilities, interest, handling, etc. This component increases in proportion with the quantity stored. This component works against the drive to redr ce the ordering fi-equency and order large quantities. Numerous research papers have been published ever since the concept of Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) had been introduced by Ford Harris in 1915. The problem, however, is that EOQ in its simplest form leads to a lot of miscalculations on the optimum lot size problem (Jones 1991). Jones (1991) argued that if EOQ has properly accounted for the costs it would lead to Just In Time (JIT) lot sizes. 1.3 Overview of Just In Time (JIT) The recurring theme for Just In Time is to eliminate waste and improve flow of materials (Fuller 1995). This means that the adoption of JIT requires cutting down or eliminating inventoiy that is not needed. Orders are placed on an immediate need

i

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

basis and enough for a day or till next delivery. In a manufacturing environment this means that orders are processed on a pull basis instead o f push.. To make it worth while to order or manufacture in small quantities or batches, the setup costs have to be brought down or holding costs have to be higher. The following two sections discuss these in detail. 1.2.1 Setup/ Ordering Costs One o f the key components to moving the basic EOQ model towards JIT is to reduce the setup cost. This can drive the quantity down as well as bring tire total cost down besides bringing the benefits of operating in JIT. The JIT literature identifies a variety of ways to bring down the setup cost, namely, the need for inspection or setup of inspection station for incoming stock is eliminated, no annual re-bidding or re-tendering, paper work reduced and a more informal ordering process, long term contracts established, etc. One o f the suggested ways in the literature (Pan & Liao 1989) to reduce the order cost component o f the cost is to increase deliveries for a particular order. Thus, the cost is split over a number of deliveries. Pan & Liao (1989) argue that the purchase cost does not necessarily increase when going to JIT, since the total order is the same but it is just that the fi'equency of deliveries increases. One of the issues that are ignored in this assumption is that costs for such deliveries have to be accounted somewhere. If the vendor bears this cost it would be passed on to the retailer as cost increase. The other problem is based on the reaction o f the vendor to the decision of the retailer. There are two scenarios here: one, the vendor also decides to move to

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

JTT and two, the vendor decides to continue to produce in EOQ. In the former scenario, costs are incurred from the purchase of raw materials (Fazel et al 1998), increased inspection to deliver zero defects to the retailer and so on. In the latter scenario, the vendor has to hold the inventory till it is shipped. This situation does not help in zero defect purchases. To ensure zero defects, the vendor has to increase the costs associated with inspection. In either case scenario, there would be a cost increase that would be transmitted to the retailer in terms of price increase. Ramasesh (1990) also approaches the problem in terms o f blanket orders with multiple shipments like Pan & Liao (1989). However, Ramasesh (1990) includes the cost o f multiple shipments in the model, namely, the freight cost associated. In a way this is a cost that needs to be considered. But it is often the case that the purchase cost includes the cost o f landing the product at the premises. This supports the argument that the price increases when moving towards JTT. Another factor that needs to be considered is that many organizations that purchase from a variety of sources optimize on their own transportation network by combining different loads from vendors in the same locality. This helps in bringing the shipment cost considerably lower. In such circumstances, the cost associated would be calculated in terms o f the volume o f the product rather than the number of shipments. Thus it is possible to bring order cost down by increasing the number of shipments per order, but this comes at a cost in terms of increased price for the product.

Reproduced with permission o f the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1.2.2 Holding Cost The other aspect that needs to be considered in moving towards JTT is the holding cost. Billington (2003) considered the total cost reduction in lot sizing by reducing the holding cost. The author argued that it is possible to reduce the holding cost by investing in automating the factory thereby reducing handling costs. Further, capital investments can reduce the cost of obsolescence and spoilage. Billington (2003) found that reducing holding cost does not necessarily bring the total cost down. The investment needed to reduce the holding cost should be considered. However, Billington (2003) he did not consider the impact of cost of storage for these additional units. Reducing tlie holding cost leads to increase in lot size which in turn would impact the storage cost. It can be argued that cost saved in reducing the holding cost is offset by the cost incurred in increased storage space. This, however, is very dependant on the size of product. Small but expensive products can bring savings if holding cost is reduced. It is also worth mentioning that the handling costs o f small products would be relatively small compared to larger ones so also the savings that can be obtained. Further, in this thesis, the cost associated with obsolescence, spoilage or returns has been considered separately. This is due to the fact that these items, although they constitute a small percentage, have other costs like penalty costs, opportunity costs and storage costs associated with them. Thus it is essential for them to be considered separately.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

On the other hand, some authors (e.g. Jones 1991) have argued that the holding costs used in the standard EOQ equation do not reflect the actual costs incurred for holding the inventory. Costs like facilities leasing costs, depreciation, interest, taxes, insurance, utilities, handling costs, inspection costs, rework, scrap, and administration costs are not considered in the holding cost function. Considering these factors as well as reducing the set up costs can reconcile JIT with EOQ. While it can be accepted that these costs are not included in the holding costs, it can also be argued that these are often not a direct linear ftmction of the lot size quantity and therefore need to be separated from the holding cost function. Functions like facilities costs and rework have been accounted for separately in this thesis. Including these factors in the lot sizing equation has brought the lot size closer to

jrr.
The other factors that are not a linear function are space cost and rework cost. Rework is often part of the EOQ process. When JIT is implemented, tlie approach is to eliminate rework. This cost is often neglected in the analysis when considering the cost of inventory. The model proposed considers the impact of this quantity. The following section looks in to the literature specifically pertaining to space. 1.4 E O Q /JIT Model Consideration of Inventory

Many authors have discussed and modeled space in the classical EOQ equation. In this section, a critical analysis on these papers is done followed by a detailed look into a few articles.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Among the authors that worked on space is Aghazadeh (2001), who illustrated that the best course for a retailer is to opt for a quantity discount model that will result in the lowest cost. The author argues that JTT philosophy is not applicable in a retailer situation. The example of Wal Mart is quoted where they use distribution centers to store inventory rather than at the individual stores. The holding cost of the distribution stores is presumably lower than that of the individual stores. It is also argued that holding inventory on a JIT basis could result in stock outs which would prove very expensive for a retailer. Through the illustration, the author concludes that taking advantage of the price quantity discount is much cheaper that ordering in JIT quantities. The model that was used, however, has one major drawback. It does not consider space as a cost factor. The holding cost only includes the carrying cost. It does not consider the cost o f warehousing these items. The author considers coffee filter as an example which admittedly is an item with low volume, but retailers do not deal with just coffee filters. Many of the products are of high volume and sometimes low profit margin. A typical example of this will be ice salt or water conditioning salts that cost very low but has a high volume. Space needs to be considered in determining the EOQ for these situations. Further, storing these filters for a long period of time (one year in the example quoted) could lead to spoilage or shrinkage or even obsolescence. This need not be the case with coffee filters if packaged properly but many products caimot be stored for this long. A closer look into the work of some of the authors is done in the following sections. 7

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1.4.1 Joshi In his article Joshi (1990) discusses the case where bulky, inexpensive and low risk items (BIL) are incorporated in the EOQ equation. The author contends that the holding costs look at all items in the same manner irrespective of the volume the item occupies. It is mentioned that the bulky items considered do not require bins or can be stacked in single or multi-story storage rack systems. They are stored in pallets and sometimes can be double stacked. If is the fixed component of the order cost, D is the annual demand, Q is the order

quantity, h is the holding cost and SC is the annual space cost, the total cost is given by
T C := D -- + ^ + SC g 2
(l.l)

The storage cost component in this situation is given as SC = p x k x N Where N = ~ mxn n is the number o f units that fit on a pallet, m is the number of pallets that can be stacked one over the other, p is the area occupied by one pallet and k is the storage cost per square foot. The author considers two scenarios. One is where the space is fixed assignment per product and the other is when the assignment is dynamic. Fixed assignment means that space for Q units is allocated for this product and not utilized for any other products. For the dynamic assignment the space utilization is far better. The space
8

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

that is available is allocated for other products. This is what is done in many warehouses where the space allocation is computerized. The author argues that due to the efficient utilization of space the annual requirement would be that for ·y units. The space cost therefore in this scenario would be denoted as SC = p x k x N SC = { p x k ) x f O ^ \2xmxn^

Thus the EOQ for the two scenarios are given as EOQ Space ( Fixed ) mn EOQ Space ( Dynamic ) mn The article is limited in its application that the author considers only floor space where pallets are placed. This poses a problem since most large warehouses rely on bins and multi-story storage rack system for most of their products. Further space is a very valuable commodity that irrespective of the kind of the product space should be considered in the calculation of the EOQ. The other quesi.u. · that this article raises is the consideration of space as a continuous function. It is a common practice that inventory is not mixed in bins or locations. If the EOQ is calculated as a little over a bin, the space actually occupied would be that of two bins. Thus the term N = -- should be an integer and m xn (1.3)

(1.2)

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

f o ^ should in actuality read as iV = Int ---- -- t-1 .In the example quoted by the author, ym-x-n y the maximum units that can be accommodated in a pallet (double stacked) is 40 units. But if the EOQ results in recommending 41 units then the space occupied would be that of 80 units. The error is higher for fixed space allocation than for dynamic. Because of the nature of the bins it would be beneficial to use equation 1.2 and 1.3 to get an approximation and then iteratively calculating the total cost for the range of ± w i x n . In the calculation the author did not utilize the model but iteratively calculated all the multiples of the space capacity to obtain the optimum solution. Adopting this method fiirther neglects the impact of holding cost.

1.4.2 Rao & Bahari-Kashani Rao & Bahari-Kashani (1990) took a similar approach to accounting for space in their model. In their model they considered the space fimction to be given as =
> 1

(1.4)

Where Sj is the fixed cost for storage of the y-th unit per year, P is the number of available storage units and 1 0 Otherwise, fo r J =l C o P,

Where C, is the capacity of storage i. The consideration of space in this way would flexible to include multiple storage locations with various size and corresponding costs. 10

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The total cost is given by C ( Q ) = ^ + h ^ + SC (1.6)

The authors consider storage space to be fixed and hence the fihst derivative eliminates SC (Storage Cost). Thus EOQ

G

' f f

( .7 )

The author concludes that the optimum cost can be obtained by computing the maximum capacity of fewer than the number o f storage areas needed for Q to obtain the optimum. Considering space as a constant in calculating the EOQ brings a lot of inaccuracies. The problem being that storage cost is directly dependant on the value of Q although it is a stepped fimction. The author also suggests that the maximum capacity of the storage areas be considered and the total cost computed and compared for the optimiun. Considering only the maximum capacity of the storage areas negates the influence of the holding cost and ordering cost if any on the EOQ. The optimum quantity could be less than a full storage capacity.

1.4.3 Fazel Fazel (1997) and Fazel et al (1998) compared the cost of EOQ to that of JIT. Fazel (1997) considered EOQ with no price quantity discount and Fazel et al (1998) with price quantity discount. The price quantity discount considered is an all unit quantity discount. The attempt in both the papers was to model the costs to aid decision makers regarding the move to JIT form EOQ.
11

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Since both the papere have a lot of similarities, the latter article will be the subject of study. In this paper the total cost for EOQ is given as T C ,= ^ * ^ * ( c \-n ^ Q ) D fo r Q<Q,

(1,8)

TQ = ^

+^

+ (C-- )D fo r

Q>Q.

(1.9)

Where ce is the cost of one unit of product when ordering in EOQ, Qmax is the order quantity beyond which there would not be any further price quantity discount and
tte is

the quantity discount rate. The price quantity discount is an all units quantity

discount that is considered, thus the price changes as follows with the increase in Q as follows:

Ce = 4 ~ ' ^ eQ M
Ce=cTM Where,

Q^Qnuuc

is the price of the product for Q = Q , and

is the fixed price when the

quantity exceeds a certain level (Qmoi) The optimum quantity for this would be the minimum total cost for either

(m o )
or 2** = ^ f o r Q->Q. (l.ll) or that of < 2 ff

12

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The author assumes in the article that the total cost for operating in JIT is a simple form of the product of JIT price and demand as follows: TCj =Cj D (1.12)

Here cj is the JTT cost o f the product. It is argued that the supplier would raise cost due to the frequent deliveries inspection and other costs involved in moving to JTT or JTT deliveries. The paper then narrows down the application of the model to where Q' < derives the cost difference for JIT and EOQ as 2 = ^ +^ + ( c ° .- it,Q 'p - C jD (1.13) and

Fazel et al (1998) concluded that for lower demands it would be cheaper to use JIT instead of EOQ and for higher demands it would be worthwhile to use EOQ. The indifference point in demand was also calculated. This is the demand at which it does not make any difference whether the EOQ or JIT is adopted. This means that the value of Z is zero at this point. The model described in both the articles has some drawbacks. Like Schniederjans & Cao (2000) pointed out, it ignores the space saved by the fact that the batch size is very small. The space savings should be considered as a major cost savings. This is especially the case when the products involved are voluminous. This point is further elaborated on the upcoming sections. The other assumption that the author considers is that there is no holding costs and ordering (setup) cost. It is argued that these costs are largely reduced and thus can

13

^ PROPERTY OF IBRAffr R'tTBSCW UrJiVERSiTY LlBRAfl

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

be neglected. This is flawed since ordering in JIT is many a times characterized by long term contracts. To establish long term contracts more resources are spent and thus this cost is high, although it is spread over many deliveries. Thus to assume that there is no ordering cost would lead to erroneous decisions. The other aspect that is ignored is that of the holding cost. Here again since the quantities are small the holding cost is assumed as negligible. Although, there is some truth to this assumption, the error compounds when a huge retailers warehouse containing 40,000 different products is considered. The holding cost can also be high when the expensive items are considered like refrigerators, washing machines, dryers etc. One of the points that the model neglects is that, the holding cost is constant, irrespective of the price of the product. Since the holding cost includes the cost of CEÇ)ital among other things, presumably the cost should vary with the increase in price. Granted the difference ($0.3/dollar discount/unit/year) is very minor in the example that the author illustrated. If the order quantity is 2500 units the holding cost would be change by negative $375. If the item is more expensive or the demand is higher this could make significant impact.

1.4.4 Schniederjans & Cao Cao & Schniedegans (2004) introduced the concept of considering the savings in space in comparing the JIT model with EOQ and price discounts. This was the latest in a series o f articles by the authors, where model by Fazel (1997) and Fazel et al. (1998) was improved upon with the consideration of space savings.

14

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The nomenclature used here is in continuation to that o f by Fazel (1997) and Fazel et al. (1998)'s model. Cao & Schniedeijans (2004) extended to total cost o f JIT to include (1.14)

Where m = -- fo r q

m>\

q is the order quantity under JIT which is less than Q. C is the annual cost o f a square foot o f facility and F is the square feet saved by initially adopting a JIT system. Thus the difference in cost is given by: Z = -- --^ ^ + ^ + (c£ - c^)D + CF Q Q 2 ^^ (1.15) V /

or by substituting the value of Q from Q = 1-' ^

see working in Appendix 1.1

Z = V2 ADh [ 1 - y j + (c^ -

)D + CF

(1.16)

The authors suggested that the TCj could be presented without the holding costs. This is never true even when q = u where u is the usage rate (D = w * demand periods in a year). That is, if the production facility shifts away from EOQ to JIT, the recommended lot size is ^ = u, which is producing as demanded per demand period (say 1 day). Even though q = u, inventory may be negligible, but surely not zero. This is also the case with cross dock. There is a point where the products enter and /or leave the warehouse. There are handling charges associated with the volume 15

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

and facilities costs while in the facility. Thus although the holding charges are small due to the low units it can never be zero. Another aspect is that of the annual facility space reduction termed as CxF. The authors suggest the term as savings to be deducted from Fazel's equation (1.12) for the total cost for JIT. The space requirements for any given product in either an EOQ or JIT system would be the lot size quantity, which in turn determines the space requirements for finished items, work-in-progress, raw material, other components, etc. If CxF represents the space requirement when using EOQ, then savings when adopting JIT policy would be CxF=CxS \
Q.

(1.17)

where S is the total space available to store Q .l îq = Q, then annual g facility space reduction is zero. The authors have not considered the magnitude of facility reduction which could directly impact the decision on the value of q. The cost indifference function is another aspect that would be impractical concerning the papers by Cao & Schniedeijans (2004). It suggests that for a particular demand point the EOQ is more cost effective than JIT. Going along with the author's argument, which suggests that if demand in the next period is such that JIT is more cost effective then shift to JIT now, otherwise retain EOQ system. This will also suggest that if you have a JIT system implemented, then shift to EOQ system if the demand in the coming period favors EOQ to JIT. In a dynamic environment, it would then suggest to follow a flip-flop policy! Firms can only 16

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

move towards a JIT system if continuous improvement programs are implemented, an issue that authore ignored. As a summary, it can be said that all the authors considered the JIT in isolation. A lth o u ^ it was mentioned that there is a need o f cooperation with the vendors this was not modeled. In the next section, papers that address the issue o f cooperation with the other members of the chain are discussed. This is important when modeling the move to JIT since it is very difficult to implement JIT without cooperation with the vendors. 1.5 C oordination in Supply chain

As mentioned earlier, while many papers discussed earlier considered JIT and various aspects therein, the problem was approached with the picture of only the organization concerned. It did not model partnership with suppliers, although it was discussed and agreed upon as important to the success of JIT. It has been found that larger firms could exercise more power in implementing JIT than smaller firms that found it hard to obtain cooperation fi-om its suppliers (Munson et al 1999). The impact of coordination within the supply chain was discussed at length by Munson & Rosenblatt (2001). The authors modeled a three level supply chain namely a single supplier, single manufacturer and single retailer and the impact of savings that can be obtained if there is coordination between the three parties. Under circumstances where there is no coordination, the manufacturer sets their orders quantity based on the order (EOQ) of the retailer. This would be a lot size multiplier of the order of the retailer. The supplier would in turn base their order 17

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

quantity based on the quantity ordered by the manufacturer. This would be a lot size multiplier o f the manufacturers order quantity. In a situation where there is coordination the leader in the supply chain would initiate the change by enticing the retailer to increase their order quantity by offering quantity discounts. This would prompt the retailer to increase the order quantity to a certain point that would bring savings to the manufacturer. A similar approach would be done for the supplier. Coordination would not necessarily bring savings to every party concerned, however, Munson & Rosenblatt (2001) argues that when considering the chain as a whole there would be savings and these savings can be shared through quantity discounts, price increases and so on. The savings could be concentrated at the manufacturer's or the supplier's or the retailer's side. The challenge is to ensure that the savings obtained at one point in the chain is distributed evenly or fairly among the players concerned. This responsibility would depend on the leader of the chain. If the leader exercises a great influence in the chain it need not share the savings and can force the others in the chain to take the losses. This issue was addressed by Munson et al (1999), where the authors examined th : dynamics o f the industry concerning the aspect o f coordination. Their article was a practical outlook on the industry and the dynamics of coordination. The authors argued that there are definite advantages in exploiting coordination but if the power o f the supply chain leader is used in an abusive way to maximize profits at the leader's end, it could lead to negative consequences like boycott or legal implications. In the short term, this approach could prove profitable to the chain
18

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

leader but ii

long run it weakens the chain and forces the abused to take

retaliatoiy measures. This leads to another question namely, if the members of the chain do decide to cooperate how will the resulting savings be distributed. The following section takes a brief survey o f the literature in this scenario. 1.6 P ro fit S haring The cooperation between the members of the supply chain to improve efficiency and costs raises another issue namely, how the savings generated would be distributed among the players. The brash approach for a leader would be to maximize and hold on to all the savings obtained being the leader. This would lead to a weakened chain as discussed earlier and long term effects. One o f the approaches would be adopting the model developed by Abad & Jaggi (2003). In this model the dynamics o f setting price in a price sensitive environment through the length of credit was highlighted. The influence o f price affects the demand and thereby the order quantity. They examine the difference in cooperative and non-cooperative scenarios. The model balances the choice between offering a small unit price and no credit against high unit price and some trade credit. Although this aspect is not discussed at length in this thesis, it is acknowledged that this issue is imperative to coordinating in a supply chain. Besides Abad & Jaggi's (2003) model other ways of profit sharing can be based on the investment ratio of the players or a simplistic 50% split through quantity discounts and trade credit and so on. 19

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1.7

Objectives and Scope of Thesis

In an environment of continuous improvement and increased competitiveness many organizations are adopting JIT. The benefits of JIT are often understated in many models due to the fact that the synergy of l)space savings, 2)coordination, 3)reduction in defects and 4)reduced setups are not modeled. Through the past sections in the literature review the object was to highlight the research done so far on the EOQ model. The model that is developed here, unlike others that studied the impact of these factors independently, illustrates the impact of each of these factors together on the total cost of a two level supply chain. 1.8 Thesis Layout Chapter 2 o f the thesis contains the problem description and the development of the mathematical model. The solution procedure is dealt with in a separate section. Chapter 3 illustrates the solution through an example. The behavior of the model is then studied through the generation of random scenarios and the results computed. The results are analyzed to see the overall impact coordination has on the total cost. This is follov/ed, in chapter 4, by the conclusion of the analysis and suggestions for further research. The appendices tliat follow includes the results in a tabulated form, and the step in the working of various equations.

20

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Chapter

2

PROBLEM DESCRIPTION AND MATHEMATICAL MODEL

2.1 Problem Objectives The problem that is being addressed in this thesis has five aspects that can be described in a figure 2.1. The matrix describes a two level supply chain and the relationship between the two levels. The two can be representative of a supplier and retailer or a manufacturer and retailer or a supplier and a manufacturer. In this thesis, it is assumed that there are only two parties involved, i.e, there is only one player in the upper level that supplies to the lower level that consists of only one player. This kind of relationship is often seen in the marketplace where the retailer requires firom the manufacturer exclusive rights to a product. Under the initial circumstances, the two parties make order quantity decisions independent of each other. The lower level (say retailer) decides independently what the optimum order quantity is based on their parameters. The upper level (say supplier) then bases their optimum manufacturing quantity based on a lot size multiplier X . of the order quantity of the retailer. This situation is described in the first box (No Space', No Coordination). Moving towards the right would be when the two levels of the chain decide to cooperate and decide on an optimum order quantity. This could mean that the lower level moves away fi' om the local optimum but results in a greater savings for the

' I n th is th e sis, th e te rm " N o Space" is u s e d to m e a n th a t th e c o s t fo r s p a c e is n o t c o n s id e re d a s a fu n c tio n o f Q (o r d e r q u a n tity ). I t is fa c to re d as a c o n s ta n t in th e m a th e m a tic a l m o d e l.

21

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

chain as a whole. This situation is described in the second box (No Space, Coordination). The retailer can be compensated by the supplier for the savings foregone in terms of discounts or lump sum compensation. The distribution of this savings, however, is not dealt within detail in this thesis. Next, the impact of space on these two scenarios is examined. Space is often an expensive commodity and the model integrates the impact of space and bin capacity to develop the optimum order quantity and lot size multiplier. Moving to j r r involves reducing the order quantity and processing orders on a lot for lot basis. This means that the supplier and retailer do not have a lot o f inventory. It would also be fair to say that the supplier has a lot size multiplier of one. It is also worth mentioning here that it is not possible to have JIT without proper coordination between the two players. Thus, this area of the matrix is indicated by the shade. Another consideration that has been included in the model is that when adopting EOQ, there maybe a lot of defects in a shipment. This is resource lost in the chain and needs to be accounted for in the model. Along with the defects brings the need to inspect the products on arrival. This causes the retailer to incur the cost of screening the shipment on arrival. These costs are eliminated when considering JIT since the approach is zero defects.

22

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Savings No Coordination Coordination JIT

1
%

Case I

Case II

"

ÎZ 3

Ï

Case III

Case IV

Case V

Figure 2.1: Two Level supply chain Matrix The model developed below explores each scenario in detail and elucidates the impact that each relationship indicated in the matrix has on the overall cost of a two level supply chain. Thus players in a two-level supply chain can evaluate the options and corresponding savings they can have in their decision to move towards JTT. In this chapter, the nomenclature used is first defined followed by the section on the mathematical model. The section on the mathematical model first establishes the assumptions and then models 1) no coordination no space 2) coordination no space 3) no coordination space 4) coordination space and finally 5) JIT. This is followed by the stepwise description of the optimal solution procedure.

23

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.2 Nomenclature 2.2.1 Input parameters: i=r,s subscript for retailer or supplier Ai = the fixed component of the order cost ($). a ~ The variable component of the order cost. It is assumed that when operating according to the EOQ policy, lots received need to be screened for quality. The variable cost is the screening cost per unit ($/unit). /?= the fi-action of units not conforming to quality that cannot be sold and thus needs to be returned. (0 <yS <1). ru= the cost of reworking ($/unit) c,= the unit purchasing cost for EOQ purchasing (S/unit). hi= the unit holding cost when operating according to EOQ policy (S/unit/yr). Ni = total number of storage areas, where N=l, 2, ... and each storage area has a maximum capacity of V. Ri = the annual cost per a storage area (S/storage area). V= opportunity cost per unit for not being able to sell the defective items ($/unit) p = penalty charge per returned unit to the supplier ($/unit). D = annual demand rate (Units/yr) n=Number of working days per year 2.2.2 Decision Variables:
Q e

= order quantity when operating under EOQ policy (units) 24

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Qj = order quantity when operating under JIT policy (units) X = lot size multiplier (1,2,3,..... ) 2.3 M athematical Model

In this model, each scenario is formulated. The model considers the impact of defects, returns and penalties for returned goods. This is incorporated into the model to see the impact it would have when approaching JIT where it is assumed that defects are zero (i.e., total quality., Fuller 1995 ). 2.3.1 Assumptions The assumptions associated with the classical Economic Order Quantity Model are held in this model, namely: 1) Demand is known, constant and independent. 2) Lead time is known and constant. 3) Receipt of inventory is instant and complete 4) There are no quantity discounts. 5) There is no shelf life for the product 6) Equipment capacity is infinite 7) Unlimited storage capacity is available Following the assumptions mentioned above the first case scenario is considered. 2.3.2 No Coordination, No Space. When a retailer is operating on EOQ, it is assumed that not all items conform to quality and a fraction (fi) of quantity (Q) is assumed to be defective. These defective items are either sold at a discounted price or returned to the supplier at the 25

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

end of each cycle. In this model, it is assumed that the retailer returns the defective products to the supplier and charges the supplier a penalty p per returned item. The penalty cost would include the holding cost of the defective items, the cost of screening and an opportunity cost for not having these items of good quality in the first place. 2.3.2.3 Retailer's Cost The figure 2.2 below illustrates the inventory cycle of the retailer following EOQ. The maximum and minimum inventory levels in a cycle are Q and PQ. It is assumed that the retailer holds on to the defective items till the next shipment arrives. Once the new shipment of Q units arrive, the defective items are loaded back on the trailer and returned to the supplier. Again, the Q units that are supplied by the supplier has PQ units that are defective and are held by the retailer till the next shipment. Thus, the cycle length T is given by:
^ Qa-P) D

26

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

With a fraction defective, the model can be illustrated as follows

Average Inventor}' Level

T im e

Figure 2.2 : Inventory cycle of the retailer

27

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The maximum and minimum inventory levels in a cycle are Q and PQ. The per lot cost for the retailer, L which are: 1. Procurement cost, PCXQ)
P C X Q ) = A r C r (Q ) ,

is the sum of all the costs in a given cycle,

+ aQ + C r Q

(2.1.1a)

2. Holding Cost, HCXQ) HCr(2)=Average Inventory Level x
T

'

'

2

(2,u i)
D I D

V

/

3. Storage Cost, SCr 5C=Kr (2.1.1c) a constant such that it does not impact the decision variable. In this scenario, it is assumed that there is plenty of storage. However, for the sake of comparison of the costs of the different scenarios in a like manner, the storage cost has been given a value that is the greater, required for
Q

when

there is coordination and no coordination. The assumption here is that space is not included in the decision variable, however that cost is valid and accounted for as overheads or otherwise. It is argued here that this function is significant and produces an impact on overall cost. 4. Penalty Refund, PnCXQ)
PnC, ( Q)
=

K

P

+

(c^+y +a)PQ

{2. L i d )

Therefore, the per lot cost for the retailer,
28

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

I,C ^0=(2.1.1a)+(2.1.1b)+(2.1.1cH 2.Lld) L C ,(Q ) = A ,+ c Q + c,Q + h, The retailer's annual cost, -K P + ^ + a ) f S Q (2.1.:

The first derivative o f the above equation is given as;

dQ

Q `( \ - P )

2

SC^ is considered a constant. It is assumed that space is available and not utilized for any other purposes. The second derivative is as follows:

Setting the first derivative equal to zero and solving for Q Qe = or ^ 4 working in Appendix j 2

where D ^, = -- ---- is the adjusted demand.

29

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

23.2.b Supplier's Cost The supplier delivers Q units every T units o f time. The decision that the supplier has to make is on the lot size multiplier X. The lot size multiplier in this thesis is considered as an integer, since the assumption is that the supplier provides this product only to this retailer. These can be exclusive products provided to a particular retailer hke retail brands. This research adopts the assumption used in Munson & Rosenblatt (2001) in this matter. Figure 2.3 illustrates the inventory cycle of the supplier. The supplier's inventory follows a stepped model. They manufacture or purchase in lot sizes of XQ and deplete inventory in steps o f Q. The dotted line indicates the actual inventoiy that the supplier is holding. This includes the defects that are to be reworked or being reworked that are returned to the supplier. Each shipment returns with a load o f PQ defective units. It is assumed here that these items can be turned around before the next shipment is delivered.

30

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The following figure illustrates the Inventory level of the supplier

i

S(^-V

XT-

T im c

Figure 2.3 : Inventory cycle of the supplier

31

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The per lot cost for the supplier, given cycle, which are: 1. Procurement cost, P
C s ( k ,

L C s ( k ,

Q ),

is the sum of the following costs in a

Q )

P C s(k,Q )-A i^ c ^ Q 2. Holding Cost, iîCj(2, Q) H c ,(k . Q ) = h, =

(2.1.6a)

+K m {2.1.6b)

The second term h[XQP is representative of the carrying cost o f the returned / defective items, where h[ = -- (c^-\-a-\-v + a>). c, 3. Storage Cost, SCs S Q = Y^ (2.1.6c) a constant. The storage cost for the supplier in this scenario follows the same pattern as that of the retailer. It is assumed that there is plenty of storage available and this cost will not impact the decision variable. Again, for the sake of comparison of the costs of the different scenarios in a like manner, the storage cost has been given a value that is the greater, required fo ilQ , when there is coordination and no coordination. 4. Rework Cost, R C s ( X , R C /X ,Q ) = cûXfiQ
Q )

(2.1.6d)

32

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

5. Penalty Cost PnCs(Q) charged by the retailer. This would be a cost to the supplier for supplying defective items to the retailer. P nC /Q ) = PnC,(Q) = h j Therefore, the per lot cost for the supplier, L C sd Q)= (2.1.6a)+(2.1.6b)+(2.1.6c)+(2.1.6d)+(2.1.6e) The Supplier's annual cost, C /A ,0 = + ( c ,+ v + a)pQ (2.1.6e)

XT = D

Where Thus

Q (l-^ )X

(I-P)

'

2

(\-P)

(\-P)

+

K ?Q + ( c , + v + a ) - ^

(2.1.7)

The value of Qe is substituted in the above equation and the optimal value of 1 is computed such that
c /2 -i.6 ^ ;> c /A ,6 j< c /2 + i,g f;v k > 2 (2.1.8)

and C ,( X .Q J < C /X + l.Q ,) forX-1 (2.1.9)

Thus, in this scenario the supplier and the retailer independently evaluate the optimum cost that each can obtain. There is no attempt on the supplier's or the

33

Reoroduced with Dermission of the coDvripht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

retailer's side to influence the other sides order quantity. In the next section the scenario o f coordination between the supplier and retailer is examined. 2.3.3 Coordination, No Space. In this scenario the two levels of the chain cooperate with each other to bring the total chain cost down to the optimum level. This means that the supplier or the retailer departs from their optimum order quantity in the interest of the total chain cost. Thus the total chain cost is optimized instead of the retailer's and the supplier's costs individually. The total chain cost is therefore given as C /A .0 = + C /0 (2.27)

(2.2.2)

The partial first derivative is:

Setting the above equation to zero the following is obtained (working in Appendix
13 )
Q ex)= I 2d (ia ^ + a ) (2 2 4

)

The partial second derivative is: a"C/ 1 0 ^ _ 2/ 7) 2/ D .... ^ 34 >2 (2.2.5)

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

For every value of A , a unique value for Qe(^) is obtained. The value of A and Qf .(X) is substituted C J A ,0 and the optimal value is computed such that

> c / A ,g / A ; ; < c / r A + v , g / A 4. 7;; v A^ 2
And
C /A ,6 g r A ;;< C /r ^ + i;,G ^ r ^ + 7;;for A=1 (2.2.7)

(z z d )

Thus the optimal cost of the total chain is computed. This cost can be less than or equal to that of no coordination. It may be noted that when the cost of the chain is optimized the retailer could be loosing money since they have gone away from their optimum and the supplier saves over and above what the retailer has lost. Thus the savings get clustered at the suppliers end. Based on the dynamics o f the supply chain relationship, as discussed in the literature review, this savings can be distributed. In the next two scenarios, space is considered as an input variable and the impact on the cost of the chain examined, 2.3.4 No Coordination, Space. In this scenario Space is considered as a function of Q. It can be argued, however, that this function is a stepped function for incremental increases in Q. Most retailers/ suppliers store items in pallets, bins, kanbans or some kind of storage area. The storage area used each have a capacity V. The quantity that needs to be stored is given by Q and the number of storage areas required is given as N = Q +1 V (2.3.1)

35

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

where fx"] is a round-down function, fx lis the smallest integer less than or equal to
X .

Thus the Storage Cost for the retailer per cycle denoted by SCr(Q) is (2.3.2)

It is assumed that V = V^=V^ since the volume of the product does not usually change from the supplier to the retailer. It is accepted that there are situations where These are examples where a supplier processes the products and the

manufacturer further processes it before it reaches the end consumer. A typical example of this can be that of a printed circuit board making its way through the supplier to the manufacturer who assembles components on them and assembles them in a box that is passed to the end consumer. The space required to accommodate the printed circuit board is a lot smaller that the space required for the fully assembled product. However, in a supplier and retailer context there is rarely a case where the volume of the product changes. The former can be very easily accommodated in to the model with minor modification. Thus, when space is considered the retailers annual cost equation (2.1.3) now becomes:

V (" .3) The first derivative of the above equation is given as: 36

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

dC,(Q)

A,D

The second derivative is as follows:

> 0, v g > 1
Setting the first derivative equation (2.3.4) equal to zero and solving for Q Qr = It . . (2.3.5) working is in Appendix 1.4

Since the storage has been taken as a continuous function, the value C r(0 can be iteratively computed for all values between (Q-yV) to (Q+yV) to obtain gg . y is a sufficiently large number that is enough to accommodate the error due to the noncontinuous function. The storage cost for the supplier is given as s c ,( i,Q ) ^ R ,N , \ J = \ ^ / (2.3.6)

The above equation ignores the space required for the total shipment of the supplier. This is because Q units get shipped out the moment it arrives. Thus the space required to accommodate that is not considered. Substituting (2.3.6) in (2.2.2) the following can be obtained

C,(l.Q)=
A.D cofiD c.D
+ h .

, ô fA -i; PD

4 ---------- --

h[Pp

 ' ----- h R

G(^ + A -l)

+1
(2.3.7)

+ h^pQ + (c^+ v + a)

37

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Again, the supplier would try to optimize their cost by adjusting the lot size multiplier by iteratively substituting the value of A= 1,2, 3, 4, .... etc. The value of Qe from equation (2.3.5) is substituted in the equation (2.3.7) and the optimal value of X is computed such that
V x> 2 (2.3.8)

and
+ &rX=l (2.3.9)

The total chain cost would be the sum of the supplier's and retailer's cost function. This would represent the total cost o f the chain if both the supplier and the retailer consider space as an important cost factor, but do not influence each other's order quantity. 2.3.5 Coordination, Space. In this scenario, the two levels of the chain cooperate with each other to bring the total chain cost down to the optimum level. The difference here is that space cost is considered. Thus substituting the space cost equation (2.3.2) and (2.3.6) in (2.2.2) the total chain cost can be given as:

V
n -w sn-w -i a-P) 2 n -w

R.

(2.4.1)

The Supplier cost and the retailer cost include storage cost as a function of Q. 38

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The partial first derivative is;

V Setting the above equation to zero the following is obtained Cf,U-l ~

(2.4.2)

^

^X(l-/]){VhXl + fi)+VhX^-i}+2K+2R^{p + À-l)}

(243^

The partial second derivative is: a ^ C / X Q , ^ 2A,D ^ 2A,D aÿ Q' a - P ) Q ' a - P ) x (2.4.4)

Again for every value of -A a unique value for Qe(V is obtained. Since the storage has been taken as a continuous function the value Cc(X 0 c a n be iteratively computed for all values between (Q- y V) to (Q+ y to obtain Qgfbr each value of

A . y is a sufficiently large arbitrar y number that is enough to accommodate the error due to the non-continuous function. The value of A and Qe(X) firom equation (2.4.3) is substituted in equation (2.4.1) and C^(X,,Q) computed such that c /r A - i ; , g / A And C /A ,G /A ;;< C /r A + U ,G /A + 7;;For A= 1 (2.4.6) > c / A . 0 rA;; < c / r A+ i ; , G / A + v A> 2 (2.4. j )

Thus, the cost of coordination with space can be calculated. In each scenario, the cost o f the chain either remains the same or reduces, due to various factors modeled. When space is considered, it influences the cost and the quantity ordered. 39

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

This in itself is an approach to JTT. Reducing the order quantity to a day to day basis can be considered as JIT. This means that there is no wastage of space and products do not wait in inventory bins to be processed. The following subsection looks at how far does the chain need to reduce costs from Coordination Space to JIT. 2.3.6 Operating Under JIT The approach in this section is different from the other sections. Here the values are known and what needs to be obtained is the amount of reduction in setup needed to reach that level. When operating under JIT, the lot size multiplier X is equal to one since the supplier would be building inventory on a lot for lot basis. Further, owing to continuous improvement and immediate identification and corresponding rectification of problems it can be assumed that approaches Zero.

Substituting these values in (2.4.3),

Ideally in a JIT world Qj = -- . Where it is assumed here that n = 365 working days n per year. This would be the scenario where products are ordered on a day to day basis. However, bringing Qj down would cause the total cost to increase. For this scenario to be profitable Ar and As should be brought down to a feasible level. Having computed the total cost in each scenario, the optimum cost is considered as

40

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

a benchmark. The cost for operating under JIT is computed and the reduction needed in setup costs is computed. 2.4 O ptim al Solution Procedure The following sections will illustrate the solution procedure to arrive at the optimal order quantity in each of the abovementioned scenarios. It is acknowledged that the model assumes the order quantity and number of storage bins to be continuous for calculation purposes but in reality it is not possible to order 566.6667 units of a product. It should be either 566 or 567 units. This is also the case where number of bins is concerned. If 100 units fit into one bin the number of bins required to accommodate 566 units would be 6 bins. It cannot be 5.66 bin or 5. This necessitates the search for the optimum solution by the iterative search surrounding solution generated by the model. The following two flowcharts illustrates the solution procedure for No Coordination and Coordination

41

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

C a lc u la te C r(Q ) & Q ,

A= 0 , K = Infiniti

A= A+1

C a lc u la te C s(A , Q g ) fo r

No

K Qe
No Yes

Yes

ltCs(A, Q e ) in c r e a s in g ,

K= C s(A , Q g )

Nirend/

End K = C s(A , Q g )

S to r e A & Q g a s O p tim a l S o lu tio n

Figure 2.4: Optimal solution procedure for no coordination (case I and case HI)

A= 0 , K = Infiniti

No

Y «5

No

Yes

K= C c(A . Q e )

--^

S t o r e A & Q e a s O p tim a l S o lu tio n

Figure 2.5: Optimal solution procedure for coordination (case II and case IV)
42

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The following is the solution algorithm adopted: 2.4.1 No Coordination, No Space
(

Step 1: Set

= hit

2AD K a -fij /
2

Step 2 : For Q = Qe-yVto QE+yF

The value of Q for which C^fQJ is minimum is the retailer's EOQ. y is a sufficiently large arbitrary number that is enough to accommodate the error due to the non-continuous function. Step 3 : For 1 = 1 to sufficiently large integer (say 2max)- ^max is usually a value beyond which the cost function for the supplier is constantly increasing.

KJ^Q + (Cr+v + aJa-P) The value of IQ for which C JX .Q ) is minimum is the supplier's EOQ and the total chain cost is C J l,Q ) = C^(k,Q) + C^(Q) 2.4.2 Coordination, No Space. Step 1 : For X= 1 to sufficiently large number (say Xmax) generate the values of o m I

+

Xmax is a sufficiently large arbitrary integer beyond which the minimum total cost C^^X.QgJ is constantly increasing. 43

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Step 2 : For Q -- Qe- y V to Qe+ y V for each X

SC ,+ - ^

+ h J Q + ( c ,+ v + a)- ^

y is again a sufficiently large arbitrary number that is enough to accommodate the error due to a non-continuous fimction. The value of Q and X for which C^(X,Q) is minimum is the retailer's EOQ and the suppliers lot size multiplier respectively. 2.4.3 No Coordination, Space Step 1: Set Step 2 : For Q = QE-yV to QE+yV

-- The value of Q for which C / Q ) is minimum is the retailer's EOQ.

n -w

y is a sufficiently large number that is enough to accommodate error due to a noncontinuous function. Step 3 : For 1 = 1 to sufficiently large integer (say Xmax)

oePD ^ +

Cc^+v + a

The value of 2 g for which C /X .Q ) is minimum is the supplier's EOQ and the total chain cost is Ç J X , 0 = C /X ,Q ) + C / 0 44

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Àmax is a sufficiently large integer beyond wliich the supplier cost is constantly increasing. 2.4.4 Coordination, Space. Step 1 ; For 1 = 1 to sufficiently large number (say Xmax) generate the values of
O «)=
^

I 2V D (U ,*A,) ^jX(l-fi){VhXl + J3)+VhXX-^)+2R, + 2R^{J3 + X~l)}

Amoxis a sufficiently large integer beyond which the minimum total cost C^(X,Q^) is constantly increasing. Step 2 : For Q = Qe- y V to Qe+ y V for each X

y is a sufficiently large arbitrary number that is enough to accommodate error due to a non-continuous function. The value of Q and X for which C^(X.Q) is minimum is the retailer's EOQ and the suppliers lot size multiplier. 2.4.5 Operating under JIT Step 1: Compute the value of Q such that Qj = -- where n=365 working days per n year Step 2: Substitute the value of Qj in equation (2.4.1) with X =land p=0 and compute the total cost. 45

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Step 3: If the total cost obtained is less than that computed in each of the above scenarios, no further action required. If the total cost obtained is greater than that of any o f the above scenarios, then Ar and As has to be reduced together uniformly to a level such that the total cost is less. In the following chapter, the procedure detailed in section 2.4 is illustrated through an example and the results of the statistical analysis performed using a number of sets on parameters described.

46

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

C h a p te r

3

NUMERICAL RESULTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

This chapter presents numerical examples to illustrate the solution procedure to the mathematical models developed in Chapter 2. It also investigates the behavior of the model tested under varying sets o f parameters. 3.1 N um erical Example

This section presents numerical examples for the models developed in Chapter 2 to illustrate the savings that could be obtained when the inventory system shifts fi'om tradition EOQ inventory policy to contemporary JIT policy. These models represent the cases when there is no-coordination between the supplier and the retailer and no space considerations (Case I: NC-NS), coordination between the supplier and the retailer and no space considerations (Case II; C-NS), no-coordination between the supplier and the retailer with space considerations (Case III: NC-S), coordination between the supplier and the retailer with space considerations (Case IV: C-S), and the case where the supplier and the retailer operate under just-in-time policy (Case V: JIT). Each case, i.e., NC-NS, C-NS, NC-S, C-S, and JIT, is examined to see the progress in savings as each step towards the implementation of the ideal JIT as described by Cao and Schniedeijans (2004) is considered. The following is a solved example to illustrate the savings that could be obtained. In the example that is illustrated let Ar =420 ($), As = 480 ($) , a =0.105 (S/unit), ^=0.046 {0 < P <1), Cr= 21 ($/unit), C s = 10 ($/unit), hr= 2.73 ($/imit/yr), A;=1.8

47

Reproduced with permission of the copyr' ih t owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

($/unit/yr), Rr= 1800 ($/storage area), Rs -- 1500 ($/storage area), v = 3.675 ($/imit), D = 120,000 (units/yr), V=10 units Case I: No Coordination, No Space From equation (1.3): 2x420x120,000 = Int{6,369.43) = 6,369 2.73 X( 1 - 0 .0 4 6 / J

Qe =

For Q = Qe-y V to Qe+y V Here y is taken as 2. This is a sufFiciently large arbitrary number from the results generated that cover the minimum value of C^(Q) and the error due to a noncontinuous function. For Q = 6350 to 6389 substituting the values in equation (2.1.3) PD

Note that SC^ is kept constant and the value assigned is the cost of space needed to accommodate the greater of the two EOQ's obtained in case I and case II, namely "no coordination no space" and "coordination no space". In the sub-section that follows, it can be seen that when the space requirement for "Coordination No space" was calculated, it was found to be 282 storage areas, since this scenario requires 637 storage areas the greater o f the two is taken as SC^ for both the scenarios. This is done to bring consistency for the space cost to the two scenarios so that the two can be compared. Thus SC^ = $1,146,600.

48

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix 1.5 shows the values for Cr(Q) and their corresponding Q and graphically shows the variation. It is obtained that :

It is interesting to note that the change in total cost is in decimals as the optirhum is approached. For practical purposes, this gives the decision maker a lot of flexibility to adjust the order quantity to satisfy other decision parameters with limited impact on the cost. To calculate the supplier's side of the cost, equation (2.1.7) is used for X from 1 to À m ax for the optimal cost. The computational logic used here is that 1 is tested from 1 to a very large number. As the values of cost for each X, C;(X, Q), are computed they are stored and if this displays an increasing trend the program exits. Here X is computed to a o f 9. The software is set this way since the increase in X, C^(X,

Q) takes a parabolic shape. This means that if two or three consecutive values show an increasing trend then the minimum has been reached. Appendix 1.6 shows the values for Cs(X, Q) and the corresponding value of X and depicted graphically. The suppliers optimum cost is at;

Thus the total chain cost is c / 2 , G) = c , r A , 0 + C /G ) = %

49

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Case I I : Coordination, No Space The approach here is combined where for each X, look for the optimum Q. To save computing time, the range of X for which the total cost is minimum, is first established. This is done by iteratively substituting the value of 1 in equation (2.2.4) and generating the value of Q. This in turn is substituted in equation (2.2.2) to get the total cost of the chain. The values ofX for which the total chain cost is minimum is identified and a search for the optimum value of X and Q is done. Thus the value of X for which the total cost was minimum was 8 and optimum value was searched for from X= 6 to 10 is substituted in equation (2.2.2). The values of Q obtained are tabulated in table 3.1.
Q ;;; ,

C,(X,Q) $8,884,758 $8,883,713 $8,883,401 $8,883,552 $8,884,008

6 7 8 9 10

3257 3000 2795 2626 2485

Table 3.1 : Value of Q obtained for each X from equation (2.2.4) For each X and Q, iteratively the surrounding values of Q were searched for the best solution, i.e. if Q(8)=2795, the best solution is searched for in the range of ±30 units. This range is selected to be sufficiently high arbitrary number such that the minimum lies within this range. The results are tabulated in Appendix 1.7. Thus, from this tabulated results, the optimal value is + c.p&y j; = gj.dgo.jgp+ ^j.203,037 = Here again, it is interesting to note that the change in total cost is in decimals as the optimum is approached. However, this is not the case for the supplier cost and the 50

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

retailer cost taken individually, that in turn varies by a few dollars. Also note the difference in the value generated from table 3.1 and the results obtained from appendix 1.7. This is due to the error of a non-continuous function. It is worthwhile also to note that the supplier's cost reduced ($5,218,309$5,203,031= $15,278), while the retailer cost increased ($3,674,525-$3,680,369=$5,844), however, the total chain cost has reduced ($8,892,834-

$8,883,400=$9,434). The retailer can be compensated by the supplier for the change through quantity discounts or can be forced to order in lot sizes of 2,815 units by the supplier and the savings kept by the supplier, if the supplier is the chain leader. Alternately, if cooperation is the aim then the net savings can be shared based on investments or total purchases or so. Case III: No Coordination, Space When No Coordination with space is considered the EOQ is represented by equation (2.3.5) and the total cost of the retailer is represented by (2.3.3). Thus substituting the input variables in (2.3.5). gg=539 units
C^(539) = $2,707,253

The best solution is searched for from Q=520 to 559 and tabulated in Appendix 1.8. The graph of the variation in the total costs takes the form of a saw tooth pattern. This is the impact of the storage areas that are taken into account.

51

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Now searching for X (lot size multiplier) that is optimal to the supplier, consider 1 from 1 to Imax where is 6. The value of X m ax is different for each set of

parameters since the software stops searching for the optimal solution when the result o f increasing X starts to generate increasing values of supplier cost. Substituting these values and all the input parameters in equation (2.3.7) X= 2 C J2,539) = $1,512,867 Again the supplier cost for X= 1 to 6 is tabulated in Appendix 1.9 The total cost is therefore C/2,539) = C/2,539) + C/539) = $2,707,253 + $1,512,867 = $4,220,120 Thus, the optimal cost for No Coordination, Space is found. Case IV: Coordination, Space In this scenario the approach is combined where for each X the optimum Q is obtained. From equation (2.4.3) X= 1 to X^ax where X m ax is a large number beyond which the values are increasing. The values of Q obtained for each value of X are tabulated in table 3.2.
X , 1 2 3 4 5

Q
775 494 385 325 286

Table 3.2: Value of Q obtained for each X from equation (2.4.3) For each Xand Q, iteratively the surrounding values of Q were searched for the best solution. The best solution is searched for in the range of ±30 units. The results are not included but follows the pattern of that of Coordination No Space. Only that 52

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

this has a saw tooth pattern to the graph due to the cost o f storage space that is included. Thus, from the table the optimal result is

Q (2,478) = $2.708,882 + $1,509,456 CJ2,179)== $4,218,338 Note that the similar situation has occurred with regard to the supplier cost where it is reduced ($1,512,867-$ 1,509,456= $3,411), the retailers cost increased ($2,707,253-52,708,882= -$1,629), and the total chain has cost has a net reduction ($4,220,120-54,218,338=51,782). The sharing of the savings can be done based on the dynamics of the supply chain relationship and the exchange of funds through quantity discounts or methods suggested by Abed & Jaggi (2003). Case (V): Operating under JIT As the supplier and retailer move towards JIT, it is assumed that the retailer ships product on a need to basis. That is the retailer buys only what is required for that day and the supplier buys or manufactures only what would be ordered by the retailer. This means that X=1 and Q = = 329 units

365

365

Moving to JIT means that the supplier and the retailer move towards total quality. This would increase the cost of C r and Cs, thereby increasing the holding cost 53

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

parameters hr and hs. It would be safe to assume that C r and C s increased by a minimum of one times the screening cost. It is also assumed that p is zero and the retailer does not need to do any screening since it is total quality that is being received. Thus Cr and C s would he $21.11 and $10.1 Iper unit and hr and h^ would be $2.74 and $1.82 per unit per year. Substituting these values in the equations: CXQ)= $2,745,751 C X lQ ) = $1,389,300 C X lQ ) = $4,135,051 Thus in this scenario adopting JIT has already proved cheaper than all the other alternatives. The major factor that contributed to the lower cost is the supply of total quality products (ie p=0). It is worthwhile to note that more savings can be obtained by reducing the set up cost or ordering costs although no reduction is required. Thus, it can be said that for this set of parameters it would be very valuable for the retailer and the supplier to move towards JIT. The summary results on these five scenarios are tabulated in table 3.3.

54

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduccion prohibited without permission.

m m # KB
$3,674,525 $3,680,369 $2,707,253 $2,708,882 $2,745,751

iSùppliérlsV$5,218,309 $5,203,031 $1,512,867 $1,509,456 $1,389,300 $8,892,834 $8,883,400 $4,220,120 $4,218,338 $4,135,051 6,369 2,815 539 478 329 5 8 2 2 1

NC- No Coordination, C- Coordination, NS - No Space, S - Space, JIT- Just in Time Table 3.3: Summary table of the total cost for all scenarios 3.2 Statistical Analysis

In the following section the model is tested through varying sets of input parameters to understand the behavior o f the model. The parameters selected are adopted from the Munson & Rosenblatt (2001) example. The demand (D) is varied randomly (following a uniform distribution) from 10,000 to 500,000 units in increments of 10,000. The setup costs (Ar & As) for the supplier and the retailer is also varied randomly (following a uniform distribution) from $50 to $500 in increments of $10. The cost for the storage area (Rr & Rs) for the supplier and the retailer follows the similar randomness pattern from $1000 to $2000 in increments of $100. The fraction of defects (/J) ranges uniformly from 0.01 to 0.05 in increments of 0.001. The cost for the supplier (cs) varies uniformly from $10 to $100 in increments of $1/-. The cost for the retailer (c j is based on the supplier cost such that:

55

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

=ac^+v where a is the markup that varies between 1.3 and 1.8 unifoimly with intervals of 0.1 and v is the value added by the supplier to the product. In the analysis the value of v has been taken as 5. Thus the value of Cr is dependant on C s but the randomness is introduced in the markup using the above-mentioned relationship. The holding cost {hr & hs) is dependant on the value o f Cr and Cs. This can be expressed as; hj - (pi XC ; where (pi is the annual holding cost percentage for firm i. (p -, varies fi'om 12 to 25% of the cost for the supplier or the retailer in increments of 1%. This again is generated randomly following a uniform distribution. The randomly generated values were tabulated and the total cost in each scenario calculated. The base reference cost is the total cost for No Coordination No Space. The summary of the averages of output measures fiom the computational study of 8410 trials are tabulated in Table 3.4.

56

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13

m M

Ê IÊ à Ê S m m Ê Ê Ê IÊ Ê

M M B
$44,903 0.05% $1,930,626 9.49% $1,957,834 9.47% 9.22% 10.82% 9.54% 6.23% 3.56% 4.55% 2.58%

$48,337 Cc(X,0)(NC-NS) - CefiCO)(C-NS) 0.11% Cc(X,Q)(NC-NS) - Cc(X,0)(C-NS) % $2,944,919 Cc(X,Q)(NC-NS) - Cc(X,0)(NC-S) 10.95% Cc(X,Q)(NC-NS) - Cc(X,0)(NC-S) % $3,005,102 Cc(^0)(NC-NS) - Cc(X,0)(C-S) 11.08% Cc(^Q)(NC-NS) - Cc()sO)(C-S) % 1.99% % Setup reduction on JIT 60.39% % Reduction in Q (NC-NS to C-NS) 35.60% % Reduction in XQ (NC-NS to C-NS) 78.03% % Reduction in Q (NC-NS to NC-S) 90.77% % Reduction in X.Q (NC-NS to NC-S) 86.63% % Reduction in Q (NC-NS to C-S) 92.73% % Reduction in XQ (NC-NS to C-S) Table 3.4: Summary averages from computational trials

The output parameters are defined below
Cc(^Q)(NC-NS) - Cc(?t,Q)(C-NS)=> This is the difference in the total cost o f the

chain between two scenarios. (NC-NS (No Coordination No Space), C-NS (Coordination No Space), NC-S (No Coordination Space), C-S (Coordination Space).)
Cc(X,Q)(NC-NS) - Cc(X,Q)(C-NS)%=> This is the percentage difference between

the total cost of the two scenarios. % Setup reduction on JIT=> the cost to operate on JIT is compared with the minimum cost of operating in the other scenarios. This parameter is the percentage reduction in setup needed to bring the total cost of operating in JIT to the minimum. It was observed that in all the experiments that coordinating in the chain brought some cost savings. When space was considered there has always been considerable savings that can be seen from the summary table 57

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

It can be said that it is definitely advantageous for organizations to move to JIT but computing the cost involved is often conducted in an erroneous manner since the actual costs and savings are hidden. Following the model developed above can lead to the conclusion that the cost involved in reducing setup costs to move to JIT is far lower than scenario o f no coordination no space. This is illustrated by the point that the percentage reduction in setup required is around 1.99 % on average. Among the other observations firom the trials are the maximum savings computed when moving fi'om no coordination, no space to coordination no space is 0.33% and the minimum is close to zero. Similarly, maximum savings from no coordination no space to no coordination space is 71.42% and the minimum is 1%. The numbers are slightly higher when comparing coordination space with no coordination no space namely 71.55% and 1.07%. This is due to the savings obtained due to coordination. This supports the fact that coordination between the supplier and retailer can bring a lot more savings. Considering the percentage reduction in setup to make JIT feasible, the maximum reduction in setup required is 75.24% and the minimum is 0%. Another surprising observation is that 93.76% of the trials did not require any reduction in setup cost for JIT to be feasible. This means that for these case scenarios, moving to JIT lot sizes require little if no investments to reduce setup cost. Other observations include, that if the supplier and retailer setup costs are equal the average percentage of improvement reduces slightly to below average from 10.95% to 10.10% for No Coordination Space and from 11.08% to 10.22% for Coordination Space. 58

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

This chapter details the solution of an example set of parameters and the overall behavior o f the results of a number of trials conducted. The next chapter concludes this thesis and contains suggestions for further research.

59

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

C h a p ter

4

COÎ'TCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH

In this research, the classical EOQ model was extended to reflect and therein compare the actual costs associated with adopting the classical EOQ approach and the JIT approach for inventory. The model brings out the advantages of coordination within the supply chain which is often an integral part of an organization that successfully adopts JIT. The results from the random experiments illustrated that if an organization considered coordination (Case II) with its supplier or retailer on its own to begin with, can reduce the total chain cost by an average of $48,337. In a competitive market this saving can be used to the advantage of the organizations concerned. It must however be noted that the percentage reduction in order quantity for the retailer was down by an average of 60% and that of the supplier by 35.60%. The huge reduction in order quantity did not reflect in total cost since space occupied by the inventory was not properly accounted for in this scenario. Considering space alone as a cost factor without coordination (Case III) brings significant impact to the cost. The results indicate that a total chain cost savings of 10.95%, on average, can be obtained in this scenario. The reduction in order quantity and there in the average inventory on hand reduced by 78.03% for the retailer and 90.77% for the supplier. This indicates considerable savings in the chain. One can argue that these quantities approach JIT lot sizes.

60

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

However, the best case is combining both the scenarios, namely considering space and coordination (Case IV), which brings us closest to JIT. In this scenario the total chain cost savings that was obtained was an average o f 11.08%. The reduction in order quantity was the best with an average reduction of 86.63% for the retailer and 92.73% for the supplier. In case III and case IV, it can be observed that order quantities of the supplier are reduced to an average o f 10%. This can be an indication that the supplier is working on a lot for lot basis that would be in accordance with the principles of JIT. Ordering in JIT is characterized by total quality shipment that are manufactured or delivered on a need-to basis. This requires establishing long term contracts (WatersFuller 1995) and coordination between the supplier and the retailer. It can be observed that case TV characterized by coordination and consideration of space in itself is the closest to JIT ordering. Moving form case IV to JIT ordering (Case V), it can be observed that the reduction in setup needed to make JIT profitable is around 1.99%. It was also observed that in 93% cases no reduction in setup was ever required. This result concurs with Jones (1991) argument that in EOQ, if all costs are appropriately accounted for would approximate JIT lot sizes. This is the conclusion that the model alludes to. The example illustrated in chapter 3 (table 3.3) shows the reduction in order quantity to JIT levels. Thus reducing setup costs, although needed, does not need to be of that much magnitude than estimated with no coordination and no space. This opens scope for lot more improvement in costs as setup is further improved.
61

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

There is however a lot more scope for further research. In the analysis that was done in this thesis the space allocation considered was fixed (Joshi 1990). Considering the space to be dynamic can improve the savings further more. Although this would be of benefit to organizations that have numerous products, it is not the scenario when organizations deal with a few products only. Abed & Jaggi's (2003) extensive research could be extended into the model to illustrate the dynamics of the players and the mode in which the profit sharing can be done. This can be further investigated in future research. The model assumes that the production rate to be infinite. Further research can be done to study the impact of finite production rates on the model. The economics of Price sensitivity to demand and demand sensitivity to price are other interesting areas that can be incorporated into the model. It is also suggested that further research can be done by extending this model to three members o f the supply chain. This would be in line with Munson & Rosenblatt (2001) model extended to JIT with the consideration of space and defects. The model can also be extended to consider single retailer with multiple vendors as well as multiple retailers and single vendor.

62

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

REFERENCES

Abad, P.L., Jaggi, C.K., A Joint Approach fo r Setting Unit Price and the Length o f the Credit Periodfo r a Seller when End Demand is Price Sensitive, International. Journal of Production Economics 83 (2003), pp.l 15-122 Aghazadeh, Seyed-Mahmoud, Comparison o f Just-In-Time Inventory and the

Quantity Discount Model In Retail Outlets, Logistics Information Management Volume 14, Number 3,(2001), pp.201-207 Billington, Peter J. Holding Cost Reduction in the EOQ Model. Journal of American Academy of Business, Cambridge, September (2003), pp.409-415 Cao, Qing., Schniedeijans, Marc J. A Revised EMQ/JITProduction-Run Model: An examination o f inventory and production costs. International Journal of Production Economics, 87(2004) pp.83-95. Chyr, Fuchiao, Lin, Tsong Ming, Ho, Chin-Fu, Comparison Between Just-In-Time and EOQ System, Engineering Costs and Production Economics, 18 (1990) pp. 233-240 Fazel Farzaneh, Fischer Klaus P., Gilbert Erika W.UITPurchasing Vs. EOQ with a price discount: An Analytical Comparison o f Inventory Costs, Int. J. Production Economics 54 (1998), pp.101-109 Fazel Farzaneh, A Comparative Analysis o f Inventory costs ofJIT and EOQ Purchasing, International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, Vol 27 No.8.(1997), pp.496-504 63

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Gupta, Omprakash K., Kini Ranjan B., Is Price-Quantity Discount Dead In a JustIn-Time Environment?, Memational Journal o f Operations & Production Management, Vol. 15 No. 9 (1995), pp.261-270 Jones, Daniel J., JIT & The EOQ Model.Management Accounting, Management Accounting, February (1991),72,8, pp.54-57 Joshi, Kailash, Storage Space Costs and the EOQ Model, Journal of Supply Chain Management; Summer (1990); 26,3; pp.37-41 Munson, Charles L., Rosenblatt, Meir J., Coordinating a Three-level Supply Chain with Quantity Discounts, HE Transactions (2001) 33, pp.371-384 Munson, Charles L., Rosenblatt, Meir, Rosenblatt Zehava, The Use and Abuse o f Power in Supply Chains, Business Horizons/January-February (1999), pp.55-65 Pan, Andrew C.,Liao, Ching-Jong., An Inventory Model Under Just-In-Time Purchasing Agreements., Production and Inventory Management Journal, First Quarter 30,1 (1989) pp.49-52 Ramasesh, Ranga V.Jlecasting The Traditional Inventory Model To Implement Just-In-Time Purchasing, Production and Inventory Management Journal, First Quarter (1990) pp.71-75 Rao, S. Subba, Bahari-Kashani, Hamid, Economic Order Quantity and Storage Size-Some Considerations, Engineering Costs and Production Economics, 19 (1990), pp.201-204 Schniedeijans, Marc J., Cao, Qing., An Alternative Analysis o f Inventory costs o f JIT and EOQ purchasing. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management. Vol 31 No.2 (2001) pp. 109-123 64

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Schniedeijans, Marc J., Cao, Qing., A Note on JTTPurchasing Vs. EOQ with Price Discounts: An Expansion o f Inventory Costs. International Journal of Production Economies, 65 (2000) pp.289-294 Fuller, Niall Waters, Just-In-Time Purchasing and Supply: A Review o f the Literature, International Journal of Operations & Production Management, Vol. 15. No.9 (1995), pp.220-236

65

! Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

APPENDICES

Appendix 1.1 Working of equation ftom Scheniederians & Cao

Z= j2 j2 2

+ Lp ~ c,)d + CF or by substituting the value of Q from

2v4D. h Z = - jo ^ yiT% 2v4D
I n yfr^

2A D

O

2

+( c^ ^ ^

c )d
/ /

+ CF

2 h

2

2

U

Z = 4 2 Â D h -^ 4 2 lÂ D h + { c ^ ,-C j )d + CF

Z = V ü 5 â | i - ^ j + (fH

)d + CF

66

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix 1.2 Working of Retailer's Order quantity for no coordination no space From Equation (2.1.3)

C M = ^ 5 ^ -" +

+K

- h M - ( C r +v + a)-

(2.1.3) . !..
.

derivative of the above equation is given as:

xlk(. : ------ éiR -- + .Y: 2'

Setting the above equal to zero

2

lA^D & = J , (2 1-4)

67

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix 1,3 The following is the working of the retailer's order quantity for Coordination, No Space. From Equation (2.2.4) aC ,(X .Q )_ A,D A,D ^ (2.2.4)

SQ

Q`a- P)

2

eVi-WA

2

Setting equation (2.2.4) equal to zero

jg r i - ; ) ;

2

2

2D{?u4^+A^) ( 1 - ^)X{h^ ( l - ( ^ ) + ( a - 1))

2

68

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix 1.4 Working o f the Retailer's order quantity for No Coordination, Space From Equation (2.3.4)

(2.3.4)

Equating to zero and solving for Q

4Z) _ p ,F (l-y g )+ 2 J ? ; G Y i- ) g ; L 2F 2 ^ DF

& =

2A.DV

(2.3.5)

69

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix 1.5 Case I No Coordination No Space: The table below shows the total retailers cost (Cr(Q)) tabulated against the value of each order quantity (Q). Highlighted in black is the minimum cost for Q=6369

6350 6351 6352 6353 6354 6 355 6356 6357 6358 6359 6360 6361 6362 6363 6364 6365 6366 6367 6368 6370 6371 6372 6373 6374 6375 6376 6377 6378 6379 6380 6381 6382

3 .6 74,524.5973 3,67 4 ,5 2 4 .5 8 9 5 3 ,6 74.524.5822 3 ,6 74,524.5752 3 ,6 7 4,524.5687 3 ,6 7 4,524.5626 3,674,524.5568 3.6 7 4 ,5 2 4 .5 5 1 5 3,6 7 4 ,5 2 4 .5 4 6 6 3 ,6 7 4,524.5422 3,674.524.5381 3.674,524.5344 3,674,524.5312 3,674.524.5284 3.674.524.5259 3,674,524.5239 3,674,524.5223 3,674,524.5211 3,674,524.5203 3 ,6 7 4,524.5200 3,674,524.5204 3.674.524.5212 3,674.524.5225 3.674.524.5242 3,674.524.5262 3,674.524.5287 3,674,524.5316 3,674.524.5349 3,674,524.5386 3,674,524.5427 3,674,524.5472 3,674,524.5521

70

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

N ü a Ë 6383 6384 6385 6386 6387 6388 6389

3 ,6 7 4 ,5 2 4 .5 5 7 5 3 ,6 7 4 ,5 2 4 .5 6 3 2 3,6 7 4 ,5 2 4 .5 6 9 3 3,6 7 4 ,5 2 4 .5 7 5 9 3 ,6 7 4 ,5 2 4 .5 8 2 8 3 ,6 7 4 ,5 2 4 .5 9 0 2 3 ,6 7 4 ,5 2 4 .5 9 7 9

Case I No Coordination No Space: Figure below i lustrâtes the change in the retailers cost with the change in Q

Retailer's C ost Function
3,674,52^.6200 3,674,524.0000 3,674,524.5800

I

3,674,524.5600 3,674,524.5400 3,674,524.5200 3,674,524.5000 3,674,524.4800
in lO iS 1 0 (0 (0 ( 0 ro ro (O ro ro ro ro ( 0 ( fO 0(0 (O (O (O O) C M in oo V fs. ro C O ^ ps. ro (O
fs.

-CrtQ)!

ro (O

o ro CO 00 C O ro (O to

(O 6 ro (O

O) 00 C O (O

Q (Units)

71

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix 1.6 Case I No C ordlnation No Space: Table below shows the variation the supplier cost with the change in the lot size multiplier (1)

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

5,318,309.64 5,247,211.32 5,227,333.28 5,220,260.31 5,218,309.37 5,218,919.44 5,220,992.95 5,223,981.11 5,227,579.03

The figure below illustrates the variation the suppliers cost (Cs(?^,Qe)) with the lot size multiplier (X .)

Supplier's C o st Function
5 .3 4 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 5.3 2 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 5 .3 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 5 .2 8 0 .0 0 0 .0 0

of

5.2 6 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 5 .2 4 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 5.2 2 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 5 .2 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 5 .1 8 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 5.1 6 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 5 6
??ar 'V - '- ' C

I

Cs(A, Q)

A

72

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix 1.7 Case II: Coordination. No Space The following are the values obtained for each value of 1 for Q=Q-3 V to Q+3 V

3,228 3,229 3,230 3,231 3,232 3,233 3,234 3,235 3,236 3,237 3,238 3,239 3,240 3,241 3,242 3,243 3,244 3,245 3,246
3,247

3,248 3,249 3,250 3,251 3,252 3,253 3,254 3,255 3,256 3,257 3,258 3,259 3,260 3,261 3,262 3,263 3,264

3,678,505.6124 3,678,501.8461 3,678,498.0829 3,678,494.3229 3,678,490.5660 3,678,486.8122 3,678,483.0616 3,678,479.3141 3,678,475.5697 3,678,471.8284 3,678,468.0902 3,678,464.3552 3,678,460.6232 3,678,456.8944 3,678,453.1687 3,678,449.4461 3,678,445.7265 3,678,442.0101 3,678,438.2967 3,678,434.5865 3,678,430.8793 3,678,427.1752 3,678,423.4742 3,678,419.7763 3,678,416.0814 3,678,412.3897 3,678,408.7010 3,678,405.0153 3,678,401.3327 3,678,397.6532 3,678,393.9768 3,678,390.3034 3,678,386.6330 3,678,382.9657 3,678,379.3014 3,678,375.6402 3,678,371.9821

5,206,256.5995 5,206,260.1550 5,206,263.7111 5,206,267.2677 5,206,270.8250 5,206,274.3829 5,206,277.9414 5,206,281.5005 5,206,285.0602 5,206,288.6204 5,206,292.1813 5,206,295.7427 5,206,299.3048 5,206,302.8674 5,206,306.4306 5,206,309.9945 5,206,313.5589 5,206,317.1239 5,206,320.6894 5,206,324.2556 5,206,327.8224 5,206,331.3897 5,206,334.9577 5,206,338.5262 5,206,342.0953 5,206,345.6650 5,206,349.2353 5,206,352.8061 5,206,356.3776 5,206,359.9496 5,206,363.5222 5,206,367.0954 5,206,370.6692 5,206,374.2436 5,206,377.8185 5,206,381.3940 5,206,384.9701

8,884,762.2118 8,884,762.0010 8,884,761.7940 8,884,761.5906 8,884,761.3910 8,884,761.1952 8,884,761.0030 8,884,760.8146 8,884,760.6298 8,884,760.4488 8,884,760.2715 8,884,760.0979 8,884,759.9280 8,884,759.7618 8,884,759.5993 8,884,759.4405 8,884,759.2854 8,884,759.1339 8,884,758.9862 8,884,758.8421 8,884,758.7017 8,884,758.5650 8,884,758.4319 8,884,758.3025 8,884,758.1768 8,884,758.0547 8,884,757.9362 8,884,757.8215 8,884,757.7103 8,884,757.6028 8,884,757.4990 8,884,757.3988 8,884,757.3022 8,884,757.2093 8,884,757.1199 8,884,757.0342 8,884,756.9522

73

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

3,265 3,266 3,267 3,268 3,269 3,270 3,271 3,272 3,273 3,274 3,275 3,276 3,277 3,278 3,279 3,280 3,281 3,282 3,283 3,2S4 3,285 3,286 3,287

3,678,368.3269 3,678,364.6748 3,678,361.0258 3,678,357.3797 3,678,353.7367 3,678,350.0968 3,678,346.4598 3,678,342.8259 3,678,339.1949 3,678,335.5670 3,678,331.9421 3,678,328.3202 3,678,324.7014 3,678,321.0855 3,678,317.4726 3,678,313.8627 3,678,310.2558 3,678,306.6519 3,678,303.0510 3,678,299.4531 3,678,295.8581 3,678,292.2662 3,678,288.6772

5,206,388.5468 5,206,392.1240 5,206,395.7019 5,206,399.2803 5,206,402.8593 5,206,406.4388 5,206,410.0189 5,206,413.5997 5,206,417.1809 5,206,420.7628 5,206,424.3452 5,206,427.9282 5,206,431.5118 5,206,435.0960 5,206,438.6807 5,206,442.2660 5,206,445.8518 5,206,449.4383 5,206,453.0253 5,206,456.6129 5,206,460.2010 5,206,463.7897 5,206,467.3790

8,884,756.8737 8,884,756.7989 8,884,756.7276 8,884,756.6600 8,884,756.5960 8,884,756.5356 8,884,756.4787 8,884,756.4255 8,884,756.3759 8,884,756.3298 8,884,756.2874 8,884,756.2485 8,884,756.2132 8,884,756.1814 8,884,756.1533 8,884,756.1287 8,884,756.1077 8.884,756.0902 8,884,756.0763 8,884,756.0659 8,884,756.0591 8,884,756.0559 8,884,756.0562

2,971 2,972 2,973 2,974 2,975 2,976 2,977 2,978 2,979 2,980 2,981 2,982 2,983 2,984 2,985 2,986 2,987

3,679,586.6701 3,679,581.9891 3,679,577.3122 3,679,572.6393 3,679,567.9704 3,679,563.3055 3,679,558.6447 3,679,553.9878 3,679,549.3350 3,679,544.6861 3,679,540.0412 3,679,535.4003 3,679,530.7634 3,679,526.1305 3,679,521.5016 3,679,516.8766 3,679,512.2556

5,204,131.7000 5,204,136.1411 5,204,140.5828 5,204,145.0252 5,204,149.4683 5,204,153.9120 5,204,158.3564 5,204,162.8014 5,204,167.2471 5,204,171.6935 5,204,176.1405 5,204,180.5881 5,204,185.0364 5,204,189.4853 5,204,193.9349 5,204,198.3851 5,204,202.8360

8,883,718.3701 8,883,718.1302 8,883,717.8951 8,883,717.6646 8,883,717.4387 8,883,717.2176 8,883,717.0011 8,883,716.7893 8,883,716.5821 8,883,716.3796 8,883,716.1817 8,883,715.9884 8,883,715.7998 8,883,715.6158 8,883,715.4365 8,883,715.2618 8,883,715.0916

74

Reproduced w ith permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2,988 j 2,989 2,990 2,991 2,992 2,993 2,994 2,995 2,996 2,997 2,998 2,999 3,000 3,001 3,002 3,003 3,004 3,005 3,006 3,007 3,008 3,009 3,010 3,011 3,012 3,013 3,014 3,015 3,016 3,017 3,018 1 3,0191 3,020

3,679,507.6386 3,679,503.0255 3,679,498.4164 3,679,493.8112 3,679,489.2100 3,679,484.6127 3,679,480.0194 3,679,475.4300 3,679,470.8445 3,679,466.2630 3,679,461.6854 3,679,457.1117 3,679,452.5419 3,679,447.9761 3,679,443.4141 3,679,438.8561 3,679,434.3020 3,679,429.7517 3,679,425.2054 3,679,420.6629 3,679,416.1244 3,679,411.5897

5,204,207.2876 5,204,211.7397 5,204,216.1926 5,204,220.6460 5,204,225.1002 5,204,229.5549 5,204,234.0103 5,204,238.4664 5,204,242.9230 5,204,247.3804 5,204,251.8383 5,204,256.2970 5,204,260.7562 5,204,265.2161 5,204,269.6766 5,204,274.1378 5,204,278.5996 5,204,283.0620 5,204,287.5251 5,204,291.9888 5,204,296.4532 5,204,300.9181 5,204,305.3837 5,204,309.8500 5,204,314.3169 5,204,318.7844 5,204,323.2525 5,204,327.7213 5,204,332.1907 5,204,336.6607 5,204,341.1313 5,204,345.6026 5,204,350.0745 5,204,354.5471 5,204,359.0202 5,204,363.4940 5,204,367.9684 5,204,372.4434 5,204,376.9191 5,204,381.3954 5,204,385.8723 5,204,390.3498 5,204,394.8279

8,883,714.9261 8,883,714.7652 8,883,714.6089 8,883,714.4573 8,883,714.3102 8,883,714.1676 8,883,714.0297 8,883,713.8964 8,883,713.7676 8,883,713.6434 8,883,713.5238 8,883,713.4087 8,883,713.2982 8,883,713.1922 8,883,713.0908 8,883,712.9939 8,883,712.9016 8,883,712.8138 8,883,712.7305 8,883,712.6517 8,883,712.5775 8,883,712.5078 8,883,712.4426 8,883,712.3819 8,883,712.3257 8,883,712.2740 8,883,712.2268 8,883,712.1841 8,883,712.1459 8,883,712.1121 8,883,712.0829 8,883,712.0581 8,883,712.0377 8,883,712.0219 8,883,712.0105 8,883,712.0035 8,883,712.0010 8,883,712.0029 8,883,712.0093 8,883,712.0201 8,883,712.0354 8,883,712.0550 8,883,712.0791 75

3,679,407.0589
3,679,402.5319 3,679,398.0089 3,679,393.4897 3,679.388.9743 3,679,384.4628 3,679,379.9552 3,679,375.4515 3,679,370.9515 3,679,366.4555 3,679,361.9632 3,679,357.4748 3,679,352.9902 3,679,348.5095 3,679,344.0326 3,679,339.5595 3,679,335.0902 3,679,330.6247 3,679,326.1631 3,679,321.7052 3,679,317.2512

3,021
3,022 3,023 3,024 3,025 3,026 3,027 3,028 3,029 3,030

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2,766 2,767
2,768

2,769 2,770 2,771 2,772 2,773 2,774 2,775 2,776 2,777 2,778 2,779 2,780 2,781 2,782 2,783 2,784 2,785 2 786
2,787

3,680,637.6132 3,680,632.0127 3,680,626.4172 3,680,620.8266 3,680,615.2410 3,680,609.6604
3,680,604.0848

5,202,769.2160 5,202,774.5456 5,202,779.8759 5,202,785.2069 5,202,790.5387
5,202,795.8711

3,680,598.5141 3,680,592.9484 3,680,587.3876 3,680,581.8318 3,680,576.2809
3,680,570.7350

2,788 2,789 2,790 2,791
2,792

3,680,565.1939 3,680,559.6578 3,680,554.1267 3,680,548.6004 3,680,543.0790 3,680,537.5626 3,680,532.0510 3,680,526.5443 3,680,521.0425 3,680,515.5456
3,680,510.0536

5,202,801.2042 5,202,806.5381 5,202,811.8727 5,202,817.2079 5,202,822.5439 5,202,827.8806 5,202,833.2180 5,202,838.5561 5,202,843.8949 5,202,849.2344 5,202,854.5746 5,202,859.9155 5,202,865.2571 5,202,870.5994 5,202,875.9424 5,202,881.2861 5,202,886.6305
5,202,891.9756

2,793 2,794 2,795 2,796 2,797 2,798 2,799 2,800 2,801 2,802 2,803 2,804 2,805 2,806 2,807
2,808

3,680,504.5665 3,680,499.0842 3,680,493.6067 3,680,488.1341 3,680,482.6664 3,680,477.2035 3,680,471.7455 3,680,466.2923 3,680,460.8439 3,680,455.4003 3,680,449.9616 3,680,444.5277 3,680,439.0985 3,680,433.6742 3,680,428.2547 3,680,422.8400 3,680,417.4300 3,680,412.0249 3,680,406.6245

5,202,897.3214 5,202,902.6678 5,202,908.0150 5,202,913.3629 5,202,918.7114 5,202,924.0607 5,202,929.4106 5,202,934.7613 5,202,940.1126 5,202,945.4646 5,202,950.8173 5,202,956.1707 5,202,961.5248 5,202,966.8796 5,202,972.2350 5,202,977.5912 5,202,982.9480 5,202,988.3055 5,202,993.6637

8,883,406.8292 8,883,406.5583 8,883,406.2931 8,883,406.0335 8,883,405.7797 8,883,405.5315 8,883,405.2890 8,883,405.0522 8,883,404.8211 8,883,404.5956 8,883,404.3757 8,883,404.1615 8,883,403.9530 8,883,403.7500 8,883,403.5527 8,883,403.3610 8,883,403.1750 8,883,402.9945 8,883,402.8197 8,883,402.6504 8,883,402.4867 8,883,402.3286 8,883,402.1761 8,883,402.0292 8,883,401,8878 8,883,401.7520 8,883,401.6217 8,863,401.4970 8,883,401.3779 8,883,401.2642 8,883,401.1561 8,883,401.0536 8,883,400.9565 8,883,400.8650 8,883,400.7789 8,883,400.6984 8,883,400.6233 8,883,400.5538 8,883,400.4897 8,883,400.4311 8,883,400,3780 8,883,400.3303 8,883,400.2882
76

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2,809 2,810 2,811 2,812 2,813 2,814 2,815 2,816 2,817 2,818 2,819 2,820 2,821 2,822 2,823 2,824 2,825

3,680,401.2289 3,680,395.8380 3,680,390.4520 3,680,385.0706 3,680,379.6941 3,680,374.3223 3,680,368.9552 3,680,363.5928 3,680,358.2352 3,680,352.8823 3,680,347.5342 3,680,342.1907 3,680,336.8520 3,680,331.5180 3,680,326.1886 3,680,320.8640 3,680,315.5441

5,202,999.0225 5,203,004.3821 5,203,009.7423 5,203,015.1032 5,203,020.4648 5,203,025.8271 5,203,031.1900 5,203,036.5536 5,203,041.9179 5,203,047.2829 5,203,052.6485 5,203,058.0148 5,203,063.3818 5,203,068.7495 5,203,074.1178 5,203,079.4868 5,203,084.8565

8,883,400.2514 8,883,400.2201 8,883,400.1943 8,883,400.1739 8,883,400.1589 8,883,400.1493 8,883,400.1452 8,883,400.1464 8,883,400.1531 8,883,400.1652 8,883,400.1827 8,883,400.2056 8,883,400.2338 8,883,400.2674 8,883,400.3065 8,883,400.3508 8,883,400.4006

2,597 2,598 2,599 2,600 2,601 2,602 2,603 2,604 2,605 2,606 2,607 2,608 2,609 2,610 2,611 2,612 2,613 2,611 2,615 2,616 2,617 2,618 2,619

3,681,660.4642 3,681,653.9362 3,681,647.4143 3,681,640.8984 3,681,634.3885 3,681,627.8846 3,681,621.3867 3,681,614.8948 3,681,608.4089 3,681,601.9289 3,681,595.4549 3,681,588.9869 3,681,582.5249 3,681,576.0688 3,681,569.6186 3,681,563.1744 3,681,556.7361 3,681,550.3037 3,681,543.8772 3,681,537.4567 3,681,531.0420 3,681,524.6333 3,681,518.2304

5,201,897.8884 5,201,904.1080 5,201,910.3284 5,201,916.5496 5,201,922.7715 5,201,928.9942 5,201,935.2177 5,201,941.4419 5,201,947.6669 5,201,953.8926 5,201,960.1191 5,201,966.3464 5,201,972.5744 5,201,978.8032 5,201,985.0327 5,201,991.2630 5,201,997.4940 5,202,003.7258 5,202,009.9583 5,202,016.1916 5,202,022.4257 5,202,028.6604 5,202,034.8960

8,883,558.3526 8,883,558.0442 8,883,557.7427 8,883,557.4480 8,883,557.1600 8,883,556.8788 8,883,556.6044 8,883,556.3367 8,883,556.0758 8,883,555.8216 8,883,555.5741 8,883,555.3333 8,883,555.0993 8,883,554.8719 8,883,554.6513 8,883,554.4374 8,883,554.2301 8,883,554.0295 8,883,553.8356 8,883,553.6483 8,883,553.4677 8,883,553.2937 8,883,553.1264

77

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2,620 2,621 2,622 2,623 2,624 2,625 2,626 2,627 2,628 2,629 2,630 2,631 2,632 2,633 2,634 2,635 2,636 2,637 2,638 2,639 2,640 2,641 2,642 2,643 2,644 2,645 2,646 2,647 2,648 2,649 2,650 2,651 2,652 2,653 2,654 2,655 2,656

3,681,511.8334 3,681,505.4423 3,681,499.0571 3,681,492.6777 3,681,486.3041 3,681,479.9365 3,681,473.5746 3,681,467.2186 3,681,460.8685 3,681,454.5241 3,681,448.1856 3,681,441.8528 3,681,435.5259 3,681,429.2048 3,681,422.8894 3,681,416.5799 3,681,410.2761 3,681,403.9781 3,681,397.6858 3,681,391.3993 3,681,385.1186 3,681,378.8436 3,681,372.5743 3,681,366.3107 3,681,360.0529 3,681,353.8008 3,681,347.5544 3,681,341.3137 3,681,335.0787 3,681,328.8494 3,681,322.6258 3,681,316.4079 3,681,310.1956 3,681,303.9890 3,681,297.7881 3,681,291.5928 3,681,285.4031

5,202,041.1323 5,202,047.3693 5,202,053.6070 5,202,059.8456 5,202,066.0848 5,202,072.3248 5,202,078.5656 5,202,084.8070 5,202,091.0493 5,202,097.2922 5,202,103.5359 5,202,109.7804 5,202,116.0255 5,202,122.2714 5,202,128.5181 5,202,134.7655 5,202,141.0136 5,202,147.2624 5,202,153.5120 5,202,159.7623 5,202,166.0133 5,202,172.2651 5,202,178.5176 5,202,184.7708 5,202,191.0248 5,202,197.2795 5,202,203.5349 5,202,209.7910 5,202,216.0478 5,202.222.3054 5,202,228.5637 5,202,234.8227 5,202,241.0824 5,202,247.3429 5,202,253.6041 5,202,259.8660 5,202,266.1286

8,883,552.9657 8,883,552.8116 8,883,552.6641 8,883,552.5232 8,883,552.3890 8,883,552.2613 8,883,552.1402 8,883,552.0257 8,883,551.9177 8,883,551.8163 8,883,551.7215 8,883,551.6332 8,883,551.5514 8,883,551.4762 8,883,551.4075 8,883,551.3453 8,883,551.2897 8,883,551.2405 8,883,551.1978 8,883,551.1616 8,883,551.1319 8,883,551.1087 8,883,551.0919 8,883,551.0816 8,883,551.0777 8,883,551.0803 8,883,551.0893 8,883,551.1047 8,883,551.1266 8,883,551.1548 8,883,551.1895 8,883,551.2.306 8,883,551.2780 8,883,551.3319 8,883,551.3921 8,883,551.4587 8,883,551.5317

03i2,456 2,457

: 3,682,644.7400 3,682,637.2873 5,201,369.7222 5,201,376.8342

CcfX,0) " 8,884,014.4621 8,884,014.1215

78

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2,458 2*459 2,460 2,461 2,462 2,463 2,464
2,465

2,466 2,467 2,468 2,469 2,470 2,471 2,472 2,473 2,474 2,475 2,476 2,477 2,478 2,479
2,480

2,481 2,482 2,483 2,484 2,485 2,486 2,487 2,488 2,489 2,490 2,491 2,492 2,493 2,494 2,495
2,496

2,497 2,498 2,499 2,500

3,682,629.8418 3,682,622.4034 3,682,614.9721 3,682,607.5479 3,682,600.1308 3,682,592.7208 3,682,585.3178 3,682,577.9219 3,682,571.5331 3,682,563.1513 3,682,555.7765 3,682,548.4088 3,682,541.0481 3,682,533.6944 3,682,526.3477 3,682,519.0080 3,682,511.6753 3,682,504.3496 3,682,497.0308 3,682,489.7190 3,682,482.4142 3,682,475.1163 3,682,467.8253 3,682,460.5412 3,682,453.2641 3,682,445.9939 3,682,438.7306 3,682,431.4742 3,682,424.2246 3,682,416.9820 3,682,409.7462 3,682,402.5173 3,682,395.2952 3,682,388.0800 3,682,380.8716 3,682,373.6700 3,682,366.4753 3,682,359.2873 3,682,352.1062 3,682,344.9319 3,682,337.7643 3,682,330.6035 3,682,323.4495

5,201,383.9470 5,201,391.0606 5,201,398.1751 5,201,405.2903 5,201,412.4064 5,201,419.5233 5,201,426.6410 5,201,433.7594 5,201,440.8787 5,201,447.9988 5,201,455.1197 5,201,462.2415 5,201,469.3640 5,201,476.4873 5,201,483.6114 5,201,490.7363 5,201,497.8620 5,201,504.9885 5,201,512.1158 5,201,519.2439 5,201,526.3728 5,201,533.5025 5,201,540.6330 5,201,547.7643 5,201,554.8963 5,201,562.0292 5,201,569.1628 5,201,576.2972 5,201,583.4325 5,201,590.5685 5,201,597.7052 5,201,604.8428 5,201,611.9812 5,201,619.1203 5,201,626.2602 5,201,633.4009 5,201,640.5424 5,201,647.6847 5,201,654.8277 5,201,661.9715 5,201,669.1161 5,201,676,2614 5,201,683.4076

8,884,013.7888 8,884,013.4640 8,884,013.1472 8,884,012.8383 8,884,012.5372 8,884,012.2441 8,884,011.9588 8,884,011.6814 8,884,011.4118 8,884,011.1501 3,884,010.8963 8,884,010.6503 8,884,010.4121 8,884,010.1817 8,884,009.9591 8,884,009.7443 8,884,009.5373 8,884,009.3381 8,884,009.1466 8,884,008.9629 8,884,008.7870 8,884,008.6188 8,884,008.4583 8,884,008.3055 8,884,008.1604 8,884,008.0231 8,884,007.8934 8,884,007.7714 8,884,007.6571 8,884,007.5504 8,884,007.4514 8,884,007.3601
8,884,007.2764

8,884,007.2003 8,884,007.1318 8,884,007.0709 8,884,007.0177 8,884,006.9720 8,884,006.9339 8,884,006.9034 8,884,006.8804 8,884,006.8650 8,884,006.8571

79

Reproduced with permission o f th e c o p y rig h t ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2,501 2,502 2,503 2,504 2,505 2,506 2,507 2,508 2,509 2,510 2,511 2,512
2.513

2,514 2,515

3,682,316.3023 3,682,309.1618 3,682,302.0281 3,682,294.9011 3,682,287.7808 3,682,280.6672 3,682,273.5604 3,682,266.4603 3,682,259.3668 3,682,252.2801 3,682,245.2000 3,682,238.1266 3,682,231.0599 3,682,223.9999 3,682,216.9464

5,201,690.5545 5,201,697.7022 5,201,704.8506 5,201,711.9998 5,201,719.1498 5,201,726.3006 5,201,733.4521 5,201,740.6044 5,201,747.7574 5,201,754.9113 5,201,762.0659 5,201,769.2212 5,201,776.3773 5,201,783.5342 5,201,790.6918

8,884,006.8568 8,884,006.8640 8,884,006.8787 8,884,006.9009 8,884,006.9306 8,884,006.9678 8,884,007.0125 8,884,007.0647 8,884,007.1243 8,884,007.1914 8,884,007.2659 8,884,007.3478 8,884,007.4372 8,884,007.5340 8,884,007.6383

60

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix 1.8 Case III No Cordlnation Space: The table below shows the total retailers cost (Cr(Q)) tabulated against the value of each order quantity (Q).

520 521 522 523 524 525 526 527 528 529 530 531
532

wrnmÜ R ffi
2709010 2708816 2708623 2708431 2708239 2708048 2707858
2707669 540

541 542 543 544 545 546
547

2708873 2708693 2703514 2708336
2708159

533 534 535 536 537 538 539

2707481 2707293 2708906 2708719 2708533 2708348 2708164 2707981 2707798 2707615 2707434 2707253

548 549
550 551 552 553

2707982 2707805 2707630 2707455 2707281 2708907 2708734 2708562
2708390

554 555 556
557

558
5fQ

2708219 2708048 2707878 2707709 2707540 2707372

81

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Case III No Coordination Space: Figure below illustrates the change in the retailers cost with the change in Q

Retailer's C ost Function
2709500 2709000 2708500 5 ^ 2708000
Cr(Q)i

 4i iiÿÿ& âasiM à& t'k

2707500 2707000 2706500 2706000

Q (Units)

82

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix 1.9 Case III No Coordination Space: Table below shows the variation the supplier cost with the change in the lot size multiplier (X)

^ s É s to . 1 2 3 4 5 6

1,559,115 1,512,867 1,551,774 1,611,971 1,680,682 1,752,152

The figure below illustrates the variation the suppliers cost (Cs(X,Qe)) with the lot size multiplier (X .)

Supplier C ost Function 1,800,000 1.750.000 1.700.000 1.650.000 1.600.000 a 6 1.550.000 (5 1.500.000 1.450.000 1.400.000 1.350.000
2

T O C

Cs(A,Q)

3

4

5

Lot S ize Multiplier (A)

83

Reprodficed with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

