NOTE TO USERS

T h is re p ro d u ctio n is the b e st co p y available.

UMI
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

HYDROLOGIC MODELLING OF CONSTRUCTION SITE SEDIMENT CONTROL POND USING SWMM

by

R enata Krasnova H yd rog eologist and G eological E n g in e e r O dessa M echnlkov State U niversity O dessa, Ukraine June 1991

A thesis presented to R yerson U niversity In partial fu lfillm e n t o f the requirem ents fo r the d e g re e of M a ste r of A pplied S cience In the P rogram o f E nvironm ental A pplied S cience and M a n a g e m e n t

T oronto, O ntario, C anada, 2004 © R enata Krasnova 20 0 4

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

UMI N um ber; EC 52959

IN FO R M A TIO N TO USER S

T he quality o f this reproduction is depende nt upon the quality o f the copy subm itted. Broken o r in d istin ct print, colored or poor quality iiiustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard m argins, and im proper align m en t can adve rse ly affect reproduction. In the unlikely even t th a t the author did not send a com plete m anuscrip t and there are m issing pages, these w ill be noted. Also, if unauthorized co p yrig h t m aterial had to be rem oved, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI M icroform EC52959 C o pyright 2008 by P roQ uest LEG. All rights reserved. This m icroform edition is protected against unauthorized copying u nd er Title 17, United S tates Code. P roQ uest LLC 789 E. E isenh ow er Parkw ay PC Box 1346 A nn Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

ABSTRACT

Hydrologie Modelling of Construction Site Sediment Control Pond Using SWMM Renata Krasnova, MASc, Environmental Applied Science and Management, Ryerson University, Toronto, 2004

Construction activities have been identified as one of the major sources of pollution to receiving waters. Although Erosion and Sediment Control (ESC) measures reduce the amount of sediment exported from construction sites, there are still significant concerns regarding the sufficiency of current control measures to protect receiving waters. This study documents the work completed to monitor and model the performance of a typical stormwater management facility used for erosion and sediment control in suburban construction site. The main objective o f this study is to provide background information regarding the performance of storm water management facilities for treating urban construction runoff prior to discharging to receiving water bodies. The RUNOFF and STORAGE/TREATMENT blocks of EPA's stormwater management model (PCSWMM4.4) were used to simulate the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff from the area under construction and assess the performance of stormwater treatment facility (Ballymore Pond) located in Richmond Hill, Ontario. The performance of the construction site sediment control pond was found to be unsatisfactory due to the high outflow concentration of suspended solids. Some specific recommendations to improve its effectiveness have been made.

Vll

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

A C K NO W LED G EM EN TS

My special thanks to people who participated in the planning and implementation of this thesis. These include my thesis supervisor Dr. James Li and m y research advisor Dr.

Pradeep Behera. I would like to thank Derek Smith and Lindsay Pyatt who shared with me their field work experience and Joanna Domarad for her dedication in assisting in the field work. I also would like to thank Rob James fo r his assistance with the SWMM.

This research study would not have been undertaken without the generous support of the following organizations:

The Toronto and Region Conservation Authority, The Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Canada, The Government of Canada's Great Lake Sustainability Fund, Environmental Canada, The Ontario Ministry of Environment, The City of Toronto, The Town of Richmond Hill, The National Science and Engineering Research Council, The National W ater Research Institute, and Clarifica Inc., Toronto.

IX

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

DEDICATION

7o Lloyd and Margarita for their love, support and understanding.

XI

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

TA B LE OF C O N TEN TS

Author's Declaration Borrower's page Abstract Acknowledgem ents Dedication Table of Contents List of Tables List of Figures

ill v vll ix xi xiii xvii xxi

Chapter 1 - Introduction 1.1 1.2 Background Study Objectives 1 4

Chapter 2 - Literature Review 2.1 Description of Urban Runoff Pollution 2.1.1 General 2.1.2 Construction Site as a Major Stormwater Polluter 2.1.3 The Effect of Construction on Receiving W aters M anagem ent of Runoff from Construction Sites 2.2.1 M anagem ent of Runoff Pollution using BM P's 2.2.2 Sedim entation basins as an Effective BM P's 2.2.3 Managing Fine Sediments Hydrologie Modelling of Urban Runoff 2.3.1 Modelling Concepts 2.3.2 SWMM Description 2.3.3 Modelling Studies 7 7 14 16 18 18 23 29 30 30 34 37

2.2

2.3

Chapter 3 - Study Site 3.1 3.2 Study Site and Stormwater Catchment Area Description 3.1.1 Soils and Drainage Pond Design Features 39 43 43

Chapter 4 - Methodology 4.1 Monitoring 4.1.1 Rainfall and Runoff 4.1.2 W ater Quality 4.1.3 Monitoring of Construction Activities 49 50 52 54

XIll

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.2

4.3

4.4

4.1.4 Bottom Sediments Accumulation vs. Construction Activities Analysis of Monitored Data 4.2.1 W ater Quantity Data Analysis 4.2.2 W ater Quality Data Analysis 4.2.2.1 Discrete Data Analysis 4.2.2.2 Composite Data Analysis Application of SWMM 4.3.1 RUNOFF and STORAGE/TREATMENT Blocks 4.3.2 Sensitivity Analysis and Model Calibration 4.3.3 Continuous Simulation Assessm ent of Pond's Performance

57 58 58 60 63 64 65 65 67 70 70

Chapter 5 - W ater Quantity Analysis 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 Rainfali-Runoff Runoff Coefficient Peak Flow Attenuation Hydraulic Detention Times and Drawdown Times 71 72 75 79

Chapter 6 - W ater Quality Analysis 6.1 6.2 Discrete analysis 6.1.1 Suspended Solids Composite Analysis 6.2.1 General W ater Chemistry 6 .2.1.1 Suspended Solids 6 .2 .1.2 pH and Alkalinity 6.2.1.3 Turbidity 6.2.2 Nutrients 6.2.3 Metals Particle Size Distribution 83 83 92 95 97 98 98 100 101 103

6.3

Chapter 7- SWMM Application 7.1 7.2 7.3 Modelling Objectives and Methodology Data Input SWMM W ater Quantity 7.3.1 RUNOFF Block Parameter Development and Calibration 7.3.2 STORAGE/TREATMENT Block Parameter Development and Calibration SWMM W ater Quality 7.4.1 RUNOFF Block Parameter Development and Calibration 7.4.2 STORAGE/TREATM ENT Block Parameter Development and Calibration 111 112 115 115 122 123 123 130

7.4

Chapter 8 - Modelling Results 8.1 8.2 W ater Q uantity Results W ater Q uality Results 133 147

XIV

Reproduced with permission of the copvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited w ith o u t oerm ission.

Chapter 9 - Continuous Simulation and Bottom Sediment Accumulation 9.1 9.2 Bottom Sediment Accumulation Continuous Simulation 9.2.1 Assessment of Sediment Load, Concentration and Removal Efficiency 9.2.2 Long-Term Pond's Performance 165 166 166 169 173 177

Chapter 10 - Receiving Water Analysis Chapter 11 - Discussion Chapter 12 - Summary of Results. Conclusions and Recommendations 12.1 Summary of Results 12.1.1 Water Quantity 12.1.2 Water Quality 12.1.3 Continuous Simulation and Receiving W ater Analysis 12.2 Conclusions and Recommendations

187 187 188 189 190

References Appendices

195 203

XV

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduotion prohibited without permission.

ReDroduced with Dermissi": i of the coDvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1.1: Multi-phase approach of TRCA towards improving erosion and control practices Table 1.2: ESC pond storage volume requirements Table 2.1: Sources of non-point urban runoff pollutants Table 2.2: Typical pollutants concentrations found in urban stormwater Table 2.3: The Performance of sediment basins and traps. A summary of field, laboratory and modeling results Table 2.4: Characteristics and capabilities of selected NFS models Table 3.1: Comparison pond design features Table 4.1: installation location and description of measuring devices Table 4.2: Water Quality Analysis Table 5.1: Rainfall event characteristics Table 5.2: Rainfall-runoff coefficient Table 5.3: Peak attenuation and flow mass balance summary Table 5.4: Hydraulic detention and drawdown times Table 6.1: Concentrations from inlets and outlet of Ballymore Pond Table 6.2: Observed SS loads from inlets and outlet and removal efficiency

2 3 10 13

26

34 45 51 62 72 73 76 81 84 91

Table 6.3: Total performance of the Ballymore Pond throughout the study period 93 Table 6.4: Average Event Mean Concentrations (AEMC's) and Provincial Water Quality Objectives (PWQO's) for general chemistry Table 6.5: Average Event Mean Concentrations (AEMC's) and Provincial Water Quality Objectives (PW QO's) for nutrients during the study period Table 6.6 : Average Event Mean Concentrations (AEMC's) and Provincial Water Quality Objectives (PWQO's) for metals

96

100

102

XVII

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without o e rm iss io n .

Table 6.7; Dio and D50 particle size Table 6.8: Particle size class and distribution Table 6.9: Average particle size, mass proportion and performance Table 7.1: PCSWMM RUNOFF block control input parameters Table 7.2: Storage/Treatment block control input parameters Table 7.3: RUNOFF block quantity calibration parameters summary Table 7.4: Common RUNOFF block water-quantity input parameters Table 7.5: S/T block line H3 input parameters Table 7.6: Input values for ERODAR SWMM parameter Table 7.7: W ater quality calibration on event basis Table 7.8: Common RUNOFF block water-quality input parameters Table 7.9: Calibrated water-quality parameters for S/T block Table 8.1: Comparison of observed and simulated water quantity results for the construction catchment Table 8.2: Comparison of observed and simulated water quantity results for the combined catchment Table 8.3: Comparison of observed and simulated outlet runoff volume and peak flow for the outlet Table 8.4: Comparison of observed and simulated mass loads for the construction catchment Table 8.5: Comparison of observed and simulated SS concentrations for the construction catchment Table 8.6: Simulated EMC and mass load and EMC for the combined catchment Table 8.7: Comparison of observed and simulated SS loads for the outlet Table 8.8: Comparison of observed and simulated SS concentrations for the outlet Table 8.9: Load-based removal efficiency

105 108 109 114 115 120 122 123 127 128 130 131

134

139

142

148

150

156

158

160 164

XVI11

R e n r n d L l M d U /ith n A r m ic ^ s in n n f t h p r n m / r l n h t r w / j n a r

F i i r t h o r r o n r n H i i r t t i n n n r n h i h i + o d \A /i+ h n u t r & a r m i c c i n n

Table 8.10: Concentration-based removal efficiency Table 9.1: Sediment Accumulation during Fall 2002-Fall 2003 Table 9.2: Summary of long-term simulated, event-based simulated, and observed instantaneous removal efficiencies Table 9.3: Long-term simulation of water quantity Table 9.4: Long-term simulation water quality Table 10.1 : Receiving water impacts due to increses in TSS concentration Table 11.1: Rainfall characteristics vs. median concentration Table 11.2: Relation between detention/drawdown times and removal efficiency

164 166

169 170 170 174 183

184

XI X

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduotion prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyriqht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

LIST OF FIGURES

Fig. 2.1: Pre- and postdevelopment hydraulics Fig. 2.2: Administrator's Performance Ratings-Percent Indicating Satisfactory Performance Fig. 2.3: Urban watershed modelling process Fig. 3.1: Ballymore Study Area Fig. 3.2: Key Plan Fig.3.3: Ballymore Pond bank erosion, September 2002 Fig.3.4: Ballymore Pond banks vegetation, September 2003 Fig. 3.5: Ballymore Construction Sediment Control Pond Fig.3.6: Ballymore Pond's cross-section Figure 4.1; W ater quality samples of each monitoring station Figure 4.2: Road Conditions in Catchment-1070 during construction 2002 Figure 4.3: Road Conditions in Catchment-1070 during construction 2003 Fig. 4.4: Schematic of hyetograph and hydrograph Fig. 4.5: A flow chart depicting the calibration process of each model data Fig. 5.1: Rainfall-runoff relationship Fig. 5.2 (a-d): Samples observed hydrographs at the inlets and the outlet Fig. 5.3: Drawdown time estimation for May 5`^ ^ 2003 event Fig. 6.1 (a-c): Suspended solids concentrations Fig. 6.2: Observed average EMC of SS Fig. 6.3: Total load -based removal efficiencies for the Fall 2002 period Fig. 6.4: Total load -based removal efficiencies for the May-July 2003 period

9

24 33 40 41 42 42 45 47 55

56

56 59 68 74 78 82 88 89 94 94

XXI

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Fig. 6.5; Total load -ba se d removal efficiencies for the August-November 2003 period Fig. 6.6; Outflow turbidity vs. EMC Fig. 6.7; Average cumulative particle size distribution for Fall 2002 Fig. 6.8: Average cumulative particle size distribution for May-July 2003

95 99 106 107

Fig 6.9; Average cumulative particle size distribution for August-November 2003 108 Fig. 8.1; Relation between observed and simulated runoff volume for the construction catchment Fig. 8.2; Relation between observed and simulated peak flows for the construction catchment Fig. 8.3; Comparison of observed and simulated hydrographs for the construction catchment Fig. 8.4; Relation between observed and simulated runoff volume for the combined catchment Fig. 8.5: Relation between observed and simulated peak flows for the combined catchment Fig. 8.6: Relation between observed and simulated runoff volume for the outlet Fig. 8.7; Relation between obsen/ed and simulated peak flows for the outlet Fig. 8.8; Comparison of observed and simulated hydrographs for the combined inlet and the outlet Fig. 8.9; Relation between observed and simulated mass load for the construction catchment  Fig. 8.10; Relation between observed and simulated SS concentrations for the construction catchment Fig. 8.11; Comparison of observed and simulated SS pollutographs for 4 events Fig 8.12; Evolution of EMC for the construction catchment Fig 8.13; Evolution of EMC for combined catchment Fig. 8.14; Relation between observed and simulated mass load for the outlet

135

136

138

140

141

143

144

146

149

151

154 155 157 159

XXI I

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Fig.8.15; Relation between observed and simulated SS concentrations for the outlet Fig. 8.16: Evolution of EMC for the outlet Fig. 8.17: Comparison of observed and simulated SS pollutographs fo r 3 events for the outlet Fig. 9.1: Long-term continuous simulation for the period of September 2002-Novem ber 2003 Fig. 9.2: Sample long-term continuous simulation results for May 2003 Fig. 9.3: Comparison of observed and simulated flow for May 2003 Fig. 10.1: Receiving water impacts assessment approach Fig. 10.2: Preliminary evaluation of severity of impacts by suspended sediments Fig. 11.1: Flydrograph and pollutograph for September 14, 2002 event Fig.11.2: Hydrograph and pollutograph for May 2, 2003 event Fig. 11.3: Hydrographs and rainfall fo r May 11-12, 2003 event Fig. 11.4: Relationship between rainfall intensity and SS concentration Fig. 11.5: Relation between detention time and RE based on simulation data Fig. 11.6: Relation between drawdown time and RE based on simulated data ' Fig. 11.7: Relation between detention time and instantaneous RE Fig. 11.8: Relation between drawdown time and instantaneous RE

160 161

163

168 171 172 173

175 178 179 180 182

184

185 185 186

xxm

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHARTER 1 IN T R O D U C T IO N

1.1

B a c k g ro u n d

Urban development is on the rise in and around most Canadian cities. As this rapid expansion takes place, it affects a significant portion of watersheds that are subjected to runoff discharges from construction sites, in many cases, limited water quality controls, particularly during large events, have lead to widespread water quality concerns resulting from sediment loading associated with construction activities. For instance, the Ministry of Natural Resources in Ontario has determined that during construction, when soil is disturbed and often left partially exposed or unprotected, the erosion process can increase at a rate up to 40,000 tim es that o f undeveloped lands or forests (Li, 1998).

In urban storm water runoff, suspended solids are considered the dominant pollutant. Evidently, suspended solids have continuously been found to have the greatest

concentration in storm water runoff (Randall et al., 1982).

In addition, suspended solids

are associated with m any pollutants such as nutrients, heavy m etals and petroleum-based organics that sorb to their surfaces.

The Ministry of the Environm ent (MOE, 1993) has stated that soil erosion at construction sites is a m ajor cause o f the degradation of rivers and streams in urban areas. According to these government agencies, tons of sediments from construction activities are entering Ontario watercourses each year. This in combination with ineffective erosion control

measures is responsible for the degradation of water quality and fish habitats, reduction in navigation in waterways, and increases in flooding (MOE & MTRCA, 1992). According to Great Lakes Science Advisory Board W orkshop (2000), construction sites are significant sources of sediments to urban streams. Although sedim ent control measures have been a requirement at construction sites for alm ost two decades, these have not proven to be adequate to protect receiving waters and meet the desired water quality and stream habitat targets. O ver the years, several studies have been conducted that aimed to improve existing erosion and sediment control practices (ESC). The TR CA has led several o f these studies

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

due to the development activities that occur within its jurisdiction, and the concern associated with projected future developments. Table 1.1 outlines the TRCA's multi

phase approach of past studies, current projects in the process of completion, and future studies aimed at improving erosion and sediment control practices.

Table 1.1: M ulti-phase app ro ach o f TR CA to w a rd s im p ro v in g e ro s io n and c o n tro l p ra c tic e s (C larifica, 2003).

Phase 1

Urban Construction Sediment Control Study Investigation to Develop an Improved Sizing Approach for Construction Sediment Control Facilities Development and implementation of ESC Model by-law Monitoring of Construction Sediment Pond Setting up model for runoff and erosion generation. Calibration of hydrologie and water quality models using field monitored data Preliminary receiving water impact analysis

1999

Phase II

April 2001 - March 2002

Phase III

August 2001-April 2002 March 2002 -- November 2003

Phase IV

P hases V --VI

A u g 2002 - MARCH 2004

P hase VII

April 2004-March 2005

The intention of this thesis is to evaluate the performance of a construction sediment pond using a hydrologie modeling approach. Thus, it contributes to the outlined research in phases V-VI.

Previous studies have indicated the need to implement ESC storage ponds at the on-set of urban development. The current design criteria for ESC ponds being considered is as follows:

-

Case 1 : Use a temporary ESC pond for the period of construction only. Case 2; Use the ultimate SWM pond for ESC during construction.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

In case 1, the sizing criteria would be as follows; (i) the perm anent pool volume m ust be sized for a minimum of 125 m^/ha o r the volume reqi^ired under the latest MOE Stormwater M anagement Planning and Design (SM PD) manual, whichever is greater; (ii) the active storage m ust be sized for a minimum of 125 m^/ha, released over a minimum of 24 hours.

In case 2, when the ultimate facility is used for ESC, the sizing must meet the criteria specified in the MOE SMPD Manual (2003). As per TRCA requirements, an `Enhanced Protection Level' will be required for sizing the permanent pool volume. In addition, the TRCA requires extended detention storage for the runoff from a 25 mm storm released over minimum 24 hours. The applicable design criteria for w et ponds is summarized in Table 1.2.

Table 1.2: ESC pond storage volume requirem ents (m^/ha) Protection Level Permanent Pool Volume^ Extended Detention Volume^ Catchment Imperviousness 70% 85% 55% 210 185 150 25 mm 25 mm 25 mm

35% 100 25 mm

Note: (1 ) MOE Enhanced Level of Protection sizing criteria - permanent pool only. (2) Extended Detention Volume is the runoff from a 25 mm storm released over a minimum of 24 hours.

The implementation o f either the ultimate pond or an interim pond designed according to the Enhanced Protection Level will provide better runoff treatm ent than the previous design criteria of 125 m % a for active storage only. However, the question still remains as to whether the Enhanced Protection Level is sufficient to control the runoff from construction sites given the significantly different sediment characteristics and extreme suspended sediment concentrations and loads as compared to stable urban areas. Furthermore, although new ponds may provide better treatment, there is still no .data to indicate the effectiveness for meeting the specific environmental quality objectives (e.g., targets for fish habitats). For example, the sizing does not relate the aquatic system sensitivity to suspended solids concentration and duration of exposures so as to lim it the effects.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Therefore the TRCA recognized the need to evaluate the adequacy of SWM ponds designed according to the MOE SMPD manual for construction sites and the performance of the ponds in meeting receiving water targets. This evaluation has been divided into two phases;

-

Phase I: Monitor a typical construction site and corresponding sediment control pond designed as per MOE SMPD manual and evaluate the pond performance; and

-

Phase II: Monitor a typical construction site, sediment control pond and receiving w ater to evaluate the integrated performance.

The present study documents the findings of the recently completed first phase. This phase included a field monitoring and modelling program conducted from 2002 to 2003 at Ballymore Pond in Richmond Hill, Ontario. The study characterizes the hydrologie conditions within typical construction sites and sediment control ponds designed according the MOE manual. In addition, the study documents construction sediment characteristics, and the evaluation of pond performance and theoretical receiving w ater impact

assessment.

1.2

Study Objectives

The main objective of this study is to evaluate the performance of storm water management facilities designed according to the MOE SW MP m anual for treating urban construction runoff prior to discharging to receiving water bodies. The study provides input for further improvement of construction stormwater treatm ent and will lead to future revisions of TR C A 's ESC guidelines.

Specific objectives include:

-

M onitor runoff from a typical construction site and construction sediment control pond to obtain runoff quantity and quality data, sediment characteristics and sediment removal efficiency;

-

Develop calibrated hydrologie and water quality model using monitored data to supplem ent measured data and assess sediment removal performance during monitoring period and long-term simulation;

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

-

Preliminary evaluation of receiving water quality impacts from pond outlet effluents by comparing sediment concentrations and durations with receiving water habitat targets.

This thesis is the next step towards linking stormwater runoff quality control best management practices and receiving w ater protection goals.

ReDroduCGd w ith nGrmiçtçtinn nf thp nnnv/rinht rw A in a r

F urther renrnHi mtimn r\rr»hiKiteH vA/lthni it r\cirmleclr\n

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

CHAPTER 2 LITERATURE R EVIEW

This chapter provides an overview of urban runoff pollution issues including types of pollutants, their origins and modes of transport, and their effects on receiving waters. Special emphasis is placed on stormwater runoff pollution coming from construction sites and management of construction sites runoff using best management practices (BMP's). This chapter also reviews current water quality models, particularly SWMM model, and modelling studies related to SWMM.

2.1

D escription o f U rban R u n o ff P ollution

2.1.1

General

It is estimated that in the year 2000, half of the world's population will be living in urban areas (Zoppou, 2001). In many countries the land occupied by the urban population is often less than 5% of the total area. This concentration of human activities intensifies local competition for all types of resources, with water amongst the most vital. W ater is essential for human existence and human settlement and it is employed extensively in urban areas for the disposal of wastes. W ater can also have a negative impact on human activity. This includes flooding, drainage, erosion and sedimentation. These problems are exacerbated in urban catchments by altering natural watercourses and increasing impervious areas. Urban runoff is typically highly polluted with pathogenic and organic substances that are a public health threat.

Urban runoff pollution results from numerous sources. The impact of rainfall dislodges particles on the surface of the ground. Many pollutants adhere to these particles and are conveyed along with soluble pollutants by the runoff. The momentum associated with the runoff dislodges other contaminant-laden particles. These are transported to a

watercourse by the flowing water and progress through the urban watershed. Depending on the type of activity on the land, the volume of runoff and the amount and types of pollutants carried with it will vary. The intensity and duration of precipitation and the time

R finrndl ine^rl with nprmÎQQinn n f thp nnnwrlnht nwnpr

F iirthpr ronrnHi intinn nrnhihitciH u/ithni it normicclnn

since the last precipitation event also affects the quantity and transport of pollutants generated (Viessman and Lewis, 2002).

Rain falling over a watershed will fall on either an impei-vious or a pervious area. On a pervious area, some rainfall may infiltrate the sub-surface and the remainder is surface runoff. Surface runoff and perhaps infiltration will eventually flow into a watercourse or a receiving water body. This is not the case for an impervious area, where nearly all the rainfall becomes runoff (Schueler, 2000). An urban area is by definition an area of concentrated human activity, which is characterized by extensive impervious areas and man-made watercourses (Zoppou, 2001 ). The result is an increase in runoff volume and flow that can result in flooding, watercource and habitat destruction.

Urbanization replaces permeable surfaces with impervious surfaces (e.g., roof tops, roads, sidewalks, and parking lots), which typically are designed to remove rainfall as quickly as possible. Increasing the proportion of paved areas decreases the infiltration and

évapotranspiration paths of precipitation, thus increasing the amount of precipitation leaving an area as runoff. In addition to magnifying the volume of runoff, urban development increases the peak runoff rate and decreases travel time of the runoff. When mechanisms that delay entry of runoff into receiving waters (i.e., vegetation) are replaced with systems designed to remove and convey storm water from the surface, the storm water's travel time to the receiving waters is greatly reduced, as is the time required to discharge the storm water generated by a storm. Figure 2.1 shows an urban area's typical predevelopment and postdevelopment discharge rates over time.

The U.S. ERA summarizes changes to hydrology that might be expected for a developing watershed: (i) increased peak discharges (by a factor of 2 to 5); (ii) increased volume of storm runoff; (iii) decreased time for runoff to reach stream; (iv) increased frequency and severity of flooding; (v) reduced streamflow during periods of prolonged dry weather (loss o f base flow); (vi) greater runoff and stream velocity during storm events (ERA, 1993). Each of these hydrologie changes can lead to increased pollutant transport and loading to receiving waters.

R e o ro d u ce d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v ria h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n

ro \ c f e v < H cçrK in

5

3

1

Fig. 2.1: Pre- and postdevelopment hydraulics (Source: EPA, Handbook, Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention and Control Planning, 1993). When discharge of pollutants into receiving water bodies exceed the assimilation capacity of these bodies, problems can result. Types of biological effects that these water quality problems may cause include: infection of organisms by bacteria and viruses, death from chronic toxicity exposure and alteration to natural habitat cycles and breeding. Pollution

and water quality degradation can also interfere with the range of legitimate human water uses.

The most common pollutants that can be expected from various non-point sources in an urban environment and their typical concentrations are presented in Tables 2.1 and 2.2.

Ronrnrll inprl V A /lth nci^rmiccinn nf the nnnv/rlnht n\A/nor

Piirthor ronrnHimtlnn nrnhiKit^H \A/ithnii+ norm iccir

Table 2.1: Sources of non-point urban runoff pollutants (modified from W hipple et al., 1983). Source Pollutant Soil Erosion M* m** M Vehicles Industrial Wastes Fossil Fuels M M M M M Lawn and Garden Chemical s Animal Wastes

Suspended solids Nutrients Nitrogen Phosphorus Heavy metals Iron Manganese Zinc Lead Copper Chromium Nickel Mercury Cadmium

M M m

m

IV ! k /1 m

M M M M M M M

M m M M M M M

M

Pesticides *M, major source;**m, minor source

M

Urban runoff quantity and quality depends on several factors that determine flow magnitude and time distribution, as well as pollutant concentrations. These include rainfall patterns, volume, intensity, and antecedent number of dry days; traffic volume; land use; geographic and geologic characteristics of the region; maintenance practices; and drainage system configuration.

Water quality parameters for stormwater comprise a long list and are classified in many ways. W anielista and Yousef (1993) classified water quality parameters as follows: (1) sediment, nutrients, and metals; (2) oxygen-demanding and inert material; (3) particulate and dissolved; (4) chemical, biological, and physical; (5) toxic and nontoxic; (6 ) organic and inorganic; and (7) others. Receiving waters can assimilate a limited quantity of each, but there are thresholds beyond which the measured amount becomes a pollutant and results in an undesirable impact. Brief explanation of some pollutants, their sources and impacts is as follows.

10

ir'a

/4 \a/i+K

/-v f

S e d im en ts. These are made up of particulate matter that settles and fills In the bottoms of

ditches, streams, lakes, rivers, and wetlands. Sources of sediment Include washoff of particles that are deposited on Impervious surfaces and erosion from streambanks and construction sites. Both suspended and deposited sediments can have adverse effects on environment. Sediments also transport other attached pollutants. Some sediment is tolerated in streams; however, too much sediment produces highly turbid waters and adverse consequences have been documented. These impacts will be described later in chapter.

H e a v y m etals. Motor vehicies are a major source of metal contribution to the environment.

Concentration of heavy metals in stromwater runoff can be one to two orders of magnitude greater than that in sanitary sewage. For example, runoff to the Ohio River was found to contain lead, zinc, chromium, arsenic, cadmium, nickel, antimony and selenium (Norman, 1991). Certain heavy metals (e.g., copper, cadmium, lead and zinc) are more soluble in water than others, and may cause toxic effects at concentrations exceeding threshold values. The sources of some of the heavy metals include: lead deposits from the use of leaded fuel, lead oxide and zinc from tire wear, and copper, chromium, and nickel from wear of the plating, bearings, brake linings another moving parts of a vehicle.

N u trie n ts are chemicals that stimulate the growth of algae and water plants. The basic

macronutrients are carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus. The typical nutrient concentrations in runoff are usually more than sufficient to stimulate the growth of algal and plant species.

B O D 5 is a good indicator of the amount of pollution being carried off by the runoff. The

urban runoff pollution, if expressed by B0D 5 on an annual total load basis, is approximately equivalent to that of a secondary wastewater treatment plant effluent. The common sources of B0D5 are usually vegetation, litter and garbage, and animal waste.

O th e r toxic ch e m ica ls. Priority pollutants are generally related to hazardous wastes or

toxic chemicals and can sometimes be detected in stormwaters. A listing was developed and published, but others not on the priority pollutants list can be equally harmful, such as chloride (Wanielista, and Yousef, 1993).

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Various chemicals have different types of impacts on the water quality. For example, lead bio-accumulates on the bottom. This may retard fish growth and reduce photosynthesis. At certain concentrations, zinc and copper are toxic to fish and aquatic micro-invertebrates. Cadmium and chromium could be mutagenic and carcinogenic. Biochemical oxygen demanding material can deplete the oxygen level in the aquatic ecosystem resulting in decrease in the fish population. Excess nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, cause algal blooms which block sunlight and consume oxygen as they decompose. Oil and grease from automobile usage, as well as improper disposal, is toxic to aquatic organisms and affects fish reproduction. Total suspended solids in water increase turbidity level, affecting fish survival (Schueler and Holland, 2000). Some common pollutants found in urban stormwater runoff are profiled in Table 2.2.

12

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

T ab le 2.2: T yp ica l p o llu ta n ts c o n c e n tra tio n s fo u n d in urban s to rm w a te r (Source: Maryland Stromwater Manual, Vol. 1). T yp ica l P o llu ta n ts Found in U nits S to rm w a te r R unoff Total Suspended Solids Total Phosphorus Total Nitrogen Total organic Carbon Fecal Conform Bacteria E. coli Bacteria Petroleum Hydrocarbons Cadmium Copper Lead Zinc Chlorides (winter only) insecticides Herbicides mg/l mg/l mg/l mg/l MPN/100 ml MPN/100 ml mg/l pg/i pg/i pg/i pg/l mg/l pg/i C o n ce n tra tio n * 80 0.30 2.0 12.7 3600 1450 3.5 2 10 18 140 230 0.1 to 2.0 A verage

1 to 5.0 pg/l *these concentrations represent m e a n o r m e d ia n storm concentrations measured at typical sites and may be greater during individual storms. Also note that mean or median runoff concentrations from s to rm w a te r h o ts p o ts are 2 to 10 times higher than those shown here. Units = mg/l = milligrams/liter, pg/l = micrograms/liter, MPN = Most Probable Number. During the monitoring o f stormwater pollution study in W isconsin conducted by Roger Bannerman and his colleagues (Bannerman et al., 1993) it was revealed that streets are the single m ost important source area for urban pollutants in residential, commercial and industrial areas. Not only did streets produce some of the highest concentrations of phosphorus, suspended solids, bacteria, and several metals, but they also generated a disproportionate amount of the total runoff volume from the watershed. Consequently, streets typically contributed four to eight tim es the pollutant load that would have been expected if all source areas contributed equally.

According to Bannerman et al. (1993), the importance o f street runoff for urban pollutant loading is due to a number of factors. First, as streets are directly connected to the

13

R e o ro d u c e d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r

F u rth e r re o rn riiio tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t n e rm is s in n

drainage system, they possess a very high runoff coefficient. Second, the curb and gutter system along streets is very effective at trapping and retaining fine particles that blo\w into them. In addition, as most other sources areas are "upstream" from streets and their gutters, pollutants delivered from sidewalks, driveways, rooftops, and lawns ultimately pass through street gutters on their w ay to the storm drain.

Finally, streets are strongly influenced by local em issions and leaks from vehicular traffic. Metals that are strongly linked to cars, such as copper and cadmium, reached their highest levels on streets and parking lots. The sam e pollutants were rarely encountered in roof and lawn runoff.

2.1.2 V -/

Construction Site as a Major Stormwater Polluter

Land activities, such as construction, contribute a significant additional amount of pollution in stormwater runoff. There is little doubt that construction sites rank among the most significant sources of sediment today. Construction activity is an important contributor to non-point source pollution in urbanizing areas (Goldman et. al., 1986; Harbor, J., 1999; Novotny and Chesters, 1989; Schueler, 1990; U.S.EPA, 1993; Fifield, 2002; etc.).

When construction disturbs land, erosion occurs during rainfall or wind events. Once suspended in wind or water, soil particles may become a m ajor water pollutant, as follows (Fifield, 2002): Sediment loading can be 10 to 20 times greater than soil particles lost from lands where plants grow. Sediment loading causes reservoirs and harbours to clog with silt and other sediments. Sediment loading causes loss of recreational areas and wildlife habitat. Sediment loading reduces the beneficial use o f water fo r human and can harm plants, animals and fish that live in the water.

Sediment loading from construction may increase the am ount of nutrients in water. Nutrients (especially phosphorus and nitrates) may com e from fertilizers used at

construction sites to aid in the establishment of plants. W hen runoff waters carry sediment downstream into waters, plants that live in the water will absorb the nutrients. The increase in these plants, or biomass, robs the water of oxygen, killing fish and other

14

R p n r n r ii in.t=^d VA/ith n a rm L Q c in n n f t h n r n n u r i n h t n \A /n n r

F i i r t h o r r o n r n r li in +inn n r n h ih it n H \A/i+hni it n n r m ic e in n

organisms living in the water. Pesticides may also be present along with the nutrients found in some soils. These harm ful chemicals move with the soil particles from construction projects. The three types o f pesticides most com monly used at construction projects are: herbicides to kill plants, insecticides to kill insects, rodenticides to kill rodents, such as mice and rats. Improper application o f pesticides could result in the direct contamination of water. Indirect pollution can also occur when the pesticides are

suspended in the air and carried from the land surface to the water.

Over half of the trace m etals carried in runoff waters are attached to sediment (Fifield, 2002). Sources of these m etals found at construction sites include galvanized metal, paint, and preserved wood. Nearly all metals can be toxic to plants, animals, and fish that live in water. In addition, metals can accum ulate in the tissues of plants, animals, and fish and have the potential to contam inate drinking water.

Other pollutants found in runoff from construction sites include hydrocarbon compounds. These com pounds are the building block for m any synthetic chem icals that are widely used on construction projects. Soil from the site can becom e contaminated as a result of leaks from heavy equipm ent, hydraulic line failures, spills during refilling, and inappropriate disposure of drained fluids. W hen runoff occurs, hydrocarbon can be washed into the water, harming plants and animal life. Therefore, it is im portant to store and use these chemicals properly. Other wastes from construction sites that can lead to unsightly and polluted water include: wash water from concrete mix, plants and planting equipment, waste from cleaning vehicles and equipm ent, waste from trees and shrubs removed during land clearing, wood, plastic and paper from packaging of building products, food containers, such as paper, aluminum, and metal cans, sanitary waste.

2.1.3

The Effect of Construction on Receiving W aters

Particles suspended in m oving water w ill eventually find their way into downstream waters where they will be deposited. Large-size particles (e.g., sand) may cover fish spawning beds or sm other immobile species, such as clams. Smaller-size particles (e.g., clays) can remain suspended for a very long tim e. W hen this occurs, less light is available for plants that live in the water. This fine-grain material can also accum ulate on the gill surfaces of fish, resulting in fish kills from suffocation.

15

RorvrnHimeH w ith norm iccinn n f tho nnn\/rinht n w n o r

F iirth n r m n rn riiin tln n nrnhihitoH w ithni it normlcc.lnn

Pollutants attached to sediment also enter streams and lakes with runoff waters. In some cases, the increased am ount of pollutants can make the environm ent poisonous. When such conditions occur, fish usually leave the contaminated areas for less polluted waters. Unfortunately, m any species cannot escape the polluted area and are often doomed.

Eroded soil entering surface waters as suspended solids is a major w ater quality problem. In a 1977 survey, the rate of soil erosion in the USA was estimated at 7.1 x 10® Mg per year (Dodson, 2000). For a given land area, eroded soil from urban areas and construction sites can be 5 to 20 times greater than that from agricultural land (Dodson, 2000). Goldman computed that construction sites are responsible for an estimated export of 80 millions tons of sediment into receiving waters each year. On a unit area basis, construction sites export sediments at 20 to 20,000 times the rate of other land uses (Goldman, e ta l., 1986). According to Fifield (2002), while the muddy waters that run off from construction sites are easy to observe, there is no full awareness of the downstream impacts eroded sediments have on both the environment and economy. Given the cost and effort needed for ESC control, it is important to remember why it matters.

The nature of the sediment impacts depend on whether sediments are suspended in the water column or are deposited on a stream channel or lake bottom. Shueler and Holland (2000) summarized the impacts of suspended and deposited sediment.

S u m m a ry o f th e Im p a c ts o f S u s p e n d e d S e d im e n t o n the A q u a tic E n v iro n m e n t:

* . abrades and damages fish gills, increasing risk of infection and disease; scouring o f periphyton from stream (plants attached to rocks); loss of sensitive or threatened fish species when turbidity exceeds 25 NTU; shifts in fish community toward more sediment tolerant species; decline in sunfish, bass, chub and catfish when monthly turbidity exceeds 100 NTU; reduces sight distance for trout, with reduction in feeding efficiency; reduces light penetration causing reduction in plankton and aquatic plant growth; reduces filtering efficiency of zooplankton In lakes and estuaries; adversely impacts aquatic insects which are the base of the food chain; slightly increases stream temperature in summer;

16

R o n r r \ H i iP .o H \ A / it h n o r m l c c i r \ n

r» f f h û r T \ n \ / r i n h t r w A in a r

P n r t h o r r o n r n r l i ir '+ in n n m h iK i+ û H

V A /l+ h r\i i t n û r m î c e l r i n

suspended sediments are a major carrier of nutrients and metals; increased w ater treatm ent costs to meet drinking water standards; increased w ear and tear of hydroelectric and water intake equipment; reduces anglers chances of catching fish; diminishes direct and indirect recreational experience of receiving waters.

S u m m a ry o f th e Im p a c ts o f D e p o s ite d S e d im e n ts on th e A q u a tic E n v iro n m e n t:

physical smothering of benthic aquatic insect community; reduced survival rates for fish eggs; destruction of fish spawning areas and eggs; "im bedding' of stream bottom reduces fish and m acroinvertebrate habitat value; loss of trout habitat when fine sediments are deposited in spawning or riffle-runs; sensitive or threatened darters and dace may be eliminated from fish community; significant contributing factor in the alarming decline of freshwater mussels; reduced channel capacity, exacerbating downstream bank erosion and flooding; reduced flood transport capacity under bridges and through culverts; loss of storage and lower design life fo r reservoirs, impoundments and ponds; dredging costs to maintain navigable channels and reservoir capacity; spoiling of sand beaches; deposits diminish the scenic and recreational value of waterways.

Taken together, the 30 reported impacts confirm that eroded sediment is a m ajor pollutant in waterways.

2.2

M a n a g e m e n t o f R u n o ff fro m C o n s tru c tio n S ite s

2.2.1

Management o f Runoff Pollution Using BMP's

Given the high level o f concern about construction-site erosion, it is critical to ensure that effective, practical methods of erosion and sediment control are being implemented. Construction-site erosion is one o f the easiest sources o f non-point source (N FS ) pollution to control because construction sites are well defined areas. The prim ary reason for erosion control failure, according to Harbor et al. (1995), is inadequate im plem entation of the most effective pollution prevention measures.

Reoroduced with permission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

storm w ater pollution is controlled through Best Management Practices (BMPs). There are several definitions assigned to BMP's. Taken from James (1995): BMP are "structural devices that are temporarily store or treat urban storm water runoff to reduce flooding, remove pollutants, and provide other am enities''. Another definition belongs to D. Mandelker '' (from Tsihrintzis and Hamid, 1997): BMPs are "control measures for slowing, retaining, and absorbing pollutants produced by surface runoff associated with non-point sources.

Tsihrintzis and Hamid (1997) named six basic components of an effective BMP system design: runoff attenuation, runoff conveyance, runoff pre-treatment, runoff treatment, system maintenance, and secondary impact mitigation. Brief description of BMP design is as follows.

R u n o ff a tte n u a tio n focuses on reduction of pollutants by minimizing the volume of runoff.

Runoff volume can be primarily contained by minimizing basin imperviousness, and delineating and protecting the environmental reserve areas. Runoff attenuation serves to enhance the perform ance of the remaining components of the BMP system.

R u n o ff c o n v e y a n c e provides safe transport of storm water to the BMP with minimum

disruption to the existing network. Swales, exfiltration drains, and parallel pipe systems are som e of these methods.

R u n o ff p re -tre a tm e n t, this captures or traps coarse sediments before they enter the BMP

to preserve storage volum e and/or prevent clogging within the BMP. Pre-treatm ent is located in an area w here sediment can be easily removed w ithout interfering with the general operation of the BMP. Examples o f some pre-treatment methods include stilling basins, grass filter strips, and filter cloth barriers for infiltration systems. For industrial or transportation applications water quality inlets or settling basins should be used to remove oily wastes prior to entering into the BMP system.
R u n o ff tre a tm e n t is the heart of the BMP system. In general, there are four basic treatm ent

options available, which include filtration, detention, retention, and infiltration. An effective BMP system m ay use any or all of these options.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

S yste m m a in te n a n c e : there is a need for a realistic plan to maintain the long-term

performance of the first four components of the system. Since the system accumulates significant quantities of sediment and possibly toxic pollutants, the disposal or containment of these residuals should be carefully planned. The design of the BMP must include easy and permanent access, as well as environm entally and economically sound removal procedures.

S e c o n d a ry im p a c t m itig a tio n : this determines whether the BMP system creates any

secondary impacts to the downstream community. For example, secondary impacts from ponds include the discharge o f hypoxic and/or thermally enriched w ater downstream, the removal of downstream riparian cover, and possibly filling or alteration of wetland areas adjacent to the pond. For infiltration systems, they include possible risk of groundwater contamination and system failure.

Strategic

watershed

planning

for urban

runoff quality

control must also

include

consideration of the

implementation and adoption of effective source

controls for

stormwater runoff together with the optimization of BMPs. According to Ellis (1989), it includes: optimization of street and road gully cleaning operations; implementation of car parking controls and street zoning restrictions; reduction in the number and frequency of road gullies, especially in residential developments; insertion of flow control devices such as orifice plates into road gullies to throttle high intensity storm events; provision of

temporary storage of storm water runoff on im permeable surfaces within suburban residential districts; reduction to absolute minimum of the amount of chlorides, bromide and grit used fo r winter deicing operations; provision of effective street and sewer sanitation maintenance in commercial and industrial districts; and control and

maintenance of oil interceptors to prevent spillage and seepage to the stormwater sewer system.

BMPs can generally be categorized into structural and nonstructural controls. Structural BMPs consist of an actual structure that collects and treats runoff (U.S. EPA, 1993). Nonstructural BMPs include practices such as public education and awareness, street sweeping and cleaning, fertilizer application control on grass areas, and zoning restrictions to limit population densities. Stormwater management strategies for urbanizing areas involve balancing structural controls with nonstructural controls. Effectiveness of structural

19

Reproduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

BMP's will be discussed in a latter section. It should be noted that no single BMP type is ideally suited for every situation; various BMPs are used for controlling different pollution sources .

Li (1997) outlined seven potential erosion and sediment problem areas at construction sites where erosion and sediment are likely to occur: (i) steep slopes; (ii) close proximity to streams and waterways, (iii) poorly designed surface drainageways; (iv) inlet and outfall of enclosed drainage; (v) large, flat surface areas; (vi) borrow and stockpile areas; (vii) adjacent properties. According to Li (1997) and Harbor (1999), for an erosion and sediment control program to be effective, it is imperative that provisions for control measures be made in the planning stage. These planned measures, when conscientiously and expeditiously applied during construction, wilt result in orderly development without environmental degradation and with cost savings. The following principles should be used to the maximum extent possible.

M in im iz e the e x te n t o f the d is tu rb e d a re a a nd th e d u ra tio n o f e x p o s u re a n d stabilize d is tu rb e d a re a s a s soo n a s p o s sib le .

Erosion during construction can be reduced significantly by minimizing the time between removal of the pre-construction cover and establishment of the post-construction cover. For small sites this involves delaying clearing and grading operations until shortly before construction begins, and applying final or temporary cover immediately to portions of the site that have reached final grade. For larger sites, the same principles applies, but in addition the site can be divided into phases, so that only the next area to be built on is to be cleared and graded. In regions with distinct seasonal variations in climate, it is usually possible to identify certain portions of the year when erosion potential is relatively low

Use n a tu ra l a n d a rtific ia l c o v e r o n d is tu rb e d areas.

Erosion from disturbed areas can be reduced significantly by prompt application of temporary surface cover. For small areas, this can include artificial materials such as erosion control blankets or plastic sheeting; and for large areas, this usually involves mulch and/or seeding to establish temporary cover. Mulch protects the soil from direct rain splash impact, and increases soil moisture retention. Seed and mulch combinations provide immediate protection by the mulch, and long-term protection when mulch decays. Temporary cover may need to be applied several times during the construction sequence.

20

ReDraduced with nerm issinn n f the nnnurinht nwuner

Further renrndi intinn nrnhihitoH withni it norm iccinn

to protect areas between construction phases. Hydroseeding applications of seed, mulch, water fertilizer and a tackifier are increasingly popular as they allow for treatment of steep slopes and other unstable or difficult areas, and can provide extensive cover very quickly. Detailed research by Harbor e t al. (1995) was performed on Ohio construction sites. Using field sampling of runoff from treated and untreated sites as well as computer modeling based on site condition maps, it was found that rapid application of surface cover dramatically reduced both the amount of sediment generated by surface erosion and the concentration and total load of phosphorus in stromwater runoff. Rapid applications of surface cover reduced soil erosion by up to 86% and phosphorus loadings up to 80% compared to bare-soil conditions. In average, according to Harbor (1999), temporary cover reduces erosion by 50%.

K ee p ru n o ff v e lo c ity low.

Runoff velocity should be kept as low as possible. For drainage ways such as ditches, high velocity can be reduced by a series of rock check dams, which break the flow velocity. Minimizing slope length and steepness can reduce overland flow velocity.

D ire c t r u n o ff a w a y fro m p ro b le m s areas.

Erosion on disturbed areas is compounded if runoff from undisturbed areas is directed across exposed areas, particularly on steep slopes. Based on the construction plan, it is possible to identify areas that will be exposed during each project phase, and to install small, temporary diversion d itches, d ik e s or slo p e drains to divert upslope runoff around disturbed areas. At a larger scale, off-site water can be diverted around the construction site to minimize the amount of water entering on-site conveyance and treatment structures. By eliminating off-site flow, discharge and erosion potential for channels on the site is reduced, and with lower total volumes of water, sediment trapping structures such as silt fences and sedimentation basins are much more effective.

R etain s e d im e n ts w ith in the s ite area.

To reduce the amount of eroded soil that leaves the site, a variety of sediment trapping measures can be used. One of the commonly used erosion and sediment control measure is the silt fence. The fence is a geotextile with fine sand-sized openings, attached to wooden stakes, which is designed to trap sediment in unconcentrated overland flow. The bottom 20 cm of the fence is buried in a trench, so that the fence forms an "leaky dam",

21

ir'ûH \a /!+ K r\^rmieeirvr»

r'r\r\v/vi/~iKf

ir+ hc& r I'/a rM 'z -v rli

v A /î+ ln /-

ponding runoff to allow time for sediment to settle before the water passes through the geotextile. Silt fences can perform very well if properly installed. Sometimes, instead of a silt fence, straw dikes are used. They operate under the same principle: if properly installed they temporarily dam overland flow, allowing time for sediment to settle out.

The other main class of sediment trapping structures are sediment traps, ponds and basins. Although varying in size and design details, all of them temporarily detain surface runoff, releasing it slowly, allowing time for sediment to settle out in the basin. A slow release rate is produced either by construction of a leaky dam or by use of a perforated outlet riser pipe surrounded by geotextile and a gravel cone to restrict the outlet flow rate. In some cases, permanent stormwater detention or retention ponds (required in many areas for flood control) can be modified to act as sediment traps during construction by adding the perforated riser outlet. Sediment basins are popular with developers because in practice they require less maintenance than other erosion and sediment control techniques, and often can be integrated with permanent stormwater management facilities. Oliver and Grigoropoulos (1981) concluded that source control of runoff by detention and natural treatment is an effective means of managing storm-generated pollution. Disadvantage include poor trapping efficiencies for fine sediments, basins that are often too small compared to the volume of flow, and the uses of basins as the only erosion and sediment control techniques on the site, rather than as a part of a comprehensive set of measures.

Im p le m e n t a th o ro u g h m a in te n a n c e a n d fo llo w -u p program .

This last principle is vital to the success of the six other principles. A site cannot be effectively controlled without thorough, periodic inspections of the erosion and sediment control practices. These practices must be maintained just as construction equipment must be maintained and materials checked and inventoried. An example of applying this principle would be to start a routine "end of day check" to make sure that all control practices are working properly.

Usually, these seven principles are integrated into a system of vegetative measures and structural measures along with management techniques to develop a plan to prevent erosion and control sediment. In most cases, a combination of limited grading, limited time of exposure and a judicious selection of erosion control practices and sediment trapping

22

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

facilities will prove to be the most practical method of controlling erosion and the associated production and transport of sediment.

2.2.2

Sedimentation Basins as an Effective BMP's

Over the last two decades, numerous field and laboratory studies have tested the best techniques for preventing erosion and trapping suspended sediment at construction sites. However, very few of the studies have assessed how well these techniques are actually implemented and perform at construction sites.

Typical comments of administrators from open response option on the survey on the performance of common used construction practices in North Carolina, USA, were summarized (Schueler and Holland, 2000). The results of the survey are presented in Figure 2.2.

23

R e o ro d u ce d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v ria h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n

100
90

II Sediment basin  Sediment trap  Riprap channel ElVeg. channel ® Slope drain  Silt fence  SDIP
35 30 2b

80
70 c o H 0) a. 60 50 40 30

 Filter strip @Pre-fab silt fence  Straw bale  Brush barrier

20 10
0
Fig.

g

2 .2 : A d m in is tra to r's P erfot.nance

R atings-P ercent

In d ica tin g

S atisfactory

Perform ance (Source: Schueler and Holland, 2000)

As shown in the Figure, few North Carolina ESC administrators were satisfied with the typical field performance of most construction practices; only three out of 11 construction practices were considered to be good or excellent. Sediment basins, sediment traps, and riprap-stabilized channels received the highest percentage of favorable ratings. Performance of sediment basins is rated as high as 94%.

Adding to the description of sediment basins given in the earlier section: retention and detention basins are open excavated or natural depressions on the ground surface of varying size and depth. Wet-detention/retention ponds maintain a permanent pool of water. Retention is relatively long-term storage that results in residence times that last weeks or months. Detention is a short-term storage with residence time of a few hours or days with discharge to adjacent surface waters (Wanielista and Yousef, 1993). It was reported that the overall removal efficiency of the retention basin for suspended solids ranges from 10-85% depending on detention time, basin design, outlet structure design and base-flow concentrations (Tsihrintzis and Hamid, 1997). Ferrara and Witkowski (1983) concluded that the effectiveness of a wet basin appears to be related to two factors, namely the processes of equalization and sedimentation. Most ponds approached 80% removal efficiency for suspended solids, approximately 55%- for nutrients, 70%-bacteria and 50-74% -for metals (Schueler and Holland, 2000)

24

Rpnrndi inp^rl with nprmi.c.cinn nf thn nnnwrinht nw nor

F iirth or ronrnHi intlnn nrnhihitor! withni it norm iccinn

Sediment basins and traps face an imposing performance challenge in removing sediment from construction site runoff: large suspended sediment concentrations. Shown in Table 2.3, field and modeling research indicates that an average total suspended solid (TSS) concentration from construction sites are about 4,500mg/l and could be as high as 17,500 mg/l in some storm events (Schueler and Holland, 2000).

If the containment system is capable of removing 90% of the sediment, it will still discharge sediment at concentration of 450 mg/L. Likewise, if the removal rate is increased to 95%, the discharged TSS concentration will be 225 mg/l, again a high turbid discharge by most standards. Given current practices, it is almost impossible to achieve 99% or more removal to produce a TSS level of 45 mg/l that in any way resembles a clear water discharge.

25

R e o ro d u c e d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v ria h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n .

Table 2.3; The perform an ce o f sedim e nt basins and tra p s. A sum m a ry o f field, la b o ra to ry and m o d e llin g re s u lts (Source; Schueler and Holland, 2002). TSS (mg/L) Mean In flo w 3,502 17,500 1,087 359 4,623 625 415 2,670 9,700 1,500-4,500 1,000-5,000 4,200 site runoff Means 4,498 365 75% Mean O u tflo w 154 626 63 224 127 322 91 876 800 200- 1,000 200- 1,200 98.6% 86.7% 75.1% 18.0% 99.8% 54.7% 80.3% 6 6 .8% 94.2% 42-87% 68-99.5% -

R esearch S tudy o r Site* SR-204 Seattle M ercer Island RT1 RT2 SB1 SB2 SB4 Pennsylvania Test Basin Georgia Model Maryland Model Uncontrolled construction

Mean % R eduction

* Sources: Horner et al., 1990; Schueler and Lugblll, 1990; Jarrett, 1996; Storm and Kirby, 1991; Barfield and Ciar, 1985; York and Herb, 1978.

Surprisingly few sediment basins and traps have been tested in the field. Of the limited number of performance monitoring studies that have been conducted, three of the most informative are: Horner's (1990) studies of three highway sediment basins in Washington state, Jarrett's (1996) Pennsylvania test basin study, and Schueler and Lugbill's (1996) of five basins and traps in the suburban Maryland Piedmont. It was reported that three out of the nine basins or traps removed sediment at a rate of 94%, five basins were in the 55% to 85% range, and one trap removed less than 20% incoming sediment (due to internal erosion at inlets).

Additional research (not related to construction sites specifically) conducted in Colorado, Texas, North Carolina (USA), New Zealand and Canada. The monitoring in Colorado revealed that the pond was reasonably effective at removing many pollutants during storm events. For example, 78% of suspended sediment, 60% of zinc and copper were removed

26

R e o m d u c e d w ith n e rm ls s in n o f th e o n n v rin h t o w n e r

F u rth e r re o ro d iio tio n o ro h ih ite d w ith o u t n e rm ie e io n

from the pond. North Carolina pond research in 1978 and Central Texas research in 1997 findings were; 93% removal efficiency for TSS for both ponds. The performance of pond/wetland system was evaluated in 1992 at a highly industrial site in New Zealand. It was found that removal of solids and various forms of phosphorus approached 75%, removal of total copper, lead, and zinc exceeded 85%. At least 80% of suspended solids and total phosphorus were removed by three Canadian w et ponds in 1996.

Stormwater ponds are one of the most effective techniques for providing pollutant removal for urban streams. Stormwater ponds are among the most adaptable, effective and widely applied stormwater treatment practices in developing areas. The popularity o f stormwater ponds can be attributed to their proven ability to attenuate flows from design storms; high urban pollutant removal capability; longevity, particularly in comparison to other types of stormwater practices (Schueler and Holland, 2000). Overall, the performance monitoring studies indicate that the removal efficiencies are highly variable and that the current design of most basins is not capable of accomplishing the challenge of 95% to 99% removal.

Because of the difficulties of sampling basins and traps at active construction sites, researchers use computer models to predict removal efficiencies. Examples include the work of Barfield and Clar in 1985 and Kirby in 1991 (Schueler and Holland, 2000). Both model studies suggest that sediment basins can achieve a much higher performance level than reported in the field.

To estimate the removal efficiencies, computer modeling uses algorithms that simulate a behavior referred to as type 1 settling. The basic principles for type 1 settling are: the flow within the basin is quiescent, settling is governed by particle size distribution of inflow sediment, and removal depends on adequate detention time. In the "real world", sediment basin design criteria require some practical and simplifying shortcuts. Most notable, a design particle is used as the spectrum of incoming particle size. The design particle is a convenient representation of the entire range of incoming sediment particles.

It is very difficult to effectively remove most particles less than 10 microns in size (e.g., silt and clays) by sedimentation alone. Detention time is important, as large particles tend to settle swiftly while finer-size particles have a slower settling velocity and tend to remain

27

Rfsnrndi inprl \A/ith nArmicicinn n f fho rtnnv/rinht nvA/nor

Ft irthnr rnnrnHi mtinn nrnhihitaH \A/ithniit norm iecinn

suspended in the basin. Therefore the settling velocity of the design particle is a key component of basin design. In an ideal situation, discharge from the basin will not begin until the design particle has settled out. Particles with settling velocity greater than the design velocity will be com pletely removed. Particles with slower settling velocities will be removed at a ratio of; actual settling velocity/ design settling velocity.

Theory implies that longer detention will provide greater removal efficiencies. However, field laboratory data have shown that most settling occurs within the first few hours and that little additional settling is gained by increasing detention time. As much as 60% of removal is accomplished within the first six hours and additional increments of sediment removal are m ore difficult to obtain after the rapid initial settling (Schueler and Holland,
2000).

Again, according to Schueler (2000), to make field performance more closely match theoretical performance criteria re-examination of sediment basin design theory and application by focusing on increased removal of smaller particles is the key solution. Some steps towards this goal include selecting smaller design particles, providing more storage, and decreasing incoming sediment loads.

it seems that basic design o f sediment basins and traps can be improved and made more reliable, but there are limits to settling. It is safe to assum e that an 80 to 90% removable rate is probably the best that can be achieved under field conditions. Likewise, it should be acknowledged that most sediment basins cannot reliably meet "clear water" discharge concentration. However, new methods are being developed and tested to capture the finer particles that remain in suspension because of their low settling velocity.

2.2.3

Managem ent of Fine Sediments

As mentioned above, because fine silt and clay-sized particles have low settling velocities, sedimentation basins are largely ineffective at reducing turbidity caused by these particles. Research by Przepiora et ai. (1997) in North Carolina determined that the turbidity of water discharged from sedimentation basins at two construction sites during a 1-yr period ranged from 120 to 3200 nephelometric turbidity units (NTU), which corresponded to

28

Ronr/^Hl moH \A ylfh r\armicoir»n rvf fhci nrirwyrinht r\V A /r» £ ii* Ri irfhrar rammrli ir'+inn

V A ii+ h/^i rvüj'mieelr^n

suspended solids concentrations of 90 to 2800 mg/L. North Carolina regulations state that w ater discharged into a freshw ater stream or reservoir m ust not cause the turbidity of the receiving w ater to exceed 50 NTU fo r drinking water sources and 10 NTU for trout waters (high-quality waters). To ensure com pliance with these standards, the turbidity of discharge w ater should ideally be <50 NTU or <10 NTU. To achieve this goal more effective technologies for removing suspended solids are needed.

Flocculants prom ote the coagulation of fine suspended particles into larger floccules that settle more rapidly under the influence of gravity. Flocculants such as alum Al2(S04)3 x I 8 H2O] and organic polym ers are widely used in wastewater treatm ent operations to aid in the removal o f suspended solids and associated contaminants. Alum and gypsum (CaSCh X 2 H2O) are found to be effective in reducing the turbidity o f storm water (Przepiora et al., 1998). However, when using chem ical flocculants, it is im portant to avoid changes in water chem istry that adversely affect the aquatic ecosystem of the receiving water. For example, when using alum, an additional chem ical treatm ent m ay be needed to offset any pH reduction caused by this acidic com pound. W ith sulfate compounds, the level of dissolved SO4 in the discharge w ater should not exceed water-quality standards (e.g., 250 mg/L is the SO4 standard adopted in North Carolina).

Robbins and Brockway (1978) evaluated the effect of CaCIa additions on suspended solids discharged from sediment basins (ponds) that collected irrigation water from different agricultural settings. Although they dem onstrated the efficiency o f the CaCb treatment for reducing discharge of suspended solids, no turbidity results were presented. Przepiora et al. (1997) compared the efficiency o f several calcium sulfate sources (phosphogypsum, agricultural gypsum, and moulding plaster) for reducing the turbidity of water samples collected from sedimentation basins a f construction sites in the Piedm ont region of North Carolina. Commercial m oulding plaster (plaster of Paris or hem ihydrate; CaS04 x 0.5 H 2O) was an efficient chem ical flocculant that contained fewer im purities than the other m aterials evaluated. In laboratory studies on sedim entation basin water, moulding plaster application rates of 350 to 700 mg/l decreased turbidity from as high as 3280 to 50 NTU within 3 h. Also, the am ount of chem ical flocculant needed to reduce turbidity to a given level decreased as the tim e allowed fo r flocculation and gravity-induced settling increased. Therefore, to use the chem ical flocculation approach for sedimentation basins at

29

construction sites, it is desirable to control both the detention tim e of the impounded water and flocculant application rate.

2.3 H y d ro lo g ie M o d e llin g o f U rb a n R u n o ff

2.3.1

Modelling Concepts

Management o f the quantity and quality of storm water runoff from urban areas is a complex task that has become an increasingly im portant environmental issue for urban communities. Together w ith economic and social issues, the increased awareness o f the impacts of urban drainage systems has resulted in a need to obtain information regarding the drainage system response to varying conditions. Choi and Ball (2002) proposed two standard approaches fo r obtaining the desired information: monitoring o f the system for both water quantity and quality, or implementation of catchment modeling systems which simulate the important

processes influencing the quantity and quality of storm water runoff from the urban environment.

Where changes to the m anagement of a stormwater system are proposed and it is desired that the impacts of these changes be assessed then it is necessary to adopt the second approach as the first approach can only provide historical information; consequently, monitoring of the storm water system can provide the desired information only after implementation of the proposed changes. Implementation of a catchment modelling system simulating flows in a storm water system, however requires monitored information to ascertain the reliability and robustness of the predicted flow conditions.

Computer modelling can be one o f the more effective and efficient methods for predicting the quantity and nature o f runoff, and the effectiveness of best m anagement practices (BMPs).

A hydrologie m odel can be defined as a mathematical model representing one or m ore of the hydrologie processes resulting from precipitation and culminating in watershed runoff (Zoppou, 1999). Hydrologie models aid in answering questions about the effect of landmanagement practices on quantity and quality of runoff, infiltration, lateral flow, both

30

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

saturated and unsaturated subsurface flow, and deep percolation. W hile models can be extremely useful in determining the effects of projects on w ater quality and quantity, a model is m ost accurate when it is used with actual data and measurements. Also, the more actual measurements properly applied to calibrate a m odel, the m ore accurate the model will be.

Hydrologie models can be used in two ways; (1) to assess the existwater-quality conditions of a water resource, and (2) to predict future riyo.

ogy and , which

may develop as a result of changes in land use, climate or any other physical alteration to the environment.

Models should be used with caution and within their span of applicability. Each model is developed for a specific purpose with certain underlying assumptions.

Monitoring

is always essential. Modelling can never replace monitoring. However,

modelling is usually an effective way to evaluate the nature of the problem. The data collected in monitoring can help improve modelling predictions and development.

Modelling is feasible only for evaluating problems that are understood well enough to be expressed in concise, quantitative terms. As models are developed to represent complex hydrologie systems, assumptions are incorporated in each model. The equations and formulas used to represent complex system are never complete, due to com plexity of the system. In some situations, modeling m ay not be feasible or necessary. Modeling a situation m ay help determine whether monitoring would be beneficial. Models are used for analytical convenience. As tools for addressing hydrological questions, models do have limitations.

The main goals of urban water quality modelling are to: characterize the urban runoff; provide input into receiving w ater analysis; determine effects, sizes and combination of control options; perform frequency analysis of quality parameters; and provide input to cost-benefit analysis (Tsihrintzis and Hamid, 1997). The first two goals are related to the magnitude of the problem and the last three are related to the analyses and solution o f the problem. One approach to modelling process in an urban watershed is presented in Figure 2.3.

31

Reoroduced with permission of the copvriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

A brief description of stormwater quality models based on researcfi of Zoppou (1999) and Tsihrintzis and Hamid (1997) is presented. Some of the most popular and comprehensive models used specifically for urban runoff pollution include: SWMM (Storm Water

M anagem ent Model), STORM (Storage Treatm ent Overflow Runoff Model), DR3M-QUAL (Distributed Routing Rainfall-Runoff Model), FHWA (Federal Highway Adm inistration), and QOS (Quantity-Q uality Simulation). STORM permits individual pollutants to be calculated for buildup purposes as a fraction of dust and dirt. In STORM, pollutants are pre-specified while In SWMM they may consist of up to ten different constituents (up to thirty In recent versions). Pollutant buildup in SWMM is done fo r each pollutant individually, without needing to use dust and dirt and the pollutant fractions. HSPF has the sam e flexibility as SWMM fo r up to ten arbitrary pollutants. STORM arbitrarily adds fractions of suspended and settleable solids to other pollutants, thus accounting fo r pollutants that adhere to solids.

32

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

-- -- .V U tiM l-AHirt (« rrn n ip n mS y M ç -m <t» !tT ih m ril >f » * t» r Trjmpuil Q ( .w iv bD u ^in

T % p iira l L 'r j i m i

K < esidi`nilul arsi Lsi'

ulcjn?.h erf
I.iand

1'.S I*

Indii^tnnl
L a n d Use

P;ii k i l ---- ^
-- I I o \ \ H?tewci(ei

W 'M l> r-< < 'rd i< » P < ïi» f1.-KMP
I n K c rriT in R W a ic r Itn O j

0 \e i Hi/V'l

T re a ln ie fti Pl»nt

J jlX lk a l M oilol l l i p i l l I):tLt

Î

Hv^rokK ïlc Otaeacttrkiii-K - HjètûRriipli.A
- In p iil H y tlr o p rtip h s - K ïa p jx alîiMi'i î> itta

r^vlt*:n lv rln>nlk*s

1

- Itmptrature
ÜiudiliJîi»L-aim't« r.s
- I.ir 'iid in i: Ual-CS

4 Pump Ctiuraclcrislics " WrirrKurrarf-rrtliHlcs
· M^nhdlt* < ».* f> iis L 'â ry . · OnHcc i -lsarui< vri> .lii_v\

· O ft d u iK ic u t iic tiy

>V w lC Î*S tU 'd Ckarut;t<eri^t)cN - VrriM }% i Prf - l>î'P H *sx4 ini S liU *« t||jC
- U v K r lu T jd i' l o n l .i t i a j ^ h

- InlU A jiKiîrucîk'iï K'iile SidI Pnv^iirliy.s
* H jn !r< iln ç ;i< - I \ j»»*

- Pollutant Kuildiip Hairs
- P o llu t a n t W a s h o lt U a tt s

. I'ffisltH l

- In flîtra ti^ m D a ta ( *4»nlvnl · A nl^cvdcnt .M'ld.stine U uiadliiim

A r iiiis T f t l T n p u l

M n r t o l C t> W D u ta tio n x

FarjunçlCR»

I
> li> ilr l O titp u f
- H ) tlit)jE<-«phs i U t i i H i l i l j j - P a Ilu U ] ( | r » p h s iQ tm J S ty i

C ^ iililir a t iH n /

V e rin c n tion

"W kat-ir' ivcrnaricw
- A lte rn a tiv e e v a lu a tio n - B M P e v alu a tio n - l> e r i'jfu i tn ilklllE

Ï

Fig. 2.3: Urban watershed modelling process (Source: Tsihrintzis and Hamid, 1997).

DR3M-QUAL computes impervious area buildup for up to four constituents individually, v/hereas for pervious areas it calculates concentration of each pollutant as a linear function of the sedim ent concentration. In FHWA, up to 13 pollutants can be chosen from a pre-specified list, all of which are calculated as a fraction of suspended solids. QQS does not use dust and dirt buildup, but uses individual parameters for up to two pollutants. FHWA only simulates single-event storms and STORM only provides continuous

simulations. The rest of the models provide both single-event and continuous simulations.

33

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The characteristics and capabilities of selected NFS (non-point source) pollution models used in the U.S.A. are comparatively presented in Table 2.4.

Table 2.4: Characteristics and capabilities of selected Tsihrintzis and Hamid, 1997)

NFS models (Source;

M ink)

i il>,l Ü50 l.'fixin - W i 1-uK-M(liem ittil c iiltir:il iiüLral

\ \ y > \ v \ i\ y

\V.lltT l|llillll> MvT'Tiiell ü M in u ll.v X ilncnl!l«»xit*.\
i

lk<;i

iu '. i In

lull.' Ville l.v.*£i-g r. simulitiiiin

iXi.iilo.) MiiiI.Tik.*

L:#linn riin-in' 4 4

I'b'n I w

/.R-M ll.SPt ( Elv\M.S /.\SV V |.Rv /»t 1 MO S-V7.IM I'H /M

L

L

i

k

*

t

,
'

t

k

*

,
·
· <

* ·

rim A ·
(VipiilJililyiiKlLk'lu'il ill itKiifcl,

·

2.3.2

SWMM Description

SWMM is among the most widely used urban water quality simulation models. The EPA's SWMM is a comprehensive hydrological and water quality simulation model developed primarily for urban areas (James, 2000). It is capable of both single-event and continuous simulation for almost all components of rainfall, runoff and water quality processes within a catchment. SWMM comprises five main subroutine modules or blocks, which can simulate different components of the hydrological cycle. Each block has a specific function, and the results of each block are entered on working storage devices to be used as part of the input to other blocks.

The main calling program o f the model is called the Executive block. This block is the first and last to be used and performs all the necessary interfacing among the other blocks.

The RUNOFF block is used in for storm water runoff simulations.

Hydrological

computations in the RUNOFF block are based on the theory of non-linear reservoirs. Time of concentration is computed based on the kinematics' wave theory. Two pervious area

34

Recroduced with cermission of the coDvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohihited without oermission.

infiltration loss equations are available, the Horton and Green-Ampt The Runoff block uses Manning's equation to route the uniform rainfall intensity over the overland flow surfaces, through the small gutters and pipes of the sewer system into the main sewer pipes, and out of the sewer pipes into the receiving streams. This block also provides time-dependent pollutional graphs (pollutographs).

A third package of subroutines, the TRANSPORT Block, determines the quality and quantity of dry weather flow, calculates the system infiltration, and calculates the water quality of the flows in the system.

A package of subroutines for water quality determination is contained in the Storage Block. The STORAGE Block allows the user to specify or have the model select sizes of several treatment processes in an optional wastewater treatment facility that receives a user-selected percentage of the peak flow. If used, this block simulates the changes in the hydrographs and pollutographs of the runoff as the water passes through the selected sequence of unit processes. Evaporation from reservoirs is simulated by a monthly coefficient (supplied by a user) multiplied by the surface area.

The EXTRAN Block completes the hydraulic calculations for overland flows, in channels, and in pipes and culverts. It solves the complete hydrodynamic equations, assesses surcharging, performs dynamic routing, and provides all the depth, velocity, and energy grade line information requested.

SWMM is the only event-based model listed that uses Horton's equation for calculating watershed infiltration losses. Input for Horton's equation consists of the maximal and minimal infiltration rates and the recession constant. The Green-Ampt equation is also used in SWMM.

Urban storm drainage components are modeled using Manning's equation and the continuity equation. The water depth over a subcatchment will increase without inducing an outflow until the depth reaches a specified detention requirement.

Surface runoff is computed in SWMM for any rainfall hyetograph, considering land use type and topography, and accounting for antecedent moisture conditions, infiltration losses

35

R eoroducad w ith oerm ission of the ooovrinht ow ner

Further reorodiiotion orohihited w ithout oerm iesion

in pervious areas, surface detention, overland flow, channel/pipe flow and constituents carried by runoff into inlets. Important input parameters are; the catchment's slope, pervious and impervious depression storage, channel and conduit layout, geometry and properties, the Manning's roughness coefficient for both overland and channel flow, and rainfall intensity, among others.

The RUNOFF block can also simulate quality of runoff processes within a drainage basin, and the routing of flows and contaminants along storm drain lines, leading to the calculation of a number of inlet hydrographs and pollutographs.

Pollutants in storage systems can be modelled as either complete mixing or plug flow. The stand-alone module EXTRAN permits SWMM to rout inflow hydrographs through open channel and a closed conduit system using an explicit numerical solution of the shallow water wave equations. Eight conservative pollutants are; suspended solids, settleable solids, BOD, COD, total nitrogen, total P, oil/grease, total coliforms as well as an arbitrary pollutant and erosion simulated in surface runoff.

Three general types of output are provided in SWMM. If waste treatment processes are simulated or proposed, the capital, land, and operation and maintenance costs are produced. Plots of water quality constituents versus time present the second type of output. These pollutographs are produced for several locations in the system and in the receiving waters. Quality constituents handled by SWMM include suspended solids, settleable solids, BOD, nitrogen, phosphorus, and grease. The third type of output is hydrologie. Hydrographs at any point, for example, the end of a gutter or inlet, are determined for designated time periods. The Statistics Block provides frequency analysis of storm events from a continuous simulation.

2.3.3

Modelling Studies

Studies related to SWMM validation and applications have been undertaken in the past by various authors (e.g. Jewell and Adrian, 1978; Jewell et al., 1978; Zaghloul, 1981; Zaghloul and Al-Shurbajia, 1990; Baffaut and Delleur, 1990; Warwick and Tadepalli, 1991; Tsihrintzis and Hamid, 1998; Lei, Li and Schilling, 2002; Dent , 2003). These studies are briefly described herein as they relate to this project.

36

R onrnrli inprl with nprm iccinn n f thn m n v rin h t nvA/nnr

F iirth nr ronrnHi intinn nrnhihitoH u/ithni it norm iccinn

A detailed sensitivity analysis was conducted on the main parameters of the SWMM RUNOFF-TRANSPORT blocks by Zaghloul (1981). The main purpose was to establish which are the most sensitive parameters affecting the Runoff-Transport simulation. The parameters' sensitivities were judged based on their effects on the simulated hydrograph in terms of shape, peak flow, volume of runoff, time to peak and consistency of the results. The most sensitive parameters found by Zaghloul (1981 )are; percentage of area impervious in the RUNOFF block and conduit length in the Transport block.

Zaghloul and Al-Shurbaji (1990) described a comprehensive study conducted to implement SWMM for urban areas in Kuwait. Fine and discretized modeling approaches showed little difference in hydrographs. It was noticed that due to high infiltration capacity o f the prevailing sandy soil, there was no runoff contribution by the pervious areas. Hence, all model parameters related to pervious areas did not need to be accurately represented in the model.

The SWMM was applied to a 10 m^ urbanized area residential area in Dallas by Warwick and Tadepalli (1991). Three different levels of watershed spatial abstraction were investigated in concert with the impact of using two different parameters for model calibration (pervious depression storage and percentage of area impervious). The calibrated mode! performed well at predicting both total runoff volume and peak flow rate. Water quality simulation was also quite acceptable, but with a consistent underestimation of total suspended solids concentration.

Tsihrintzis and Hamid (1998) applied SWMM to simulate the quantity and quality of urban stormwater runoff from four sites in South Florida. The objectives were to test the applicability of the model in small subtropical urban catchments. It was found that SWMM performed very well in small areas. Average model-predicted concentrations for the four constituents (BOD5, TSS, TKN and Pb) during model verification showed good agreement with published values in Florida.

There are a variety of methods that have been developed to calibrate mathematical or conceptual rainfall-runoff models. Jewell et al. (1978) described a methodology for calibrating coupled quantity-quality urban stormwater management models using SWMM on a 1014-acre basin in Greenfield, Massachusetts. By separating the quantity and quality

37

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

portions of the model it was possible to calibrate each using measured data. Verification results showed good agreement between observed and predicted values.

Jewell and Adrian (1978) presented the SWMM pollutant washoff functions and stressed the importance of calibrating each model for the given basin. They described a methodology that can be used effectively to adjust the parameters for a given watershed.

Baffaut and Delleur (1990) developed an interactive program to automate the calibration of the water-quality parameters of the RUNOFF block of SWMM by using Expert-system technology. It acts as a front end in the estimation of the parameters and the build up of the input files. The goal of the Expert system is to obtain a set of parameters for which the predicted pollutant loads are close to the measured loads. The Expert system has been tested on several watersheds including the Denver watershed (Colorado), and it was found that it could perform the calibration but that shortcomings exist in the model itself that cannot be alleviated through calibration.

Lei, Li and Schilling (2002) developed a new model calibration procedure called Stepwise Hypothesis Test Model Calibration procedure (SHYTMC) that tries to overcome the limitation and problems of classical model calibration/ verification procedures. The objective of model calibration using SHYTMC is to find a parameter space that results in a band o f modelled output time series. The specific feature is that the SHYTMC procedure is not intended to verify a model; it uses all observed data fo r calibration.

38

Reproduced with permission of the copvriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 3 S TU D Y SITE

3.1

S tu d y S ite and S to rm w a te r C a tch m en t A rea D escrip tio n

The study site is approximately 15.1 hectares in size located south of Sunset Beach Road and west of Bayview Avenue within Community of Oak Ridges in the Town of Richmond Hill. The development lands are surrounded by Sunset Beach Drive in the north, Bayview Avenue in the east and existing developments in the west and south as shown in Figures 3.1 and 3.2. The site is known as Ballymore on Bayview Development Phase I and II (formerly known as the Longmoor lands).

The stormwater catchment area consists of two subcatchment areas which discharge the stormwater runoff into Ballymore sediment control pond. One of the subcatchments is 12.96 hectares in size and located at the south-east side of the pond. It discharges runoff into a pond through the pipe with a diameter of 1070 mm. Through the study we will be referring to it as Catchment-1070 (C-1070), or Construction Catchment. The

subcatchment with an area of 2.14 ha on the north-west side of the pond discharges the runoff through the pipe with a diameter of 510 mm and will be referred to as Catchment510 (C-510), or Stable Catchment.

At the time of the study (fall 2002-fall-2003), Catchment-510 had been completely developed and Catchment-1070 was under development with active construction of building structures. At the time monitoring began construction activities at Catchment-1070 were in a stage with houses and roads already built, but driveways and lots were exposed to erosion. During this time period, piles of earth were present throughout the inlet of Catchment-1070 area and the roads were completely covered with soil that had eroded from the site.

As a result, this study will provide specific information on the water quality from construction sites with active building structures and performance of sediment control ponds in addition to other general construction site characteristics.

39

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohihited without oermission.

B A LLYM O R E POND

44 4 4 4 4

C-510

B[l C/W10 CfïSOE N l

C-1070
CATCHMENT BOUNDARY ^ 4 , \ ^

Fig. 3.1: Ballymore Study Area

40

R e o ro d u c e d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v ria h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ih ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n .

D ouglas Rood

L o ke

m /c o

S unset Beoch_E ood Lake A venue C-51Û

mm
c-1070

/
/

Gono

LC'.ke

./

RlLHMUNjJ HIL L

SxouffviHe

Ro a d

K e y Pl an

Fig. 3.2: Key Plan

Bulkheads were installed at both inlets to reduce the amount of sediment entering the pond during the construction period. The bulkheads are removed after construction is

complete and the sediment control pond is converted to a stormwater management pond. The use of bulkheads is a standard practice for construction sites using sediment control ponds. These are installed in the maintenance chamber of the sewer pipe discharging

runoff into the pond. They are designed to decrease the amount of sediments entering the pond.

41

R e n rn d ijc e d w ith n e rm ls s in n o f th e o n n v rin h t o w n e r

F u rth e r re n rn d i lo tin n n rn h ih ite d w ith n iit n e rm ls s in n

At the beginning of the monitoring program, the sediment control pond was experiencing erosion along its banks (Figure 3.3). The vegetation growth was not completed for the most of the 2002 fail sampling period.

Fig.3.3: Ballymore Pond bank erosion, Septem ber 2002 (Source: Pyatt, 2003).

Figure 3.4 represents the image of the pond banks vegetation almost at the end of the monitoring period in Septem ber 2003.

Fig.3.4: Ballymore Pond banks vegetation, September 2003.

42

Reproduced with permission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction prohibited without oermission.

3.1.1

Soils and Drainage

The site is situated on Markham till plain, on medium textured shale and limestone W oburn loam and W oburn sandy loam. This is typically susceptible to sheet erosion. Both external and internal drainage is good (Hoffman and Richards. 1955). Till here has been modified by lacustrine sand, silt and clay, or by kame deposition consisting of sand and gravel. The regional topography is m oranic, where occasional thick peat deposits occur in the local depressions. The subsurface conditions included a stratum of silty clay till.

The soil within the study area prim arily consists of about 1.5 meters o f sandy silt till (or silt and sand till) over stone clayey silt till. Around the perim eter o f the sandy silt area, the clayey silt till is closer to the surface and predominates (Sabourin Kimble & Associates Ltd., 2000).

In the pre-developm ent scenario the surface drainage from the study area was draining via overland sheet flow and ditch systems northward to lake Wilcox. Under post development scenario the drainage from the site is conveyed to SWM facility through curb, gutter, storm sewers and the discharge from the facility will be conveyed through a swale to the downstream storm sew er and then to Lake Wilcox.

3.2

Pond Design Features

The storm water m anagem ent (SW M ) facility, which is currently used as a construction sediment control basin for the site is located in the north-west corner o f the site. The SWM facility was designed to serve an area of approxim ately 15.1 hectares in size, which primarily consists of residential land use. The storm drainage from the study site is conveyed to the SWM facility through major and m inor systems and the outflow from the facility eventually feed into Lake W ilcox downstream.

In addition to perm anent pool volume, the SWM facility is designed to store the runoff from a 25-mm storm event for 48-hr (drawdown tim e), and 1:2 through 1:100 year peak flow control to a maximum outflow of 1.4 m^/sec which is less than the capacity of the downstream receiving ditch (Sabourin Kimble & Associates Ltd., 2000).

43

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

The perm anent pool volume Is based on MOE Stormwater M anagement Practices Planning and Design Manual (Enhanced Level o f Protection). The facility is designed with a shallow sediment forebay. Table 3.1 compares the MOE's SMPD manual wet pond

guidelines for Enhanced Level of Protection (with 45% surface im perviousness) and the measured Ballymore pond as-built conditions. Other design parameters are shown for reference. As shown, the pond meets the MOE sizing requirements fo r maximum permanent pool volume, extended detention volume above perm anent pool volume, and drawdown time.

44

Ronrndllf'.pad w ith nP-rmiccinn nf thp nnnv/rlnht n w n n r

P iirtho r ronrndi ir'tirvn nrnhlKitûr! vA/ithrvnt nar-mlcicirin

Table 3.1: Com parison pond design features MOE SMPD Manual 125* 1-2 (mean); 3 max 1 to 1.5; max 2 40 N/A Ballymore Pond 154 2.4 max 1.6 110 242

Design Param eter Permanent pool volume (m^/ha) Permanent pool depth (m ) Active storage depth (m) Extended detention (m^) Quantity control volume (m") Drawdown tim e (hours)

Objective Enhanced Level of Protection Minimize resuspension Storage and flow control Runoff from 25 mm storm 2-100 year w ater quantity control

Suspended solids settling 24 48 Maximize flow path and Length to width ratio 3:1 2:1 minimize short-circuting Based on Enhanced Level of Protection and 45% surface imperviousness (MOE, 2003)

Ballymore Pond with two inlets and an outlet is represented on Figure 3.5. Pond's crosssection is shown in Figure 3.5.
Inlet 1070

Outlet

Inlet 510

Fig. 3.5: Ballymore Construction Sedim ent Control Pond

The pond has a total storage volume of 6071 m^, which includes a permanent pool volume of approximately 2360 m^. The extended detention outflow is controlled by a 112 mm diameter orifice resulting in a 48 hour drawdown time (runoff from a 25 mm storm). Two

45

Reproduced with permission of the copvriaht owner. Further reproduction orohibited without permission.

orifice plates (444 mm and 515 mm diameters) situated within Ditch-Inlet-Catch-Basins (DlCBs), control the flow during 1:2 to 1:100 year storms. The outflow from the pond currently discharges into an open 42-m ditch south of Sunset Beach Road.

Lake W ilcox is the primary receiving water body from the outflow of the pond.

Located

within York Region, and the Oak Ridges Moraine, Lake W ilcox has been recognized as a valuable recreational and environmental resource (FCM 2000; Town o f Richmond Hill 2003). Lake W ilcox is a kettle lake, formed by the melting of a remnant block of glacial ice (Town of Richmond Hill 2003). The lake has a surface area of approxim ately 55.6 ha, with a watershed area extending over 260 ha within the moraine (Town of Richmond Hill 2003).

Unfortunately, Lake W ilcox has been exposed to various pollutants through the everincreasing anthropogenic activities undertaken within its watershed (Town of Richmond Hill 2003). This has resulted in an unhealthy aquatic ecosystem. According to the Town of Richmond Hill (2003), issues associated with the water quality include the buildup of phosphorus in the water column, a lack of oxygen in the bottom waters, too many nuisance plants in the water and too few fish of desirable species. Nutrients from

fertilizers, septic systems, and naturally occurring sources within the watershed have collected within the lake over tim e (Town of Richmond Hill, 2003). O ther issues include the lack of clarity in the water, altered shoreline, inadequate water balance creating the need to control the outlet via dam structure, and a shift in aquatic communities (Town of Richmond Hill, 2003).

46

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

o lL

c _

CL

C

g

1 ? U )
V)

2
C

Ü
(A

T3
CL

o

2 o E >, 75 m Û 3 m d>

47

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 4 METHODOLOGY

This chapter discusses a system of methods used in this research. The chapter is sectioned into the following parts: (i) monitoring, including rainfall and runoff monitoring, water quality sampling, and monitoring of construction activities and bottom sediments accumulation: (ii) monitored data analysis, including water quantity and quality analysis; (iii) the PCSWMM component with the description of RUNOFF and

STORAGE/TREATMENT blocks that are used, calibration techniques, and continuous simulation.

4.1

Monitoring

Assessment of Ballymore Pond facility performance was based on coordinated measurements of rain, runoff volumes and water quality at the inlet and outlet during fall 2002 (September-October) and spring / fall 2003 (May-November) period.

In cooperation with the Government of Canada's Great Lakes Sustainability Fund (GLSF), Town of Richmond Hill (RH), Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (TRCA), Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO), Ontario Ministry of Environment (MOE), National Water Research Institute (NWRI), Ryerson University has monitored a sediment control pond in the Town o f Richmond Hill since 2002. This monitoring program was

implemented to evaluate the pond's performance throughout the construction period and to help to determine what changes (if any) are necessary to Improve current design criteria. Monitoring was conducted by L. Pyatt from the beginning of the program with the help of the author from May 2003. L. Pyatt left the program on June 2003. The author continued monitoring until the end of the program in November 2003.

The primary objectives of the monitoring program were to collect water quantity and quality data representative of the construction sites draining into the local receiving waters and monitoring of water quantity and quality for all phases of construction which would provide relationship between construction phase, pollutant loads and removal efficiency of the pond.

49

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.1.1

Rainfall and Runoff

Rainfall data are necessary to estimate the amount of runoff generated during an event, which is then used to predict runoff volumes and predict responses to events of different magnitudes.

When monitoring, it has been recommended that rain gauges be placed at least every 2.5 to 5 square kilometers (Keefe et al., 1995). A tipping bucket rainfall gauge and data logger has been set up since 1996 on the roof of a municipal building near the construction site (within 1 square kilometer) and operated by TQI Thompson Flow Investigation on behalf of the Town of Richmond Hill. The hourly rainfall records have been received from 1996 to 2003.

Measured rainfall at a short time interval (i.e. 15 to 60 minutes) within the study area reassures the event start times for measured flow and level within the pond. A local rain gauge also gives cleaner hydrographs since the rainfall should reflect the intensity and duration of the event when plotted against level and flow measurements.

The collected raw rainfall data was processed for volume, duration, intensity and antecedent periods' values and used for runoff simulation

Runoff flow measurement is needed to calculate pollutant loads and design BMP's. Flow data was collected using a flow logger, and an area velocity sensor. The 4150 Flow Logger, manufactured by ISCO Inc., is capable of measuring the average velocity and pond water level, while calculating the flow rate of the flow stream (ISCO, 1993). The depth and velocity sensors are both contained within a single probe, which was installed at the invert of the sewer pipe. The data logger used FL0W LINK3, ISCO's flow-data management software fo r programming and calibration. Readings were retrieved using a laptop computer. The software facilitated to program and download data from the loggers. Downloaded data was converted to EXCEL spreadsheet for interpretation and analysis.

The Area Velocity Sensors (AV probes) were used at each inlet and outlet. Using technology based on the Doppler effect, the velocity sensor directly detects the average

50

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

velocity of a stream as the flow moves up or downstream (ISCO, 1993). In addition, the a/v probes contain a differential pressure transducer that senses the hydrostatic pressure produced by the w ater above the sensor (ISCO, 1997). The velocity sensors are programmed to trigger the ISCO 6712 samplers when there is an increase in level or flow. At the Richmond Hill study site, the a/v probes were programmed to trigger the samplers based on an increase in level. Description and location of measuring devices are given in Table 4.1.

Table 4.1: Installation location and description of measuring devices

Station King Rd. and Yonge St.

Description Tipping bucket rainfall gauge

Quantity 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

intersection Inlet-1070 (south-east side of the pond) Inlet -510 (north-west side of the pond) Outlet (north part of the pond) 4150 ISCO Flow Logger Area Velocity Sensor (AV probe) ISCO 6712 Water Quality Sampler 4150 ISCO Flow Logger Area Velocity Sensor (AV probe) ISCO 6712 Wa»' 4150 ISL Quality Sampler i'k.A, ' .ogger

Area Velocity . ;ens- ' (AV probe) ISCO 6712 W  .uality Sampler

With the concern for potential damage of the flow monitoring devices during the winter/early spring season, flow-monitoring devices were installed only for the late spring/summer/late fall season (August 2002 to November 2002 and May 2003 to November 2003).

All the devices being used for data collection were frequently inspected for any faults or problems. Current maintenance of installed equipment, such as cleaning the probes from debris was performed to make sure the flow readings were correct.

The automatic sampler is powered by a 12-volt deep cycle DC power source. Battery life depends on the type of battery used, the recording interval and how frequently the

51

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

automatic sampler triggering mechanism is initialized. One standard 12V DC battery provided the power for each logger and was adequate for the collection of at best one event.

4.1.2

W ater Quality

The ISCO 6712 portable samplers were selected for wet weather water quality analysis. These samplers have enough memory to store five sampling programs and sampling data that can be viewed through the sampler display (ISCO, 1997). The samplers were chosen based on their ability to collect individual samples over specified time intervals to account for the variability in constituent concentration throughout the course of any runoff event (ISCO, 1997). The samplers are equipped with 24 bottles that collect water samples for quality testing throughout the course of the event. For wet-weather events the samples were activated automatically (triggered by increases in water level) to capture the entire storm hydrograph. Samples were then flow-composited and analyzed to also measure event mean concentration (EMC).

Samples were submitted to the Ministry of Environment and Energy Lab in Toronto and analyzed following principles outlined in S ta n d a rd M e th o d s (Eaton e t a!., 1998) for metals, nutrients (P and N) and general chemistry. Particle size analysis of suspended solids was undertaken using an optical laser light diffraction method and results were reported by size class in percentage by weight. Appendix A summarizes the analytical procedures used in this study.

Some programming features are difficult to determine until several events have occurred and the data is reviewed. This period is commonly referred to as the `trial and error' period. For example, in this study, flow proportional sampling was requested. However, after an event, the pond experiences a slow drawdown time causing back flow to occur up the two inlet pipes. The back flows caused pooling and reverse flow measurements. Thus, the samplers were not able to collect water samples under these programming conditions.

As a result the samplers were set to trigger on an increase in level and programmed to collect every five minutes. This way the logged flow data (at five-minute intervals) and the samples could be calculated to reflect flow proportioning. The samplers were programmed

52

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

to collect 1 sample per bottle (24 bottles) at five-minute intervals, over a period of 120 minutes. Each bottle has a capacity of 1L. Discrete water samples were collected for each event and analyzed for Suspended Solids (SS). Portions from each discrete sample were extracted and mixed to form composite samples. Composite samples were analyzed as average concentrations for several parameters including metals, nutrients, and general chemistry.

Depending on site characteristics, a sampling program designed to collect time-weighted samples at five-minute intervals (120 minutes duration) should be monitored carefully. For example, if the storm duration is less than 120 minutes, baseflow may be collected in some of the 24 bottles, resulting in diluted composite samples. If the storm duration is longer than the 120 minutes, then the sampler will not be able to characterize the entire event. In this study runoff flow peaks were observed within the 120 minutes of sampling, enabling the analysis to be representative of the major moments in an event (i.e. just before the peak of the hydrograph, or the first flush). Therefore, during the spring (2003) sampling season, it was decided to alter the sampling program and change the sampling intervals from five minutes, to fifteen minutes. This change in time interval extended the sampling period from 120 minutes to 360 minutes, or 6 hours. Summary of collected data is included in Appendix B.

The summer of 2003 experienced frequent but short-duration rainfalls. This caused the sampler to trigger and start the collecting process. This short rain duration was enough to provide a collection of 3-4 bottles, and at other times no collection was experienced. When a heavy rainfall followed this condition there would be no collection due to the fact that the sampler was previously triggered and not reset before the event. Often times the monitoring staff was not aware of the earlier short rainfall. This occurrence would only be evident when the staff arrived to collect samples.

Flow data was collected from the inlets and the outlet on a continuous basis. Maintaining the equipment was very important. If any of the loggers malfunctioned, flow data would not be recorded, or if a sampler triggered earlier or did not trigger at all due to incorrect settings, there would be no samples collected from that station. For example, samples from the outlet during August 2003 were not collected due to the incorrect setting of a

53

Reproduced with permission of the copyrioht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

trigger mechanism. In July-August the pond level was too low to be influenced by rainfall. Because the triggering time was set too high, there no samples were collected.

4.1.3

Monitoring of Construction Activities

Performance monitoring at construction sites is not an easy task. A construction site is never the same from month to month, and each storm event creates an ever-changing series of channels and gullies that contribute to runoff and sediment at multiple points.

The housing construction phase was ongoing in Catchment-1070 at the time of monitoring period, thus the state of the lots and driveways was monitored to determine the area directly exposed to erosion. A checklist was developed that indicated the lot # and

whether the lot was exposed, or sodded and whether the driveways were gravel or paved. The drainage area serviced by Inlet 1070 was completely exposed for the majority of the fall 2002 and spring 2003 sampling period. These conditions were reflected in the samples collected.

Figure 4.1 demonstrates the difference in samples collected from each monitoring station.

54

Reoroduced with oermission of the coDvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Outlet

Figure 4.1: W ater quality samples of each monitoring station (Pyatt, 2003).

In addition, these conditions were also apparent when comparing the conditions of the roads in both areas. The roads within the Catchment-510 drainage area were clean. Figure 4.2 demonstrates the road conditions during the construction.

55

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 4.2; Road Conditions in Catchment-1070 during construction 2002 (Pyatt, 2003).

Figure 4.3 represents road conditions during summer 2003 period. Roads are cleaner but lots of debris and piles o f earth are still apparent beside lots under construction.

Figure 4.3: Road Conditions in Catchment-1070 during construction 2003.

56

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.1.4

Bottom Sedim ents Accum ulation Monitoring

A significant amount of sedim ents accumulates within the facility during the life-span of a construction sediment pond, which typically ranges between one to three years,

depending upon the size of developm ent area. The higher accum ulation rate attributed to the high soil erosion rates experienced at construction sites during rainfall events. Marsalek et al. (1997) identified that once the sedim ent accumulation within the facility reaches a threshold level, the perform ance of the pond will be affected. The factors that affect perform ance include: (i) reduced settling tim es resulting from reduced storage volume; (ii) potential erosion o f bottom deposits, and (iii) release of contaminants from the sediment into the overlying w ater column and their discharge from the pond into the receiving waters.

To

measure

bottom

sedim ent accum ulation

within

the

pond,

standard

surveying

techniques were used. A subm ersible surveying rod was constructed to meet the needs of this task. The rod was designed with a flat bottom with spikes to help anchor the rod to the bottom o f the pond. By exam ining the pond elevation drawings, thirteen points were selected, where elevation m easurem ents were taken. Stakes were driven into the pond bottom that extended above the pond's surface to m ark w here each of these points was selected. A t each stake, the rod was submersed and the elevation marked. This was later converted into absolute elevation levels. The difference between the pond's bottom elevation and the measured elevation using the rod was then calculated. In this study method was applied at the end of monitoring period in O ctober 2003. From these measurements, the total accum ulation of sediments was obtained.

It is im portant to note that this method of m easurem ent is regarded only as an approximation of bottom sedim ent accumulation. It is recognized that in using standard surveying techniques the elevation levels observed m ay be inaccurate, but can provide a general understanding of the rate of accumulation experienced in the pond. Therefore, it was verified from the modelling, which is discussed in a later section (Chapter 8).

57

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.2

ANALYSIS O F MONITORED DATA
W ater Quantity Data Analysis

4.2.1

Water quantity data obtained during the monitoring include the rainfall data and the data collected through the flow and level m easurem ent devices described in a previous section.

Rain data is presented in the form of h y e to g ra p h , which is a plot of rainfall depth versus time, in this study a hyetograph is plotted as a bar graph using an inverse y-scale (Fig. 4.4).

Rain falling on the watershed in quantities exceeding the soil and vegetation (interception and évapotranspiration) uptake becomes surface runoff (Viessman, 2002). Using other words, runoff occurs when excess precipitation moves across the land surface. The volume of runoff passing through a flow section is called discharge, or runoff rate, or flow rate (Akan, 2003).

The runoff reaches the inlet (or design point) from different parts of the catchment at different times and rates. Therefore, the discharge at the catchm ent inlet during and after a storm event varies with time. A plot of the discharge versus time is called a h y d ro g ra p h . Hydrograph provides information on peak flows,time distribution of flows, the total flow volume over a certain duration which is very im portant in pond sizing.

A runoff hydrograph is generally bell-shaped, although multipeaked hydrographs can result from variable rainfall rates. The general schematic of rainfall-runoff process is shown in Figure 4.4.

58

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oermission.

hvelouniDh

ru n o iï hydrograpli

I
u _

cc

(0

T im e

Fig. 4.4: Schematic of hyetograph and hydrograph.

Rainfall volume Is the sum of rainfall during a rainfall event, and the rainfall event is one separated by a period of no rainfall (inter-event dry period) (Wanielista, 1993). For some research, 4 hours is the minimum interevent time for storms to be considered independent (Wanielista, 1993). In this study the interevent time of 12 hours is used to separate the events to be used in later modelling.

The total influent/effluent volume is determined by summation over the given tim e intervals (5 or 15 minutes). It is calculated as:

(4.1)

where Q is a flow measured over finite time interval. At; T i represents the start of the runoff flow, and T 3 represents the end of the runoff flow.

Given the surface area of the catchment, flow data can be converted to a uniform depth of water over the catchm ent area.

The runoff coefficient for the catchment is the ratio of the runoff volum e (or depth) to the rainfall volume (or depth) over an event. The runoff coefficient is a measure of the ability of the catchment to transmit rainfall, rather than allowing it to percolate into the ground or return to the atmosphere through evaporation and transpiration. A high value of the runoff

59

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

coefficient Is indicative of a large percentage of impervious surfaces In the catchment. For construction sites, value of runoff coefficient provides an idea of the degree of runoff to be expected.

A storm water quality pond designed for a frequently occurring event should (i) detain the design runoff long enough to achieve the targeted level of treatment, and (ii) empty the design runoff soon enough to provide available storage fro the next event. Thus, the key design concepts for storm water quality ponds are the d e te n tio n tim e and the e m p ty in g
tim e (drawdown time) (Akan, A.O., 2003).

Pond influent and effluent hydrographs are used to find parameters such as detention time and drawdown time. The time difference between the centroids of inflow and outflow is defined as the h y d ra u iic d e te n tio n tim e, or the average time by which the bulk of fluid is held back or detained by the pond. It is a measure of the ability of the facility to reduce its im pacts on receiving waters.

Detention of 24 hours or more has been shown to remove 90% or m ore of the suspended solids (W anielista and Yousef, 1993). However, soluole and colloidal fractions may not be significantly removed.

For the design o f storm water quality control ponds, d ra w d o w n tim e (time to drain a full pond) of 24-40 hours is used (Papa, 1999). A t the sam e time it was pointed out that drawdown time often overestimates the actual detention time (Papa, 1999).

Sedim ent control ponds are designed with specific quantity control criteria including a m inimum of 24 hours detention time. The Ballymore pond was designed fo r a 48 hours detention time. Thus, it is important to determine if the Ballymore Pond is performing as it was designed.

4.2.2

Water Quality Data Analysis

The Laboratory Services at the MOE performed the analytical tests of water quality results. The param eters analyzed in this study are outlined in the Table 4.3. The

60

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

analytical procedures used by the MOE lab fo r each parameter measured are included in Appendix A.

U.S. ERA (1993) defines discrete and composite samples as follows;
D is c re te s a m p le : individual samples collected at specific times collected manually or

automatically, often combined to create a composite sample. C o m p o s ite s a m p le : samples combined based on a predeterm ined formula involving flow weighting, time interval, or other approach.

Of the water quality parameters listed in Table 4.2, SS was measured in the discrete samples collected at the site. The composite samples were analyzed for the remaining parameters. Once the samples are analyzed and results are received from the MOE

laboratory services, they were interpreted for analysis of the pond's performance.

61

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 4.2: Water Quality Analysis

Parameters Conductivity, pH, turbidity, particle size distribution, General Chemistry chemical oxygen demand (COD), alkalinity, total solids, suspended solids, dissolved solids, chloride Nutrients Ammonia+ammonium, nitrite, nitrate+nitrite, TKN Phosphate, total phosphorus Aluminum, Arsenic, Barium, Beryllium, Calcium, Metals Cadmium, Cobalt, Chromium, Copper, Iron, Magnesium, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Lead, Selenium, Strontium, Titanium, Vanadium, Zinc
P A H s: Naphthalene, 2-methylnapthalene, 1-

methyinapthalene, 2-chloronapthalene, Acenapthylene, Fluroene, Phenanthrene, Anthracene, Fluoranthene, Pyrene, Benzo(a)anthracene, Chrysene, Benzo(b)fluoranthene, Benzo(k)fluorL. .thene, Benzo(a)pyrene, Dibenzo(a,h)anthracene, Benzo(g,h,i)perylene, 1-chloronapthalene, Perylene, Organics Indole, 5-nitroacenapthene, Biphenyl

H e rb ic id e s a n d P e sticid e s: 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4,6,-

trichlorophenol, 2,4,5-trichlorophenol, 2,3,4trichlorophenol, 2,3,4,5-tetrachlorophenol, 2,3,4,6tetrachlorophenol, Pentachlorophenol, Silvex, Bromoxynil, Picloram, Dicambia, 2,4-D-propionic acid, 2,4-D, 2,4,5-T, 2,4-DB, Dinoseb, Diclofop-methyl

62

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.2.2.1 Discrete Data Analysis

Stormwater quality refers to the pollutants in the water. Runoff pollutant concentrations typically vary with time as a result of erosive forces (flow rate) and the duration of runoff events. Consequently, w ater quality data are often represented by pollutographs.

Pollutographs are measured by collecting discrete samles at uniform time intervals, and graphed as time-series data sets.

The primary quantative measure of a runoff quality is its co n ce n tra tio n . Concentration is defined as the mass of a constituent per unit volume of water and is mathematically represented as

r C=

y

.

(4.2)

where M is quantity(mass) of a constituent, V is volume of water.

Concentration units used in this study are mg/L. The mass load is estimated for a given volume V by M = C V . The load per unit time is evaluated by M=CQ, where Q is the volumetric discharge rate. Both pollutant concentration and pollution load (mass) are used to evaluate the effect of a constituent on a water body.

Even though concentrations often vary by several times of magnitude during a storm event, a single index known as event mean concentration (EMC) can be used to characterize runoff constituents (Sansalone and Buchberger, 1997; Charteneau and Barrett, 1998). The EMC is defined as total constituent mass M discharged during an event divided Mathematically, by total volume V of discharge during the event (Huber, 1993).

63

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

where C(t) is constituent concentration at time t and Q(t) is stormwater discharge at time t. The EMC is a flow-weighted average of constituent concentration. Total mass loading of a constituent during the storm is obtained by multiplying EMC by total volume of storm runoff.

Use of EMC is appropriate for evaluating effects of stormwater runoff on receiving waters. Receiving water bodies respond relatively slowly to storm inflows compare to the rate at which constituent change during a runoff event. Thus, it is total load or EMC that is important parameter.

The average event mean concentration (AEMC), that is the arithmetic mean of two or more individual storm runoff Event Mean Concentrations, is also used to characterize the quality of runoff.

4.2.2.2 Composite Data Analysis

The composite samples represent average concentrations, or total load, of each pollutant from all monitoring stations per event. Pollutants include metals, nutrients, and physical

and chemical properties such as chemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, alkalinity and etc.

The maximum and minimum average event mean concentrations are estimated and plotted in comparison with the PWQO to determine if any of constituents are exceeding the provincial guidelines.

Removal efficiency characterizes the performance of the pond during different stages of construction. Removal efficiencies for different pollutants are calculated using methods described in latter section.

Included in the water quality analysis of the composite data are the particle size distributions. The particle size distribution is significant as it describes the nature of

particles that are entering and exiting the pond. The average cumulative particle size distributions were plotted and the D50 and D1 0 values were calculated for this study. The value for D50 represents the median diameter. This size is assumed to characterize the

64

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

bulk of the distribution (Simons & Sentrk, 1992). The Dio value represents the size of sediments where 10% of the distribution is larger size fractions (Chorley et a!., 1984). Alternatively, everything smaller than the Diu values accounts for 10% of the distribution. This value holds significance because the proportion of fine material largely controls many of the dynamic properties of sediments (i.e. porosity, permeability, she 'ring resistance, etc.)

4.3

APPLICATION OF PCSWMM

Hydraulic and hydrologie conditions of the stormwater catchment's area and facility were modelled using the Stormwater Management Model (SWMM 4.3) developed for the EPA and run as the engine within the PCSWMMTM shell. The model simulates influent and effluent hydrographs and predicts sediment accumulation rates within the facility based on measured flow volumes, SS loads and rainfall recorded near the study site.

The model PCSWMM was selected fo r the following reasons: continuous water quantity and water quality simulation; accommodation of various hydraulic conveyance, storage and diversions elements with the drainage work; provision of storage/treatment capability; and popular support and acceptance of SWMM4 for continuous water quality and quantity modelling.

4.3.1

Runoff and Storage/Treatment Blocks

For this study 2 blocks of the program were used:
RUNOFF

This block generates surface runoff and pollutant loads in response to precipitation and surface pollutant accumulation. It also has a limited ability to route flows through pipes and gutters. Rainfall data is also executed within the RUNOFF block. The catchment was not subdivided, but was modeled as one lumped subcatchment. Construction catchment was modelled separately to investigate the behavior of catcment undergoing construction.

S T O R A G E /T R E A T M E N T (S /T )

Thio block is designed to route flow and pollutant loads through a storage/treatment facility. The user is given a great deal of flexibility by the block's ability to connect as many

65

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

as five storage/treatment units, which may be given storage characteristics or be modeled as a simple flow-through device. We use one storage and treatment facility unit.

The SWMM Storage-Treatment block provides a framework to simulate hydraulic storage and treatment of up to three different pollutants in as many as five interconnected storage/treatment units. Modelled pollutant simulated in this study included only

suspended solids. S/T was originally conceived to simulate the routing of flows and pollutants through a dry- or wet-weather storage unit or treatment plant, but it has been enhanced and is now general enough to wide application (Newman, et al., 2000). S/T may accept inputs for inflow and influent quality from any properly formatted source including output from the SWMM RAIN and RUNOFF blocks. In our case these flows and loads come from the RUNOFF block. Model output, which consists of either time series or summaries of discharged flows and pollutant concentrations, may be used as input for other SWMM blocks or may be re-processed for use with a host of other applications.

In addition to the inflow and concentration information provided in the RUNOFF interface files, the S/T block requires a number of other inputs to simulate pond performance. These inputs include a description of the physical and operational characteristics of the pond, options for either a completely mixed or a plug-flow regime, and information to describe the presumed decay rates of the pollutants to be modelled.

In this study, the SS treatment was simulated as the completely mixing reactor because of: (i) the construction pond permanent pool volume was large compared to the average event runoff volume, (ii) the high concentration of inflow SS, and (iii) mixing was facilitated by the presence of two inlets located opposite to each other. In this mode, the incoming sediments were instantly distributed uniformly throughout the facility resulting in uniform pollutant concentration throughout the facility. The removal efficiency was obtained as a function of the pollutant decay coefficient, which in conjunction with simulation time step, determines the decay rate. The analyses described herein utilized the first-order, exponential decay rates fo r pollutant removal. The S/T block was set-up as illustrated in the SWMM documentation (James, 2000) for the assignment of coefficients for Data Group G3 to analyze exponential decay in completely mixed systems.

66

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.3.2

Sensitivity Analysis and Model Calibration

Before modelling, it is advisable to understand tfie general behaviour of a water-quality model. One way to do it is called a s e n s itiv ity analysis.

According to James (2003) sensitivity analysis consists of varying model coefficients or parameters one at a time, with the amount varied being representative of the uncertainty in the parameter being analyzed. There is a variety of ways to implement such an analysis. Two of the most common are simple parameter perturbation and first-order sensitivity analysis. The parameter perturbation sensitivity analysis method is used in this study. As the name implies, p a ra m e ie r p e rtu rb a tio n consists of varying each of the model parameters (for example raised and lowered a fixed percent) while holding all other terms constant (Chapra, 1997).

Calibration follows sensitivity analysis. W. James (2003) defines calibration as a "procedure to discover the global optimum of an array of modelling parameters that can only be discovered with estimation and are not directly measurable in the field". Calibration of a catchment modelling system requires that the control parameters (input data) be determined so that the results of process model and input information mimic the real response of the catchment. Since surface runoff varies with the catchment characteristics, calibration of a catchment modelling system usually requires adjustment of the model control parameters to minimize prediction errors.

According to Choi and Ball (2002), there are two categories of the control parameters: (i) measured parameters (parameters that are physically measured, such as pipe diameters, catchment areas, rainfall depth or rainfall intensity, etc; and (ii) inferred parameters (parameters that are not measured and are determined from the application of a model: depression storage, M anning's roughness, imperviousness, etc.). In general, the values of inferred parameters are considered those that need to be adjusted during calibration, while measured parameters are assumed error free during the calibration. Inferred control parameters in this study are determined by "trial and error" method whereby the values of the input parameters are modified in a systematic manner until the simulated and monitored hydrographs and pollutographs are similar.

67

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 4.5 depicts how the model was calibrated.

C A T C H M E N T IN F O R M A T IO N

T

M o d e le r I n te r p r e ta t io n M o d e le r I n te r p r e ta t io n

IN P U T IN F O R M A T IO N T O C A T C H M E N T M O D E L IN G S Y S T E M " ^

S IM U L A T IO N

AD JUST IN P U T IN F O R M A T IO N

O UTPUT \ S IM IL A R TO RECORDED D A TA

\

A P P L IC A T IO N ,

V
STO P

Fig. 4.5: A flow chart depicting the calibration process of each model data (Source: Choi and Bail, 2002).

Choosing values for input parameters is called parameter estimation (James, 2003). Uncertainty for input parameters should be estimated before calibration. All input parameters can be divided into 5 groups (groups B, 1 ,2 , 3 and 4) according to their level of uncertainty (from James, 2003):

68

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

B .B in ary: Input that acts like switches, or run control input parameters that may be either

completely correct )in the sense that the datafile runs correctly) or completely incorrect (the datafile crashes or does not run successfully).

P a ra m e te rs th at c a n be m e a s u re d w ith a lm o s t to ta l c e rta in ty (catchment areas, pipe

diameter, and other conduit geometries, conduit slopes and elevations, storage areas and other). These are not good candidates for calibration.

2 .P a ra m e te rs tha t c a n be e s tim a te d w ith a high d e g re e o f c e rta in ty in th e field, d e s ig n o ffice o r la b o ra to ry {% imperviousness, Manning's n for pipes, particle size distributions,

temperature, flow, concentrations and others). These can and should be modified within narrow limits during calibration.
3 .P a ra m e te rs th a t c a n n o t be e a s ily m e a s u re d in th e fie ld o r la b o ra to ry like infiltration rates,

rainfall, pollutant build-up, pollutant wash-off, and many others. These are good candidates for calibration.
4 .P a ra m e te rs th a t c a n n o t be m e a s u re d w ith a n y c e rta in ty a t all, such as mean ground

slope in some situations, catchment widths, and several others.

For these categories, uncertainty varies in broad ranges; B.uncertainty is either null or complete, 1.uncertainty is small, a few percentage points, perhaps 5-10%, 2. perhaps 10-25%, 3.perhaps 25-50%, and 4.who knows? If any estimate can be made at all, perhaps assume 50-100% as a starting point.

Tables o f uncertainty classes for SWMM4 are listed in book of W .James "Rules for responsible modeling". Details are given in Chapter 7.

69

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.3.3

Continuous Simulation

In order to assess the Ballymore Pond performance and estimate the sediment load generation from construction watersheds with active housing construction condition, a long-term simulation model was developed. The long-term simulation was conducted using Toronto Buttonville Airport rainfall record. All input parameters subject to calibration procedure were averaged.

4.4 Assessment of Pond Performance

To assess the pond performance two sets of runoff quality data were used: (i) field data and (ii) data obtained as modelling results. were obtained. Thus, two sets of removal efficiency values

A fter quantity calibration, that is, matching modelled and observed combined inflow and outflows, the water quality calibration was conducted for each of the events. In this case, the observed SS load was compared for the simulated load fo r the sampling period during the event. If the runoff event duration is smaller than sampling period then the complete calibration fo r the event was obtained, otherwise a partial calibration was obtained.

The SS load based removal efficiency is defined as follows;

[(KxEM C ,)-(K x fM C j]
(F .x E M C )

x lO O % ,

(4.4)

where V, is inflow volume, EMC, is inflow concentration, V q is outflow volum e and EMCo is outflow concentration and RE is removal efficiency.

70

Reproduced v/ith permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 5

WATER QUANTITY ANALYSIS

In this section the results o f water quantity analysis from the observed data are presented. Due to the unavailable data required for rainfall and flow, not all sample events were included in this analysis.

5.1 Rainfall-Runoff

Rainfall during the storm events in studied region ranged from approxim ately 7 mm to 38 mm. More detailed information about each storm event can be found in Table 5.1 and Appendix C. An inter-event time of 12 hours was selected to identify the individual events.

The rainfall events are classified based on the event volume; (i) large storms - greater than 20 mm, (ii) medium storm s - between 10 mm to 20 mm, and small storms --less than 10 mm. During the monitoring period, two sm all size storm s, eleven medium storms and six large storms were recorded.

71

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 5.1; Rainfall event chancteristics. Total Rainfall (mm) 28.8 13.3 18.4 10.0 13^ 9.4 6.8 17.4 17^ 10.8 13.8 23^ 15.2 14 15.0 38.0 25 30.7 32.2 Rainfall Duration (hr) 8.4 5.3 8.9 13.8 23.5 6.3 9.5 14.5 13JB 4.5 17.0 21^ 11.6 5.8 9.8 23^ 8.5 19.0 49.3 Average Intensity (mm/hr) 3.5 2.6 2.1 0.7 0.6 1.5 0.7 1.2 1.2 2.2 0.8 1.1 1.3 2.2 1.5 1.6 2.8 1.6 0.7 Maximum Intensity (mm/hr) 47.5 72.5 7.5 17.5 5 5 2.4 6.4 11.2 8.8 5.6 19J2 7.2 13^ 12^ 10.4 8.8 14.4 5.6 Inter-Event Period (days) 23.3 0.5 4.5 5 0.5 1.9 0.6 3.4 4.8 3.5 3.5 3.4 0.5 2.0 0.7 2.4 2.2 10.6 2.6

Event 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 15 16 17 18 19 21

Event Date 14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 2-Oct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 2-May-03 5-May-G3 11-May-03 20-May-03 4 -Jun-03 8-Jun-03 13-Jun-03 11-Aug-03 15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 22-Sep-03 14-Oct-03 2-Nov-03

5.2 Runoff Coefficient

The volum etric runoff coefficient was determined by dividing the total runoff volume by the total rainfall volume for each event monitored, that is, the fraction o f rainfall volume that was converted to immediate stormwater runoff during an event. Table 5.2 presents the volumetric runoff coefficient values for the construction Catchment -1070.

72

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 5.2: Rainfall-runoff coefficient.
Total R ainfall (mm) 28.8 13.3 18.4 10.0 13.0 9.4 6.8 17.4 17.8 10.8 13u8 23^ 15.2 14 15.0 38uO 25 30.7 32.2 O bserved R u n o ff (mm) 6.8 1.7 6.9 2.2 3.0 3.0 2.9 7.0 5.1 2.9 5.3 15.9 6.9 4.9 6.0 25.3 17.3 23 2 19.2 R u n o ff C o e ffic ie n t 0.24 0.13 0.38 0.22 0.23 0.32 0.43 0.40 0.29 0.27 0.38 0.67 0.45 0.35 0.40 0.67 0.69 0.76 0.60

E vent Date 14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 2-Oct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 2-May-03 5-May-03 11-May-03 20-May-03 4-Jun-03 8-Jun-03 13-Jun-03 11-Aug-03 15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 22-Sep-03 14-Oct-Q3 2-NOV-03

The volumetric runoff coefficients calculated for the events varied between each of the events. The broad range extends from 0.13 to 0.76. It may be noted that the runoff coefficient gradually increases from the fall 2002 to fall 2003, as per construction activities on Catchment-1070. Figure 5.1 presents the rainfall -ru n o ff relationship in the watershed. The figure shows that surface runoff volume increases with the rainfall volume. It was estimated that on average, storms over 20 mm produced in average 60% o f runoff, storms between 10 and 20 mm and less than 10mm produced 38% and 37% runoff,

consequently.

73

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4 0
35

30

ë ":
E î t 20 o c

a:

Z 5

15

= 0.72
10
:

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Rainfall (mm)

Fig. 5.1; Rainfall-runoff relationship. On average, 25%, 41% and 58% of rainfall appeared as surface runoff during storm events over the three monitoring periods (Fall 2002, May-July 2003 and August-Novem ber 2CJ3).

There are m any factors that may explain the variability in runoff coefficients among the events. One of the main factors that can influence the rate of runoff during an event is the am ount of depression storage and infiltration activity over the catchm ent area. Because construction sites incur several changes on the catchm ent's landscape, the amount of depression storage and the rate of infiltration can be altered continuously. Thus, for each event the runoff coefficients were influenced by the state of the site's condition. The inter event times and antecedent moisture conditions can also influence the runoff coefficient values. For this study it is noted that for the inter-event period less than 1 day, average runoff volume was found to be 29% of total rainfall volume; for the inter-event period from 1 to 2 days runoff volum e increased to 34%; and fo r the period more than 2 dry days average runoff volume was 41%.

74

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

5.3

Peak Flow Attenuation

One of the functions o f stormwater control ponds is to attenuate peak flow rates (Whipple, 1979; V\lu at a!., 1996; Fennessey et a!., 2001). Table 5.3 shows the volumes and peak discharges fo r the various storms monitored over the study period. Flow mass balance between the inflow and the outflow is also presented.

75

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 5.3: Peak attenuation and flow mass balance summary.

Inflow Date Peak Flow (I/s) V olum e (m ) 321 1090.6 120.4 433.1 144.9 1413.1 99.4 4915 57.9 62& 8 48.9 706.6 219 522^ 151.4 1306 100.1 1152 94.7 8418 4& 5 768 385J 2872L3 136.5 967/7 243.1 3932.2 85.3 2949.1

O u tflo w Peak Flow (1/s) V olum e (m ) 12.6 1044.5 8.6 422.4 1& 3 1505/2 72.4 337^ 10.4 614.4 7.4 73T3 8.4 506.9 16.8 1244.2 16.6 1090.1 17.9 783.4 10.6 721.9 54.1 4024.3 14.4 9523 16.3 1858/3 7.5 1643.5

D ifference Peak Flow V olum e -96% -4% -93^0 -3% -89%& 6% -2796 -45% -82% -2% -8596 4% -66% -3% -89% -5% -83% -6% -81% -8% -79% -6% -86% 29% -89% -2% -93% -112% -91% -79%

14-Sept-02 20-Sept-02 27-Sept-02 2-Oct-02 19"Oct-02 25-Oct-02 2-May-03 5" May"03 11-May-03 2Q-May-03 4-Jun-03 8-Jun-03 15-Sep-Q3 19-Sep-03 2-NOV-03

1

A sample rainfall and observed hydrographs at both the inlets and hydrograph at the outlet are presented in the Figure 5.2 (a-d).

76

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

B ally m o re Pond S e p te m b e r 14, 2002 R a in = 2 8 .8 m m

250

0 5

200

in ? O
u _

150

Inlet 1070
- Inlet 5 10 -- O u tle t

100

£ c < 5 0 4
2.5

E

50
3.5

9/14/02
21:00

9/15/02 2:25

9/15/02 7:50

9/15/02 13:15

9/15/02 18:40

9/16/02 0:05

9/16/02 5:30

9/16/02 10:55

D a t e /T im e

B a lly m o r e P o n d O c t o b e r 2, 2 0 0 2 R a in = 1 0 m m

F"
0.2

0.4
0.6
- Inlet 510 - Outlet

E

E

a.

re

20

10/ 2/02

10/ 2/02

16:00

19:45

10/2/02 10/3/02 3:1510/3/02 7:00 10/3/02 10:45 23:30
D a te /T im e

10/3/02 14:30

10/3/02 18:15

b)

77

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

B a lly m o r e P o n d M a y 5, 2 0 0 3 R a in = 1 7 .4 m m

120

0.2 100
0.4 80 Ram |mm )

· - Inlel 610
O utlet

&
c

a:
40

20

5/ 5/03 14 00

5/ 6/03 10:00

5/ 7/03 6:00

5/ 8/03 2:00

5/8103 2 2:0 0

5/ 9/03 18:00

D a te /T im e

B a lly m o r e P o n d S e p te m b e r 15, 2003 R a in = 1 5 m m
120

100

0.5

80
Rain ·Inlet 1 070

I

- In le t 510 -- O utlet

U .

a:
2.5

20

3.5 9 / 1 5 /0 3 11:00 9 / 15/03 2 3 :3 0 9 / 1 6/0 3 12:00 9 / 1 7 /0 3 0:30 9 / 1 7 /0 3 13:00

D a te /T im e

d)

Fig. 5.2 (a-d): Samples observed hydrographs at the inlets and the outlet.

78

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Outflow hydrographs from the pond show that SWM facility significantly shaved the peak flow rates of the inlet hydrograph during storm events. The maximum peak discharge for the inflow is found to be 385.7 I/s while the maximum peak discharge for the outflow is only 72.4 I/s. An average difference between inflow and outflow peak values is 82%. The outflow volume of 17963.5 m^ is 12% less than inflow volume of 20078.6 m^. Analyzing the event inflow-outflow balance; some minor losses

m ay have occurred through evapo-transpiration and infiltration. The primary losses (events of Oct. 2, 2002 and June 8, Sept. 19 and Nov 2, 2003) would be attributed to flow monitoring error.

5.4

Hydraulic Detention Times and Drawdown Times

As mentioned in Chapter 4, the hydraulic detention time is defined as the time difference between inlet and outlet hydrograph centroids, which provides a measure of detention of inlet hydrograph within the facility during the storm event. Detention time is a function of the water volume in the pond and the outflow rate. Typically longer detention times are required for greater pollution removal efficiencies. It is suggested that a detention time of 24 hr or more can achieve a 90% or more removal efficiency of suspended solids (Wanieiista & Youseff, 1993). However, according to the same authors, a study using

model detention ponds concluded that a minimum detention time of at least 72 hr is needed to remove more than 95% of the suspended solids and 30% to 70% of nutrients and metals. The latter pollutants are typically found in dissolved form. This finding

creates doubt for the current design criteria that requires a 24 hr detention time, or a 48 hr detention time that is commonly used in practice (Sabourin, Kimble & Associates Ltd., 2000).

The average hydraulic detention time was found to be 12 hours. This is low in comparison to the expected drawdown time of 48 hours intended by the design of the pond.

The drawdown time for each of the events was estimated by determining the time delay between the maximum water elevation reached during the event runoff to that of minimum elevation (i.e., passing of the storage volume) at the end of the event. The drawdown time

79

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

is

d e f in e d

as the time from maximum to minimum active storage volume. Drawdown will

vary depending on the active storage volume captured during the event.

Tac'e .14 represents the estimated hydraulic detention and drawdown times from the observed inflow and outflows for the Ballymore pond. In this case, the inlet hydrograph to the pond constitutes the combined hydrographs from Catchment- 510 and Catchment 1070.

An average drawdown time of 46.0 hours was calculated. For some events the estimated drawdown time was very high because of a large storm size, large flow duration, longer duration of the storm and, probably, some contribution from the baseflow. The estimated average drawdown favorably matches with the designed drawdown of 48 hours. Higher drawdown times than designed occur due to prolonged inflow after the end of the storm events (hydrograph recession).

Figure 5.3 represents the sample drawdown time estimation. The combined inlet hydrographs to the pond and pond outflow hydrographs were used for the drawdown time calculation.

80

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 5.4: Hydraulic detention and drawdown times.

Event Date 14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 2-Oct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 2-May-03 5-May-03 11-May-03 20-May-03 4-Jun-03 8-Jun-03 13-Jun-03 15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 14-Oct-03 2-NOV-03 Average

Hydraulic Detention Time (hr) 11.4 10.1 13/4 8.1 9.9 15.4 7.8 19.9 5.7 16.6 10.6 14/4 11.3 9.8 15.3 19.7 39.5 11

Drawdown Time (hr) 25^ 51.5 107.8 36.5 39.0 94.3 24.3 27.3 29 16.0 14.5 2Ta 9.0 86.5 101.0 N/A N/A 46

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

33

O
CL C

C D

o

CL

§ "D
C D

0.160

T 900 j

"D

O O
3 "

CD

Drawdown Time = 1575 minutes (27.25 hours)

0.140

3- 800 -- 700 -- 600

(Q `

0.120
C D "T1
C

I
"D CL C

i

O

O
"D

Runoff Inflow (m3/s) Pond Outflow (m3/s) Storage Volume (m3'
oo

-- 300
200 100

O
3"

N

0.040
- -

g;

m
CL

0.020

3*
o ~o
C D

0.000

0

40 0

800

1200

1600

2000

2400

2800

3200

Time, Minute;

oe oe
o'
3

Fig. 5,3: Drawdown time estimation for May

2003 event.

CHAPTER 6

WATER QUALITY ANALYSIS

in this section the results of water quality analysis are presented. Similar to water quantity analysis, water quality analysis is conducted for the events for which complete inflow and outflow information were available. The water quality analysis includes results from both discrete and composite samples.

6.1 Discrete Analysis

Discrete

samples were analyzed for suspended solids.

For each of the events

pollutographs were developed.

6.1.1

Suspended Solids

Suspended solids concentration is a critical parameter in stormwater because many stormwater contaminants are strongly associated with suspended solids (Schueler and Holland, 2000). Therefore, suspended solids concentrations are often used to gauge the general level of water quality improvement in storm water facilities. As mentioned in Chapter 1, elevated 8 8 concentrations can also adversely affect stream benthos, primary photosynthetic productivity, and fish habitat.

Discrete samples were collected using two different time intervals. As discussed earlier, for the 2002 fall season, 24 bottles were collected every 5 minutes fo r the first 2 hours of an event. Subsequent to the analysis of the fall events, it was determined the sampling period could be extended to collect every 15 minutes for the first 6 hours of the event. This was to broaden the representation of the pollutant load for an event through w ater quality samples. From the samples, pollutographs were generated for suspended solids. Table 6.1 represents the summary of observed 8 8 event mean concentrations during the sample period and maximum concentrations during the event at the inlets and the outlet of the Ballymore Pond.

83

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

"D O
Q. C

C D

J3

o

C D Q.

T3

C D

ZT
C D "D

Table 6.1; Concentrations from inlets and outlet of Ballymore Pond.

O O
Event D a te S a m p le P e r io d (h r) 14-S8P-02 20-Sep-D2 27-Sep-02 2-O ct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 2-Mav-03 5-May-03 11-Mav-03 20-M ay-03 4-Jun-03 8-Jun-03 13-Jun-03 2-Auq-03 11-Auq-03 26-Auq-03 15-Sep-03 22-Sep-03 14-Oct-03 25-Oct-03 2 -Nov-03 12-NOV-03 19-Sep-03 A veraq e (w hole A verage 28.8 13.3 18.4 10 13 9.4 6.8 17.4 17.8 10.8 13.8 23.B 14 NA 14 20.4 9.8 25 30.7 8.2 32.2 NA 38 F a ll 2002 M ay-July 2003 August
Novem ber

c5`

zr
C D

R a in fa ll (m m )

2 3
c

"n

27
C D C D T3

2 hr

O Q. C a O
23

O g OE
C D o_

OO

o
C2

X3 C D

C O
CO

o'
23

6 hr 12 hr period)

C o n s tr u c t io n W a t e r s h e d In le t 1070 SS a v e ra g e M a x . SS C oncentration C oncentration (m g/L) (m g/L)* 20100 8766 16551 34000 12200 6004 9935 19100 3800 1150 40700 13801 979 412 1040 2350 2266 6110 1448 4100 1499 3380 5030 8560 NA NA 591 3400 1050 4190 NA NA 3030 687 238 538 806 2910 2800 385 533 366 NA NA 1100 367 3620 9368 1949

S ta b le W a te r s h e d In le t 5 1 0 SS a v e ra g e M ax. SS C oncentration Concentration (m g/L)* (m g/L) 297 450 36 13 143 429 2190 006 385 151 188 92 49 22 53 214 NA NA 83 252 258 327 NA NA 1320 136 28 39 160 55 120 58 47 100 46 46 36 163 NA NA 92 36 427 173 47 47 129 250 110

O u tf lo w fro m t h e P o n d SS average Concentration (m g/L) 277 27 75 7 29 17 30 36 224 100 49 NR 82 NA NA NA 121 28 205 N.A 88 670 93 120 72 87 M ax. SS Concentration (mg/L)* 415 59 189 10 67 62 52 60 470 192 202 NR 144 NA NA NA 213 46 325 NA 197 856 259

2003

561

58

201

NA=Data is not Available; NR=Data is not Reliable

The estim ated average SS EMC from the Catchm ent-1070 during the sampling period was 3620 mg/L, within a range of 238 to 16550 mg/L. This is com parable to the average inflow value of 4498 mg/L from construction catchm ents described in `Literature Review' (Chapter 4). The maximum instantaneous 8 8 concentration recorded in this study was 40700 mg/L in October 25, 2002. The estimated average 8 8 EM 7 from stable Catchment510 during the sampling period was 129 mg/L within a range of 13 to 806 mg/L. Maximum concentration of suspended solids of 2190 m g/L was m easured on October 2, 2002. Average outflow 8 8 event mean concentration was determined as 120 m g/L within a range of 7 to 670 mg/L. The highest 8 8 concentration o f 856 m g/L was recorded at the end of the study period, on Novem ber 12, 2003.

The first phase of monitoring, which was Fall 2002, is characterized with quite high average 8 8 concentrations for the inflows. The average event mean concentration (AEMC) concentration of 8 8 during Fall 2002 period for the construction catchment, stable catchm ent and the outlet were: 9368 mg/L, 250 mg/L, and 72 mg/L, respectively.

During m onitoring of phase II for the period of May to July 2003, it was observed that 8 8 AEMC decreased for the construction catchm ent to 1949 m g/L and fo r the stable catchm ent to 110 mg/L w hile increased for the outlet up to 87 mg/L.

A further decrease in 8 8 concentration for inflows was observed during the third phase of monitoring (August-Novem ber 2003). Average 8 8 EMC's o f 561 m g/L and 58 mg/L were recorded for construction catchm ent and stable catchments, respectively. However, the outlet exhibited an average increase in outflow of up to 201 mg/L.

The average observed SS EMC fo r the outlet was gradually increasing during the monitoring period, starting at 72 m g/L for the fall 2002 (2-hours sampling tim e) and going up to 201 mg/L by Novem ber 2003. This concentration is best explained by the fact that at the end o f the study period the pond w as established for well over a year. So, obviously its 8 8 content was higher com pared to the beginning. Most o f the suspended particles that didn't settle were very fine. They are of particular interest because these fine particles were pushed first to enter the outlet by the incoming runoff and w ere collected within the first hours of sampling.

85

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Examples of pollutographs for three events (each one represents a different phase of monitoring) during the study period w ere generated from observed data and are presented in Figure 6.1(a-c).

86

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Suspended Solids Concentrations for October 2, 2002
100000

10000

O )
E
c o c 0 ) o c o
1000

S S In le t 1 0 7 0

100
"

- S S In le t 5 1 0 O u tle t

o w

C O

10

1

1 2 3 4

5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Bottle #

Suspended Solids Concentrations fo r May 20, 2003
10000

1000

O )
E

c

o

I < u

100

S S In le t 1 0 7 0

Outlet

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Bottle #

(a), (b)

87

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Suspended Solids C oncentrations for S eptem b er 22, 2003

1000

2 c 0 ) c o o
Ü

10
r _ . -

CO CO

SS Inlel 1070 -· S S Intel 5 10 Gull el

1 2

3 4 5 6

7 8 9 10 1 1 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Bottle #

(c)

Fig. 6.1 (a-c): Suspended solids concentrations.

The average 8 8 EMC from Inlet 1070 on O ctober 2"'* reached alm ost 10,000 mg/L, while Inlet 510 showed an average of 806 mg/L in the first two hours of the event. At the same time the outlet produced a significantly reduced concentration of exiting the pond suspended solids (7 mg/L). Although both events received sim ilar rainfall volumes

(approximately 10mm), the outlet 8 8 concentration was significantly higher for May 20*^ (100 mg/L) compared to October 2"'* event (7 mg/L) . This shows the variation of 8 8 effluent concentration between the events.

8 8 concentrations in Fall 2002 were obtained during 2 hours of sampling. It is possible that a limiting sampling tim e alters results. Actual average inflow concentration would likely be low er if the sampling time was lengthened.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

It was observed that the average SS EMC for construction catchment decreased by 79% from phase 1 to phase II and by 72% from phase II to phase III, resulting in an average decrease by 94% from phase I to phase III. At the same time a 77% decrease in concentration was observed for the stable catchment (C-510).

Figure 6.2 shows the change in concentration of suspended solids during the study period.

O b s e rv e d A v e ra g e S S C o n c e n tra tio n s F o r th e C o n s tru c tio n C a tc m e n t, S tab le C a tc h m e n t an d th e O u tlet

100000
SS Average EMC

for the Construction Catchmdn

10000
C

o
1000

2 c a > u c o o to
CO

S3 Average EMC for the Stable Catchmeh

100-

f--

SS Average EMC for the Cutlet

F a ll 20 02

M a y - Ju ly 2 0 0 3

A u g u s t- N o v e m b e r 2003

Fig. 6.2: Observed average EMC of SS.

On May 20th, Inlet 1070 average suspended solid concentrations decreased down to half o f that experienced on uctober 2nd (approximately to 5000 mg/L). This m ay be attributed to the progression in construction activities where additional lots were sodded during the spring sampling period. However, the outlet experienced higher suspended solids

concentrations exiting the pond, indicating that by the end of Summ er 2003 concentration o f suspended solids of 58 mg/L observed in the inflow from Catchment -510 at the end of study period (August-November 2003). It can be explained that although catchm ent 510 is stable it is still a newly-developed area, which was undergoing personal home

construction, such as fences, gardening, patios etc., during first two monitoring phases (Fall 2002-Summer 2003).

89

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 6.2 represents the estimated inlet and outlet SS load and instantaneous removal efficiencies for the monitored events. The average instantaneous removal efficiency of SS for the observed events was estimated as 94%. The removal efficiency based on the estimation of loads for the entire event is presented in the later section.

90

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 6.2; Observed SS loads from inlets and outlet and removal efficiency.

SS Load (kg) Event Date Rainfall (mm) Construction Catchment (Inlet 1070) 1307 414 953 1717 74 2190 88 266 1205 557 318 NA 265 609 NA 433 387 832 124 118 NA 745 12602 Stable Catchment (Inlet 510) 10 1 42 499 11 13 3 5 NA 32 5 46 3.1 13.4 7.8 7 NA 10 NA 4.6 29.5 1.5 744

S 3 Load from Outlet 12.7 1.5 3.6 0.5 2 0.5 2.5 4.3 596.3 20L4 1.7 14 NA NA NA 31 6.2 26 NA 11 70.7 22.1 829

Load based Removal Efficiency 99% 100% 100% 100% 98% 100% 97% 98% NA 97% 99% NA NA NA NA 93% NA 97% NA 91% NA 97% 94%

14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 2-Oct-02 19-Oct-G2 25-Oct-02 2-May-03 5-May-03 11-May-03 20-May-03 4-Jun-03 13-Jun-03 2-Aug-03 11-Aug-03 26-Aug-03 15-Sep-03 22-Sep-03 14-Oct-03 25-Oct-03 2-NOV-03 12-Nov-03 19-Sep-03 Average Total

28.8 13.3 18.4 10 13 9.4 6.8 17.4 17.8 10.8 12L8 14 NA 14 20.4 9.8 25 30/7 8.2 32 2 NA 38

According to the load-based removal efficiencies (LE) shown in Table 6.2, the pond is performing very well. These removal efficiencies values are higher than results obtained from other studies, such as; 78% of removal efficiency in Colorado pond, 93% and 67% in North Carolina and 93% in stormwater Ponds in Central Texas (Schueler and Holland, 2002), 86% removal efficiency in the Canadian Heritage Park' Pond Report, 2002), 78% - Canadian Harding Park W et ED Pond (TRCA, 1996). (MOB SWAMP

However, percentage removal efficiencies are not necessarily the most reliable method for determining the pond's performance. Ultimately, the determining factor is the outflow

91

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

concentrations. The EMC values presented in Table 6.1 are suggesting that the pond is
unable to reduce s u s p e n d e d solids c o n ce n tra tio n s to safe levels u n d e r certain conditions.

6.2

C o m p o site A n alysis

The composite samples are a mixture of each discrete sample.

For example, of the 24

bottles collected, a portion from each was extracted into one composite bottle. This composite bottle was then divided into several bottles for the analysis of water quality parameters outlined in Table 4.3. It should be noted that all samples analyzed for PAHs, herbicides and pesticides produced a "NMR" ("no measurable response") according to the MOE laboratory services. Because these parameters were not detected in large enough quantities in the samples, these results are not included.

The composite water quality data was also partitioned into 3 periods, or phases, as construction progressed; Fall 2002, May-July 2003, and August-November 2003.

Summary water quality tables for each of the events for the inflow and outflow are presented in Appendix F.

Fall 2002 results show that during that time the pond was able to significantly reduce the mass load of pollutants entering the facility. For the Fall 2002 season, the average removal efficiency for the various contaminants monitored ranged from -180% to 97.5%. The highest removal efficiency achieved was for suspended solids (97.5%), followed by the total phosphorus (93.7%) and total solids (91.3%). Negative value of -180% is obtained for cadmium.

The average removal efficiency of the pond in May-July 2003 period ranged from -92.2% to 86.7%. The highest removal efficiency observed during this period was als' r SS

(86.7%), followed by total phosphorus (85.1%) and COD (80.3%). Beryllium exhibited the maximum negative removal efficiency o f -92.2% .

The third sampling period of August-November 2003 Is characterized by a noticeable decrease in the average removal efficiencies, practically for all parameters. Suspended solids and total phosphorus experience the higher removal efficiencies (72.4 and 70.2%)

92

Reproduced with pei,

',on of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

compare to the metals. Table 6.3 and Figures 6.3-6.5 represent the average removal efficiencies for different parameters throughout the study period.

Table 6.3: Total performance of the Ballymore Pond throughout the study period. Performance (%) MayA u gustJuly November 2003 2003 80.3 61.4 86.7 72.4 -8.5 3.9 51.2 53.3 85.1 70.2 58.0 46.6 67.6 41.9 59.0 39.2 -92.2 -52.2 62.4 46.4 -71.5 95.3 118.7 11.7 37.6 46.9 -135.4 29.3 41.2 30.8 18.8 21.3 72.5 58.1 52.9 35.0 55.3 -203.1 30.9 13.9 4.1 18.9 51.1 24.8 56.6 73.8

Param eter Chemical Oxygen Demand Suspended Solids Dissolved Solids Total Solids Total Phosphorus TKN Aluminum Barium Beryllium Calcium Cadmium Cobalt Chromium Copper Iron Magnesium Manganese Nickel Lead Strontium Titanium Vanadium Zinc

Fall 2002 55.1 97.5 5.3 91.3 93.7 76.2 1.7 80.5 -17.5 80.4 -180.1 37.4 5.7 26.4 -6.2 47.0 81.3 14.0 31.0 57.4 -143.8 -47.0 22.8

W hole Study Period 65.6 85.5 0.2 65.3 83.0 60.3 37.1 59.6 -54.0 63.1 -52.1 55.9 30.1 -26.5 21.9 29.0 70.7 34.0 -38.9 34.1 -40.3 9.7 51.1

93

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Suspended Solids Molybdenum Total Phosphorous Total Solids Calcium Barium Manganese TKN Strontium COD Magnesium Copper
Beryllium

Dissolved Solids Lead Chromium Nickel Cobalt Vanadium
Aluminum

Zinc Iron Titanium Cadmium
-100
-5 0 0 50

100

Total Performance (%)

Fig. 6.3; Total load -based removal efficiencies for the Fall 2002 period.

Cobalt Susp.Solids Total Phosphorous COD : Zinc Manganese Aluminum Calcium Barium I TKN Pb Ni Total Solids Vanadium Iron Chromium Strontiurn Titanium j Copper I Magnesium Dissolved Solids · Cadmium :
Her IIliu m
" ' -ir '. .r

-100

-5 0

0

50

100

Total Performance (%)

Fig. 6.4: Total load -b ased removal efficiencies for the M ay-July 2003 period.

94

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Cadmium Suspended Solids Demand Manganese Zinc Total Solids Cliromlum TKN 1 Calcium Aluminum Barium Nickel Iron Vanadium ' Magnesium Strontium Cobalt Titanium Dissolved Solids Beryllium jpper
-100

-1 5 0

-5 0

0

50

100

Total Performance (%)

Fig. 6.5; Total load -b ased removal efficiencies for the August-November 2003 period.

Negative removal efficiencies suggest that there is an internal source within the pond (i.e. bottom material), or from the eroded banks along the pond's edge. Another possible

explanation for the negative removal efficiencies includes the gradual accumulation of pollutants in the basin sediments before they are driven out in a storm. For example,

residents that received new sod on their lots were encouraged to water their lawns frequently. This may have produced enough runoff to enter the pond, while carrying some pollutants from the site. These pollutants can gradually build up so that during the next event a higher concentration may exit the pond than what initially entered during the event. Also, runoff acidity may m elt the metals contributing to their concentration increase in the outflow.

As with the discrete analysis, the removal efficiencies for the composite results are not the determining factor of the pond's performance. The actual concentrations of the pollutants exiting the pond are considered to be the ultimate indication of the pond's ability to protect

95

Reoroduced with oermission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

downstream habitat. The results of this study are indicating that high removal efficiencies do not determine safe levels of pollutant concentration.

6.2.1

General Water Chemistry

The general water chemistry was analyzed and includes the following: chemical oxygen demand (COD), suspended solids (SS), total solids, dissolved solids, conductivity, pH, alkalinity, turbidity, dissolved organic carbon, dissolved inorganic carbon, chloride, and silicon.

The average events mean concentrations for general physical and chemical parameters analyzed in this study are presented in Table 6.4. Provincial W ater Quality Objectives are also included in the table for comparison reason.

Table 6.4: Average Events Mean Concentrations (AEMC's) and Provincial Water Quality Objectives (PWQO's) for general chemistry. Average EMC Fall 2002 Parameter
o o

A\/erage Aug.-Nov. 2003
o K o o in o

May-July 2003
0)

('whoU P erioc ) h o
_c

N

o l O

o hO

o 3

a
3
o

o in

jS
_c

3
o

Ç

c
23 62 69.5 1017 1282 267 397 8.0 72.7 1454 5.1 12.5 24.6 3.1

_c

O
24 106 483 377 611 8.16 60 166 5 18 113 2

jS
Ç

%
c

2

3
O

Ç

b a 1

U )

C O D (m g /L ) S u sp en d ed Solids

66.6 4412 4696 284 436 8.48 44.7 1547 5.38 9.90 39.0 5.72

35.6 163 381 218 336 7.98 57.0 207 8.3 13.3 26.2 3.1

50.0 48.1 212 164 254 7.97 72.0 329 3.5 10.0 17.2 1.5

100 377 577 193 299 8.0 88 504 12.5 20.5 14,9 2.3

41 85 241 149 241 8.0 71 133 7.8 16 13 1.8

77 285 444 159 245 8.1 83 605 8 19 13 1

78.8 1935 2185 248 377 8.2 68.5 1167 7.7 14.3 26.2 3.7

42 99 278 177 277 8 67 223 7 13 19 2

41 151 407 256 404 8 63 284 6 15 52 2

-

6.5 to 8.5

(mail)
Total Solids (m g/L) Dissolved Solids (m a/L ) Conductivity fu S /cm t pH Alkalinity (m g/L C a C O i) Turbidity (F T U ) C arbon (D O C ) fm o/L) C arbon (D IC ) (m o/L) Cl (m g /L ) Silicon (m g/L )

293 231 355 8.05 45 81 6 8 29 4

-

96

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

6.2.1.1 Suspended Solids

As mentioned in earlier chapters, suspended solids (SS) concentration is a critical parameter in stormwater. As expected, with construction progressing towards the end, inflow SS concentration from the construction catchment experienced a significant decrease throughout the study, from phase I (Fall 2002) to phase III (November 2003).

The average inflow S 3 concentration for Fall 2002 was 4412 mg/L within a range from 23 to 8680 mg/L. It decreased down to 1017 mg/L in the May-July 2003 sampling period (ranging from 348 to 2300 mg/L), and experienced further decrease down to 377 mg/L in the last season. The average SS EMC from the stable catchment decreased from 163 mg/L in the Fall 2002 to 48 mg/L in May-July, and increased up to 85 mg/L in the last sampling phase. It averaged 99 mg/L for the whole study period. However, the outlet concentration of suspended solids shows significant increase from Fall 2002 to spring 2003 (from 62 mg/L to 106 mg/L) and further increase up to 285 mg/L by the end of study. Though removal efficiency for SS was quite high throughout the sampling periods (varied from 97.5% at the beginning to 72.5% by the end of study), effluent average SS concentration of 151 mg/L is very high.

One of the earliest works on suspended sediments effects on fish was conducted by a group of European scientists who attempted to develop criteria for suspended sediment concentration in relation to fisheries quality (MOE, SWAMP, 2002). The criteria for continuous suspended load were as follows: less than 25 mg/L: not harmful; 25 to 80 mg/L: fish yield somewhat reduced; 80-400 mg/L: good fisheries unlikely; and greater than 400 mg/L; poor fisheries. Thus, the average effluent suspended sediment load at Ballymore Pond would unlikely provide good fisheries. The average SS composite effluent value of 151 mg/L is close to the average SS EMC of 120 mg/L obtained by the analysis of discrete samples.

It should be considered that these values are obtained during a time-limited sampling period o f 2 to 6 hours. Further investigation on concentration o f suspended solids described in the following chapter using a modelling approach should give an answer.

97

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

6.2.1.2 pH and Alkalinity
The mean inflow pH for the Fall 2002 period was 8.2; for May-July 2003 it was 8.1, and for August-Novem ber 8 .0 . Outlet pH varied from 8.1 to 8 .2 throughout the study period. T h e re was little variability in pH levels among storm events (Table 6.5). All pH values observed at the site lay within the 6.5 to 8.5 range recommended by the Ontario Minisî.-y of Environment and Energy Provincial W ater Quality Objectives (MOE, SWAMP, 2002).

Alkalinity, reported as the concentration of calcium carbonate (CaCOa), displayed some variability among events, ranging from 33 to 90 mg/L at the inlets during the Fall 2002 period, from 55 to 102 mg/L at the May-July 2003 period, and from 55 to 107 mg/L at the last monitoring phase. Outlet alkalinity varied from a minimum value o f 3 4 mg/L in the Fall of 2002 to 106 m g/L in the Fall of 2003, showing a graduate increase from phase to phase. The average EMC during the whole study period were very close: 67 m g/L at the inlets and 62 mg/L at the outlet.

6.2.1.3 Turbidity

Turbidity of storm water coming from the construction catchm ent is found to be gradually decreasing from 1547 NTU (Fall 2002) to 1453 (May-July 2003), and down to 503 NTU in the last sampling period. The average turbidity value from inlet 1070 is 1168 NTU which is significantly higher than turbidity levels of 400-600 NTU obtained in Maryland construction site (Schueler and Lugbill, 1990). Inflow turbidity values from stable catchm ent averaged 223 NTU. A much higher turbidity level for the construction catchm ent is a result of progressing construction activities.

Turbidity levels for the outlet experience a significant increase throughout the study period: 81 NTU in the Fail 2002 period changed to 166 NTU in the May-July 2003 and to 605 NTU in the last sampling period indicating that fine particles are accum ulated in the pond throughout the study period. These outflow values are comparable to turbidity levels found by Przepiora et al. (1997): turbidity of w ater discharged from sedim entation basins at two construction sites during a 1-year period ranged from 120 to 3200 NTU, which

corresponded to SS concentrations of 90 to 2800 mg/L. According to Canadian W ater Quality Guidelines, turbidity of receiving waters with background between 8 and 80 NTU

98

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

should not exceed background levels by more than 8 NTU. W hen background exceeds 80 NTU, turbidity should not be increased by more than 10% of the measured background level at any one tim e (Canadian W ater Quality Guidelines, 1988). Obviously, concerning turbidity levels, the perform ance of Ballymore pond may be rated as very poor.

In addition, a strong linear relationship between EMC of SS exiting the pond and turbidity levels was obtained in the study. As shown in Figure 6.6, outflow turbidity levels in Ballymore pond construction site can be predicted by the equation;

Turbidity (N TU 's)=2.46(S S )-73.72,

( 6 . 1)

where concentration of SS is measured in units of mg/L. This linear regression yields correlation coefficient (R^) of 0.92. Consequently, given the strength of this relationship, turbidity can be readily predicted from the available 8 8 event mean concentration.

500

450

400

350

y = 2.4642X - 73.72
2 300

= 0.92

250
J3

.3

200

150

100

50

0

50

100

150

200

25 0

300

350

400

450

500

SS EMC (m g/L)

Fig. 6 . 6 : Outflow turbidity vs. EMC.

6.2.2

Nutrients

99

Reoroduced with oermission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

During all periods of sampling, all nitrogen species showed positive removal on a load basis. Average EMC's and comparison of measured concentrations to PW QO's are shown in Table 6.5.

Table 6.5: Average Events Mean Concentrations (AEMC's) and Provincial Water Quality Objectives (PWQO's) for nutrients during the study period.

Average EMC
P a ra m e te r

Fall 2002
N-

May-July 2003
o o o

Aug.-Nov. 2003 £
3 o
o ro
_a> Ç

Average EMC (whole period)
h o o
Ç

O O 5 a.

o o

o

o

o
IT)

lO o
Ç -

in
_c

C
Nitrogen (NH3+NH4^ (mo/L) Nitrogen (N02) (mo/L) Nitrogen (N02+N03) fmo/L) Ptiosptiate (mq/L) Total Phosporus (mo/L) TKN (mg/L) 0.04 0.09 0,68 0.04 4.22 4.03

3 o

m «
c

3 o

%

a >
_c

1 3
o
-

0.26 0.07 0.80 0.13 0.33 1.73

0.05 0.05 0.41 0.02 0.12 0.81

0.18 0.05 0.90 0.07 1.24

0.23 0.05 0.77 0.08 0.33 2.18

0.12 0.04 0.75 0.01 0.17 1.45

0.22
0.08 0.89 0.20 0.60

0 .19 0 .05
0.75 0.12 0.25 1.41

0.19 0.04 0.42 0.10 0.43 4.32

0.15 0.07 0.83 0.10 2.02 3.11

0.23
0.06 0.77 0.11 0.30 1.77

0.12 0.05 0.53 0.04

0.24
2.19

0.03
-

2 .73

2.57

Throughout the study period the average Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen removal efficiency was 60% ranging from 76% to 47%.

Total phosphorus (TP) removal efficiency was observed as 94%, 85% and 70% within the whole sampling time, averaging 83%, which are significantly higher than reported rates of 51% (Urban BMP's, W ashington and MOE, 1991) and 49-60% (Saburin and Kimble, 2000). However, the average TP influent concentration from construction catchment varied from 4.22 m g/L in the Fall 2002 to 2.73 m g/L in May-July 2003, and to 2.57 mg/L in the August-Novem ber 2003 period, which It is very high com pare to the acceptable value of 0.03 mg/L. Average inflow TP concentration from the stable catchm ent is significantly lower: It decreased from 0.33 mg/L in the first two sampling periods to 0.25 m g/L in the Fall 2003.

I DO

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The outlet average TP EMC is 0.24 mg/L, which is significantly higher fhan the recommended maximum TP concentration of 0.03 m g/L intended to avoid excessive plant growth in the pond (MOE, SWAMP, 2002).

6.2.3

Metals

Over half of the trace metals carried in runoff waters are attached to sediments (Fifield, 2001). The main sources of metals in runoff from construction sites include galvanized metals, paint and preserved wood. Also, atmospheric fallout and rooftops runoff make an im portant contribution to the m etal's content. Table 6.6 outlines the study's results compared to PW Q O 's.

Table 6 .6 : Average Events Mean Concentrations (AEMC's) and Provincial W ater Quality Objectives (PW Q O 's) for metals.

101

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Average EMC Fall

2002
Parameter
o o _ c o in c

May-July

Aug.-No V.

2003
o ro o m Ï c 0 ) o ro

2003
o in c o o

Average EMC (whole period)
o in _ c

U l

2

b a 5

Q l

o

3 c

o

3

2

c

o

3 _ c

o

3

A1 (u g /L ) Ba (u g/L ) Be (ug/L) Cd (u q /L ) C a (m q /L ) C hrom ium (u q/L ) Co (uq/L) Cu (u g /L ) F e (u q/L ) Pb (u q/L ) M g (ug/L) Mn (u q/L ) M o (u g /L ) NI (u g /L ) S r (u q /L ) Ti (u q/L ) V (u q /L ) Zn (u g /L )

944 111 0,3 0.3 344 5,4 18 4,2 987 2.6 10.3 537 2,8 3.6 740 7.3 5.0 10.6

1663 33,7 0.1 0.1 62,5 5,9 1,9 22 7 1801 4,7 5.0 132 1.1 4.0 285 10.3 7,7 21,1

873 189 0,1 0.2 50.9 4.7 09 7.7 921 1.8 74.0 66,0 1,1 2,3 265 9.1 6.3 8.2

1866 84.8 03 03 149 35 2 30 84 1211 55 6,5 374 0.3 35.2 416 63 5,6 23,7

952 297 0.1 0,3 41 8 20 9 14 13,6 912 3,6 2,7 127

611 27.0 0.2 03 44.1 3.4 06 6.9 584 2,2 5,0 69,6

1579 44 5 0,1 0,3 681 2,3 17 8.0 1346 5.5 5,0 1734 -0,2

470 23,4 0,0 2,3 28 8 1,5 0.8 8.1 403 -08 2.7 50.0 35.4 1,3 157 8,2 25 11,0

1082 41 4 02 510 50,2 13 18 5,7 915 0,3 3,9 147

1463 80,0 0,2 03 187 14.3 2,1 6,9 1181 4,5 7,3 361 0.9

1028 289 01 09 44,4 9,4 14 14,8 1039 2.5 38 103 18.3 2.5 196 8.8 49 18.7

855 29,1 0,1 17.1 48.4 3.1 1.1 6.7 807 1.4 27,6 94,3 1.1 1,9 243 89 4.3 10.0 1100 0.5 1 0.9 5 300 5 25 6 20

22 146 7,8 4,4 24,0

1.6 286 5.8 2,9 9,7

3,2 216 13.5 48 20.4

1,9 180 11 7 36 120

14.0 457 9.0 5,2 18,3

The analysis indicates that Fall 2002 removal efficiencies for metals are ranging from -180% for cadmium to 81% for manganese. Removal efficiencies in May-July 2003 period ranged from - 9 2 fo r beryllium to 118% for cobalt. Fall 2003 efficiencies ranged within 203% for lead to 95% for cadmium.

Storm water m etals with average removal efficiencies above 50% in the Fall of 2002 include barium, calcium and strontium; in May-July 2003: aluminum, barium, calcium, cobalt, manganese, nickel, lead, vanadium, and zinc. This indicates that pond performed better in a second sampling period.

102

Reoroduced with oermission of the coDvriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

In the last period o f August-November 2003 metals such as cadmium, manganese and zinc experienced removal efficiency higher than 50%.

During all three monitoring periods, the average effluent concentration of chromium, copper and iron exceeded O ntario's PWQO's. Cobalt's effluent concentration exceeded provincial objectives only during August-November 2003 period.Trace level amounts of beryllium and nickel were found in both inlets and outlet samples, all at concentrations well below th e ir respective PWQO's.

6.3

Particle Size Distribution

The performance of a stormwater management facility is controlled, among other factors, by the size of incoming sediment. The distribution may vary from storm to storm. The important criterion in the design and sizing of ponds is the selection of the design particle size that would be equal to or greater than the particles to be removed (Greb, 1997). The resulting performance of a pond will reflect how well the chosen size class matches actual conditions.

The particle size distribution (PSD) of stormwater is important for several reasons. First, the relationship between suspended solids removal and the removal of other constituents is greatly influenced by suspended particle size. Clay particles, in particular, have a large capacity to carry nutrients and contaminants due to their high cation exchange capacity, and large surface area to weight ratio. Second, the change in size distribution observed between the inlet and outlet is an important indicator of size selective particle removal either by settling, flocculation or filtration. Third, the outlet particle size distribution has important implications for effluent impacts to receiving waters.

In this study, particle size distributions were determined from the composite w ater quality samples. Particle size analyses were performed on both inlets and the outlet suspended solids material. All particle size measurements were performed at the MOE Lab. Cumulative distributions and classes summarized particle-size data. Categories

corresponded to size classes traditionally designated as sand (62 to 2000 microns), silt (4 to 62 microns), and clay (smaller than 4 microns) (Chow, 1964; Greb, 1997).

103

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

A total of 57 field samples were collected from the study site, including 41 inflow samples from the both inlets, and 16 outflow samples. All cumulative distribution curves were summarized by averaging the "percent greater than" values for each measured particle size. 21 size categories ranging from 0.43 microns to 999 microns in diameter were analyzed. The Dio values represent 10% of the distribution that is greater than this value. The Dso value is representative of 50% of the particle size distribution.

Table 6.7 shows the Dio and D50 values for the both inlets and outlet for each event and average values reflecting 3 monitoring stages (Fall 2002, May-July 2003 and AugustNovember 2003).

Table 6.7: Dioand D50 particle size.

Inlet 1070 Inlet 510 Event Dio

Outlet

Inlet 1070 Inlet 510 D5 0

Outlet

104

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 02-0ct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 Average: 02-Mav-03 05-May-03 11-May-03 12-May-Q3 20-May-03 05-Jun-03 08-Jun-03 21-Jul-03 Average: 02-Aug-03 09-Aug-03 11 -Aug-03 26-Aug-03 15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 22-Sep-03 27-Sep-03 14-Oct-03 18-Oct-03 25-Oct-03

2OE99
-

41.50 19.28 15.68
-

14.42
-

7.07
-

3.15 3.45 2.86
-

2.23
-

13.47 20rt0 39.90
-

19.30
-

2.57 3.60 5.60
-

2.41
-

18.50
-

2.32
-

-

-

23.61 10.72 14.21 14.79 16.84 19.70 2&00 94.17 13.82 26.28 20.64 33.37 27.20 26.99 42.65 32.82 42.68 15.79 27.87 52.95 14.59 18.83

23.74 &L80 4A 95
-

16.86 6.09 16.94 7.25 14.14 7.41 2 37 12.58
-

4.71 2.17 2.59 298 2.39 3.35 2.97 6.61 2.60 3.21 3.17 7.01 2L13 4.73 5.42 4.97 6.37 3.10 2L79 4.97

2.95 4.26 6.34
-

2.32 1.00 2.17 246 1.99 243 A84 299
-

31.80 76^4
-

298 &86
-

-

-

11.15 38.43
-

2.75 5.04
-

9.54
-

2.94
-

34^2 50.69 1&59
-

-

4.69 6.93 -L18
-

-

-

-

71.12 19.90
-

15.87 24.01 27.24 18T9 2345
-

4.13 5.09 5.27 4.07 4.93
-

11.97
-

3.35
-

13.25

02-NOV-03 12-NOV-03
Average: Total Average

49.07
-

14.71 12.53
19.51 14.82

3.77 2.69
3.27 4.26 4.00

1.86

4.47
-

2.87 3.53
4.27 3.44

12.83
28.40 26.96

36.78 34.03

5.21 4.59

The particle size distribution of incoming sediments was composed of extremely fine grained, primarily consisting of fine silts, clays, and colloidal materials particles. 90% of particles entering the pond from both inlets are finer than 30 microns. 90% of particles exiting the pond are smaller than 15 microns in diameter.

105

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figures 6.7-6.9 show

the average cumulative

particle size distribution for three

consequent periods of the monitoring. PSD's for each of the events monitored are included in Appendix G. The median particle size (D 5 0 ) of the average PSD is found to be approximately 4.0, 4.6, and 3.4 pm at the inlet 1070, inlet 510 and the outlet, respectively.

too
ro hCD

Average Cumulative Particle Size Distribution Fall 2002

c

JZ

2
CD

0.1

1

10

100

1000

Particle Size (microns)
-- Inlet 1070 Inlet 510 - Outlet

Fig. 6.7: Average cumulative particle size distribution for Fail 2002.

106

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

A v e ra g e C u m u la tiv e P a rtic le S ize M a y -J u ly 200 3

100
90 80
c
CD

70

t-

JZ

30

20

n- T . ,

0
0.1

-----1

1

10
Particle Size (m icrons)

100

1000

InletlOZO

Inlet 510

Outlet

Fig. 6 .8 : Average cumulative particle size distribution for May-July 2003.

107

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Average Cumulative Particle Size Distribution August-November 2003
100 90

m
H

c

l'J

60

I
20
10

0

0.1

1

10
Particle Size (m icrons)

100
· Outlet

1000

Inlet 1070

= Inlet 510

Fig 6.9; Average cumulative particle size distribution fo r August-November 2003.

Tables 6.8 and 6.9 summarize the particle class, masses, and performances as regrouped into very fine to coarse sand, siit and clay groups.

Table 6 .8 ; Particle size class and distribution. Particle Class Size Range (microns)
Inlet 1070

Fall 2002 %
Inlet 510 Outlet Inlet 1070

May-July 2003 %
Inlet 510 Outlet

August-November 2003 %
Inlet 1070 Inlet 510 Outlet

Fine to Coarse Sand

62-999
average fo r tfie w hole period

4.3 5.0 51.0 50.0 44.7 45

4.3 5.6 49.4 53.6 46.3 40.8

4.1

5.7

6.4

0.2

4.9

6.1

4.1

2.8
48.3 40.7 47.6 56.5 49.9 37.3 87.9 40.5 38.7 34.1 44.4 56.3 11.94 54.6 55.2 61.8

4-62 Silt
average fo r the whole period

<4 Clay
... .

average fo r the whole period

108

R s o ro d u c e d with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 6.9: Average particle size, mass proportion and performance. Particle Class Size Range (microns) Particle Size %
Inlet 1070 Inlet 510 Outlet Inlet 1070

Mass kg
Inlet 510 Outlet

Removal Efficiency (%) 3.9 99.3

Fine to Coarse Sand Silt

62499

5.0

5.6

2.8

497.6

36J

4-62

50

53.6

40.7

5006

345.2

56.9

98.9

Clay

<4

45

40.8

56.5

4505

2628

79

98X3

The clay fraction (smaller than 4 pm) contributed 40.8-45% of the weight to the suspended solids material in the influent. The silt-size fraction contributed more (50.0-53.6%), with the remaining sand-size fraction contributing only 5.0-5.6%.

Effluent characteristics in terms of PSD are: content of clay fraction is 56.5%, siit and sand-size are 40.7% and 2.8, respectively.

Based on obtained results, this pond performs very well in removing all three particle classes: removal efficiency for the clay, silt and sand particles are 98.3%, 98.9%, and 99.3%, respectively.

According to soil classification based on various combinations of sand, silt and clay given by Davis and Bennett (1949), sediments incoming from Catchment-1070 and Catchment510 belong to silty clay soil class while outflow sediments represent clays class.

Particle size distributions indicate that fine sediments dominate the sediment loads entering and leaving the pond.

109

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reoroduced with oermission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 7

SWWIM APPLICATION

This chapter covers the set up and calibration of the PC SWMM model. RUNOFF and STORAGE/TREATMENT blocks input parameters and calibration procedures are discussed in depth.

7.1

Modelling Objectives and Methodology

Modelling objectives included the assessment of: (i) the event mean concentration and load of suspended solids for the monitored individual events, (ii) the long-term sediment generation from the construction watershed; and (iii) the long-term performance of the construction sediment control pond.

As mentioned in Chapter 4, the model used in the study is PCSWMM (US EPA SWMM version 4.4.), which is a parametric, deterministic sirjiulation model that uses rainfall data to simulate runoff and pollutant load from a user defined watershed condition. While it is impossible to develop the construction watershed model and pond simulation model that will simulate observed conditions with 100% accuracy, the models with reasonable accuracy were developed for the assessment of construction site and pond performance. As a result, the model outputs are viewed as a guiding estimate of field conditions.

To simulate the typical construction watershed condition, a representative construction watershed model was developed for Catchment-1070. To account for the inflow from the stable catchment (Catchment-510), the area of the stable catchment was added to the construction catchment area, thus creating the Combined simulated catchment.

The construction activities make this watershed very dynamic in terms o f hydrology. The standard hydrologie calibration procedure typically used in stable developed catchments was not applicable in this case because of variable watershed conditions over the period. Therefore the following methodology was adopted to develop the construction watershed model:

11

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1. The entire monitoring period was divided into three separate periods from which three individual construction watershed models were created. The three periods include: (i) September to October 2002, (ii) May to July 2003, and (iii) August to Novem ber 2003. If is assumed that during these periods the watershed conditions, particularly imperviousness and corresponding soil exposure due to construction activities are reasonably constant.

2. The construction model was calibrated with available observed runoff quantity data (i.e., runoff volume, and peak flow) for each of the events. The hydrologie model parameter values that produce matching runoff hydrographs were identified.

3. The calibrated runoff quantity models for each of the periods w ere further used for the calibration of runoff quality using the SS concentration data (i.e., SS pollutographs). Since observed SS data is partial (i.e., first 2 to 6 hrs), the calibration procedure was limited to matching portions of observed and simulated pollutographs. In other words, if the first 2 to 6 hours of simulated pollutograph was reasonably matched with observed data, the model was selected for the generation of the entire pollutographs of the event.

4. A continuous simulation model fo r the construction watershed was developed to assess the long-term sediment generation conditions.

7.2

SWMM Data Input

R U N O F F b lo c k

The RUNOFF block input file is comprised of consequent data lines from A to K that accommodate all input parameters fo r this block. Input data is arranged in the following manner: after the titles contained in A line, the control data are listed in lines B1 through B3, the C lines hold the data concerning the snow input, the E lines contain the rainfall data, and the F lines are used for the evaporation data. The channel and control structure data are listed in G lines; H lines provide the subcatchm ent data fo r the quantity simulation. The subcatchm ent snow data are listed on lines I. In this study we neglect snow input because monitoring did not take place in winter.

Rainfall data are the single most important group of hydrologie data required by SWMM. In SWMM, Line D1 is the first rainfall control line. It defines the precipitation input option.

112

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Data group E l (rainfall control line) defines the type of precipitation (KTYPE), precipitation values or pairs per line (KING), precipitation print control (KPRINT), variable precipitation intervals (KTHIS), time units (KTIME), precipitation input type (KPREP), number of

precipitation values (NHISTO), and the default rainfallinterval (THISTO). Line E3 is used to input precipitation data. Input is a function of the param eter KTYPE on data group E1. For this study rainfall data have been entered as the starting time in minutes for the interval and the interval precipitation value.

The quality data fit into fo u r lines labeled J1 to J4.

Line J1 identifies the num ber of

constituents to be modeled and the land use types, line J2 sets up the dust and dirt characteristics, line J3 sets up the constituent build up equations and line J4 allows a fraction of one constituent to be added to another. The K line provides the erosion data and the L lines provide subcatchm ent surface quality data. The remaining M lines are concerned with print controls.

Table 7.1 lists som e of the run, rainfall and quality controls that were used in the RUNOFF block of the model. Details on the other input parameters will be discussed in later sections.

113

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

XI
C D

D Q. C

O

§ Q.
a

C D

Table 7.1: PCSWMM RUNOFF block control input parameters.

3CD

8
5
ë'

P a ra m e te r

Run Control D escription B1 M etric inputoutput Snowm elt param eter N um ber of hyetographs C hoice of infiltration equation Q uality (erosion) sim ulated Evaporation param eter

V a lu e

R ain fall Control P a ra m e te r D escription D1 ROPT P recipitation input option El Type of precipitation input N um ber of precipitation values Print control Variable THISTO option P recipitation tim e units P recipitation unit type N um ber of data points for hyetograph Tim e interval between values Initial tim e of precipitation input

V a lu e

M etric IS N O W WRGAG

1 0 1

1

Q u ality Control P a ra m e te r Description JJ Trigger m ultiple land IMUL uses J1 Number of quality constituents Number of land uses

V a lu e

0

3
CD

T l

C

K TYPE

2

NOS

1

-§
o
C
Q .

INFILM

0

KING

0

JLAND

1

o

KW ALTY

1

KPRINT

0

IROS

"D O
Q.
CD

IVAP

0

KTHIS

0

IROSAD

B3 W e t tim e step Transition between wet and dry Dry tim e step U nits of LONG

KTIME

0

DRYDAY

O c
"D

W ET

300

KPREP

1

C BV O L

CD

Erosion 1 sim ulation param eter Option to add 1 erosion to constituent Num ber of dry days prior to varied storm Av. catcbasin 0 storage volume Dry days required to recharge 0

C/)

oe

W ETD R Y

300

NHISTO

varied

DRYBSN

DRY

300

THISTO

varied

RAINIT

Highest av. 30varied min rainfall intensity

LUNIT

4

TZRAIN

varied

S T O R A G E /T R E A T M E N T B lo c k

All control input data fits into lines B1 and C1-C2. These lines define the starting and ending date and tim e and print control. Monthly evaporation rates are required to correct for evaporation from detention units. Line D1 provides evaporation data.

General information is listed in lines F1-F2. Line F1 includes a name for the treatment facility, line F2 contains a unit's description. Lines G1-G4 provide pollutant removal information such as removal equation type and removal coefficients.

All S/T block control data is summarized in table 7.2; details on other input parameters will be discussed in later section.

Table 7.2; Storage/Treatm ent block control input parameters.

Parameter B1 NOTAPE JNS NOT DS NU NP COST METRIC

Description Input Data Source External element number from the external Total number of simulation time steps Size o f time step Num ber of storage/treatm ent units Number of pollutants routed Cost calculations performed? Metric input-output

Value 0; input from external input file 200 288 900 1 1 0; no 1 ; use m etric unit

7.3

SWMM Water Quantity

7.3.1

RUNOFF Block Parameter Developm ent and Calibration

Surface runoff is computed in SWMM fo r any rainfall hyetograph, considering land use type and topography, and accounting fo r antecedent moisture conditions, infiltration losses in pervious areas, surface detention, overland flow, channel/pipe flow and constituents carried by runoff into inlets. There are several key parameters used in the PCSWMM RUNOFF quantity input files that should be discussed as to how they were chosen for this

115

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

study. These include hydrologie parameters such as in filtra tio n
c h a ra c te ris tic s .

and su b c a tc h m e n t

in filtra tio n

INFILM - This param eter recognizes the type of infiltration simulation that will be used in the runoff model. SWMM allows two options for infiltration calculation of pervious areas. Horton's and Green-Ampt techniques. Horton's technique was employed in this study. Soil infiltration is considered a function of time;

f p = f ^ + ( f o - f ^ ) e ^ '^

,

(7.1)

where fp is the infiltration capacity into soil, mm/sec; too is the minimum or ultimate value of fp (W LM IN) in mm/sec; fo is the maximum or initial value of fp (WLMAX), mm/sec; (t) is the time from the beginning of the storm in seconds; and (k) is the decay coefficient (DECAY) in s e c '\ The equation was originally developed to depict the reduction of a watersheds infiltration capacity in the presence of surface moisture. The Horton equation was chosen fo r several reasons. The first reason is because it is the most well known and accepted of several infiltration equations (Huber and Dickinson, 1992; James and James, 2000; Viessm an et al., 1993; Elliot and W ard, 1995). The second reason was because PCSW MM used an integrated form of the equation that compensates for the reduced loss of soil infiltration capacity when a light rainfall occurs (Nix, 1994).

Although the Horton infiltration equation is probably the best-known of the several infiltration equations available, there is not enough published data available to help to select values of parameters foand f^fo r a particular application (James and James, 2000). Since the values o f fo, tj, and a depend on soil, vegetation, and initial moisture content, ideally these parameters should be estimated using results from field infiltrom eter tests for a num ber o f sites o f the watershed and for a num ber of antecedent wetness conditions. A t this m om ent of the research field data to find estimates of fo, fa, and a for studied subcatchm ent were not available, thus choice of parameters fo and fo, is based on average values obtained from different literature sources.

16

RRnrndiir.Rri with nermission of the coovriaht owner. Turther reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

S u b c a tc h m e n t c h a ra c te ris tic s

Data groups G1 (channel/pipe data) and H1 (subcatcment data) are used to establish) surface flow routing for the RUNOFF module. Surface flow routing is accomplished using subcatchment elements and pipe elements (circular channel flow). Subcatchment

elements receive rainfall, account for losses due to evaporation and infiltration (via Horton's equation), and permit surface depression storage to account for losses such as retention on grass or pavement. Surface flow from subcatchm ent goes into channel pipe/inlet.

Flow routing for both a subcatchm ent and a pipe in SWMM is accomplished by approximating them as non-linear reservoirs. This is a coupling of a spatially lumped continuity equation with the Manning equation (James and James, 2000). Input

channel/pipe data (group G3) include physical parameters of the pipe such as diameter and length of channel/pipe, invert slope and Manning's roughness coefficient. Flow routing data such as subcatchm ent width WW1 and area of subcatchm ent W AREA, percent imperviousness (WW3), slope (WSLOPE) and percentage of subcatchm ent

imperviousness (WW3) is usually derived from topographic maps, aerial photos and drainage system plans. These are customarily obtained from the local agency responsible for drainage, usually the city or county. Some of the data were not available and the input parameters such as slope, percent imperviousness, depression storage. Manning's coefficients values are derived with an approximation from available materials or taken from the reference sources.

C a lib ra tio n

To be useful fo r the solution of practical problems, the model should be calibrated, meaning that values for the model parameters should be estimated prior to running the model. It has to be done to enable the model to closely match the behavior of the real system it represents (Gupta, 1998). According to Delleur (1998), proper calibration of the runoff quantity model is necessary before attempting to calibrate the quality portion.

Calibration focused on adjusting the values of SWMM parameters to minimize the deviation between measured and m odel predicted parameters. The purpose o f calibration is to find "best" values for the difficult parameters (James, 2003). In urban runoff quantity modelling, calibration can be comparatively simple; e.g., computed peak flow is plotted

117

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

against observed peak flow for a number of different rainfall events. If the model is good, the points should fall on 45-degree line with little scatter. The purpose of calibration is to best fit the line of equality, and to reduce the scatter (improve the model accuracy).

Calibration was performed on an event basis. The procedure for calibration was as follows; for each quantity calibration run, the observed and simulated hydrographs were first matched to achieve the observed volume, flow peaks and shape. For each quality run, the observed pollutograph was matched to part of simulated pollutograph to match SS concentration, load and shape. This was done by adjusting parameters obtained during sensitivity analysis.

As mentioned in Chapter 4, sensitivity analysis is required to check the "robustness" of the model. Sensitivity analysis is intended to prioritize the model parameters. It proceeds by holding all parameters but one constant at their expected value, and perturbing that parameter within reasonable expected limits (James, 2003). If apparently small

perturbations of a parameter produce large changes in the outcome, the system is to be sensitive to that parameter. The following quantity parameters are found as the most sensitive: percent imperviousness, subcatchment width, impervious area depression storage. Manning's roughness coefficient, and a slope. Their brief description as follows.

Imperviousness is defined as the percentage of the catchment area, which is impervious and hydraulicaliy directly connected to the outlet such as driveways and rooftops with downspouts (James, 2003). It falls into class 3 of uncertainty meaning uncertainty is 25%50%. Percent imperviousness was found to be the most sensitive parameter affecting both total flow volume and peak flow. It corresponds with the findings of Zaghloul (1981) and Jewell (1978). The percentage of imperviousness of a subcatchment varied almost linearly with the computed peak flow and runoff volume. The peak flow and runoff volume increases as the percent of imperviousness increases. The initial value of percent imperviousness used for calibration was 45%. This value was suggested by Choi and Ball (2002) for medium density residential land use. The final calibrated values are presented in Table 7.3. They averaged 35% for construction catchment and 54% for combined catchment for I phase of construction (Fall 2002 period), 64% and 75% respectively for the 1 1 phase (May-July 2003) and 69% and 79% for the III construction phase (AugustNovember 2003).

118

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Parameter WW(1), width of subcatcment (uncertainty class 4, "who knows"), was also found to be sensitive to peak flow and volume. It was noted that peak flow was affected primarily as a result of change in width. It was observed also that width appeared to be less sensitive at higher values than at lower ones. The reduced value of the width resulted in a delayed and attenuated peak hydrograph causing the build up of the surface runoff on the subcatchment plane. Conversely, the increased value of the width allowed the rapid rain drain of water from the subcatchment plane resulting in an advanced larger peak hydrograph. The average calibrated width of the subcatchment varied from 124 to 278 m for the construction catchment and from 173 to 217 m for the combined catchment, gradually increasing towards the end of study period, Fall 2003 (Table 7.3).

Depression storage is defined as a volume that must be filled prior to the occurrence of runoff on both pervious and impervious areas. It represents a loss, or "initial abstraction" caused by surface ponding, surface wetting, interception and evaporation (James and James, 2000). Impervious area depression storage parameter was mostly found to be sensitive to first peak flow. Its uncertainty category is 3 (25-50%). Calibrated values for impervious area depression storage for construction and combined catchments varied from 0.1 to 5 mm. The highest suggested upper limit is 5.1 mm (0.2 in) given by Brater (1968) in James and James (2000).

Parameter WSLOPE

(uncertainty class 2-4:10-50%) was used to adjust the main peak

flow. Subcatcment slope is estimated by dividing the change in elevation by the length of flow path. Typical change in elevation is approximately 1 to 10 mm (James and James, 2000). For flatter slopes, there is a considerable sensitivity of the peak flow and the runoff volume. This is attributed to the build up of water on the subcatchment surface, which will run off slowly at a longer time. As the slope increases, the runoff flow occurs faster with the result of higher values of peak and runoff volume. Value of 0.01 was used as an initial value for the simulation. Calibrated values varied from 0.004 to 0.02 for construction and combined catchments (Table 7.3).

119

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

jO (D "O O OE C O C D
CL

 D
C D
67

oe
o`
Z5

Z T O 0 1 C Û *
C D
ZT

Table 7,3: RUNOFF block quantity calibration parameters summary.

C alib rated Quantity P a ra m e te r % Im petviousness W W (3) Subcatchm ent width (m) W W (1) Imperv. area depression storage (mm) W S T0R E 1 Slope W S LO PE

C alibration Purpose
Primarily volume adjustment (peaks) Primarily peaks adjustment (volumes) P rim arily firs t peak adjustment (other peaks) Primarily peaks adjustment 15-45 35 53-170 124

1 Phase Fall 2002

II Phase M ay-July 2003
65-81 75 65-300 162

III Phase A ugust-N ovem ber 2003
47-90 69 215-400 278 50-95

C D Tl

3

24-90

43-88

3"
C D C D "O CL C

53-290

173

76-250 139

170300/217

O

a o 3  Q O g
cr
cd '

0.5-6.3 2.3

0.1-7.5 2.3

0.5-4.5 3,0

0.1-6.6 2.8

0.8-5 2.32

1.5-5 2.8

0.004-0.01 0.008

0.0096-0.02 0.012

0.005-0.02 0.01

0.009-0.015 0.01

0.01

0.005-0.01 0.008

CL

 D
C D
cn cn

o'

3

Manning's roughness coefficient is the measure of resistance to the runoff flow. The value of the roughness coefficient depends on the type of soil, surface cover and vegetation in pervious areas. In impervious areas such as streets and building roofs, the coefficient depends on the type of the material used in construction. Manning's coefficient for impervious areas is found to affect peak flows, its uncertainty class is 2 (10-25%). it was noted that peak flow decreases as the roughness increases. At low values of roughness the sensitivity is greatest. This is due to the fact that smooth surfaces permit faster runoff from the subcatchment. Impervious Manning's coefficient was applied within suggested range of 0.010-0.015 (James and James, 2002).

Appendix I includes quantity calibration parameters for each event calibrated. Summary Table 7.3 presents quantity calibration parameters for construction and combined catchments.

The values obtained confirm that catchment conditions were changing: imperviousness value for development phase (I) was 35 % which gradually increasedd to 69% by the end o f construction. The same pattern in increase for % imperviousness from phase I to

phase 1 1 1 (from 54 to 75 and to 79%) is observed for the combined catchment as construction progressed.

Table 7.4 contains important water-quantity input parameters that were used in the model.

121

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 7.4: Common RUNOFF block water-quantity input parameters.

Param eter WW(1) WW(3) WSLOPE WW(5) WW(6) WST0RE1 W ST0R E2 WLMAX WLMIN DECAY

D e scrip tio n (units) Width of subcatchment (m) Percent of imperviousness Ground slope Impervious Manning roughness Pervious Manning roughness Impervious depression storage (mm) Pervious depression storage (mm) Horton's max infiltration rate (mm/hr) Horton's min infiltration rate (mm/hr) Horton's infiltration decay rate (sec ' )

Value 162-217* 54-79* 0.008-0.01* 0.013-0.015* 0.03 2.3-4.8* 4.5 127 0.036 0.00115

U ncertainty C lass 4 3 2-4 2 4 3 4 4 4 4

"calibrated range

7.3.2

STORAGE/TREATMENT B lo ck Param eter D evelopm ent and C alibration

Lines D1 (evaporation data), F2 (S/T unit parameters), and H1-H3 (Detention Unit Data) accommodate ttie input water quantity parameters.

Evaporation data was obtained from Clarifica Inc. (Toronto). Appendix H contains ttie Input file with estimated monthly evaporation values for the studied region. Lines H1 and H3 are used to describe the special characteristics of the detention unit (Bailymore Pond). Parameter IROUTE(I) recognizes the complete mixing assumption. Parameter lOUT describes the depth-treated outflow relationship that characterizes the discharge of treated flow from unit I. In this model the depth-treated outflow relationship is described by 10 data pairs in line H3. Storage-stage data are obtained from the Design Brief on Bailymore pond (Sabourin Kimble and Associates, 2002) and accompanying drawings.

Volume parameter (STORE) is left blank in every H3 line. Thus, the program estimates the volume at each depth by averaging the surface area at each depth and the lower adjacent depth, multiplying by the difference in depth, and adding the result to the estimated

122

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

volume at the lower adjacent depth (i.e., by a trapezoidal rule integration) (James and Jam.es, 2000). H3 line input parameters are presented in Table 7.5.

Table 7.5; S/T b lo c k line H3 in p u t param eters.

Depth (m) 0 0.5 1.5 2.4 2.5 3.0 3.3 3.5 3.75  4

Area K ) 94 704 1366 2575 2650 2958 3144 3265 3880 4495

Volum e K ) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

Treated O utflow (m ^/s) 0 0 0 0 0.016 0.023 0.024 0.027 0.030 0.033

R esidual O utflow (m^ I s ) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

Total volume of water in a unit at the start of simulation W ARN(i) fits into line H8, which defines the initial conditions in detention unit I.

C a lib ra tio n

The most sensitive parameters found were the initial volume within the facility WARN(I) followed closely by the discharge rate from the facility. They fall into uncertainty categoryt which means that ''uncertainty is small, a few percentage points, perhaps 5-10%. Total volume of water in the pond at the start of simulation is 2700 m^. Calibrated values vary from 2500 to 3000 m^ that lies in 8.5-11% range

7.4 S W M M W a te r Q u a lity

7.4.1

RUNOFF B lo c k Param eter D evelopm ent and C a libra tion

Simulation of urban runoff quality is very inexact. Very large uncertainties arise both in the representation of the physical, chemical and biological processes and in the acquisition of data and parameters for model algorithms (James and James, 2000).

123

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The RUNOFF block in the SWMM model is the origin of water quality constituents. Several mechanisms constitute the genesis of stormwater quality, most notably b u ild up and
w ash off. in an Impervious urban area, it is usually assumed that a supply of constituents is

built up during dry weather on the land surface. Alternatively, quality loads (mass/time) can be generated by a rating curve approach where loads are proportional to flow to some power.

B u ild u p refers to pollutant accumulation over the catchment surfaces, and is the outcome

o f a complex array of dry-weather processes that occur between rainfall events, such as atmospheric deposition, and many anthropogenic urban activities (James, 1995; Behera, 2001). Buildup occurs over the number of dry days prior to the beginning of simulation (DRYDAY) and also during continuous simulation when runoff is very small (<0.013 mm/hr) (Delleur, 1998).

The RUNOFF block simulates quality of runoff processes within a drainage basin, and the routing of flows and contaminants along storm drain lines, leading to the calculation of a number of inlet hydrographs and pollutographs. There are several options for computing accumulation and wash-off of pollutants in SWMM (James and James, 2000). Here, an accumulation method that follows an exponential equation was used:

P S H E D = Q F A C T (1) * ff-e

(7.2)

where PSHED is the constituent quantity at time t; t is the preceding dry weather period ; QFACT(2) is the power or exponent for the build-up parameter; and Q F A C T (I) is the first build-up parameter, e.g. limit.

W a s h o ff is the process of erosion and transport of constituents from a catchment surface

during the period of runoff (Warwick and Tadepalli, 1991; Delleur, 1998). The relationship used within SWMM describes washoff at each time step to be proportional to the runoff rate (r) raised to a power (WASHPO)

P O F F (t)= R C O E F X *

* psH E D ,

(7.3)

124

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

where POFF (t) is constituent load washed off at time t; RCOEFX is washoff coefficient (RCOEFX=RCOFF/3600; RCOEFF is washoff coefficient; r is runoff rate over

subcatchment ;WASHPO is a runoff rate exponent.

Equations (7.2) and (7.3) are commonly used equations in SWMM and were the most appropriate to use with the given data. The RUNOFF block forms the source of generating hydrographs and pollutographs for most other SWMM blocks, and may be run for periods ranging from minutes to years.

Both buildup and washoff processes are conceivably continuous processes occurring over the catchment. Quality buildup and washoff parameters were subject to calibration process. Details are given in later section. Erosion Input

Erosion and sedimentation are often cited as major problems related to urban runoff (James and James, 2000). In this study an attempt was to made to simulate erosion of solids, in SWMM, erosion simulation falls under the water quality component of the

RUNOFF module. Erosion is treated as an additional water quality constituent, so that one of the fewer pollutants can be simulated. In addition, it is required that at least one quality constituent must be simulated (e.g., TSS). No particular soil characteristics (e.g., particle size distribution) are assigned to the erosion parameter, and its title is "Erosion" with units of mg/L, in the output.

To simulate soil erosion in SWMM, the parameter IROS in Line J1 was indicated. Erosion may be added to another constituent, e.g., suspended solids, if desired using parameter IROSAD in J1. However, the Erosion parameter was maintained as an individual parameter throughout the RUNOFF Module.

Other im portant input parameters are: (1) the maximum 30-minute rainfall intensity of the storm (single event) or of simulation period (continuous), RAINIT, (group J1); (2) the area of each subcatchment subject to erosion, ERODAR, (group K1); (3) the flow distance from the point of origin of overland flow over the erodible area to the point at which runoff enters inlet, ERLEN, (group K1); (4) the soil factor K, SOILF, group K1); (5) the cropping

125

R o n m d iic e d with n s rm is s lo n of the coovriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

m anagement factor C, CROPMF, (group K1); and (6) the control practice factor P, CONTPF, (group K1).

PCSWMM uses the Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE) to predict the average soil loss fo r a given storm o r time period. The USLE was developed by W ischm eier and Smith (1958) as an estimate of the average annual soil erosion from rainstorms for a given upland area, L, expressed as the average annual soil loss per unit area;

L = R *K *L S *C *P

.

(7.4)

where R is the rainfall factor, K is the soil erodibility factor, LS is the slope length gradient ratio, C is the cropping management factor or cover index factor, and P is the erosion control practice factor.

Maximum 30-minute rainfall intensity of the storm, param eter RAINIT, was estimated from an inspection of the input hyetograph prior to simulation.

Parameter ERODAR (group K1) represents the area of the subcatchm ent subject to erosion and in this study indicates the land area on which soil is exposed. 3 different values o f ERODAR were obtained fo r each of three stages of development. With progressing construction activities, the area of soil exposed decreased from 3.96 ha in the Fall 2002 to 0.23 ha at the end of construction in Novem ber 2003 (Table 7.6).

126

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 7.6: Input values fo r ERODAR SVVMM param eter.

Area exposed after housing Observation developm ent Period/Date Fall 2002 27-May-03 27-Jun-03 14-Jul-03 28-Jul-03 13"Aug-03 11-Sep-03 10-0ct-03 13-NOV-03 % 97 80 54 54 40 12 12 12 2.5

Catchm ent area exposed* % 29.6 25.1 16.9 16.9 12.6 3.7 3.7 3.7 0.8

Catchm ent area exposed

ha 3.84 3 25 2.19 2.19 1.63 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.10

Total catchment area exposed including banks area** ha 3^6 &38 2.32 2.32 1.76 0.61 0.61 0.61 0.23 development=4.05 ha

` Catchm ent area=15.1 ha, soil exposed Sabourin Kimble and Associates, 2000) " Banks area=0.126 ha

area after housing

The soil factor, K, is a measure of the susceptibility of soil particles to rainfall erosion and runoff transport. The input K value is estimated based on MTO recommendations (J. Li, 1997).

CROPMF, or cropping m anagem ent factor `C , is dependent upon the type of ground cover, the general m anagem ent practice and the condition of the soil over the area of concern. There are 3 different values for CROPMF that were exercised in this study in accordance to the phase of development.

Control Practice Factor `P ' (CO NTPF) accounts for the erosion-control effectiveness of superimposed practices, such as contouring, terracing, com pacting, sedim ent basins and control structures. Value 'C is taken from Fifield (2001).

Summ ary of RUNOFF block quality input parameters is presented in Table 7.7.

127

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 7.7: W ater quality calibration on event basis.

Event Date 14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 2-Oct-02 19-0ct-02 25-Oct-02 Average 2-May-03 5-May-03 11-May-03 20-May-03 4-Jun-03 8-Jun-03 A verage 15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 22-Sep-03 A verage Average

Phase

C a lib ra te d Q uality M odel P aram eters Q F A C T (I) W ASHPO RCOEFF ERLEN 400 200 300 210 250 250 268 200 430 210 200 200 200 240 200 200 265 222 243 0.725 1.5 0.878 1.2 0.64 1.9 1.141 2 3 2.43 2 2 1.55 2.163 1.217 1.09 1.06 1.122 1.475 0.02 0.1 0.1 1 0.01 7 1.372 0.246 0.05 0.1852 0.138 0.001 0.438 0.176 0.313 0.059 0.027 0.133 0.560 150 56.8 200 200 150 100 143 20 150 300 100 173 150 149 300 150 300 250 181

1 1

II 1 1

III

C a lib ra tio n

Water quality calibration focused on matctiing SS loads and shapes of pollutographs as close as possible to measurements by varying the sensitive parameters within the range given in the literature and the manual o f the model.

Four input quality parameters were found to be the most sensitive and were used to calibrate the loads of SS and shapes of pollutographs, namely: QFACT1, WASHPO, RCOEFF, and ERLEN. The last parameter ERLEN represents the erosion input into a simulation. All of these parameters, except ERLEN, are in a category 4 of uncertainty, which means that these parameters cannot be measured with any certainty at all (James, 2003). Their uncertainty falls into a range which James suggests as "who knows?" If any estimate can be made at all, perhaps assume 50-100% as a starting point" .Parameter ERLEN is scaled into category 2, meaning that its uncertainty is 10-25%.

128

R e a ro d u c e d with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The washoff exponent rate W ASHPO and coefficient R C O E F F are by far the most sensitive parameters during all the events. The initial value fo r QFACT1 was determined by simulating the 8 8 loads from the stable catchment. Its average value was found to be 250. A summary of quality calibration parameters on an event b a sis is also shown in Table 7.7.

Calibrated values for QFACT1 varied from 210 to 430 throughout the monitoring period. W ashoff parameters W A 8 H P 0 and RCOEFF were used to adjust initial values for 8 8 and the maximum concentration. Calibration values for W ASHPO fell into an average range of 1.14 to 2.16. This alm ost corresponds with the observations fro m Kuch's (James 2003) and Delleur's (1998) that typically the exponent W ASHPO takes values between 1.5-3.0 for particulate and less than 1.0 fo r dissolved constituents.

RCOEFF is the coefficient in the washoff equation. The value o f RCOEFF for 8 8 varied from 0.001 to 7,exhibiting the highest values for the events w ith highest observed 8 8 concentration.

Parameter ERLEN is scaled to 2 in the uncertainty category. Its value varied from 57 to 300, with initial starting value of 150, which was averaged from design maps.

Table 7.8 presents the water-quality input parameters used in all 8WI\/IM simulations in this study.

129

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 7.8; Comm on RUNOFF block water-quality input parameters.

Param eter KALC KWASH KACGUT Q FACT(1) Q FACT(2) W ASHPO RCOEFF ERODAR ERLEN SOILF CROPMF CONTPF ` calibrated range

Description Exponential constituent buildup Power-exponential washoff Pollutant buildup functionality First buildup parameter ( limit) Second buildup parameter (power or exponent) Runoff rate exponent W ashoff coefficient, in'^ Area of erosion, ha Fiow distance Soil factor `K' Cropping management factor 'C Control practice factor `P'

Value 2 0 1 222-268* 1 1.141-2.163* 0.133-1.372* 0.61-3.97* 143-250* 0.3 0.8-0.1* 1

Uncertainty Class B B B 4 4 4 4 1 2 3 3 3

7.4.2 S/T Block Param eter Development and Calibration

Suspended Solids are characterized by concentration aione, their removal is simulated through removal equations. Data Groups G1 through G3 are used to establish these removal equations. Removal of a SS is simulated as a function of its influent concentration and removal equation is

R - ( 3 i 2 +a?j

,

(7.5)

w here X3 is the removal equation variable; fraction, 0 < R < 1.0.

8 1 2

, a i 3 , aie are coefficients; and R is a removal

130

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

C a lib ra tio n

Quality calibration fo r the outlet in S/T block included adjusting the a-coefficients(pollutant removal values) and PCO(i) (concentration in the pond at the start of the simulation). PCO(I) values fall into category 4 of uncertainty, and a-coefficients - into category 2. Their values are shown in Table 7.9.

Table 7.9; Calibrated water-quality parameters for S/T block.

Calibrated Parameter 33 3i 2 3i 3 3i 6 PCO(I)

Value range From -0.000005 to -0.001 From 0.000065 to 1 From -0.000065 to -1 From 0.140 to 7 From 0.1 to 2300

131

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reoroducecl with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 8

MODELLING RESULTS

This chapter provides the results generated from the PCSWMM model. The results are presented separately for the construction catchment, combined catchment and the outlet.

8.1

Water Quantity Results

From the calibrated SWMM model, the runoff volumes and peak flows for monitored events were estimated.

Table 8.1 represents the comparison of observed and simulated inlet runoff volumes and peak flows for the construction catchment. The difference in runoff volume between observed and simulated events ranged between 0 and 8.3% and the difference in peak flow ranged between 0.17 and 5.9%. The total observed runoff volume over the total sampling period is found to be 113 mm compared to the total of 115 mm of simulated runoff volume over the same period. The average difference between observed and simulated runoff volume is 2%. The average difference between peak flows is also 2%.

133

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 8.1: Comparison of observed and simulated w ater quantity results for the construction catchment.

Event Date

Rainfall (mm) 28.2 13.3 18.4 10.0 13.0 9.4 6.8 17.4 17.8 10.8 13US 2333 15.0 3839 32L2

Comparison of Runoff Volume

Comparison of Peak Flow

14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 02-0ct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 02-May-03 05-May-03 11-May-03 20-May-03 04-Jun-03 08-Jun-03 15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 02-NOV-03 Total Average Correlation

Observed Simulated Observed Simulated % % ' (mm) Difference (mm) (I/s) (I/s) Difference 6.80 6.80 231.0 0.00 231.4 0.17 1.80 99.4 1.70 5.56 101.0 1.58 7.00 6.90 70.9 71.9 1.43 1.39 2.40 72.4 2.20 8.33 72^8 0.55 3.20 24.0 3.00 6.25 25.5 5.88 29.0 3.10 102 3.23 30.5 4.92 3.00 16.7 290 17.5 4.57 3.33 1.41 97.9 7.00 7.10 99.4 1.51 5.30 63 7 5.10 65.0 3.77 2.00 3.00 2.90 66.8 68X3 2.20 3.33 49.5 5.30 50.4 1.79 5.30 0.00 16.20 375.7 15.90 377.4 0.45 1.85 6.10 106.7 1.20 1.64 108.0 6.00 25.90 25.30 222.6 0.18 2.32 223.0 1.04 77.7 1.02 19.00 19.20 78.5 115.4 113.0 2.0 0.9 0.9

Figures 8.1 and 8.2 show a strong correlation between observed and simulated volumes and peak flows for construction catchment.

1:1

134

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

R = 0.9

S 20

f  D

0 10
15

20

25

30

Observed R unoff (mr|i

Fig.

8.1:

Relation

between

observed

and

simulated

runoff volume for the

construction catchment.

135

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

400
350

(f>
300

·u

I3
w
E

250

200
150

I
C L

c e (U 100
50

01 50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

Peak Flow Observed (1/^)

Fig. 8.2: Relation between observed and simulated peak flows for the construction catchment.

Figure 8.3 (a-c) compares observed and simulated hydrographs fo r some events.

136

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Oct. 25, 2002 Catchment-1070 Rain=9.4 mm 0
Inflow Observed
Inflow S im u la te d

0.05 0.1 0.15 E E _ c 0.25 '« 0.2 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45

I

L L

10/25/02 19:40

10/25/02 21:45

10/25/02 10/26/02 1:530/26/02 4:000/26/02 6:04 23:50 Date/Time

a)
May 5, 2003 Catchment-1070 Rain=17.4 mm 120

0
0.2

100

3 R ain Inflow O b se rv ed " i n f lo w S im u la te d

0.4

0.6

w

0.8 I

1
40

C H

a

1.2
1.4

20
1.6 1.8 5/5/03 14:00 5/5/03 17:45 5/5/03 21:30 Date/Time 5/6/03 1:15 5/6/03 5:00

b)

137

Reoroduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

May 20, 2003 Catchment-1070 Rain=10.8 mm 80 I
d Z H R a in

70 60 50

-

-- In flo w O b s e rv e d

·*^--*~" ln llo w S im u la te d

0.5

E
40

E
1.5 0:

o
u.

ro

30

20 10 0 '..
5/20/03 11:30 5/20/03 12:45 5/20/03 14:00 5/20/03 15:15 5/20/03 2.5

16:30

5/20/03 17:45

5/20/03 19:00

Date/Time

c)

Fig, 8.3 (a-c): Comparison of observed and simulated hydrographs for the construction catchment.

Table 8.2 represents the comparison of observed and simulated water quantity results for the combined catchment. The difference in runoff volume between simulated and observed events ranged between 0% and 12% and difference in peak flow ranged between 0.17% and 5.88%. Simulated and observed total volumes differ by only 0.2%, average difference between peak flows is 1.25%.

138

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 8.2: C o m pa rison o f observed and sim u la te d w a te r q u a n tity re s u lts fo r the co m b in e d catchm ent.

E vent Date

R ainfall (mm)

C o m pa rison o f R u n o ff V o lu m e

C o m p a riso n o f Peak Flow

O bserved S im ulated O bserved S im ulated % % (mm) D ifference (I/s) (mm) D ifference (I/s) 7.12 2 82 9.24 3.18 4.11 4.62 3.41 8.50 7.52 5.50 18.68 6.30 25.60 19.20 125.8 0.9 7.13 2.82 9.72 3.36 4.21 4.63 :168 8.60 7.65 4.91 18.89 6.32 25.13 19.00 126.05 0.14 0.00 4.94 5.36 2.38 0.22 7.34 1.16 1.70 -12.02 1.11 0.32 -1.87 -1.05 0.20 231.0 99.4 70h9 72/1 24.0 29T) 16.7 97.9 63/7 66/3 375.7 106.7 222.6 77.7 231.4 101.0 71.9 72/8 25/5 30/5 17.5 99.4 65.0 68/3 377.4 108.0 223.0 78/5 0.17 1.58 1.39 0.55 5.88 4.92 4.57 1.51 2.00 2.20 0.45 T 20 0.18 1.02

14-Sep28.2 02 20-Sep13.3 02 27-Sep18.4 02 02-Oct10.0 02 19-Oct13.0 02 25-Oct9.4 02 02-May6.8 03 05-May17.4 03 11-May17.8 03 20-May10^8 03 08-Jun23^ 03 15-Sep15.0 03 19-Sep38^ 03 02-Nov32L2 03 b ta l A verage C o rrelation

1.2
0.9

Figures 8.4 and 8.5 show very strong correlation between observed and simulated volumes and peak flows for combined catchment.

139

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

35
30

-g 2 5

E

O' T3

° 20 3
15

R "= 0 .9

ü

3 E « 1 0

10

15

20

25

30

35

O b s e rv e d R u n o ff (m m )

Fig. 8.4: Relation between observed and sim ulated runoff volum e fo r the combined catchment.
1:1

140

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

450

400 350
= 0.9 300
LL

^ 250

i 150
100

50

0
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450
O b s e rv e d P e a k F lo w (I/s)

Fig. 8.5; Relation between observed and sim ulated peak flow s for the combined catchment.

Table 8.3 presents the com parison of observed and sim ulation w ater quantity results fo r the outlet. The difference in runoff volum e between sim ulated and observed events ranged between 1.8% and 84% averaging 7.4%; and difference in peak flow ranged between 0.3% and 28.8% averaging in 1.3%.

141

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 8.3; Comparison of observed and simulated outlet runoff volume and peak flow for the outlet.

Comparison of Volum e Comparison of Peak Flow Rainfall Observed Simulated Date (mm) Observed Simulated % % Observed Difference Difference (1/s) (m:) (I/s) (m ') 1073.2 1044.5 2.7 12.6 14-Sep-02 28 2 12a 1.0 506.4 16.6 422.4 8.6 8.6 20-Sep-02 13.3 -0.9 1533.4 1.8 16.4 1505.3 16.3 27-Sep-02 18.4 0.6 12.4 386.0 11.0 337.9 10.6 02-0ct-02 10.0 3.3 574.1 -7.0 614.4 10.4 10.4 19-Oct-02 13.0 -0.4 25-Oct-02 9.4 737.3 529.3 -39.3 7.4 7.6 2.4 -78.6 506.9 283.8 8.4 0.6 8.5 02"May-03 6.8 1244.2 104522 -19.0 16.8 -0.3 16.8 05~May"03 17.4 17.9 6.1 17.6 -1.6 783/4 834.3 20-May-03 10.8 5800.8 31.5 3970.9 31.6 44.3 2823 08-Jun-03 23U5 -56.7 607.7 14.2 14.4 1.4 15-Sep-03 15.0 95223 1010.0 1858.6 -84.0 16.6 1.9 38.0 16.3 19-Sep-03 -81.5 -12.6 3091.0 1703.0 18.8 16.7 02-Nov-03 3222 15887.0 -7.4 1.3 Total 17068.9 0.9 0.8 Correlation Event

The relationship between observed and simulated peak flow s is shown on Figure 8.6.

142

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

7000 6000 5000 E 2 40.0
T3

1:1

0 )

Pf = 0.8

JS

^ 3000 E'

w 2000

1000

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

Observed V olu m e

Fig. 8.6: Relation between observed and simulated runoff volum e for the outlet.

Value of 0.8 is obtained indicating a strong correlation between two variables.

143

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

50.0

40.0

1:1

f
E 30.0 I

2 ; "O Q ) % 20.0 3 w
0.

*

1 00

0.0

00

10.0

20 0

30.0

40 0

50.0

O b served P e a k (U s )

Fig. 8.7: Relation between observed and simulated peak flow s for the outlet.

Simulated outlet peak flow rates match the observed ones more accurately. Strong correlation of 0.9 is found (Figure 8.7).

Figure 8.8 (a-c) represents the comparison of observed and simulated inflow and outflow hydrographs for the combined catchment and the outlet for several events. Hydrographs fo r all of the events modeled are included in Appendix 1 .

144

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Sept. 14, 2002 Combined Catchment and Outlet Rain=28.8 mm

350 300 250 
(A 200
Rain Inflow Observed Inflow Simulaled Outflow Observed -O utflow Simulated

0.5

I
2.5

I
O i

(0

100
3.5

9/14/02 21:00 9/15/02 3:40 9/15/02 10:19 9/15/02 16:59 9/15/02 23:39 9/16/02 6:19 Date/Time

May 5, 2003 Combined Catchment and Outlet Rain=17.4 mm 160 140

0.2
Rain Inflow Observed Inflow Simulated Outflow Observed

120
100

0.4
0.6

Outflow Simulated

E

e
u.

I

60 1.4

q ;

5/5/03 14:00

5/5/03 19:00

5/6/03 0:005/6/03 5:00

5/6/03 10:00

5/6/03 15:00

5/6/03

20:00

Date/Time

a)

145

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Sept. 15. 2003 Combined Catchment and Outlet Rain=15 mm

160
140
 Inflow O b s e rv e d Inflow S im u la te d X O utflow O b se rv ed O utflow S im u la te d

0,5

120
--

100

o u_

c '(5

O'
2.5 40

3.5 9 /1 5/03 11:00 9/1 5/03 18:30 9/16/03

2:00

9/16/03 9:30

9 /1 6/03 17:00

Date/Time

c) Fig. 8.8 (a-c): Comparison of observed and simulated hydrographs for the combined inlet and the outlet.

In summary, the construction catchment total observed and simulated flow volume and peak flow rates are matched within 8% and 6%, respectively, while differences between observed and simulated volumes and observed and simulated peak flows averaged 2%. At the combined catchment total volume differs from the simulated total volume by 0.2%, Simulated peak flow in the combined catchment differ from that observed by 1.2% in average, or within 6%.The outlet total observed volume is 7% bigger than the simulated. Peak flow differs by only 1.3 % in average.

146

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

8.2

W a te r Q u a lity R e su lts

As was mentioned earlier, stormwater quality modeling is an inexact exercise because of the many variable and interdependent factors that can influence water quality (James and James, 2000).

The runoff sediment load from a construction site yields from two sources: (i) buildup and washoff of sediments from the watershed surface, and (ii) soil erosion from the exposed pervious area. Accordingly, SWMM uses two routines for sediment generation during a runoff event. First, a buildup and washoff routine which is typically used for simulating SS load from catchments. Second, soil erosion routine, which uses Universal Soil Loss Equation to model sediments from soil erosion. The simulated sediment load for the event is the combination of both sources.

C o n s tru c tio n C a tc h m e n t

The parameter values of buildup and washoff processes and erosion processes for the Catchment-1070 were obtained during runoff quality calibration. Regarding the erosion input: the exposed soil area for the construction site which was subjected to erosion comprised of two sources: (i) soil exposure in the individual lots which were monitored, and (ii) soil exposure from the banks of the construction sediment control pond.

As mentioned previously, the observed SS values were obtained by monitoring at the inlet during the first 2 to 6 hours of an event. This data was sufficient for the events with short durations: however, it was only partial for the most of the events.

Table 8.4 represents the comparison of observed and simulated water quality results. During the sampling events (2-6 hours duration), a total mass load of 17294 kg was observed and a total mass load of 18783 kg was simulated. The difference between observed and simulated total mass load for individual events ranged between 6 and 105%. This is typical in case of water quality simulation. The total simulated load for the whole sampling period was found to be 22784 kg.

147

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Total simulated load from erosion is 351.6 kg, which is only 1.5% of the total SS load coming into the pond. In average. 70% of the mass load is entering the pond within the first hours.

Table 8.4: Comparison of observed and simulated mass loads for the construction catchment. Comparison of 8 8 Simulated Load % Load Loads for sampling 8 8 load for from from the % period the the Whole Event Rainfall erosion Difference erosion (Catchment-1070) Event (mm) Date 8imulated Observed (kg) (kg) (kg) (kg) -104.9 1758 1307 638 16.07 0.9 14-Sep-02 28/2 1979 0.0 31.0 1.6 953 952 27-Sep-02 1 8/t 2422 1.3 1834 6.4 32T) 10.0 1717 02-0ct-02 154 63 -17.5 6.0 3.9 74 19-Oct-02 13fO 2764 3436 0.2 2190 36/3 5.0 25-Oct-02 9.4 0.3 156 268 0.7 88 43^ 02"May-03 6.8 2862 19.4 5.7 0.7 266 282 05-May-03 17.4 1941 1043 -15.5 31.0 1.6 1205 11-May-03 17\8 1097 18.4 1.7 765 27^ 557 20-May-03 10^ 2514 1.5 7254 6707 -8.2 37.1 08-Jun-03 22h6 1118 1.0 0.1 642 32.6 433 15-Sep-03 15.0 1928 1.4 0.1 43.9 745 1328 19-Sep-03 38.0 0.1 787 50.8 1020 1.3 387 22-Sep-03 25.0 959 0.0 149 0.3 118 20^ 02-NOV-03 32/2 22784 351.6 17294 18783 7.93 Total 0.9 Correlation A strong correlation of 0.9 is found between observed and simulated SS loads (Figure 8.9).

148

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

8000 7000
COCO

^ 5000
=0 .9

4000 E 3000
2000

m oo

0

1000

2000

3000

4000
Observed Load (kg)

5000

6000

7000

8000

Fig. 8.9: Relation between observed and simulated mass load for the construction catchment.

Table 8.5 shows that the observed average SS concentration from the construction catchment is estimated to be 3288 mg/L, simulated - 3984 mg/L, Observed average SS concentration varied from 74 mg/L in Oct.2, 2002 to 7254 mg/L in June 8, 2003. The difference between simulated and observed SS concentration averaged 17.5% within the range of 105%.

149

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 8.5: Comparison of observed and simulated SS concentrations for the construction catchment. Comparison of SS % Simulated Concentrations for sampling Difference EMC for period the Entire (Catchment-1070) Event Simulated (mg/L) Observed (mg/L) (mg/L) 8766 6004 9935 1150 13801 412 1040 2266 1448 5030 687 367 238 366 3288 0.8 on (AEMC) from the Ballymore construction L 4281 4613 10561 973 22112 771 1104 1968 2399 4650 1030 662 481 462 3984 -104.8 -30.2 5.9 -18.2 37\6 46.6 5.8 -15.1 39.6 -8.2 33^ 44.6 50.5 20.8 17.5 860 2180 7813 370 6876 685 3135 2809 2798 1195 1422 574 449 385 2254

Event Date

Rainfall (mm)

14-8ep-02 27-8ep-02 02-Oct-D2 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 02-May-0 3 05-May-03 11 -May-03 20-May-03 08-Jun-03 15-8ep-03 19-8ep-03 22-8ep-03 02-Nov-03 Average Correlation

28^ 18.4 10.0 13.0 9.4 6.8 17.4 17.8 10.8 23.6 15.0 38.0 25.0 32.2

The average event mean c o ,.

watershed was estimated as 225^ , · ' ,;ithin a range of 385 mg/L to 7813 ng/L . Figure 8.10 shows the relationship between observed and simulated 8 8 concentrations. Correlation of 0.8 is determined, which is less than correlation obtained for the mass loads.

150

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

30000

- r 25000

·5 20000

1:1
O 15000

= 0. T 3
·2 10000

5000

5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

O b s rv e d SS C o n c e n tra tio n (m g /L )

Fig. 3.10: Relation between observed and simulated SS concentrations for the construction catchment.

Figure 8.11 (a-d) represents the comparison of observed and simulated pollutographs for September 14, 2002, May 5, 2003 and May 20, 2003, and show the portion of observed and simulated SS during the sampling period of the whole event.

151

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

25000

Sept. 14, 2002 Catchment-1070 Rain=28.8 mm

20000

@1 %!*

0.5
Rain
S S O b se rv ed SS S im ulated

15000

1.5

D ) _ E w
to 10000

I'

6 liouis oC.samplinu

^

E E. '5 2.5
Ç

a:

5000 3.5

0
9/14/02 21:00 9/14/02 23:55 9/15/02 2:50 Date/Tim e 9/15/02 5:45 9/15/02 8:40

a)

152

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

May 5, 2003 Catchment-1070 Rain=17.4 mm 10000 9000 8000 7000 6000 % 5000 w to 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 5/5/03 14:00 5/5/03 17:45
() Ilnurs ul'sampling
. Rain SS O b se rv ed SS S im ij{a{e d {

0 0.2 0.4 0.6

I!

1

0.8 I

1 I a;
1.2 1.4 1.6
1.8

5/5/03 21:30 Date/Time

5/6/03 1:15

5/6/03 5:00

b)

May 20, 2003 Catchment-1070 Rain=10.8 mm
4500
3 Rain S S O b s e rv e d

4000 3500 3000 ^ 2500

*

-- S S S im u la te d

0.5

E E
_c

« 2000
1500 1000 500 6 hours of .sampling 0

nj

-------5/20/03 14:00 5/20/03 16:30

5/20/03 11:30

5/20/03 19:00

Date/Time

C)

153

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Sept.19, 2003 Catchment-1070 Rain=38 mm 1200
U i n

1000
· ·> 1 , ' - ;   I t ' i i ' . 1 .it Î! f ' I T

R ain SS O b se rv ed

0.5

S S S im u la te d

800

D )
E 600
!ii! Î  ' ! ! 4 ; ' ».

w m
400

1 1 : A

1.5

a:

to

 .

200

2.5

V
S

0 9/19/03 6:00 9/19/03 9:45 9/19/03 13:30 9/19/03 17:15 9/19/03

21:00

9/20/03 0:45

9/20/03 4:30

Date/Time

d)

Fig. 8.11; Comparison of observed and simulated SS pollutographs for 4 events.

The duration of May 20, 2003 event was only 8 hours. Because the time of the observed poiiutograph matched the time of simulated poliutograph, there was a chance to verify the m odel's performance: the difference between observed and simulated loads was 27% which is a fairly good result for quality calibration.

Based on simulated EMC results, a graph of change of EM C's during the whole monitoring period was created (Figure 8.12).

154

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

9000 8000 O) 7000

E -g
° en (D g O

6000
5000 4000

O

3000 2000 1000

C O
C/0

Fall 2002

May - July 2003

August- November 2003

Construction Catchment SS Concentration

Fig 8.12: E v o lu tio n o f EMC fo r th e c o n s tru c tio n ca tch m e n t.

C o m b in e d C a tc h m e n t

For the com bined catchm ent the decrease in EMC during the study period was observed as well. Simulated results for mass loads and EMC are shown in Table 8.6. The highest value of event concentration of 5957 m g/L is obtained for the phase I event in October 2002. The lowest 8 8 EMC is 378 mg/L and characterizes the very last monitored event in phase III.

155

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 8.6; Simulated EMC and mass load and EMC for the combined catchment.

Rainfall Event Date (mm) 2& 2 13.3 18.4 10.0 13.0 9.4 6.8 17.4 17.8 10.8 23 6 15.0 38.0 32.2

Simulated SS Load for the W hole Event (kg) f# 0 ' 111 2807 3074 226 3273 448 4687 2798 1842 2599 1346 2256 1104 1987

Simulated EMC

14-Sep-02 22-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 02-0ct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 02-May-03 05-May-03 11-May-03 20-May-03 08-Jun-03 15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 02-NOV-03 Total Average

(mg/L) 755 256 1880 5957 306 4441 806 3532 2383 2440 1034 1388 584 378 1867

SS Load from Erosion (kg) 122.0 24.6 4& 8 32.0 5.0 3.0 0.7 24.5 20.0 15.0 36.0 1.0 1.4 0.3 23.9

% of SS from Erosion 14 22 2 1 2 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0

For the combined catchment the total simulated SS mass load for the whole study period is 1987 kg, average EMC is 1867 mg/L, ranging from 256 to 5957 mg/L. Mass load coming from erosion is 24 kg which is only 1% of the total mass load of SS. Similar to results from construction catchment, EMC experiences gradual decrease from phase 1to phase II and to phase III : 3620 mg/L in the Fall 2002 period, 2124 mg/L in May-July 2003; and 708 mg/L in August-Novem ber 2003 period. Figure 8.13 represents the evolution of EMC's throughout the study period.

156

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

7000 6000 ca 500C 4000

2 c m o
c

3000 2000 1000

O
CO

0
AugustFall 2002 May - July 2003 November 2003

I

---- Combined Catchment SS Concentration

!

Fig 8.13; Evolution of EMC for combined catcfiment.

O u tle t

Table 8.7 presents the comparison of observed and simulated SS loads results. The total observed mass load is 380.6 kg which is 15% less than simulated load o f 447.2 kg for the whole study period. Simulated total SS load for the whole period (event of June 8 was not considered) is 656.7 kg, which indicates that within 6 hours of average sampling period only 15.5% of sediments exited the pond's outlet. The rest 84.5% seems to pass out later.

157

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 8.7: Com parison of observed and simulated SS loads for the o u tlet Comparison of SS Loads for Sim ulated SS load sampling period % for the Entire Event Date Rainfall (Outlet) Difference (mm) Event Observed Simulated (kg) (kg) (kg) 12.7 20 37 14-Sep-02 28.2 30 3 ^ 2.7 44 1.5 17.1 2 0 -S e p -0 2 l 13.3 89.9 18.4 5.6 36 27-Sep-02 3.6 0.6 10.0 18 3.4 02-0ct-0 2 0.5 2.7 19-Oct-02 13.0 2.0 26 40.3 0.7 9.4 0.5 3.5 25-Oct-02 29 2.5 2.7 7 5.4 6.8 02"IVIay-03 17.4 4.4 71.0 05-May-03 4.3 2 19.4 10.8 20.4 -5 20-May-03 35 0 345.4 22 4599.0 08-Jun-03 23.6 26& 5 -94 15-Sep-03 15.0 31 16.0 18.1 15.0 -47 19-Sep-03 221 15.8 3& 0 53.4 11.0 12.0 8 02-NOV-03 32.2 101.8 112.1 -10.1% 656.7 otal 0 .7 Correlation

W ith a total observed mass load of 112.1 kg and a simulated mass load 101.8 kg this exhibits a difference of 10%. Correlation of 0.7 is observed between simulated and observed loads.

158

Rep.mduced with permission of the copyright owner. Fuilner reproduction prohibited without permission.

35

30

25

I

·O g 20 ·D 0 ) ü 5 1 0
E

= 0.7

10

15

20

25

30

35

Observed Load (kg)

Fig. 8.14: Relation between observed and simulated mass load for the ou tlet Regarding the modelling o f SS concentration, the following results are obtained (presented in Table 8.8): average SS observed concentration is 202.5 mg/L, which Is 1: less than simulated SS concentration of 242.6 mg/L. Correlation coefficient between observed and simulated SS concentration is 0.84 (Figure 8.15). AEMC is 93 mg/L.

159

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 8.8: Comparison of observed and simulated SS concentrations for the outlet. Comparis,on of SS Concentn atioi 6 for samplin 3 period (Oui let) Simulated Observed Simulated EMC

Difference

Event Date

Rainfall (mm)

(kg)
14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 02-0ct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 02-May-03 05-May-03 20-May-03 08-Jun-03 15-Sep-03 19-Sep'03 02-NOV-03 Average Correlation 2& 2 13U3 18.4 10.0 13.0 9.4 6.8 17.4 10.8 2315 15.0 38.0 32.2 277 27 75 7 29 17 30 36 110 1630 121 93 88 202.5 0.8

(kg)
395 58 120 9 41 23 32 28 105 1862 66 80 197 242.6 17%

(%) 30 53 38 22 29 26 6 -29 -5 12 -83 -16 55

(mg/L) 278 55 59 9 66 8 19 65 42 316 33 16 184 93

4 50

400

0> 3 50

E

.2 300

C

Ï
S 250 =
CO T3

0.8

.
150

3

*3

I

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

O b s e rv e d S S C o n cen tratio n (m g/L)

Fig. 8.15: Relation between observed and simulated SS concentrations fo r the outlet.

160

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 8.16 shows the change in EMC during the whole study period. EMC for Fall 2002 is found to be 93 mg/L, for May-July it is 110.5 mg/L and for August- November 137 mg/L. It was found to increase slowly which indicates that overall SS concentration of the pond increased due to unsettled sediments accumulated over the period of time.

400 350 1 - 300 250
200

150

50

Fall 2002

May - July 2003

A u g u s t- N o v em b er 2003

r
Fig. 8.16: Evolution of EMC for the outlet.

Figure 8.17 (a-c) show the comparison between outlet pollutographs for events of October 2002 and May 2003.

161

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

October 25, 2002 Outlet Rain=9.4 mm 70 60 50 40 30

0

ll!i

IH ;!

'!

I

0.05

W ill

.
-

Rain S S O b s e rv e d SS S im u la te d

0.1
0.15

g

D )

'·i:' ·f I
I

0.2

I

«5

\

0.25 -f 0.3 0.35

of

20 10

h

0.4 0.45

10/25/02 0:00

10/25/02 10/25/02 20:55 22:10

10/25/02 23:25

10/26/02 0:40

10/26/02 10/26/02 1:55 3:10

Date/Time

a)

May 5, 2003 Outlet Rain=17.4 mm 700 600 500 400 300

0.2
B?) R ain " S S O b se rv ed S S S im u la te d

0.4

0.6

D )
E
«

E 0.8 E

III!
E d

200
1.4

100
1.8
5/5/03 14:00 5/5/03 17:45 5/5/03 5/6/03 1:156/6/03 5:005/6/03 8:45 21:30 5/6/03 12:30

Date/Time

b)

162

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

May 20, 2003 Outlet Rain=10.8 mm 250

200

- · Rain · SS Observed '·S 3 Simulated

0.5

150

aI

E U )

D)

'

E

(O 100

i
n

E

1.5 O U

c m

\

50

i<î
2.5 5/20/03 11.30 5/20/03 15:15 5/20/03 19:00 5/20/03 22:45 5/21/03 2:30 5/21/03 6:15 5/21/03 10:00

Date/Time

c)

Fig. 8.17 (a-c): Comparison of observed and simulated SS pollutographs for 3 events for the outlet.
Using formulas described in Chapter 3, load-based and event-based removal efficiencies are calculated. The results are shown in Tables 8.9 and 8.10.

Table 8.9: Load-based removal efficiency.

163

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Event Date

Inflow Load Simulated

Outflow Load Simulated (whole event)

Removal Efficiency 53.5% 7.7% 95.7% 99.7% 81.9% 99.3% 92.9% 99.4% 94.3% 95.1% 96.5% 82.2% 87%

(kg)
14-Sep 20-Sep 27-Sep 2-Oct 19-Oct 25-Oct 2-IVIay 5-May 20-May 15-Sep 19-Sep 2-Nov Average 850 111 2807 3074 226 3273 448 4687 1842 3/) 3 2256 1104

(kg)
395 58 120 9 41 23 32 28 105 66 80 197

Table 8.10: Concentration-based removal efficiency. Inflow Concentration Combined Simulated (mg/L) 755 1880 5957 306 4441 806 3532 2383 1034 1388 584 378 Outflow Concentration Simulated (mg/L) 278 55 59 9 66 8 19 65 42 33 16 184 63.1% 97.1% 99.0% 97.2% 98.5% 99.0% 99.5% 97.3% 95.9% 97.6% 97.3% 51.5% 91%

Event Date

Removal Efficiency

14-Sep 20-Sep 27-Sep 2-Oct 19-Oct 25-Oct 2-May 5-May 20-May 15-Sep 19-Sep 2-Nov Average

164

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 9

CONTINUOUS SIMULATION AND BOTTOM SEDIMENT ACCUMULATION

This chapter covers the assessment of sediment load entering the pond during the study period. The PCSWMM modeling approach and comparison of modeling results along with field results obtained by actual measurements of bottom sediment accumulation was implemented. Also, assessment of long-term removal efficiency by the pond is presented.

9.1

Bottom Sediment Accumulation

To measure bottom sediment accumulation within the pond, standard surveying techniques were used, as described in detail in Chapter 4. This method was applied near the end of the monitoring period in October 2003. Thirteen measurement points with known calculated elevation values were selected. From these measurements, the total accumulation of sediments was obtained.

Initial bottom pond elevations in August 2002, measured elevations in October 2003 and total accumulation during the study period are shown in Table 9.1.

165

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 9.1: Sediment Accumulation during Fail 2002-Fall 2003. E levatio n in A ugust 2002 (m) 298 297.5 297.5 298 298 298 298 298 298 298 298 298 298 A verage Elevation in O ctober 2003 (m) 298.07 297.58 297.6 298.09 298.1 298.08 298.1 298.09 298.07 298.15 298.25 298.2 298.3 Total A c c u m u la tio n (m) 0.07 0.08 0.1 0.09 0.1 0.08 0.1 0.09 0.07 0.15 0.25 0.2 0.3 0.13

Applying the calculated value of 0.13 m for average sediments' depth and known pool's area value of 704 m^and sediments' density of 1230 kg/m^(MOE, 2003), value of 111903.5 kg of total mass accumulated within study period is calculated. Considering contributing area of 15.1 ha, sediment accumulation rate of 6.0 m^/ha is obtained.

9.2

C o n tin u o u s S im u latio n

9.2.1

A sse ssm en t o f S edim ent Load, C o n ce n tra tio n and R em oval E fficie ncy

In order to estimate the sediment loads and pond performance during the study period from September 2002 to November 2003, long-term simulation PCSWMM was conducted. The continuous simulation model was based on 9 months of hourly rainfall data (from September 2002 to June 2003) extracted from Toronto Buttonville Airport 30-years rainfall record.

All o f the calibrated quantity and quality parameters of RUNOFF and S/T blocks that vary from event to event, including percentage imperviousness, impervious area depression storage, subcatchment width, slope, impervious Manning's coefficient, washoff coefficients

166

Reproduced

ith permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

and etc., were averaged. Average values of these calibrated parameters served as an input parameters to RUNOFF and S/T blocks of PCSWMM. Input files are included in Appendix H.

Based on model results, 69290 kg of sediments entered the pond and 3187 kg are exited the pond during the 9 months of simulation. To account for the July-October months, the average monthly sediment load values of 7699 kg for inflow and 354 kg for the outflow were used. Thus, total estimated sediment loads entering and exiting the pond during the study period were 100086 kg and 4603 kg, respectively. The remaining 95482 kg, or a layer of 0.11 m sediments is calculated to have been deposited at the bottom of the pond over the study period. Considering the contributing area of 15.1 ha, estimated accumulation rate is 5.1 m % a.

The difference of 0.02 m between modelled depth of sediments and measured depth can be explained either by crude measurements or errors during stormwater quality modeling.

Figure 9.1 represents PCSWMM plot output file results in the form of outlet treated flow and SS concentration for the study period.

167

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2 0 0 2 -2 0 0 3 C o n tin u o u s S im u la tio n
G ullet Flows and Outlet SS C oncentration Ballym ore SW M T re a te d 0.025 0.020 'S r* iC £ 0.015 0.010 0.005 0.000 750

LL

1

1

1

JJL

m

E

O )

500

(0 O T

250

j.
Aug 3003 S ep O ct N ov D ec Jon 2003 Feb Mar A pr M ay Jun Jul

Date/Tim e

Fig. 9.1; Long-term continuous simulation for the period of Septem ber 2002November 2003.

Applying modelled total simulated inflow and outflow volumes values, average inflow and outflow concentrations of sediments are calculated. For ttie study period average SS concentration for the inflow is found to be 2033 mg/L, for the outflow 99 mg/L. These values are closely matching with the average EMC's simulated on an event basis: 1867 mg/L for the inflow from the combined catchment and 93 mg/L fo r the outflow.

Pond performance during the period of 2002-2003 was estimated. Removal efficiencies (RE) results are shown in Table 9.2.

168

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 9.2: Sum m ary of long-term simulated, event-based simulated, and observed
in s ta n ta n e o u s re m o v a l e ffic ie n c ie s .

Average C-Based RE (%) On Event Continuous Basis Simulation 95 91

Average Load-Based RE (%) Continuous On Event Basis Simulation 87 95

Average Instantaneous Observed RE (%) Load-based 96

These values are very close, averaging 93%, indicating high sedim ent removal efficiency by the pond.

9.2.2

Long-Term Perform ance

Long-term continuous simulation was conducted to estimate the cumulative construction sediment loads leaving the site. The continuous simulation model was based on 3 years hourly rainfall data from Toronto Buttonville Airport for average and extreme wet year conditions. The average rainfall-year condition was assessed using the 1978 to 1980 rainfall record and the extrem e rainfall year condition was assessed u

sing the 1990 to 1992 rainfall record. The May 2003 watershed condition, which represents the active building construction scenario, was used for the continuous simulation.

Tables 9.3 and 9.4 represent the w ater quantity and quality results of continuous simulation of pond model.

169

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 9.3: Long-term simulation of w ater quantity. A verage W et Year C o n d itio n Param eter (A p ril 1978 - N ovem ber 1998) (mm) Total precipitation Total infiltration Total evaporation Surface runoff 1,662 438 390 874 (m l 255,250 67,260 59,880 134,210 E xtrem e W et Y ear C o n d itio n (A p ril 1990 - N ovem ber 1992) (m m ) 1,860 490 434 983 (m l 285,610 75,250 66,700 151,000

Table 9.4; L o n g -te rm s im u la tio n w a te r quality. A verage W et Year C o n d itio n P aram eter (A p ril 1978 - N o vem b er 1998) (kg) Total inflow load Total outflow load Removal efficiency(% ) 186,360 16,772 91 E xtrem e W et Year C ondition (A p ril 1990 - N ovem ber 1992) (kg) 209,000 20,450 90

The long-term SS removal efficiency for the Ballymore Pond was estimated as 91% and 90% for average and extreme wet year conditions. This satisfies the Level 1, Enhanced receiving water protection. This removal performance meets the highest criteria under the MOE SMPD manual ("Enhanced Protection"). However, the overall system performance depends on the receiving water impacts due to actual flow rates and concentration discharged into receiving waters.

The annual sediment-loading rate from the construction site was estimated to be 3.2 and 3.4 m^/ha for average and w et year conditions, respectively. This compares to 1.9 m^/ha for stable watersheds with sim ilar imperviousness (MOE, 2003).

170

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 9.2 represents the sample continuous simulation results in the form of outlet flow and SS concentration for May 2003.

M a y 2 0 0 3 S a m p le L o n g -T e rm C o n tin u o u s S im u la tio n
Outlet Flows and Outlet S S C oncentration Ballym ore S W M Treated 0.025 

0.020

È
I

0.015 0.010 0.005
 

:

0.000
750 -

500 ·

E
C O

(0

250 ·

1 M ay M a y 2003

8 Thu

15 Thu D ate/T im e

22 Thu

Figure 9.2; Sample long-term continuous sim ulation results for May 2003.

Figure 9.3 represents the comparison of observed and simulated flow for May 2003 as a model verification.

171

1 1 ^ Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

0 .0 4 5

0.04 0.035 0.03
M 0.021

0.02

0.015
0.01

0.005

S

CO

o

s
lO

S

s

LU
C O

in

lO

§

i

o

I

o

C O

CO

o

s s

i

I

Observed Outflow

· Sim ulated Outflow

Fig. 9.3: Com parison o f observed and sim ulated flow for May 2003.

172

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 10

RECEIVING WATER ANALYSIS

This section presents the preliminary impacts assessm ent fo r receiving water, due to effluent discharge from construction sediment control facility. The receiving water analysis accounts for concentration and duration of exposure in the receiving w ater body. Figure 10.1 presents conceptually the receiving w ater impact assessm ent approach.

U p s tre a m
P ro p o s e d D e v e lo p m e n t

D u r a t io n o f E x p o s u r e

Critical Concentration Tim

ESC S W M F a c ility

M ix in g Z o n e

Critical Concentration

R e c e iv in g S tre a m (F is h e ry H a b ita t)

D o w n s tre a m
Tim

Fig. 10.1: Receiving w ater impacts assessment approach. During runoff events the effluent from a catchment enters a control the facility; it enters the watercourse and mixing occurs in the stream. The concentration in the downstream zone depends on: Effluent concentration from the ESC facility Background concentration in the stream Stream flow and pond Inflow/outflow rates.

Two methods are used in a preliminary manner to assess the receiving water impacts without mixing and dilution in the receiving stream:

173

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1. Risk on fish habitat due to increase in TSS concentration changes in in stream concentration (GOC, 1993) ; 2.

relative

Severity of impacts due to TSS concentration and duration of exposure (Ward, 1992, MNR).

The first method quantifies the risk to fish and fish habitat based on the increases in suspended solids concentration above the background levels. Observed pond effluent TSS concentrations are used to evaluate the risks. Table 10.1 summarizes the results

and shows the number of events that would impact fish and fish habitat.

Table 10.1: Receiving water impacts due to increses in TSS concentration (SourceiGOC, 1993). Sediment Concentration increase (mg/L) 0 < 25 25 -1 0 0 1 0 0 -2 0 0 200 - 400 > 400 Risk to Fish and Fish Habitat No risk Very low risk Low risk Moderate risk High Risk Unacceptable risk Number of events during 2002-03 monitoring period 2 events 9 events 2 events 2 events 1 event

The second impact assessment methodology considers both concentration and duration of exposure to the effluent from the pond. The concentration and duration of exposure cun/es for the Ballymore pond outlet during monitored events were estimated using the model. Figure 10.2 illustrates concentration and duration of exposure. Points of this curve represent the number of hours when the concentration is exceeded during each event.

174

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1000000
-®- May-5-03 -- May-02-03 -«*- May-20-03 -- ^ June-08-03 -- Sept-15-03 - Sept-19-03 - 0 - Sept-27-02 - - Sept-20-02 ~ Oct-25-02 Zone 3

^ 100000

Zone 4
MAJOR IMPACT Per Event

10000

1000
Zone 2

»TE IMPACT

100

MINOR IMPACT P erE real

25 mg/L Zone 1
FEW ILL EFFECTS Per Event

0.1

1

10

100

1000

10000

Duration of Exposure (hr)

Fig. 10.2; Preliminary evaluation of severity of impacts by suspended (Modified from Ward, 1992).

sediments

It may be seen that the pond effluent concentration can induce minor to moderate impacts. This evaluation should be treated as preliminary because no mixing or dilution is considered in the analysis.

Although the design standard of Ballymore pond met the requirements of the MOE Stormwater Management Planning and Design Manual criteria, the effluent TSS

concentration can impact on fish and fish habitat.

175

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 11 D ISCU SSIO N

This chapter covers a range of issues, which may influence the outcome of the study. The possibilities for water quality results being affected by different factors are investigated.

There are severai issues concerning the monitoring program and modelling methodology that arise from this study. One of the criticai factors that can alter the results is the methodology of monitoring stormwater events. For example, sampling time is a major concern. During the Fall 2002 sampling period samples were collected at the beginning of the event every 5 minutes, which mean that full sample collection of 24 bottles was completed in two hours. Analysis of hydrographs indicates that the collection of samples was completed before the flow reached its peak in the hydrograph. Looking at the event of September 14, 2002, for example (Figure 11.1); the hydrograph consisted of two peaks. The second flow peak followed the first one after 4.5 hours. However, collection was completed in two hours and the poilutograph depicts only the first flow peak. Thus, complete information on observed water quality was not available for further analysis and modelling. During the second monitoring period, which started in May 2003, the sampling time was changed to collect every 15 minutes instead of 5 minutes. It extended the collection time to 6 hours. This time extension allowed for a much better representation of events. Results for events with rainfall depth less than 10 mm were affected the most. For example, event of May 2, 2003 is characterized by rainfall of 6.8 mm (Figure 11.2). It produced poilutograph that extended almost to the end of hydrograph.

Issues involving interpretation of the events could also influence the study results. Mainly, this concerns determining the start and end time of events in case of back-to-back events. This is because tne start/end times will alter the calculation of the total volume of the hydrograph. The value of total volume is essential due to certain reasons, such as: (i) total volumes are used to calculate the centroids of the hydrographs, which are used to determine the hydraulic detention time; (ii) total volumes are used to calculate the mass loads and performance data. In some events it is difficult to determine the real proper timing.

177

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Septem ber 14th, 2002

250

450
400

200
Flow C - 1070

350

150

I I I % I *

300
SS concentration

250

I
LL

100

) 200 0 o c o 150 o w
100

c

C O

50

50

0Ü ---9/14/02 22:20 9/14/02 23:35 9/15/02 0:50 9/15/02 2:05 9/15/02 3:20 9/15/02 4:35 9/15/02 5:50 9/15/02 7:05 9/15/02
8:20

w0
9/15/02 9:35

Date/Tim e

Fig.11.1: Hydrograph and poilutograph for September 14, 2002 event.

178

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

May 2, 2003

18 16 14 12
I'
5

60

i Il` ' , ' « 1 1 1 /""\

50

* * 1 '1 1 
,

40 E
c

ro

10 86 4 2 *1 ' 1 , \ 1 1 1 A f

·

1 /

!

-

Flow C-1070 SS concentration

u.

0

*

30 i:
c

0 1 0 > o
c o

: -v

}  '

\

f 1 1

·

II

20 o w 10

C O

0 5/2/03 0:00

5/2/03 2:30

5/2/03 5:00

5/2/03 7:30 5/2/03 10:00 5/2/03 12:30 5/2/03 15:00
Date/Tim e

Fig.11.2: Hydrograph and poilutograph for Mayv2, 2003 event.

In this case, when observed data Is critical for proper model calibration, it is important to maintain a standard method of determining start/end time of an event. To identify inter event tim e for individual events 12 hours was selected. For example, event of May 11-12, 2003 (Figure 11.3): the inter-event time of 14 hours is observed between rainfalls. Thus, the event of May 11-12 was separated on two events: May 11^ and May 12"^.

179

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Wtey 11-12, 2003

E E
i l 30

cc

re

9 5/10/03 22:45 5/11/03 8:45 5/11/03 18:45 5/12/03 4:45 5/12/03 14:55 5/13/03 0:55 5/13/03 10:55 5/13/03 20:55 5/14/03 6:55 5/14/03 16:55

Date/Time
 -Rain Inlet 1070 " -- Inlet 510 -- Outlet

Fig. 11.3: Hydrographs and rainfall for May 11-12, 2003 event.

Suspended solids load from an event may also be influenced by

the presence of

bulkheads at the inlets prior to the construction sediment ponds. During the study water quality samples were collected downstream from the bulkhead. At the end of the fall

sampling period visual observations revealed that a significant amount of sediment had accumulated at the bulkhead, almost reaching the top. Therefore, it is possible for the sediment accumulated behind the bulkhead to be stirred up by the incoming runoff from a new event and be carried into the pond.

13 out of 21 analyzed samples from the construction

catchment exhibited initial SS

concentration (the very beginning of sampling) significantly higher than those at the end of sampling. For example, at the beginning of the September 20, 2002 event, SS concentration was 34000 mg/L and by the end of the 2-hours sampling period it decreased to 166 mg/L. The June 4, 2003 event experienced a decrease in SS concentration from

180

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

3380 mg/L to 59 mg/L. The concentration of SS in the August 11 and September 15, 2003 events went down from 4190 mg/L and 3030 mg/L to 18 mg/L and 39.4 mg/L, respectively. The higher initial SS concentration could have been influenced by presence of a bulkhead. During intense storm events, sediments behind the bulkhead could have been stirred up. Thus, initial samples collected within the first hour showed a much higher SS

concentration. The rainfall intensity at the beginning of a storm could also be an important factor affecting stormwater mixing with sediments collected behind the bulkhead. This possibility was investigated. A scatter plot between average rainfall intensity during the first 2 hours of a storm and first hour average SS concentration is illustrated in Fig. 11.4. It is obvious from the graph that correlation between the two variables is very small. It was calculated as 0.11, indicating that high initial inflow concentration of SS was not influenced by presence of a bulkhead during storms with high rainfall intensity.

181

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

18100

16100

?

14100

12100

o 10100

R ' = 0M1

8100

61 00

4100

21 00 :

*
100
0.5 1 1.5 2 2 5 3 3.5 4.5

Average initial rainfall intensity (m m/hr)

Fig. 11.4: Relationship between rainfall intensity and SS concentration

Other factors that may have influenced the w ater quality results include rainfall depth, intensity, duration, and interevent dry periods. According to results from a study in Maryland (Schueler and Lugbill, 1990), median SS concentration increases with the increase in rainfall depth. Table 11. i contains data to calculate the correlation between median SS concentration and rainfall depth, rainfall duration, average intensity and interevent days.

182

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 11.1: Rainfall characteristics vs. median concentration. Rainfall Depth (mm ) 28.8 13.3 18.4 10.0 13.0 9.4 6.8 17.4 17.8 10.8 14 15.0 38.0 25 30.7 32.2 0.13 Rainfall Duration (hr) 8.4 5.3 8.9 13.8 23.5 6.3 9.5 14.5 13.8 4.5 5.8 9.8 23.8 8.5 19.0 49.3 0.07 Average intensity (mm/hr) 3.5 2.6 2.1 0.7 0.6 1.5 0.7 1.2 1.2 2.2 2.2 1.5 1.6 2.8 1.6 0.7 Interevent Period (days) 23.3 0.5 4.5 5 0.1 1.9 0.6 3.4 4.8 3.5 2.0 0.7 2.4 2.2 10.6 2.6 Median SS Concentration (mg/L) 3602.1 2295.8 5085,5 8499.5 1278.8 12457.0 406.7 313.4 1451.0 682.5 250.6 103.3 108.1 246.6 265.4 156

Event 14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 2-Oct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02 2-May-03 5-May-03 11-May20-M ay11-Aug-03 15-Sep-03 19-Sep" 03 22-Sep-03 14-Oct-03 2-NOV-03 R'

0.001

0.01

There

is

no

correlation

found

between

m edian

SS

concentration

and

rainfall

characteristics.

Logically, longer detention/drawdown tim e results in more opportunity fo r sediments to settle followed by increase in removal efficiency of the m anagement facility. An attempt to establish the relationship between detention/drawdown time and removal efficiency based on simulated results and instantaneous removal efficiency w as undertaken. Table 11.2 contains data for detention/drawdown tim es and removal efficiencies. The obtained results are shown in Figures 11.5-11.8 and are as follows: there is no evidence of a correlation between detention/drawdown tim e and removal efficiency found in this study.

183

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 11.2: Relation between detention/drawdown times and removal efficiency.

Event Date 14-Sep 20-Sep 27-Sep 2-Oct 19-Oct 25-Oct 2-May 5-May 20-May 15-Sep 19-Sep .2-Nov

Removal Efficiency 53.5% 47.7% 95.7% 99.7% 81.9% 99.3% 92.9% 99.4% 94.3% 95.1% 96.5% 82.2%

Detention Time (hr) 11.4 10.1 13.4 8.1 9.9 15.4 7.8 19.9 16.6 9.8 15.3 39.5

Drawdown Time (hr) 25.8 51.5 107.8 36.5 39 94.3 24.3 27.3 16 86.5 179 -

120%

100%

= 0.005

S'

80%

(U 'o

c

I(Z

60%

s

a:

e 0 )

40%

20%

0%

0

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Detention T im e (hr)

Fig. 11.5: Relation between detention tim e and RE based on sim ulation data.

184

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

120%

100%

^
C

80%

R = 0.07

.2
ô
£ 60%

"râ > O
E 40%

0£
20%

0 .0 %

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

Drawdown Tim e (hr) Fig. 11.6: Relation between drawdown tim e and RE based on simulated data.

120

.

100

S' s
S

80

R = 0.03

60

s
Û C
« 40

20

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Detention T im e (hr)

Fig. 11.7: Relation between detention tim e and instantaneous RE

185

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

120

100

R = 0.03
S' 80

.2
u

C

it

lU

60

ra o

£

ÜL
20

(ü

40

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

Drawdown Time (hr) Fig. 11.8: Relation between drawdown time and instantaneous RE.

186

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 12

SUMMARY OF RESULTS. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

12.1 Summary of Results
12.1.1 W ater Quantity

A total of 27 storm events were monitored during the study period. Due to the fact that not all rain or flow data was available, only some of the sample events were included in this analysis. A total of 21 storms were characterized hydrologically; (I) 6 large storms (greater than 20 mm); (ii) 8 medium sized storms (between 10 and 20 mm); 3 small storms (less than 10 mm). Storms less than 6 mm of rainfall produced a negligible amount of runoff, probably due to the initial abstraction losses and high infiltration resulting from soil exposure and construction conditions. Therefore, they were not included in the analysis.

As expected, runoff coefficients gradually increase as development proceeded. On average 25%, 41% , and 58% of rainfall appeared as surface runoff during storm events over the three monitoring period (i.e., September - October 2002, May - July 2003, and August -- November 2003).

Outflow hydrographs from the pond show that this SWM facility significantly shaved the peak flow rates o f the inlet hydrograph during storm events. Peak flow rates were substantially attenuated as storm water passed through the facility. The average difference between inflow and outflow peak values was found to be 82%.

The drawdown times, defined as the time between maximum and minimum active storage volumes during a storm, were also estimated from the observed hydrographs. On average, the drawdown time was estimated at about 46 hours with a range from 14 to 107 hours. Longer drawdown tim es occurred during larger events as a result of hydrograph recession. Shorter times occurred because of sm aller inflow volumes.

187

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

12.1.2 Water Quality

W ater quality summary analysis was based on observed data obtained from the field measurements throughout the study period and simulated data obtained through modeling exercise.

Suspended Solids (SS) is the most critical constituent in construction site runoff in terms of concentration and loading. Furthermore, suspended sediments act as carriers for other constituents (phosphorus, metals and organics). Hence, SS serves as a direct and indirect measure of overall performance of the sediment control pond.

The following summarizes the water quality findings based on discrete sampling:

-

The average observed event mean concentration (EMC) of suspended solids at the inlet of construction watershed was 3,620 mg/L, ranging from 238 to 16,550 mg/L;

-

The instantaneous suspended solids concentration was recorded as high as 34,000 mg/L in one of the events.

-

The average simulated inflow SS EMC was 2,254 mg/L, within a range of 385 mg/L to 7,813 mg/L.

-

The average observed EMC of suspended solids at the outlet was 120 mg/L. The range was from 7 mg/L to 670 mg/L.

-

The average simulated outflow EMC was 93 mg/L, ranging from 16 mg/L to 278 mg/L. The average observed SS load removal efficiency during the sampling period was estimated to be 94%.

-

The average SS load removal efficiency was estimated from the simulation model using the entire pollutographs as 87%.

The following summarizes findings from composite samples analysis:

-

Turbidity levels for the outlet were found to experience a significant increase throughout the study period: 81 NTU in the Fall 2002 period changed to 166 NTU in the May-July 2003 and to 605 NTU in the last sampling period indicating that fine particles are gradually accumulating in the pond. Average turbidity level for the outlet is 284 NTU that is harmful to receiving fish habitat.

188

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

-

Nutrients varied in their removal efficiencies; average removal efficiency for TKN was 60% and for total phosphorus (TP) reached as high as 83%. Although TP experienced quite high removal efficiencies throughout the study period, outflow average EMC is estimated as 0.24 mg/L, which is significantly higher than the recommended value of 0.03 mg/L.

-

Metals also varied in their removal efficiencies: metals with average removal efficiencies above 50% in the Fall 2002 include barium, calcium and strontium; in MayJuly 2003: aluminum, barium, calcium, cobalt, manganese, nickel, lead, vanadium, and zinc. This indicates that the pond performed better in the second sampling period. In the last period of August-November 2003 only metals such as cadmium, manganese and zinc experienced removal efficiency higher than 50%. During all three monitoring periods, average effluent concentration of copper and iron exceeded Ontario's PWQO's. Cobalt's effluent concentration exceeded provincial objectives only during August-November 2003 period.

-

The particle size distribution from the construction site was skewed towards the finer particles. The particle size distribution of incoming sediments was composed of

extremely fine-grained particles, primarily consisting of fine silts, clays, and colloidal materials paii:icles. 90% of particles entering the pond from both inlets were found to be finer than 30 microns. 90% of particles exiting the pond were smaller than 15 microns in diameter. The clay fraction (smaller than 4 pm) contributed 40.8-45% of the weight to the suspended solids material in the influent. The silt-size fraction contributed more (50.053.6%), with the remaining sand-size fraction contributing only 5.0-5.6%. Effluent characteristics are: content of clay fraction is 56.5%, silt and sand-size are 40.7% and 2.8, respectively.

12.1.3 Continuous Simulation and Receiving Water Analysis

In order to estimate the sediment loads and pond performance during the study period from September 2002 to November 2003, and also for the model's verification, long-term simulation PCSWMM was conducted.

189

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

For the study period average SS concentration for the inflow is found to be 2033 mg/L and for the outflow 99 mg/L. These values are closely matched with average EMC's simulated on event basis.

Also, load-based pond performance during the period of 2002-2003 using continuous simulation was estimated as 95% compare to load-based removal efficiency of 87% simulated on event basis and 96% of instantaneous RE calculated from field data.

It was estimated that 0 .1 1m of sediments were accumulated at the bottom of the pond with a rate of 5.1 m^/ha during August 2002-November 2003 period.

Long-term

continuous

simulation was

also conducted to

estimate the cumulative

construction sediment loads leaving the site. Two sets of three-year hourly rainfall data corresponding to average and extreme wet year conditions were considered.

The annual sediment-loading rate from the construction site was estimated to be 3.2 and 3.4 m^/ha for average and wet year conditions, respectively. This compares to U.S. ERA data of 1.9 m^/ha for stable watersheds with similar imperviousness.

The long-term 88 removal efficiency for the pond was estimated as 91.0% and 90.0% for average and extreme wet year conditions respectively.

May 2003 rainfall events were used for verification of the model, which showed a good comparison with observed data.

12.2 Conclusions and Recommendations
The primary objective of this study was to assess the performance of storm water management facilities designed according to the MOE SWMP manual fo r treating urban construction storm runoff prior to discharging in receiving water bodies. The scope

included assessment of typical hydrologie conditions of a construction site, sediment characteristics and performance of sediment control pond in terms of water quantity and quality.

190

Reproduced with permission of the copvriaht owner. Further reproduction orohlbited without oermission.

Construction site runoff differs significantly from stormwater runoff over developed areas. Large loads entering the ESC facility mean a significant amount of sediments leave the facility, even with high removal effectiveness. From this study, concentration of suspended solids in construction runoff was on average 200 times higher than in urban runoff from developed areas.

This study demonstrates that significant water quality improvement can be achieved through implementation of SWM facility such as sediment control pond during the construction activities. The field data collection and analysis show that the Ballymore pond meets the target in terms of suspended solids removal efficiency (> 80%). However, despite the high removal efficiency, effluent concentration of suspended solids remains elevated and receiving water impacts to fish and fish habitats can be expected. Also, outflow concentrations of total phosphorus and several metals, such as copper, iron and cobalt, exceeded the Province Water Quality Objectives. These results suggest that: (i) stormwater basins designed to prevent downstream pollution associated with sediments may not. be as effective in removing chemical pollutants and elevated turbidity as they are in removing sediments; (ii) the concentrations exiting the pond should serve as the determining factor of the pond's performance rather than the removal efficiencies.

The stage of construction influenced the event mean concentration of SS showing a greater concentration of suspended solids during the most active housing development stage. Sediment inflow was rapid for the entire construction period (including time required for the building sodding and landscaping of individual lots). Once a catchment area was completely developed and vegetation was established, sediment inflow dropped

significantly. Study showed that outflow turbidity levels were increasing throughout the monitoring period and reached as high as 600 NTU on average at the end of the study period. These values significantly exceed 'safe' levels for receiving waters.

Based on model verification results, the study indicated that modelling of pollution from a construction site is a useful tool, which can support monitoring programs for effective decision-making.

Overall, the performance of the construction site sediment control pond was found to be unsatisfactory. The elevated levels of suspended solids have the potential of producing

191

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

adverse effects on the receiving watercourses depending on the relationship between suspended solids concentration and duration. The following recommendations to improve the pond's effectiveness are made;

-

Sediment control pond should be constructed at the start of the construction process to ensure the capture of sediment from all phases of construction.

-

The sizing criteria for sediment control ponds should be consistent with the ultimate SWM facility (MOEE, 2003). This includes "Enhanced Level of Protection". This would bring the level of protection during construction to the highest standard presently practiced. Also, the outflow concentration of suspended solids should be identified and an approximate level of (e.g., 25 mg/L) (Ward, 1992) maintained.

-

The permanent pool for the sediment control pond should be cleaned when it is half full of sediment (i.e., 125 m % a *50%=63 m3/ha) to ensure its proper performance.

-

The banks of the sediment control ponds suspected to be significant sources of soil erosion and sediment contributions to the storage facility. Slope stabilization should be a high priority in pond construction.

-

To provide temporary soil stabilization and prevent soil erosion chemical stabilizers, or soil binders, may be used; materials such as vinyl, asphalt, or rubber can be sprayed onto the surface of exposed soils to hold the soil in place.

-

Particle size distribution analysis shows that construction sediment is comprised primarily of smaller particles. The low settling velocity o f smaller particles yield lower treatment effectiveness as compared with stable urban sites and highlight the need for enhanced source controls. Other measures, such as outflow polishing through vegetation filtering or sand trenches could be considered. The introduction of devices such as microfilters at stormwater pipe outlet should be considered to capture the small sediments from the outflow.

-

To decrease turbidity levels, alternative methods such as chemical flocculation may be used.

192

Reproduced with permission of the copvriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oermission.

Receiving water impacts would best be determined from site-specific monitoring. This should include a comprehensive baseline monitoring before construction. Conditions at the outlet of the pond and downstream within the receiving stream should be included.

The overall ESC effectiveness could be improved by reducing the amount of sediments reaching the ESC pond. Other `at-source' ESC practices should continue to be implemented and other practices such as earlier re-vegetation could be enhanced. Effe^'ive use of ESC measures at the source, upstream of the pond, will reduce the incoming sediment load and improve the overall removal efficiency.

The ESC controls should be inspected frequently to verify their effectiveness, particularly after runoff events. Inspection records should be created to document the inspection and repairs.

Further study is recommended to investigate the potential harm to fish and the organisms exposure. by increased suspended sediment concentrations and duration of

193

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reoroduced with oermission of the coDvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohlbited without oermission.

References
Akan, A.O., Houghlalen, R.J. U rb a n H yd ro lo g y, H y d ra u lic s a n d S to rm w a te r Q uality. John. Wiley & Sons, Inc. Hoboken, New Jersey, 2003.

Baffaut, C. and Delieur, J.W. "Calibration of SWMM Runoff Quality Model with Expert System". J o u rn a l o f W a te r R e s o u rc e s P la n n in g a n d M a n a g e m e n t, vol. 116(2), pp. 247261, 1990.

Bannerman, R., Owens. D, Dodds, R. and Hornewer, N. "Sources of Pollutants in Wisconsin Stormwater". W a te r S cie n ce a n d T echnolog y, vol. 28(3-5), pp. 241-259, 1993.

Bhadury, B., Harbor, J. Maurice, P. "Chemical trap Efficiency of a Construction Site Stormwater Retention Basin". P h y s ic a l G e o g ra p h y, vol. 16(5), pp. 389-401, 1995.

Chapra, S.C. S u rfa c e W a te r Q u a lity M o d e lin g . McGraw-Hill, 1997.

Charbeneau, R.J.,

Barett, M.E. "Evaluation of Methods fo r Estimating Stormwater

Pollutant Loads". W a te r E n v iro n m e n t R e se a rch , vol. 70, pp. 1295-1302, 1998. Choi, K., Ball, J.L. " Parameter Estimation for Urban Runoff Modelling". U rb a n W ater, vol. 4, pp. 31-41, 2002.

Chorely, R.J., Schumm, S.A. and Sugden, D.E. G e o m o rp h o lo g y. Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1984.

Chui, T.W., Mar, B. W. and Hornet, R.R. "A Pollutant Loading Model fo r Highway R u noff.
J o u rn a l o f E n v iro n m e n ta l E n g in e e rin g , A S C E , vol. 108(6), pp.1193-1210, 1982.

Clarifica Inc. "investigation to Develop an Improved Sizing Approach for Construction Sediment Control Facilities". Prepared for; Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada. File Number: DF01-0001, March 2002.

195

R e o ro d u c e d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n n ro h ih ite ri w ith o u t o e rm is s io n

Clarifica inc. " Preliminary Assessment for Improved Design Criteria for Construction Sediment Conti ol Ponds". Prepared for Toronto and Region Conservation Authority and Fisheries and Oceans Canada. File; IR01 - 0001, March 2003.

Clarifica Inc., 2003. "Preliminary Assessm ent fo r Improved Design Criteria for Construction Sedim ent Control Ponds" . Prepared for Toronto and Region Conservation Authority and Fisheries and Oceans Canada, March 2003. File: 1R01 - 0001.

Delieur, J.W. " Modeling Quality of Urban R u n o ff. H y d ro in fo rm a tic T o o ls fro P lanning ,
D e s ig n , O p e ra tio n a n d R e h a b ilita tio n o f S e w e r S yste m s. Marsalek, J. et al. (Eds). Kluwer

Academ ic Publishers, Netherlands, pp. 242-285, 1998.

Dent, S. "Autom ated Calibration using Optimization Techniques with SWMM RUNOFF" . SW M M Users Conference, Toronto, Canada, February 20-21, 2003. ·

Dodson, R. D., S to rm W a te r P o llu tio n C ontrol, McGraw-Hill, 2000.

Elliot, William J. and Andy D. W ard. E n v iro n m e n ta l H y d ro lo g y . Lewis Publishers. New York, 1995.

Ellis, J.B. "The Management and Control of Urban R u n o ff. J o u rn a l o f W a te r R e s o u rc e s
P la n n in g a n d M a n a g e m e n t, vol. 3(2), pp. 116-124, 1989.

Environmental protection Agency (ERA). Handbook. U rb a n R u n o ff P o llu tio n P re v e n tio n
a n d C o n tro l P la n n in g . Office of R & D. Center for Environmental Research Information.

Cincinnati, Ohio, 1993.

Fennesey, L.A.J., Hamlett, J.M., Aron, G. and LaSota, D. "Changes in Runoff due to Stormwater M anagem ent Pond Regulations. J o u rn a l o f H y d ra u lic E n g in e e rin g , vol. 6(4), pp. 317-327, 2001.

Ferrara, R.A. and Witkowski, P. " Stormwater Quality Characteristics in Detention Basins".
J o u r n a l o f E n v iro n m e n ta l E n g in e e rin g , A S C E , vol. 109(2), pp. 428-447, 1983.

196

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Fifield, J. S. D e s ig n in g fo r E ffe c tiv e S e d im e n t a n d E ro s io n C o n tro l O n C o n s tru c tio n Sites. Forester Press, 2002.

GOC. "The Yukon Placer Authorization" .

Government of Canada.

Authorization and

supporting docum ents applicable to placer mining in the Yukon Territory. Ottawa, 1993.

Goldman, S., Jackson, K., and Butsktynspy, T., E ro s io n a n d S e d im e n t C o n tro l H a n d b o o k. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1986.

Greb, S.R., Bannerman, R.T. " Influence of Particle Size on W et Pond Effectiveness'.
W a te r E n v iro n m e n t R e s e a rc h , vol. 69, pp. 1134-1138, 1997.

Greenland International Consulting Inc., and Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (TRCA). " Urban Construction Sediment Control Study". April 2001. File Number: 00-G1320, 2001.

Gupta, H.V. and Sorooshian, S. Yapo, P.O. "Toward Improved Calibration of Hydrologie Models; Multiple and Noncom m ensurable Measures of Inform ation". W a te r R e s o u rc e s
R e s e a rc h , vol. 34(4), pp. 751-763, 1998.

Harbor, J. " Engineering G eom orphology at the Cutting Edge of Land Disturbance: Erosion and Sedim ent Control on Construction Sites". G e o m o rp h o lo g y , vol. 31, pp.247-263, 1999.

Harbor, J.M., Snyder, J., Storer, J. "Reducing Nonpoint Source Pollution from Construction Sites Using Rapid Seeding and Mulching". P h y s ic a l G e o g ra p h y , vol. 16(5), pp. 371-388, 1995.

Hoffman. D.W. and Richards, N.R. S o il S u rv e y o f Y ork C o u n ty . Report No. 19 of the Ontario Soil Survey. Ministry of Agriculture and Food. Reprinted February 1990. Guelph, ON, 1955.

Horner, R.R., Guedry, J. and Kortenhoff, M.N.
H ig h w a y C o n s tru c tio n S ite E ro s io n and

Im p ro v in g th e C o s t E ffe c tiv e n e s s o f C o n tro l.

P o llu tio n

W ashington

State

Transportation C enter and the Federal Highway Adm inistration. Seattle, WA, 1990.

197

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Huber, W.C. "Contaminant Transport in Surface W ater". In H a n d b o o k o f H yd ro lo g y. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, 1993.

Huber, W ayne C. and Robert E. Dickinson (USEPA).
V e rs io n 4: U s e r's M a n u a l. Environmental Research.

S to rm W a te r M a n a g e m e n t M o d e l

Ibrahim, Y. "A Method of Estimating Optimal Catchment Model Param eters". W ater
R e s o u rc e s R e s e a rc h , vol. 29(9), 3049-3058, 1993.

ISCO Inc. 1997a. 6 7 0 0 P o rta b le S a m p le rs In s tru c tio n M a n u a l. 60-9004-021. Revision, I 60-9003-411 D 7-98. Lincoln, Nebraska, July 1997.

ISCO Inc. 1997b. 4 1 5 0 F lo w L o g g e r In s tru c tio n M a n u a l. 3243-143, July 1997.

60-3244-074.

Revision I, 60-

James, W. and James, W.R.C. W a te r S y s te m s M o d e ls [1 ,2 ]. User's guide to SWMM4 RUNOFF and supporting modules, University of Guelph and CHI, 2000.

James, W. H y d ro lo g y & H y d ra u lic s V o c a b u la ry fo r E n g in e e rs . Computational Hydraulic International, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, 1995.

James, W. R u le s fo r R e s p o n s ib le M o d e lin g . 4'^ edition. CHI, Guelph, Ontario, 2003.

Jewell, T.K. and Adrian, D.D. ''SWMM Stormwater Pollutant W ashoff Functions". J o u rn a l
o f E n v iro n m e n ta l E n g in e e rin g D iv isio n , A S C E , vol. 104(5), pp. 1036-1039, 1978.

Jewell, T.K., Nunno, T.J. and Adrian, D.D. "Methodology for Calibrating Stormwater Models". J o u rn a l o f E n v iro n m e n ta l E n g in e e rin g D iv., A S C E , vol. 104(3), 485-501,1978.

Laboratory Office of Research and Development U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Athens, Georgia 30613. EPA/600/3-88/001a, 1992.

Lei, J., Li, J. and Schilling, W . "Stepwise Hypothesis Test Model Calib ation Procedure of Urban Runoff Design Model and an Alternative of Monte-Carlo Simulation".

198

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Li, James. E ro s io n a n d S e d im e n t C o n tro l T ra in in g M a n u a l. Prepared fo r the Ministry of the Environment, Ryerson Polytechnic University, 1998.

Linsley, R.K. Jr., Kohler, M.A., Paulhus, J.L.H. A p p lie d H y d ro lo g y . Me Graw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1949.

Marsalek, J, W att, W.E., Anderson, B.C., and Jaskot, C. "Physical and Chemical Characteristics o f Sediments from a o'orm w ater Management Pond" . W a te r Q u a lity
R e s e a rc h J o u rn a l o f C a n a d a , vol. 32(1), pp. 89-100, 1997.

Maryland

Department of Environment.

Maryland

Stormwater Manual (Vol.1), 2000

http://www.m de.state.m d.us/assets/docum ent/chapter1.pdf.

Ministry of Environment SW AMP Report. TRCA. Performance Assessment of a Stormwater Retrofit Pond-Harding Park, Richmond Hill, Ontario, 2002.

Ministry of the Environm ent (MOE). S to rm w a te r M a n a g e m e n t P la n n in g a n d D e s ig n
M a n u a l, March 2003.

Newman, T.L. Analysis/Design

II,

Omer,

T.A. and

Droskoll,

E.D.

"SWMM

Storage-Treatm ent fo r
o f U rb a n W a te r

of Extended-Detention

Ponds". A p p lie d

M o d e lin g

S y s te m s . M o n o g ra p h 8. Edited by W .James. CHI, Guelph, Ontario, 2000.

Nix, Stephan J. U rb a n S to rm w a te r M o d e llin g a n d S im u la tio n . Lewis Publishers, London, 1994.

Norman, C.G. " Urban R unoff Effects on Ohio River W ater Quality" . W a te r E n v iro n m e n t &
T e ch no lo g y, vol. 3, pp. 44-46, 1991.

Novotny, V. and Chesters, G. "Delivery of Sediment and Pollutants from Nonpoint Sources: A W ater Quality Perspective" . J o u rn a l o f S o il a n d W a te r C o n s e rv a tio n , vol. 67, pp. 443-446, 1989.

199

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Oliver, L J . and Grigoropoulos, S.G. "Control of Storm-Generated Pollution Using a Small U rban Lake" . J o u rn a l (W a te r P o llu tio n C o n tro l F e d e ra tio n ), A S C E , vol. 53(5), pp. 594-603, 1981.

Papa, P., Adams, B.J., and Guo, G. "Detention Tim e Selection for Stormwater Quality Control Ponds". C a n a d ia n J o u rn a l o f C ivil E n g in e e rin g , vol. 26, pp. 72-82, 1999.

Przepiora, A., Hesterberg, ., Parsons, J.E., Gilliam, J.W., Cassel, D.K., and Faircloth, W. "Field Evaluation of Calcium Sulfate as a Chemical Flocculant fo r Sedimentation Basins".
J o u rn a l of. E n v iro n m e n ta l. Q u a lity , vol. 27, pp. 669-678, 1998.

Przepiora, A., Flesterberg, D., Parsons, J.E., Gilliam, J.W., Cassel, O.K., and Faircloth, W. "Calcium Sulfate as a Flocculant to Reduce Sedimentation Basin W ater Turbidity". J o u rn a l
of. E n v iro n m e n ta l Q u a lity , vol.26, pp.1605-1611, 1997.

Pyatt, L. "Performance Evaluation o f a Sediment Control Pond". M.A.Sc. Thesis. Environm ental Applied Science and Management Program. Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, 2003.

Randall, W. "Storm w ater Detention Ponds for W ater Quality Control". Proceedings, Edited by W DeGroot, Engineering Foundation, U rb a n W a te r R e s o u rc e s
R e s e a rc h C o u n c il o f A S C E , 1982.

Robbins, C.W. and Brokway, "Irrigation W ater Salt Concentration Influences on Sediment Removal by Ponds". S o il S c ie n c e S o c ie ty o f A m e ric a J o u rn a l, vol. 42, pp. 478-481, 1978.

Sabourin Kimble and Associates Ltd. 2000. "Stormwater Management Facility 4ab, Design Brief, Ballymore on Bayvlew Development, O PA 129 - 19T-86100, Town of Richmond Hill". Project No. 99:905:D1#3649. June 16, 2000. Revised Septem ber 8, 2000.

Sansalone, J.J. and Buchberger, S.G. "Partitioning and First Flush of Metals in Urban Roadway Storm water" . J o u rn a l o f E n v iro n m e n ta l E n g in e e rin g , vol. 123(2), 134-143, 1997.

200

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Schueler, T. R., and J.Lugbill. P e rfo rm a n c e o f C u rre n t S e d im e n t C o n tro l M e a s u re s a t
M a ry la n d C o n s tru c tio n S ites.

Report.

Department

of

Environmental

Programs,

Metropolitan W ashington Council of Governments, W ashington DC, 1990. Schuler, T.R. and Holland, H.K. The P ra c tic e o f W a te rs h e d P ro te c tio n . Center for W atershed Protection. Ellicott City, USA, 2000.

Town of Richmond Hill. 2004. "Lake W ilcox". http://www.town.richmond-hill.on.ca/subpaqe.asp?paqeid=parks lake w ilcox.

TRCA. Performance Assessment of an Off-Line Stormwater Management Pond. Heritage Estates Stormwater Management Pond. Richmond Hill, Ontario, 1996.

Tsihrintzis, V.A. and Hamid, R. " Modeling and Management of Urban Stormwater Runoff Quality: A Review". W a te r R e s o u rc e s M a n a g e m e n t, vol. 11, pp. 137-164, 1997.

Tsihrintzis, V.A., Hamid, R. "Runoff Quality Prediction from Small Urban Catchments Using SWMM". H y d ro lo g ic a l P ro ce sse s, vo l.12, pp. 311-329, 1998.

Viessman, W. Jr., Lewis, G.L. In tro d u c tio n to H y d ro lo g y . Prentice Hall, Pearson Education, Inc., New York, 2002.

Viessman, W arren Jr., Gary L. Lewis, and John W. Knapp. In tro d u c tio n to H yd ro lo g y - 3rd edition. Harper Collins Publishers, New York, 1989.

W anielista, M. P. and Yousef, Y.A. S to rm w a te r M a n a g e m e n t. John W iley &Sons, Inc., New York, 1993.

Ward, N. "The Problem of Sediment in W ater for Fish" . Northwester Ontario Boreal Forest Management Technical Notes. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, 1992.

W arwick, J.J. and Tadepalli, P. "Efficacy of SWMM Application". J o u rn a l o f W a te r
R e s o u rc e s P la n n in g a n d M a n a g e m e n t, vol. 117(3), pp. 352-366, 1991.

201

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Water Quality Guidelines (criteria) for Turbidity, Suspended and Benthic Sediments, 1988. Updated 2001. http://wlapwww.qov.bc.ca/wat/wq/BCguidelines/turbidity.html.

Whipple, W. Jr. "Dual-Purpose Detention Basins". J o u rn a l o f th e W a te r R e s o u rc e s
P la n n in g a n d M a n a g e m e n t D ivision, vol. 105(WR2), pp. 403-412, 1979.

Whipple, W., Grigg, S., Gizzard, T., Randall, C.W., Shubinski, R.R., and Tucker, L.S.
S to rm w a te r M a n a g e m e n t in U rb a n izin g A re a s . Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1983.

Wu, J.S., Holman, R.E. and Dorney, J R. "Systematic Evaluation of Pollutant Removal by Urban W et Detention Ponds". J o u rn a l o f E n v iro n m e n ta l E n g in e e rin g , vol. 122(11), pp.

983-988, 1996.

Zaghloul, N. A. "Sensitivity Analysis of the SWMM Runoff-Transport Parameters and the Effects of Catchment Discretization". 1981 International Symposium on Urban Hydrology, Hydraulics, and Sediment Control. University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky-July 2730,1981.

Zaghloul, N. and Al-Shurbaji, A. M. "A Storm W ater Management Model for Urban Areas in Kuwait" . W a te r R e s o u rc e s B ulletin, A W R A , vol. 26(4), pp.563-575, 1990.

Zoppou, C. "Review of Urban Storm Water Models". E n v iro n m e n ta l M o d e llin g & S oftw are, vol. 16, pp. 195-231, 2001.

202

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

APPENDICES

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. J K. L.

Analytical Procedures, Ontario Ministry of the Environment, Laboratory Services. Summary of the collected data for the duration of study. Summary of Hydrologie Characteristics. ' Observed Hydrographs vs. Rainfall. (Data is available.) Pollutographs for Each Event. (Data is available.) Pond Performance for Composites. (Data is available.) Constituents Concentrations. (Data is available.) Particle Size Distributions on Event Basis. (Data is available.) Quantity and Quality Calibrated Input Parameters Examples of PCSWMM Input Files. (Data is available.) Comparison of Observed and Simulated Hydrographs. (Data isavailable.) Comparison of Observed and Simulated Pollutographs. (Data is available.)

203

Reoroduced with nermission of the coovriaht owner. F u rth e r re n ro d u c tin n n rn h ih ite d uuithnnt n e rm ic s in n

Appendix A
A n a lytica l P rocedures, O nta rio M inistry o f th e E nvironm ent, Lab orato ry S ervices

204

Reproduced with permission of the copvripht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Parameter

Method
Colorimetry following two-stage reaction with mercuric thiocyanite and ferric iron_______________________ Automated system using electrodes in a constant temperature bath for conductivity, a calibrated potentiometric system for pH and titration for TFE alkalinity (to an end-point of pH 4.5).____________________________ Molybdate reactive silicates: dissolved reactive silicate ions are measured through the formation of molybdenum heteropoly blue complex Dissolved inorganic carbon (+ carbon dioxide) are measured by acidifying the sample supernatant, extracting the CO2 through a dialysis membrane and reacting it with phenolphthalein and colourimetric measurement Organic carbon is measrued in the sample supernatant by acidification followed by nitrogen flushing to remove inorganic carbon and UV digestion in an acid-persuiphate medium. The resulting CO2 is analyzed as above________ Total Solids: refers to the material (residue) which remains after an aliquot of well-mixed sample is transferred into a ta red dish and evaporated to dryness (20 hrs minimum) at 102 ± 2 ° C. Suspended Solids refers to all material (residue, particulate) which is removed from a sample when a wellmixed sample aliquot is filtered through a 1.5 to 2.0 pm glass fibre filter. The material on the filter is dried at 103 + 2°C. Dissolved solids refer to the material (residue, filtrate) which remains in solution when a well-mixed sample is filtered through a 1.5 - 2.0 pm glass fibre filter. An aliquot of the filtrate (50 or 100 m l) is transferred, using a transfer pipette, into a fared dish and evaporated to dryness (20 hrs minimum), at 103 +_2°C.___________________________ Samples are mixed with an acidified Potassium Dichromate Solution that contains mercuric sulphate to suppress chloride interference. Concentrated sulphuric acid containing silver sulphate as a catalyst is added and the mixture is digested in a mechanical-convection oven for 3 hrs at 149 +_1°C. Analysis is completed by automated colorimetric measurement of trivalent chromium.

Chloride Conductivity, pH, Alkalinity

Silicon: reactive silicate; Dissolved organic carbon; and Dissolved inorganic carbon W )
S I

< u

E

O s

0) 0 O

c

S o lid s:

Suspended Dissolved Total

C h e m ic a l O xyg en D em and

205

ReDroduced with nerm issinn nf th e nnnurinht nw ner

Further renrndi ir.tinn nrnhihited withm it nerm iceinn

Particle Size

Turbidity

Optical - laser light diffraction (Coulter LS130 Particle Size Analyzer) This method is capable of analyzing from 0.1 to 900 pm in 27 size channels. However, it is reported as a percent distribution by volume (no count data). Measurement of light scattering at 90° +130° by nephelometry calibrated to Formazin turbidity standards

T o ta l M e ta ls:

Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) following ultrasonic nebulizer

Q ) 5

n s 'W

Aluminum, Barium, Beryllium, Calcium, Cadmium, Cobalt, Chromium, Copper, Iron, Magnesium, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Lead, Strontium, Titanium, Vanadium, and Zinc
T o ta l N u trie n ts:

Total P TKN

Total P: digestion in sulphuric acid, potassium sulphate media followed by reduction with ascorbic acid measured a orthophosphate Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen: digestion with Kjeldahl's reagent, neutralization and analysis for ammonia species by colorimetry Simultaneous, automated analysis of one aliquot of sample: - Ammonia by conversion to indophenol blue with sodium nitroprusside as a catalyst Nitrite by colourimetric method after reaction with sulphanilamide and N (1-napthyl) ethylenediamine dihydrochloride Nitrate + nitrite by colorimetric method following conversion of nitrate to nitrite Phosphorus, as orthophosphate, by colorimetric method following reaction with ascorbic acid

U ) D is s o lv e d c 0) N u trie nts: > * -> 3 Ammonia+ z Ammonium Nitrite Nitrate+nitrite Phosphate

206

ReDroduced with permission of the coovriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix B
S u m m a ry o f th e collected data fo r th e d u ratio n o f study

207

R eD roduced with o e rm is s io n o f the coovriaht owner. Further reorodiiction nrohibiteri w ithout nerm ission

Date 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 14-Sep 20-Sep 27-Sep 2-Oct 19-Oct 25-Oct 2-May 5-May 11-May 20-May 4-Jun 8-Jun 13-Jun 22-Jul 2-Aug 9-Aug 11-Aug 26-Aug 15-Sep 19-Sep 22-Sep 27-Sep 14-Oct 18-Oct 25-Oct 2-Nov 12-Nov 1070 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y N

o o

CM

CO

o

O CM

Data Flow Discrete (TSS) Corn oosite (TSS) Rain 510 Outlet 1070 510 Outlet 1070 510 Outlet Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y j Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y* N Y N N Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y N N Y Y Y N N Y N Y N Y Y N N N N Y Y N Y Y N Y Y N Y Y N N Y N Y Y N Y Y N Y Y N Y Y N Y Y N Y Y N Y Y N Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y* Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y N Y Y Y Y* Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N Y N N Y N N Y N Y Y* Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y* Y* Y Y N N

Y=Yes, data is available N=No, data is not available * Data is not complete

208

Reproduced with permission of the coovriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oermission.

Appendix C
S u m m a ry of H ydrologie C h a ra cte ristics

205

R e D ro d u ce d w ith D e rm issio n o f th e c o o v ria h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n .

jO

!D
D

D

C 8

% 5 3 D 5 D 3 I 3'
3"

Ballymore Pond September 2002-November 2003 Events Summary of Hydrologie Statistics
Rain

Event Date

I: 1 If B
3 o < 1 1 s % 5
47.5 72.5 7.5 17.5 5 5 2.4 6.4 11.2 8.8 5.6 19.2 12.8 10.4 5.6 28,8 13.3 18.4 10 13 9.4 6.8 8.4 5.3 8.9 13.8 23.5 6.3 9.5 14.5 13.8 4.5 17 21.3 9.8 23.8 49,3 3.5 2.6 2.1 0.7 0.6 . 1.5 0.7 1.2 1.2

1

2 c 0

§: (n

ë V f

 o 0 % w 0.

Inlet Combined t o c
0

ü I* 1
23.3 0.5 4.5 5 0.1 1.9 0.6 3.4 7.1 2.82 9.2 3.2 4.1 4.6 3.4

tr 1
3
5

Outlet

o 1 1 . a*
co 2 (V >

O

o ü Z
11.D 22 36 19.6 23.2 32

<

?1 i 1 fî a i û . f
C C

c 0

î

0 ü Z
01 CD

E1
g ai o
1

c

tr ai
£

u. rt

Q 1

u.

£ ai > <
7.8 3.9 5.8 4.1 7.7 4.7 3.8 4.1 7.7 4.5 3.7 17 4.5 6.5 3.5

L L « ai a.
12.6 8.6 16.3 72.4 10.4 7.4 8.4 16.8 16.6 17.9 10.6 54.1 14.4 16.3 7,5

fc o
c ê

ai o o

il I i 1
z Q
11.4 10.1 13.4 8.1 9,9 15 4 7.8 25.8 51.5 107.8 36.5 39 94.3 24.3 27.3 29 16 14.5 21.8 86.5 179

g s

F

3*

D S
3

3

3.

K > O o 3
3*

§.
3"

3

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

8 N
o o p

14-Seo 20-Seo 27-Sep 2-Oct 19-Oct 25-Oct 2-M av 5-Mav 11-Mav 20-tv! av 4-J un 8-Jun 15-Sep 19-Sep 2-Nov

34.8
21.5

17.4
17.8 10.8 13.8 23.6 15 38 32.2

8.5
7.5 5.5 5 18.7 6.3 25.6 19.2

4.8
3.5 3.5 3.4 0.7 2.4 2.6

28
34.5 26.8 40.25 33 80.5 75.8

2.2
0.8 1.1 1.5 1.6 0.7

26.6 5.2 11.2 6.9 7.5 6.1 3.9 16.6 10.9 6.6 7.8 19.7 7.6 19.1 10.8

321 120.4 144.9 æ .4 57.9 48.9 24.9 1514 100.1 94.7 49.5 385.7 136.5 243.1 85.3

6.8 2.75 3.8 2.2 4 4.8 3.3 8.1 7.1 5.1 4.7 26.2 62 12.1 10 7

37 30 72 19.5 20 36 37.3 70 40 48.5 54 65.5

58.3
79 129.5

0.25 0.21 0.50 0,32 0.32 0.49 0.50 0.43 0.42 0.51 0.36 0.79 0.42 0.67 0.60

19.9
5.66 16.6 10.6 14.4 9.8 15.3

Appendix I
Q u a n tity and Q u a lity C a lib ra te d In p u t P a ra m e te rs

207

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Quantity Input
Event Date Phase Calibrated Quantity Model Parameters W W {3) 33 W W {1) WSTORE1 W SLO PE W W (5)

14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 2-Oct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02
A verage

1

15 45 35 44
39 35

162 53 120 120 170 120
124

6.3 0.5 1.5 1.5 4 0.2
2.3

0.006 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.004 0.01
0.008

0.015 0.015 0.015 0.015 0.015 0.015
0.015

2-May-03 5-May-03 11-May-03 20-M ay-03 4-Jun-03 8-Jun-03
Average

II

68 56 43
76 52

72 190 130 250
39

0.5 3.55 5
3.65

88
64

150
139

0.9 4.5
3.0

0.01 0.005 0.02 . 0.02 0.01 0.01
0.010

0.015 0.01 0.012 0.01 0.015 0.015
0.013

15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 22-Sep-03
Average

III

47 71 90
69

215 400 220
278

1.1 0.8 5
2.3

0.01 0.01 0.01
0.010

0.015 0.015 0.015
0.015

Q u a lity In put
Calibrated Q uality Model Parameters Event Date Phase QFACT(1) W ASHPO RCOEFF ERLEN

14-Sep-02 20-Sep-02 27-Sep-02 2-Oct-02 19-Oct-02 25-Oct-02
Average

1

400 200 300 210 250 250
268

0.725 1.5 0.878 1.2 0.64 1.9
1.141

0.02 0.1 0.1 1 0.01 7
1.372

150 56.8 200 200 150 100
143

2-May-03 5-May-03 11-May-03 20-May-03 4-Jun-03 8-Jun-03
A verage

II

200 430 210 200 200 200
240

2 3 2.43 2 2 1.55
2.163

0.246 0.05 0.1852 0.138 0.001 0.438
0.176

20 150 300 100 173 150
149

15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 22-Sep-03
Average

III

200 200 265
222

1.217 1.09 1.06
1.122

0.313 0.059 0.027
0.133

300 150 300
250

208

ReDroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

