A N A N A L Y SIS OF PILO T P O W E R B A S E D P O W E R C O N T R O L A N D D Y N A M IC LOAD S H A R IN G IN C ELLU LA R C D M A N E T W O R K S

MAHESWARAN SUBRAMANIAM
B.Sc.Eng.(Hons), Com puter Science and Engineering, University of M oratuwa, Sri Lanka

A thesis subm itted in p artial fulfillment of the requirem ents for the degree of M aster of Applied Science in th e program of Electrical and Com puter Engineering

Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, C anada

©M AHESW ARAN SUBRAMANIAM 2004 PROPEBfYOF

RYERSON tmiVERStTY LIBRARY

UMI Number; EC52986

All rights re s e rv e d INFORMATION TO USERS

T he quality of this reproduction is d ep en d en t upon the quality of the copy subm itted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard m argins, and im proper alignm ent can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a com plete m anuscript and there are m issing pag es, th e se will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright m aterial had to be rem oved, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI

___

®

UMI Microform EC52986 Copyright 2008 by ProQ uest LLO All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United S ta te s Code.

ProQ uest LLC 789 E ast Eisenhow er Parkway P.O. Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

A u th o r's D ecla ra tio n

I hereby declare th at I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. Signature

' .'/n

ii

I n s tr u c tio n s o n B o rro w ers
Ryerson U niversity requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please give name, address, phone num ber, email, date, and sign below.

Name

Address

Phone

Email

D ate

Signature

Ill

Abstract
A N A N A L Y SIS OF PILO T P O W E R B A SE D P O W E R C O N TR O L A N D D Y N A M IC LOAD SH A R IN G IN CELLULAR C D M A N E T W O R K S Masters of Applied Science, Dept, of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ont, Canada Power control is one of the most important processes in cellular CDMA networks as the interference is the predominant factor that influences the capacity and signal to noise and interference ratio (SINK). In mobile communication, minimizing the mobile transm itted power subject to maintaining the link quality is a challenging task. In this thesis, a pilot power based power control (PPBPC) algorithm integrated with base station assignment is proposed which is decentralized, uses transm it power control and adapts cell sizes for load distribution. In the proposed algorithm, each base station transmits its forward link pilot power inversely proportional to the total reverse link received power. The mobile station senses the strongest pilot power received and determines its home base station. Using the proposed algorithm, dynamic propagation of base station assignment occurs which leads to re-assignment of home base stations system-wide reducing the total mobile transm it power. The simulation results are the evidence for the feasibility of the implementation of the algorithm. It is shown that using the PPBPC algorithm, uniform SINK is achieved for all users in each cell in homogeneous (in terms of required bit rate and bit error rate) user environ ment and it occurs when the algorithm converges at a load balanced point. Theoretical and simulation results are in very close agreement. Unlike previously proposed algorithms in the literature, our proposed algorithm does not require prior knowledge of the channel gains between the users and the base stations, and this scheme does not require extensive computation as well. We also investigate the system performance with various load conditions and conclude th at the load balanced system performs better than a load unbalanced system. The simulation study shows th a t in a load balanced system, the maximum received power at the base stations is minimized th at leads to interference balancing of the system.

IV

A cknow ledgm ent

I wish to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor Prof. Alagan A npalagan for offering me an opportunity to be a graduate student, and his guidance and inspiration th rough the entire research for this thesis. I th an k him for spending countless hours in discussing my work, papers and the thesis. His patience w ith students and willingness to always provide ex tra help are greatly appreciated. I would like to th an k the D epartm ent of Electrical and Com puter Engineering and School of G raduate Studies of Ryerson University for their support in term s of d ep art m ental facilities, research stipend, and scholarships. I would like to th an k Dawn W right and all the staff m em bers of our departm ent for their kind support. I would like to acknowledge my supervisor's funding resources N ational Science and Engineering Research Council of C anada (NSERC), C anada Foundation for Innovation, O ntario Innovation T rust and Ryerson University. I th an k th e fellow graduate students in th e W IN C O R E Lab, who gave me an excellent research environm ent to work w ith all the fun and offered support whenever needed. All above, I would like to acknowledge th e im m easurable support and m otivation of P onnam balam m aam aa family, my parents, my brother and Prof. K irubarajan. W ithout th em I cannot be where I am now.

Dedication

This work is dedicated to my parents, brother, maamaa family, and my friends fo r their love and support. To all of them fo r encouraging me each step along the way.

VI

C o n te n ts

1

In tr o d u c tio n 1.1 1.2 Historical O v e rv ie w .................................................................................................. M ultiple Access Technologies.................................................................................. 1.2.1 1.2.2 1.2.3 1.3 Frequency Division M ultiple Access (F D M A )...................................... Tim e Division Multiple Access ( T D M A ) ............................................. Code Division M ultiple Access ( C D M A ) ............................................. .............................................................

1 2 3 3 4 4 6

Thesis C ontribution and O rganization

2

P o w e r C on tro l in C ellu lar S y ste m s 2.1 2.2 2.3 Near-far Problem and Overcoming in CDMA N e tw o r k s ................................ Classification of Power Control Power Control L iterature ........................................................................... ..............................................................................

9 10 12 18

3

S y s te m M o d e l a n d D e sc r ip tio n vii

21

3.1 3.2

General System D e s c rip tio n ............................................................................. Radio Channel M odel......................... 3.2.1 Small Scale F a d i n g ................................................................................. 3.2.2 Large Scale F a d i n g .......................................................... 3.2.3 Handoff in Wireless S y s t e m ..................................................................

21 25 26 26 30 31

3.3

Problem S ta te m e n t.............................................................................................

4

P ilo t Pow er B ased Pow er Control (P P B P C ) A lgorith m 4.1 Iterative Steps in PPB PC A lg o rith m ............................................................. 4.1.1 Load M e asu rem en t.................................................................................. 4.1.2 Load A d ju stm e n t................................. 4.1.3 Home Base Station A ssig n m e n t........................................................... 4.1.4 Transmit Power A ssig n m e n t.......................................... 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 Analysis of PPBPC A lgorithm ......................................................................... SINK Balancing using PPB PC Algorithm ...................................................

34 35 36 36 37 38 40 46 49 50

Load Sharing using PPB PC A lg o rith m ............................... Limitations of PPBPC A lg o rith m ...................................................................

5

P erform ance E valuation 5.1 Simulation S e t u p ............................................................................................... . viii

51 51

5.2

Sim ulation R e s u l t s .................................................................................................. 5.2.1 5.2.2 5.2.3 5.2.4 5.2.5 5.2.6 Cell B re a th in g .............................................................................................. Short Term Handoff During A lgorithm Im p le m e n ta tio n .................. SINR w ith Load V a r ia tio n ...................................................................... Load Balanced S y s t e m ............................................................................. Dynamic Load Sharing Feature of P P B P C ........................................ Com parison w ith H anly's A lgorithm ..........................................

56 56 58 60 61 67 69 79

5.3

Sum m ary of Results

...............................................................................................

6

C o n c lu sio n s a n d F u tu re W ork

81

IX

List o f Figures

2.1 Received power level at the base station after power control......................... 2.2 Some im portant classifications of power control..............................................

12 13

3.1 Channel allocation model of FDMA in AM PS................................................. 3.2 Channel allocation model in CDMA................................................................... 3.3 Reverse link with power control in a cell........................................................... 3.4 Intercell and intracell interference at a base station in the reverse link. . .

22 22 23 28

5.1 The grid cell layout with a hot-spot cell around (4,4).................................... 5.2 Hot-spot before PPBPC algorithm is implemented.......................................... 5.3 Hot-spot after 1 iteration of PP B P C .................................................................. 5.4 Hot-spot after 2 iterations of PPB PC ................................................................ 5.5 Hot-spot after 4 iterations of PPB PC ................................................................ 5.6 Hot-spot after 13 iterations of PP B P C ....................................................

54 55 55 56 56 57

5.7 5.8 5.9

H ot-spot after 19 iterations of P P B P C ................................................................ Base station sw itching.............................................................................................. Theoretical and sim ulation values of SINR w ith to ta l received power a t a base sta tio n ..................................................................................................................

57 59

60 62 64 65 66 68 68 68

5.10 Load balanced system provides m axim um SINR............................................... 5.11 Load balanced SINR with users............................................................................. 5.12 Load at base stations with load balanced SIN R................................................ 5.13 Load sharing gives more SINR th an a load unshared system ........................ 5.14 T he cell at saturation before becoming a hot-spot........................................... 5.15 T he hot-spot base station before the algorithm s ta rts ..................................... 5.16 T he footprint after the hot-spot satu ratio n ........................................................ 5.17 The Eb/Io variation w ith iterations (after 40*^^ iteration, a new set of mobile users was in tro d u c e d )................................................................................. 5.18 T otal mobile transm it power variation w ith iterations.................................... 5.19 The stan d ard deviation of the to ta l received power at the BSs....................

71 74 78

XI

List o f Tables
3.1 Environment and corresponding path-loss exponent. .......................... 28

XU

C h a p ter 1

In tr o d u c tio n
h e world is dem anding more from wireless com m unication technologies th an ever before. In recent years the cellular comm unications m arket has exploded.

T

M ore people around th e world are subscribing to wireless services and consumers are using th eir phones more frequently. The th ird generation wireless d a ta services and applications such as wireless email, web browsing, digital picture exchange and global positioning system (GPS) applications are more dem anding to the radio communication resources. In order to m eet the growing demands of subscribers for different kinds of services, such as conferencing , m ultim edia, database access and Internet, it is necessary to have higher d a ta rates and more stringent Q uality of Service (QoS) requirem ents. Conse quently, new transm ission technologies and improved radio resource m anagem ent tech niques such as base statio n assignment, channel assignment, transm it power control, and

2 handoff are required in cellular communication systems. We will discuss some of the im portant aspects of the wireless communication system and definitions in this chapter. Now let us see how the wireless communication system has grown over the past decades.

1.1

Historical Overview

In 1979 the first analog cellular communication, Nippon Telephone and Telegraph (NTT) system, became operational. Subsequently, the Nordic Mobile Telephone (NMT) system and the Advanced Mobile Phone Service (AMPS) were introduced in 1981 and 1983 re spectively. These systems were based on frequency division multiple access (FDMA) and are known as first generation cellular systems. The first digital cellular standard, the Global Standard for Mobile Communications (GSM), based on time division multiple access (TDMA), was deployed in 1992 in Europe. Two digital standards developed in the United States are lS-54, based on TDMA, and IS-95, based on narrowband direct sequence code division multiple access (DS-CDMA). The first digital cellular system in Japan was Personal Digital Cellular (PDC), introduced in 1994. Now the system has evolved up to 3G standard and it uses a high data rate technology such as CDMA2000, wide-band CDMA (WCDMA) and time division synchronous code division mul tiple access (TD-SCDMA). The most important things in the evolution of the wireless communication system are the evolution of the multiple access technologies and other improvements in wireless communications techniques such as base station assignment, channel assignment, power control techniques, and handoff techniques, and etc. Now we

will discuss some of th e above technologies an d techniques briefly [1].

1.2

M u ltip le A ccess Technologies

T he support of parallel transm ission on the reverse link and forward link is called m ultiple access, whereas th e exchange of information in b o th directions of a connection is referred to as duplexing. Hence, multiple access and duplexing are th e m ethods th a t facilitate the sharing of th e broadcast communication medium. The necessary insulation is achieved by assigning to each user, different p arts of the dom ains (space, frequency, time, code) th a t carries th e signals. The access technologies can be mainly divided into 3 prelim inary techniques according to the domains. T hey are FDMA, TDM A and CDMA.

1 .2 .1

F r e q u e n c y D iv is io n M u ltip le A c c e ss (F D M A )

FD M A is th e division of th e frequency band allocated for wireless cellular telephone com m unication into a fixed number of channels, each of which can carry a voice con v ersation or, w ith digital service, carry digital data. FDMA is a basic technology in th e analog Advanced Mobile Phone Service (AM PS), the most widely installed cellular phone system in N orth America. W ith FDM A, each channel can be assigned to only one user a t a tim e. FDM A is also used in th e T otal Access Com m unication System (TACS) [2].

4

1.2.2

T im e D iv isio n M u ltip le A ccess (T D M A )

Time division multiple access (TDMA) is digital transmission technology th at allows a number of users to access a single radio-frequency (RF) channel without interference by allocating unique time slots to each user within each channel. Hence, in TDMA system, the filters at the receivers are simply time windows instead of the bandpass filters required in FDMA. As a consequence, the guard time between transmissions can be made as small as the synchronization of the network permits. Guard times of 30--50/iS between time slots are commonly used in TDMA based systems. As a consequence, all users must be synchronized with the base station to within a fraction of the guard time. It is noted th at the GSM uses the TDMA technology [1].

1 .2 .3

C o d e D iv isio n M u ltip le A ccess (C D M A )

There are three common types of spread spectrum techniques such as direct sequence (DS), frequency hopping (FH), and time hopping (TH). The commercial IS-95 CDMA system is specified for reverse link operation in the 824 - 849 MHz band and 869-894 MHz for the forward link. Each user within the cell is to use the same radio channel. IS-95 uses DS m ethod and a baseband signal with bit duration T multiplied with a pseudo random sequence (PN) with a much smaller duration Tc to obtain a signal with a bandwidth th at is much larger than the original bandwidth. The shift registers with feedback connections are used to generate this PN sequence practically. Different spreading sequences are used for different users to implement the multiple access. To reduce the interference.

5 th e spreading sequence should be orthogonal am ong themselves, i.e., they have very less cross correlation [1]. T he first CDMA network was commercially launched in 1995. It is n o ted th a t the spread-spectrum technology is more secure and offers higher transm ission quality. Power-controlled multi-cell CDMA increases the cellular system capacity [3].

In te r fe r e n c e in C D M A

CDM A system s are interference limited. Therefore, in order to increase the capacity, reducing the interference is im portant. The interference could be reduced by introducing directional antennas, thereby, dividing the cells into sectors. Dividing the cells into sec to rs increases the num ber of base stations, handoffs and system complexity. Introducing m icrocell zone concept is also another approach in reducing the antennas. Another ap proach is the activation/ deactivation of transm itter. For example, on the average, each voice circuit is active for only a fraction of tim e due to listening and pauses in speech. T he carrier can be tu rn ed off during idle periods. In practice, the power is reduced to a non-zero value to facilitate synchronization. This active fraction of tim e is known as speech activity factor. T he interference can be reduced by im plem enting power control which is investigated in th is thesis. Power control is a single m ost im portant system requirem ent in cellular CDM A networks.

6

1.3

Thesis Contribution and Organization

In mobile communication, minimizing the mobile transm itted power subject to m aintain ing the link quality is a challenging task. In this thesis, an integrated pilot power based power control (PPBPC) algorithm with base station assignment is proposed which is decentralized, uses transm it power control and adapts cell sizes for real-time load distri bution. The iterative algorithm helps compute the mobile transm it power and perform the base station assignment for each mobile user. We analyze the behavior and performance of the algorithm and show that uniform SINR is achieved for all users in each cell in homogeneous (in terms of required bit rate and bit error rate) user environment and it occurs when the algorithm converges at a load balanced point. Unlike previously proposed algorithms in the literature, our proposed m ethod does not require prior knowledge of the channel gains between the users and the base stations, and this scheme does not require extensive computation. We show th at the theoretical and simulation results are in very close agreement. It will be seen th at using the proposed algorithm, dynamic propagation of base station assignment occurs which leads to re-assignment of home base stations system-wide re ducing the total mobile transm it power. The adaptive power adjustment in hot-spot congestion scenario is demonstrated by comparing the sensitivity of the results with another existing algorithm (by Hanly's [4]). We show th a t the system has flexibility in the required SINR by dynamically adjusting the value of a parameter which depends on two other parameters, namely K f and Kr, which are used in adjusting the forward and

reverse link power respectively. We investigate th e system performance w ith various load conditions and conclude th a t th e load balanced system performs b e tter than a load unbalanced system. The sim ulation study shows th a t in a load balanced system, th e maxim um power received at th e base stations is minimized th a t leads to interference balancing of the system. We validate the algorithm by creating appropriate system model and implementing different sim ulation scenario. The dynamic load sharing and the sensitivity of the al g orithm are analyzed by adjusting different system param eters such as different load conditions and to tal received power ratios. The feasibility of the im plem entation of the algorithm is also dem onstrated. T h e thesis is organized in the following way. In C hapter 2 we describe various power control techniques and its im portance to CDMA-based mobile comm unication systems. We also discuss some of the related work in power control in the literature. In C h ap ter 3, pilot power based power control (PP B PC ) algorithm 's system model is described w ith necessary assumptions. T he im portant param eters and notations th a t we discuss later in this thesis are also defined. C h ap ter 4 details the pilot power based power control algorithm (P P B P C ) and its technical details. T he im portant steps of the algorithm and the base station assignment technique are also discussed. This chapter discusses how the SIN R balanced system is achieved by im plem enting this algorithm . We describe the power assignment solu tio n th ro u g h the m atrix transform ations. Finally, the load sharing techm que is also

8 explained. C hapter 5 presents the simulation setup and the results. We vahdate our algorithm 's performance in handling the hot-spot scenario by adaptive adjustment of the cell's foot print. The impact on the uniform SINR with the load variations are discussed using the simulation results and the mathematical derivation was validated through the simula tion results. We also show that the load balanced system has a better performance than a load unbalanced system. Finally, the sensitivity of the algorithm for various system conditions and adaptation of the proposed algorithm are compared with th at of Hanly's algorithm. The Chapter 6 concludes with a brief discussion about the main contribution of the thesis, and points out directions for future work based on this thesis work.

C h a p te r 2

P o w er C on trol in C ellu lar S y stem s
O W E R control is one of the most im portant system requirem ents in every radio access technology such as FDMA, TDM A and most im portantly in DS-CDMA

P

in cellular networks. In most m odern systems, both base stations and mobile stations have th e capability of real-tim e (dynamic) adjustm ent of their transm it power. Proper base sta tio n assignm ent is also im portant when we investigate the power control. Power control comprises the techniques and algorithm s to manage and adjust the tran sm it power of base stations and mobile stations. It also serves several purposes, including reducing co-channel interference, m anaging connection quality, maximizing cell capacity, and minimizing mobile station m ean transm it power. The necessity for power control in FD M A /TD M A -based cellular networks was from the requirem ent for co-channel interference managem ent. This type of interference is caused by the frequency reuse due to lim ited available frequency spectrum . By proper power adjustm ent, the

10 harmful effects of co-channel interference can also be reduced. This allows a more

''dense" reuse of resources and, thus, contributes to higher capacity. In CDMA cellular systems, one user's desired signal power is interference seen by other users. reducing the interference is important in cellular CDMA networks. Hence,

2.1

Near-far Problem and Overcoming in CDM A Networks

Let us consider the reverse link communication in CDMA networks. The mobiles th at are closer to the base station will cause significant interference to the mobiles th at are farther from the base station because of very different signal attenuation along with non-zero cross-correlation between signature sequences assigned to users. This effect is known as near/far effect. The reverse link requires power control primarily to solve the " near-far" problem. All mobile stations transm it the signal on the same frequency channel at the same time but with different codes. Therefore, one mobile station's signal may interfere with others. A mobile's received signal quality at the base station is inversely proportional to the power of the interference from other mobiles. The near-far problem arises when two mobiles at different distances from the base station transm it the signal power at the same level. Due to different propagation loss, the transm itted signal power received at the base station will be different. The mobile near the base station, which has high

11 received signal power, greatly interferes w ith the distant mobile, which may not be able to be detected.

Power control on the reverse link also deals w ith the rapidly changing characteristics of m u ltip ath fading channels common in urban environment. In this environment, the received power of a typical wireless channel varies dram atically w ith tim e for a specific velocity and m ultip ath characteristics. To solve problems encountered in urban environ m ent, th e power control algorithm ensures th a t the received power levels of all mobile statio n s are the same at the base station. The algorithm does this by controlling the m obile's tran sm it power. Mobile stations are comm anded to transm it at a higher power level when th eir received power is low, such as when they are far from the base station or when they undergo severe fading. Similarly, mobile stations are com m anded to transm it a t a lower power level when their received power is high, such as when they are near th e base statio n or when they have line-of-sight. To control power in this m anner, the algorithm continuously m onitors the received power of each mobile device and contin uously adjusts its transm it power to achieve the predefined performance levels, such as b it error ra te (BER) or the signal to interference noise ratio (SINR).

Power control adjusts mobile transm it power in such a way th a t the received power at hom e base station from every mobile station is almost equal regardless of the locations. T his can be clearly shown in Fig. 2.1. Well-defined power control is essential for proper function of DS-CDM A system. In the absence of power control, the capacity of the DSCDM A mobile system will be very low, even lower th an th a t of mobile system s based on

12

i

I
BjW&ë from base

Disteoce Éroîabase station to;
Average power die mobile needs to ti ansmt

station to m bbüç Average power r e t # # at base station.

Average power received by mobile

Figure 2.1: Received power level at the base station after power control.

FDM A [5]. One of the reasons for the use of power control is that it reduces the average mobile transm it power. Hence, the mobile's battery life is increased. According to the above mentioned facts, for proper operation of modern high-capacity cellular radio systems, power control is an essential feature. Power control techniques can be classified into the following categories discussed in the next section.

2.2

Classification of Power Control

Power control can be classified into several categories according to different criteria th at are used in the power control method. Fig. 2.2 shows some important classification of power control methods that we discuss in this section.

13

Centralized Decentralized Power Control Algorithms SHR  Based SiNR - Based & e n g th Based Open Loop Closed Loop

Forward Link Reverse Link

AdaptlveStep Size Fixed Step Size

F ig u re 2.2; Some important classifications of power control.

A . F o rw a rd lin k a n d R e v e r se lin k
R e v e r se lin k P o w er C on trol Reverse link power control manages the tran sm it power on a m obile's access channel an d reverse traffic channel. Power control for DS-CDMA reverse link is the m ost im por ta n t system requirem ent because of the n ear/far effect. CDMA is interference limited; therefore reducing interference is im portant in increasing the capacity. Power control reduces th e average mobile transm itted power as well.

F o rw a rd lin k P o w er C on trol For th e forw ard link, no power control is required in a single cell system, since all signals are tra n sm itte d together and hence vary together. However in m ultiple cell system s, interference from neighboring cells fades independently from the given cell and therefore

14 degrades the performance. Thus, it is also necessary to apply power control in this case to reduce inter-cell interference.

B . C en tra lized and D ecen tralized

C e n tra liz e d P o w er C o n tro l

A centralized controller has all information about the established connections and chan nel gains, and controls all the power levels in the network or part of the network. Cen tralized power control requires extensive control signaling in the network and cannot be used in practice.

D e c e n tra liz e d P o w er C o n tro l

A decentralized controller controls only the power of one single transm itter, and the algorithm depends only on local information, such as measured SINR or channel gain of the specific user. These algorithms perform well in ideal cases, but in real systems there are a number of undesired effects. Measuring and control signaling takes time, which results in time delay in the system. The possible output power of the transm itters are constrained due to physical limits and quantized nature. Different external constraints such as the use of maximum power on specific channels affect the output power as well.

15

C . s t r e n g t h , S I N R a n d B E R b a sed
S tr e n g th b a se d p ow er con trol In stren g th based schemes the strength of a signal arriving at the base station from a mobile is m easured to determ ine w hether it is higher or lower th an the desired strength. T he com m and to lower or raise the transm it power is sent accordingly.

S I N R b a se d p o w er con trol In th e SIN R based schemes the m easured quantity is the SINR where interference consists of channel noise and m ulti-user interference. Strength based power control is easier

to im plem ent b u t SINR based power control exhibits b etter system performance. A serious problem associated with SINR based power control is the potential to get positive feedback to endanger the stability of the system. Positive feedback arises in a situation w hen one mobile under instructions from the base station to increase its transm it power in order to deliver a desirable SINR to the base station. B ut the increase in its power also results in an increase in interference to other mobiles so th a t other mobiles are then forced to also increase their power and so on. We often get infeasible solutions commonly in fixed base sta tio n assignment where the mobile cannot change its home base station even if it would be able to have a good link with very less transm itted power w ith an adjacent base station. If the required SINR is less for a mobile, it has to increase the tra n sm it power to increase the SINR. This increases the interference also. T hen again th e SIN R m ay reduce. In the case of N mobiles in the system, this becomes a typical

16 non-cooperative N-person game problem where each user is trying to achieve their own goal and one user's goal is an obstacle for the other user [6].

B E R based pow er control

Bit error rate (BER) is defined as the ratio of received bits th at are in error, relative to the amount of bits received. Transmit power can be controlled based on BER. If the signal and interference power are constant, the BER will be a function of the SINR, and in this case it is equivalent to QoS. However, in reality the SINR is time-variant and, thus, the average SINR will not correspond to the average BER. In this case the BER is a better quality measure. Since the channel coding is implemented in every practical system, power control can be based on the average number of erroneous frames as well.

f

= ^S IN R .

(2.1)

The SINR and ^ relationship is given in (2.1). The transmission bandwidth W and the transmission rate R are constants in our system model that we will describe later. Therefore, BER can be defined as a function of SINR.

17

D . O p e n -lo o p a n d C lo se d -lo o p

O p en -Io o p p o w er c o n tro l

In open-loop power control, the mobile's transm it power is determ ined by m easuring th e received signal strength of the base station and by estim ating the forward link p a th loss. Assum ing a similar (average) p a th loss for the reverse link, the mobile uses this inform ation to determ ine its transm itter power. The first tim e a mobile station tran sm its, it will do so on its access channel as a reply to a message on the paging channel, or to place an outgoing call. The mobile user estim ates the channel sta te on th e forw ard link, and this estim ate is used as a measure of the channel state on the reverse link. These techniques can compensate for p ath loss and large-scale variations such as shadowing, bu t it is not possible to com pensate for m ultipath fading because reverse and forward links are generally not correlated.

C lo se d -lo o p p ow er co n tro l

Closed-loop control involves both the forward and reverse traffic channels, so successful optim ization of th e algorithm requires the sim ultaneous analysis and sim ulation of both of these physical layer channels. Closed-loop power control is feasible in a terrestrial cellular environm ent. However, in mobile comm unication systems using m ultiple low e a rth o rb ital satellites, th e fades occur too rapidly for th e closed-loop power control to track, due to the large round trip propagation delay.

18

E. F ix ed and A d a p tiv e S tep Size
Another method of classification is based on whether or not the transm it power step size is made adaptive to the channel variation which increases or decreases the mobile users' transm it power by the actual difference between the received signal power and the desired received signal power. Power control command in fixed step size algorithms is a simple 1bit command. Adaptive step size algorithm is superior to the fixed step size algorithm. However, the fixed step size algorithm is easier to implement because adaptive size algorithm needs additional bandwidth on the return channel to carry the power control step size instead of the 1-bit control command as in fixed step size algorithm.

2.3

Power Control Literature

In [7], the performance of a CDMA system was analyzed in a mobile satellite environment and it has been shown th at CDMA approach provides greater capacity. In [3], Gilhousen et al. showed that the power-controlled multi-cell CDMA increases the cellular capacity. Grandhi [8] proposed a centralized power control (CPC) scheme which requires some kind of central controller th at needs to have knowledge about all the radio links in the system. Their focus was on maximizing the minimum carrier to interference ratio (CIR) or attaining a common CIR over the network. A CPC scheme was constructed by Zander [9] th at has an optimal solution in terms of minimum transmit power. A de-centralized power control implementation was proposed in [10] and [11], and each

19 d istrib u tes th e power control operation among the users. T his d istrib u ted control process was combined w ith the base station assignment by Hanly in [4] in which an algorithm was presented for controlling mobiles' transm it power levels and also for selecting their home base stations. In this algorithm , each base station m easures th e to ta l interference in the reverse link in the network. Every mobile station com m unicates w ith its surrounding base stations by measuring the interference a t each base station. T hen it calculates their transm it power to every base station to achieve the required quality of service. Then, the mobile station selects its home base station which requires th e minimum mobile transm it power. T h at is, the mobile station selects its hom e base station in such a way th a t the interference is minimized. In [12], Q iu et al. introduced an algorithm to effectively adjust the size of a cellular area to m axim ize overall system capacity. W hen the SINR at the base station is reduced below th e required level, the base station reduces the pilot power at a predefined pace. T h e mobile station chooses its home base station with the strongest pilot power among all received pilot signals. Some subscribers in the overlapping region will be forced to handoff to a less loaded neighboring cell. In [13], the base station assignment mechanism was perform ed by estim ating the forw ard link pilot power strength received at the mobile station. In [13], the pilot power tra n sm itte d by the base station is inversely proportional to the estim ated to tal reverse link power a t th e base station. In our work, each base station transm its its forward link pilot power inversely proportional to the to ta l reverse link received power. T he mobile

20 station senses the strongest pilot power received and determines its home base station. Deviating from other approaches in the hterature, in our scheme, mobile transm its the signal power which is inversely proportional to the received pilot power from its home base station. We will discuss the algorithm in the next chapters in detail.

C h a p te r 3

S y s te m M o d el and D escrip tio n

I

N th is chapter, we detail the cellular mobile CDMA system model w ith appropriate assum ptions for which our transm it power control and base station assignment algo

rith m is proposed and analyzed. The system param eters and model assum ptions needed for establishing th e various simulation scenarios are also described in this chapter.

3.1

G eneral System D escrip tion

We consider a stand ard, uniform hexagonal layout of cells with base stations a t the center of every cell in th e CDMA cellular network. This cellular system consists of N base stations, labelled as 1,2,3....N. Fig. 3.1 shows hexagonal cell layout th a t is appropriate for th e FD M A channel allocation model as used in AMPS. Here, the frequency is reused in th e netw ork where th e different num bers denote the different frequency set. T he cell
21

22

F igure 3.1: Channel allocation model of FDMA in AMPS.

Figure 3.2; Channel allocation model in CDMA.

23 num bers assigned from 1 to 7 are considered as one cluster. In this system, th e same frequency set is reused and a considerable minimum distance is m aintained to minimize the effect of th e co-channel interference. T he channel or the frequency allocation in our model is the same as used in the 18-95 com m ercial CDM A channel allocation. T h at is, all hexagonal cells use the same frequency band. To distinguish one user's transm ission signal from another, each user's d a ta symbols are m odulated by a unique binary spreading sequence. Fig. 3.2 shows the way th e frequency channels are allocated in our proposed model. This figure has a single num ber " 1" assigned to all the cells. T h a t is, unlike in FDM A system shown in th e Fig. 3.1, all th e channels use the same frequency set. The spreading bandw idth of th e channel (in Hz) is denoted by W.

users

N users R ev erse link

F ig u re 3.3: Reverse link with power control in a cell.

O ur algorithm is proposed to implement th e power control for the reverse link only and it ad ju sts th e m obile's transm it power as shown in Fig. 3.3. The power is controlled

24 in such a way th at the received signal power at the base station is equal S as shown in Fig. 3.3. The cellular system model consisting of Musers, labelled 1,2,... M transm its infor mation on the reverse link of a system. Each mobile user is assigned to a particular base station as its home base station. We assume that the users are uniformly distributed within each cell and there are no perfect cell boundaries in the network. The user j com municates with its home base station, i = bj. All the users in all the cells are treated equally in terms of required bit rate and bit error rate. T hat is, a homogeneous system environment is considered. In our cellular system model, we do not consider the mobility of the users while implementing the algorithm. No soft handoff is implemented in the system. Therefore, there may be a possibility for excessive number of sudden switching in our model's im plementation. However, this effect could be minimized by implementing the soft-handoff in practical considerations. To avoid aggressive switching and unnecessary handoff of very close mobiles to base stations, we assume th at there is a minimum threshold level in the forward link pilot power. Hence, the very close users of the base station will always be communicating with its closest base stations. We also assume that our system always operate above this pilot power level limit. Users are assumed to be in communication with the closest base station by the measured power. If a user suddenly has a good line of sight or if the obstacles were removed, then the user may switch back to a base station with the better-hnk. More

25 discussion about this issue related w ith our algorithm will follow in the next chapter. T he therm al noise is present in both the forward and reverse link in a practical cellular CDM A system. We assume th a t the forward link noise power level is zero

th ro u g h o u t the thesis. We consider a large capacity CDMA system, in which m ultiple access interference is the dom inant source of interference in the reverse link. T h at is, the value of th e noise power level is much less compared to the to tal reverse link interference power at th e base station. Hence, we assume non-zero therm al noise power at the base station.

3.2

R adio C hannel M odel

In th e cellular system , the system coverage area is divided into cells and each cell has a fixed base station. T he base station serves each cell through its allocated frequency. T hese frequencies are divided into channels, such as in IS-95 (CDMA) the channel band w id th is 1.25 MHz w ith m ultiple channels. The channels have traffic channels which carry th e voice or th e d a ta from one mobile station to another and the control channels are used for control purposes. T he received signal level fluctuates as the mobile channel varies with changing envi ronm ent w ith time. This behavior is known as fading and the channel is said to be a fading channel. This channel is described by several m athem atical models such as prob ability m odels and em pirical models. The fading is expressed in two m ajor categories as sm all scale fading and large scale fading [1].

26

3 .2 .1

Sm all Scale F ading

The random phase and amplitudes of the different m ultipath components cause fluctua tions in signal strength, thereby, inducing small-scale fading. The speed of the mobile or the speed of the surrounding objects induce a time-varying Doppler shift on m ultipath components. These effects dominate the small-scale fading. The small-scale m ultipath fading could be analyzed by expressing the channel statistically as Rayleigh or Ricean models. But these are out of scope of this thesis and we assume that the m ultipath components could be considered in the following way in the system. Fast fading is assumed not to affect the average power level and the proposed al gorithm (PPBPC) is implemented fast enough to compensate for it. We assume no Doppler shifts and an immobile network in our system model; hence, no rapid change in the received signal.

3 .2 .2

Large Scale Fading

Large scale propagation models predict the local average power, th at is, the average power of the small-scale variations. Power measurements used to develop these models are averaged over short distances. The models predict power attenuation or received power as a function of large distance variation. Real propagation occurs in environment where buildings, trees, cars, etc. exist.

These objects obstruct the waves and cause additional attenuation than in free space. The radio waves undergo reflection, diffraction and scattering. Due to the complexity of

27 the environm ent it is impossible to derive theoretically a model which predicts the net resulting wave as a function of a distance in a real environment. A nalysts have resorted to deriving models empirically. Thousands of measurements are taken in a certain class of environment (urban cities, suburbs, rural, indoors, etc). Using statistics tools, the observed power variations are characterized. This type of radio propagation is generally modelled as R adar cross sectional model, distance dependent p a th loss model, log-normal shadowing model, and Okum ura model [1].

D is t a n c e D e p e n d e n t P a th L oss
The distance dependent p a th loss model depends on the transm itter-receiver separation. O ur m odel is described as the distance dependent p ath loss model. The received power of a transm itter-receiver separation by a distance r in a cellular environm ent can be represented as

n

Pr=M^) ,

(3-1)

where pr and pt are th e received and tran sm itted power respectively, n is the p a th loss exponent and is th e reference distance, r^e/ defines a close-in reference distance

to which th e received signal power at all farther distances can be compared. Table 3.1 shows th e typical values of n, which vary depending on different environment [1]. The use of r^e/ is not strict, and in real channels it will not be necessarily valid, since it depends on th e an tenna heights and patterns. However, for analysis of CDMA cellular

28 networks, it is necessary to recalculate all of the power levels to some known reference power level, which is considered to depend on Vrej [!]·

E n v iro n m e n t Free space Urban area cellular radio Shadowed urban cellular radio In building line of sight Obstructed in building Obstructed in factories

P a th Loss E x p o n e n t n 2 2.7 to 3.5 3 to 5 1.6 to 1.8 4 to 6 2 to 3

Table 3.1: Environment and corresponding path-loss exponent.

This simple model is accurate in areas with little terrain profile variation. Therefore, the model is reasonable for conventional cellular networks which employs antennas in flat service areaa. But it is not accurate in ad-hoc kind of broadcast system which employs small cells and low antennas. in terferin g users from otfiercell(s) (oth ercell in terferen ceorin terceil in terferen ce)

in terferin g users fr o m hom ecell

d esiredm ob ileuser

BS

desiredu ser'scell o rh om ecell

in ter fer in gu sers' ceB (s)oroth erceB (s)

F igure 3.4: Intercell and intracell interference at a base station in the reverse link.

We assume th at the large scale fading is due to the distance, and the propagation is

29 obstructed in building environm ent and the signal is to fade according to r~°` law, where r is th e distance from th e tran sm itter to the receiver. Fig. 3.4 shows a 2-cell environm ent of a cellular CDMA system. If the distance from th e hom e base station to the mobile station is r ^ and the distance from other cell base statio n to the mobile station is ro, then the desired signal and the interference signal from th e mobile is proportional to r " " and r "" respectively. Here, th e theoretical and m easurement based propagation models indicate th a t aver age received signal power decreases logarithm ically with distance. This model has been used extensively in the power control literature [13]. The average-scale p a th loss for an a rb itra ry transm itter-receiver large separation is expressed as a function of distance by using a p a th loss exponent, n

-- r f 1" P L oc ----- ,
Tref \

where P L is th e average p a th loss between the transm itter-receiver separation of distance r and, Tref is th e reference distance in the log-distance path loss model. T he log-norm al distribution describes the random shadowing effects which occur over a large num ber of m easurem ent locations which have the same transm itter-receiver sep aratio n , b u t have different levels of clutter on th e propagation path. T his phenomenon is referred to as log-normal shadowing. We only assume th a t the p ath loss is due to the d istance an d no shadowing is considered in our analysis.

30

3.2.3

H an d off in W ireless S y stem

Handoff occurs when a mobile moves into a new cell while a conversation is in progress. The mobile switching center automatically transfers the call to a new channel belonging to the new base station. The handoff process could be initiated by the base station or the mobile station depending on the strategy used. W hen a higher signal power is received from a different base station or when the received signal power is below a threshold, the handoff process may be initiated. Handoff could be classified as soft handoff and hard handoff.

H ard Handoff' In the hard handoff, the mobile station first releases the previous connection with the base station and it communicates with the new base station. This strategy is known as ''break before make" . In this type of handoff, the user may hear a click sound when the base station switching occurs. There may be a ping pong effect (oscillation of the home base station assignment) when the mobile is closer to the boundary.

Soft Handoff" In the soft handoff, the mobiles keep communicating with the current base station while it is also communicating with the new base station. This prevents extra switching and helps to increase the reliability. Soft handoff needs the overlapping of base station

coverage zones, so th at every mobile station is always well within the range of at least

31 one base station. Soft handoff technology is used by the CDMA system. In CDMA, all base stations use th e sam e frequency channel to communicate w ith each mobile station, no m atter where th e mobile is physically located. Each mobile has an identity based on a code, ra th e r th a n on a frequency or sequence of tim e slots. Because no change in frequency or tim ing occurs as a mobile passes from one base station to another, there are practically no dead zones. As a result, connections are almost never interrupted or dropped.

3.3

P ro b lem S tatem en t

Let us denote the mobile transm it power from the mobile user k by Pk(n) in iteration n, th en th e to ta l received power at the base station z, Qi(n), is given by

M

Q iW = ^ GijPj{n) + Vi, j=i

(3.2)

where Gik is the uplink gain from the mobile station k to base station i and Vi is the noise power a t the base station i. Then the interference power for mobile user k a t base statio n i is given by
Iik{n) = ^ GijPj(n) + Vi(3.3)

Iik{n) is th e to tal unw anted power at base station i for user k. It is assum ed th a t 1^ is the spread spectrum bandw idth and R is the required rate of

32 transmission. We assume homogeneous user scenario, which means th at all the quality of service requirements such as transmission rate, required SINR are the same for all the users in the network.

The most important parameter for a reliable digital communication system is the bit energy to noise density ratio, The multiplication of processing gain and the signal

to interference ratio will give the bit energy to noise density ratio. One of the ways to measure the quality of the communication of any communication system is the signal to noise interference ratio. Users could also be classified according to their bit rate R and ^ requirements. Since we consider homogeneous users, SINR is an appropriate tool to quantify the performance.

The signal to noise interference ratio at the iteration index n for the mobile station k at the base station i is given by SINRik(n) where

where p[fc(n) is the desired signal power at base station i for mobile station k at the iteration. In order to increase the SINR of a mobile at a base station, the mobile transm it power may be increased. However, the increase in its transmission signal power also results in an increase of the interference to other mobiles, which will force other mobiles to also increase their power. In the case of N mobiles in the system, this becomes a typical non-cooperative Af-person game problem. Therefore, proper optimization should

33 b e done in selecting th e value of th e power for each mobile user.

C hapter 4

P ilo t Power B ased Power Control (P P B P C ) A lgorithm

O

UR goal is to determine (a) home base station and (b) transmit power for each user subject to satisfying the SIR requirement in a cellular CDMA system with

homogeneous users while minimizing the total (or average) transm it power in the system. This problem has been studied extensively in the literature. However, we propose an algorithm th at (a) is based on pilot power strength, (b) achieves the above goals, (c) is flexible in system operations through the adjustable forward link and reverse link param eters { K j,K r - which will be defined later), (d) th at achieves uniform SINR in the system via load balancing.
34

35

4.1

Itera tiv e Steps in P P B P C A lgorithm

In this chapter we present pilot power based power control (PP B PC ) algorithm th a t iteratively adjusts the mobile transm it power and also the cells' coverage area (i.e., base statio n footprint) in order to decrease the interference power. In every iteration, each mobile selects its home base station and determines its transm itter power which is needed to m aintain an acceptable quality of service. Throughout this thesis, we assume th a t th e quality of service is dependent only on the SINR. T he basic idea of this algorithm is, when the base station is heavily loaded, the base sta tio n sta rts directing some of its mobile stations to the lightly loaded adjacent cells by decreasing th e pilot signal power, thereby, shrinking the cell size. T he algorithm runs as described below. In P P B P C algorithm , we need the estim ation of the received pilot power a t the mobile statio n s and the estim ation of to ta l received signal power at the base stations. T he algorithm iteratively goes through the following four im portant steps.

1.

Step I

: L oad m easu rem en t

In each iteration of the algorithm, every base station estim ates the to tal reverse link received power.

2.

S t e p I I : L oad a d ju stm en t

T he base statio n transm its forward link pilot power, which is inversely proportional to th e to ta l received reverse link power.

36 3. S t e p I I I : H om e base station assignm ent Each mobile station senses the strongest pilot power received and selects the base station which sent the strongest pilot power, as its home base station. 4. S te p I V : Transm it power assignm ent The mobile station transmits its signal at a power level which is inversely propor tional to the strongest sensed received pilot power. The algorithm runs through the above 4 steps iteratively until the algorithm converges. Next, we discuss the above steps in detail.

4 .1 .1

Load M easu rem en t

The base station measures its total received power. This has the reverse link signal power from the mobile stations and the reverse link noise power. It can be expressed as given in (3.2). Since we consider a large capacity CDMA system, the interference power is dominant and it is almost equal to the total reverse link received power. This step helps to determine the congestion level of a particular cell.

4 .1 .2

L oad A d ju stm en t

The base station transmits its forward link pilot power inversely proportional to the to tal reverse link power received as

37

Pi{n)

oc

^ Q iW

-

h W

^ to M

'

(4')

where K f is assum ed to be a tim e-invariant constant, which can be used to adjust the forward link pilot power level to the desired operating level, Piin) is the pilot power tran sm itte d from base station i and h(n)* is a time-varying constant and it is used as a norm alizing factor. However, it should be noted th at, at a particular tim e, the value of h(n)* is the sam e for all base stations. T he pilot power received from base station i at mobile sta tio n k is given by P\kip) = (4.2)

where G\^ is th e forward link gain from base station i to the mobile station k and Pik(n) is th e pilot power received from base station i at the mobile station k. By implementing this step, th e heavily congested base station is attem pting to handoff its m ore-distanced home users to th e neighboring cells, and the lightly congested base stations attem p t to accept some adjacent heavily loaded cell's users into its home cell.

4 .1 .3

H o m e B a s e S ta tio n A ssig n m e n t

T his step is known as home base station assignment. The mobile station k senses

38 the strongest forward link pilot power received from the base stations, and it selects the base station which transm its the strongest sensed pilot power as its home base station bk. hk = arg (m ax
\ i /

= arg ( m ^ [G-fcPi(n)] ) ,
\ i

Vfc.

(4.3)

In the base station assignment step, for example, in a hot-spot where there is a high concentration of users, the base station reduces its pilot power as in Step II, causing more distant users to link up with their neighboring base stations. So each cell adapts its footprint according to the load distribution. T hat is, the base station starts directing some mobile stations to lightly loaded surrounding cells by reducing the pilot signal power, thus shrinking the cell size for the load sharing. This nature is known as ''cell breathing" .

4 .1 .4

T ran sm it P ow er A ssign m en t

In this step, mobile station k transmits the reverse link power inversely proportional to the pilot power pl^k{n) received from its selected home base station bk- It can be expressed as:

39

= where

a

"

is a constant, which can be used to control the reverse link signal power level

to th e desired nom inal range. By substituting (4.1) in (4.5), we will get the foUowing equation:
» (" + !) = (4,6)

^f^bkk Let h(n) be defined as:
h(n) = ^ ^ ^ .

(4.7)

Since (4.6) is valid for all the base stations, we drop the cell index 6^ and denote it as base sta tio n index of i,
P .(n + 1) = (4.8)

D i s c u ss io n

Users strictly w ithin one cell are limited to communication with the base station in th a t cell. In this case we assume th a t the pilot signal power received from other base stations are very weak. They do not have strong pilot power received from surrounding base statio n s and, therefore, are unable to establish reliable connections. B ut users in the overlapping region, i.e., between two cells, receive strong enough pilot power from at least two base stations to make reliable communication. In our algorithm the mobile sta tio n indirectly m easures the traffic load of the surrounding base stations by estim ating

40 the pilot signal power strength and determine its home base station. It selects the base station which sends the strongest pilot power as its home base station. PPBPC algorithm does not need to have the reverse link and the forward link gain information from the mobile station to all the base stations. Appropriate base station assignment allows the mobiles to reduce the transm it power by reducing the congested cell assignment and trying to keep the required SINK above the minimum. This leads to total system interference being reduced and total capacity being increased. Unbalanced interference power requires reallocation of power and reassignment of base stations. For the efficient use of the channel, no more power than necessary is required in meeting the minimum required SINK. Our consideration here is a dynamic propagation of base station assignment based on congestion and it leads to reassignment of the base station system-wide.

4.2

Analysis of P P B P C Algorithm

W ith regular m atrix notations, we define the reverse link power vector as:

P W = \ Pi {n), P2{n), . . . , pM{n)f .

(4.9)

Then, by defining the channel gain m atrix as

^ ~

'

(4.10)

41 and D = [duv\MxM '

(4.11) 0, we can represent (4.8) in m atrix form as: u

P (n + 1) = /i(n )D G P (n ) + /i(n)D V ,

(4.12)

where (4-13)

and Vi is th e noise power at base station i and i = 6^. We will analyze h{n) later in this chapter. Let A be an M x M m atrix with complex or real elements with eigenvalues Ai, Ag, , Am

of m atrix A . T he spectrum of the m atrix A is all the eigenvalues of the m atrix A. T hen th e sp ectral radius g{A) of the m atrix A is defined as:

p(A) = m ax IAd.
^

\< i< M

Let us consider (4.12) after enough iterations. At the convergence, the mobile trans m it power vector reaches a fixed point and the values do not get changed. Hence, P (n + 1 )

UNn/BElT,' LIBRA RY

42 and P (n ) are equal. Therefore, if we let the iteration index n to approach oo, (4.12) can be expressed as:

P = /i(oo)D GP + /i(oo)DV.

(4.14)

The matrix D G is a positive (non-negative) full rank irreducible matrix since each element in D and G is a positive random variable. If the spectral radius of /i(oo)DG is less than unity, i.e., p(/i(oo)DG) < 1, then [I --/i(co)DG] is invertible and positive [14], where I is the M x M identity matrix. In such a situation, the network is called feasible and the optimal solution to the power control problem is given in [15] and [16]. We can find out the optimal power vectors P as follows:

-1 I - h{oo)DG /i(oo)DV. (4.15)

It has been shown in [15] that the solution is Pareto optimal. That is, P is a minimal vector among all the feasible solutions. Pareto optimality is an optimality criterion for optimization problems with multi-criteria objectives. A state A is said to be Pareto optimal, if there is no other state B dominating the state A with respect to a set of objective functions. A state A dominates a state B, if A is better than B in at least one objective function and not worse with respect to all other objective functions. Relating to the game theory [17], an outcome of a game is Pareto optimal if there is no other outcome th a t makes every player at least as weU off and at least one player strictly

43 b e tte r off. T h a t is, a P areto optim al outcome cannot be improved upon w ithout hurting at least one player [17]. T h e SIN R at base station i for a particular mobile station k is given by

where Vi is th e noise power at the base station i and Pfc(n) is /cth mobile sta tio n 's reverse link tra n s m it power. In th e above optim ality problem, for the feasibility of the system, th e spectral radius of h (o o )D G should be less th an unity, i.e., ^(/i(oo)D G ) < 1. Hence we may adjust the value of h{oo) to reach th e required conditions for the optimality. In order to adjust h (n ), we can adjust K f and Kr- However, we cannot adjust those coefficients arbitrarily. Because we have to consider other system constraints such as the m axim um transm it power lim it of th e mobile stations, the m axim um pilot power limit of base station and th e required SIN R requirem ents. In general, th e value of h{n) may be set equal to the inverse of th e norm of power vector. A sim ple choice can be

hin)

II GP(Ti) + V II

m a x { Q i(n )j^ J

Let us consider (4.12). In order to find the optim al power vector using eigenvalue problem , we should w rite this equation in A X = AX form at with regular m atrix notar

44 tions and the m atrix should satisfy the appropriate conditions. Hence, the right hand side of (4.12) should be adjusted properly. We introduce P (n) as shown in 4.18.
vq

in (4.9) and define a m atrix

P(n) = [P(n);uo] = \pi{n),p 2 {,n).. . p M { n ) , v o f ,

(4.18)

where Vq - max {%}.

We define a m atrix Z from (4.2) and (4.10) as follows:

Z = DG.

(4.19)

Let us also define a matrix C as follows:

C = D g,

(4.20)

where g is defined as follows:

g = 19v\mxi >

and

g^ = --. %

(4.21)

Now we create a matrix Z(n) with Z and C from (4.19) and (4.20) respectively and define it as described below:

45

(
Z Z(n) = C

\
(4.22) 0

\

Kn)

y

It is n o ted th a t the above definitions in (4.2), (4.9), (4.10), (4.13), (4.18) and (4.22) satisfy th e following equation.

h{n) Z{n) P{n) = [h (n )D G P (n ) + h(n)D V ;uo]

(4.23)

Hence, (4.18) can be w ritten as follows;

P ( n + 1) = h{n)7t{n)P{n).

(4.24)

Therefore, (4.12) can be m ade as a single m atrix similar to A X can be expressed in th e m atrix form as in (4.24).

= AX. Hence, (4.8)

L et us consider th e O. Perron and G. Probenius's theory of stochastic m atrices [18], [14]. T h e o r e m 1 : If th e M x M m atrix A is a non-negative and irreducible, then: (a) T he m a trix A has a positive eigenvalue, r, equal to the spectral radius of A; (b) T h ere is a positive eigenvector associated w ith the eigenvalue r; (c) T h e eigenvalue r has algebraic m ultiplicity 1. L et us consider (4.24). A t the convergence of the algorithm , the power vector a t the an d (n -H 1)*^ iterations are equal. Therefore, we can drop the iteration index n and

46 we assume that n is large enough. Hence, (4.24) can be expressed as;

P = h{oo)ZP

(4.25)

In (4.25), the matrix Z is non-negative and irreducible. Hence we can apply the Perron-Frobenius theory to find the solution. It can be shown that the existence of unique positive eigenvalue solution to (4.25) together with the corresponding all-positive eigenvectors, is guaranteed by the Perron-Frobenius theory of stochastic matrices [18], [14], [8], [19] and [20].

4.3

SINR Balancing using P P B P C Algorithm

In our system, we assume that the quality of the communication is dependent on the SINR only. The SINR at the iteration index n is SINRik{n) for the mobile station k at the base station i is given by

where p-fc(n) is the signal power of interest received at base station i from the mobile station k. The SINR also can be expressed in terms of the total signal power received

47 at th e base statio n , and th e power of interest from the mobile station. T h at is,

SINRik[n) =

GifcPfc(n) Qi{n) -- GikPki'n)

(4.27)

If we apply th e result in (4.8), we will get the SINR of th e mobile station k at iteratio n SINRik{n) as

SIN Rikiji) =

-- l)h (n -- 1) Gik G 'ik Qi{n) -- Qi{n -- l)h{n -- 1 )

(4.28)

SINRik{n) =
Q i(n -l)

h{n -- 1) 5 k -- h{n -- 1) Gik

(4.29)

A t th e convergence, i.e., when the algorithm saturates after enough iterations (n -- » oo, theoretically), p ( n --1) = p(n). Let us denote the transm it power value a t convergence asp (o o ). Therefore, a t the convergence of th e algorithm , m ax{Q i(n)} = m ax{Q i(n--1)}. For large n, we su b stitu te the result h{n -- 1) = h{n) = h(oo) in (4.28), we will get th e following equation assum ing th a t the forward and reverse link gain are equal,
G ik = G [^ ,\/i, k.

i.e.,

hiod)

1
= -h(co) --
-

1

S I N R i k { o 6)

(4.30) Qmax(cX)) 1

For sim plicity, we have assum ed th a t the param eters K f and Kj- are equal and um ty.

48 Also we chose the value for the time varying constant h{n)* as h{n)* = Qmax{n) is the maximum received power among all the base stations in the system at the iteration index n. We apply the above assumptions and get the SINR equation as given in (4.30). Let us analyze (4.30). The value of SINR is dependent only on h{n). This value is independent of the locations of mobile stations and the base stations. Also this is a unique value for all mobile stations at their respective home base stations. This means th at the SINR is balanced system-wide and that is not dependent on the mobiles' signal transm it power or the base stations since we implement transmit power control. As a result, the received signal power at every home base station from its mobile station is equal. Let us consider this result for two mobile stations j and A : at a base station i, and we will get
G ijP jjn )
^

G ikPkjn)

Qi{n) -- GijPj(n)

Qi{n) -- GikPk{n)

This implies GijPj(n)= GikPk(n),

-- Piki' '^)-

T hat is, the received power at a base station from aU its home users is equal in the SINR-balanced system. We assume that the pilot power strength should not be

49 reduced fu rth er below a m inim ura value. This is to ensure th a t the critical situations are m inim ized. T h a t is, mobile transm it power does not converge to zero or diverge to infinity.

4 .4

L oad Sharing using P P B P C A lgorithm

M anaging th e system resources efficiently is one of the m ost im portant requirem ents in any engineering design. Load sharing is essential in handling large capacity CDMA com m unication system . W hen a base station is heavily loaded w ith mobile stations, the heavily loaded cell m ay need additional resources th an the allocated resources. Hence, th e system needs to block additional users which cause the extra congestion. However, at th is tim e, th e neighboring cells may have system unused resources. Hence, if the load is sh ared am ong th e base stations, then there may be opportunities for the additional users to be accepted by th e system rath er th an blocking. In th e proposed pilot power base power control algorithm, when the base station is heavily loaded w ith th e mobile stations, the total received power at the base station will be relatively high. T hen the algorithm reduces the forward link pilot signal power com paratively as th e load is inversely proportional to the pilot power. Hence, the more d istan ced users of th e congested base station will link up w ith the adjacent base stations. T h a t is, th e hot-spot cell by lowering the pilot signal power, thus shrinking the cell size can d istrib u te th e m ore distanced users to its adjacent base stations. T hen the cap acity can be increased. T h a t is, the system could adapt itself according to its traffic

50 distributions.

4.5

Limitations of P P B P C Algorithm

The most important aspect of the communication system is the achieved quality of service. Throughout the algorithm, it does not have a direct control of the deliverable quality of service requirements. Therefore, there is a possibility for the total system to suffer as the achieved system-wide uniform SINR goes below the required threshold. One way to overcome this problem is to block the new connections or disallow for the handoff when the SINR is dropped below the required level. Another way is to adjust the time-varying constant coefficients such as Kf , Kr and h{n)* to bring the SINR to the required level by maintaining the other constraints, which is a complex problem and can be further researched. Since this algorithm does not check the achievable quality of the communication, a detailed statistical analysis is important in the performance analysis of system. Since the abnormal mobility of users or increased number of calls in any abnormal event (less probable) can also make the entire system to fail. Therefore, thresholds combined with an appropriate call admission control mechanism should be introduced in this system.

C h a p te r 5

P e r fo r m a n c e E valu ation

I

N order to verify th e analytical results in implementing the pilot power based power control algorithm , we performed sim ulation studies. In this chapter, we describe

how th e sim ulation was done and discuss the results. The objective of the sim ulation is to d eterm in e th e validity and the perform ance of the proposed algorithm . It also helps to determ in e th e sensitivity of the system perform ance w ith subscriber and network load conditions in using the proposed algorithm .

5.1

S im u la tio n Setup

We describe th e sim ulation setup w ith param eters here.

· T h e system bandw idth is W = 1.25 MHz as in IS-95. T he bit rate requirement is 8000 b its/se c as th e voice transm ission is considered. 51

52 We assume a cellular network with 36 base stations.

· The cells are assumed to be square in shape. We marked each base station's position by X and Y co-ordinates in the system coverage area. The base stations are located at integer points (x,y), x= l,2,3.......6, y=l,2,3....6. For example, the cell corresponding to base station (4,4) is the square region of coordinate points [3.5,4.5] and [3.5,4.5].

· It is assumed that the base station is located at the center of each square cell, i.e., at the diagonal crossing point of the cell.

· We uniformly distributed 400 users throughout the network, i.e., over [0.5,6.5] X [0.5,6.5]. We assume that all the distributed users are actively participating in the conversations (i.e., activity factor=l).

· The more distanced user from the base station is along the diagonal corner of the cell. We normalize the distance in such a way that the more distanced user's transmitter-receiver separation to be unity. Hence, the density of users is ^ per unit area, where M (= 400) is the total number of mobile stations actively partic ipating in the conversations.

· It is assumed that the path loss exponent a is 4. Also we assume th at the link gain is only dependent on the distance and it is given by Gik = 1/d^,, where dik is the distance between user k and the base station i.

53 · In our sim ulation, we assume th a t the effect of fast fading is m itigated by several techniques such as introducing RA K E receiver, channel coding etc. Therefore, we do n o t consider the fast fading factors in th e model.

· T h e m ultiple access interference (MAI) is the dom inant interference in our system. We assum e th a t our system is sufficiently loaded w ith the users.

· T h e forw ard link gain G' and the reverse link gain G are assum ed to be equal in o u r sim ulation model. Since we considered the distance dependent p a th loss only, for a p articu lar uniform distribution of the users, G' and G are equal through all th e iteratio n s of the algorithm.

· We assum e th a t the initial home base station th a t a mobile links up w ith is by th e strongest pilot power strength. Also the algorithm sta rts by transm itting an eq u al am ount of pilot power from all the base stations.

· T h ro u g h o u t th e sim ulation, we assume th a t the therm al noise is present in the reverse link and we do not consider the forward link noise power.

· W e do a snap-shot analysis in a network under different load conditions.

· In o u r sim ulation, th e P P B P C algorithm runs for 20 iterations for a particular im m obile situation. These 20 iterations are for a particular instance of a distribution of users in th e network. The results are analyzed after the algorithm saturates.

· Soft handoff is not considered in th e system.

Instead, every mobile statio n is

54

assigned to only one base station at any time according to the pilot power strength received. No actual handoff is implemented, rather, all the mobile stations are assigned to base stations in every iteration, hence the mobile stations may switch between base stations during the running of the algorithm.

We created a hot-spot around (4.0,4.0). That is, in the region [3.5,4.5] X [3.5,4.5], we added extra 20 users by distributing them uniformly. The goal is to analyze the behavior of the algorithm in and around the hot-spot.

-

.0 . · 0,

' 4* t *% · · ' .0 o\

' "o* , ' t *1 -

. · * r ' . ^ . * 0* : ; v - : » ·0 . .. · . · · .
0

;

'7 ' : .
J . . 

Q'

.

 · «
0

· -

:'o

< 0. "
,

. a" · ·® < ·a* ·
1 3

, .

·

.. ' 0

0 .: , a '/ é 1 5

;

î;

4

1 e.

Figure 5.1: The grid cell layout with a hot-spot cell around (4,4).

Fig. 5.1 shows the physical layout of the cellular network; square grid cells, base stations at the center of the cells, the uniform distribution of the mobile users and the hot-spot cell congested with additional users. Around the base station (4,4), there are

55 20 ad d itio n al users uniformly distributed. Hence, th e hot-spot ceU has more density of users as shown in Fig. 5.1.

O *

0 *

o *

F ig u re 5.2: Hot-spot before PPBPC algo- F ig u re 5.3: rithm is implemented. PPBPC.

Hot-spot after 1 iteration of

Fig. 5.2 shows th e initial base station assignm ent in the sim ulation before the algo rith m s ta rts to run. In th e figure, a dot, indicates a mobile station and a circle 'o '

denotes a position of a base station. The base stations are equally spaced and placed at th e center of the square grid where the diagonal distance square is 2. T he highlighted cell '<g)' is th e h o t-sp o t base station which is heavily loaded w ith ex tra 20 users.

56

5.2

Simulation Results

Fig. 5.2 shows the initial base station assignment across the network. Initially, an equal amount of pilot signal power is transmitted from all the base stations. Since each mobile station assigns its home base station based on the received pilot power strength, the base stations are assigned proportional to the distance. The more distanced home users of every base station is connected together by the encircling line, and this closed area is considered as a cell's footprint.

5.2.1

C ell B reath in g

o

0 * * ^

Figure 5.4: Hot-spot after 2 iterations of Figure 5.5: Hot-spot after 4 iterations of PPBPC. PPBPC.

Figs. 5.2 to 5.7 show the cell's footprint with the number of iterations. Initially, the

57 ho t-spot cell s m ore distanced users switch to the neighboring cells around the hot-cell (4.4). T h e adjacent base stations of the hot-spot base station are located at (3,3), (3,4), (3.5), (4,3), (4,5), (5,3), (5,4) and (5,5). T hen th e cell breathing occurs at the adjacent cells aro u n d th e hot-spot. Fig. 5.2 th ro u g h Fig. 5.7 show the initial through the final base station assignment for a p articu lar mobile user distribution in an immobile network. The size of th e h o t spot was initially large (see Fig. 5.2) with 20 additional users. Hence, the to tal received power a t th e hot-spot base station was higher th an th a t of the adjacent base stations. L ater, th e h o t-spot base station reduces its pilot power, shrinking its coverage area and allowing th e m ore distanced users to link up w ith the adjacent base stations. T h a t is, th e P P B P C algorithm attem p ts to distribute the overload to the adjacent base stations.

o'O

F ig u re 5.6; Hot-spot after 13 iterations of F ig u re 5.7; Hot-spot after 19 iterations of PPB PC . PPBPC.

58 Fig. 5.3 and Fig. 5.4 show the base station assignment and cell coverage area of the system after the 2^'^ and the iterations of the algorithm respectively. In these figures,

the size of the hot-spot base station is reduced in size and the more distanced mobile users are connected to the lightly loaded adjacent base stations. This clearly shows th at the load is shared when the PPBPC algorithm runs with time iteratively. Fig. 5.6 and Fig. 5.7 further show the system footprint and the base station assign ment after the and 19^^ iteration of the algorithm respectively. In these figures, the

hot-spot size does not change significantly. However, some of the other cells which are away from the hot-spot cell have some changes in their footprint. This is due to the fact that those base stations are trying to distribute their load to their adjacent lightly loaded cells. Since we considered the immobile network, the users are assumed not to be moving and the algorithm is running fast enough to compensate the fading effects on the signal power. Fig. 5.7 shows the final base station assignment after the algorithm saturates. There is no significant change occurred after this situation. This is one of the evidences th at the PPBPC algorithm with the base station assignment converges.

5 .2 .2

Short Term H an doff D uring A lgorith m Im p lem en tation

Initially, some of the hot-spot cell users switch into the neighboring cells around the hot-spot cell (4,4). As we have seen previously, the cell breathing would be propagated to the other neighboring cells of these cells.

59 We can also see th e to ta l num ber of switching vs the num ber of iterations in Fig. 5.8. A nother evidence for th e saturation of the system is th a t the to tal num ber of switching w ith th e num ber of iterations. There is no switching after some iterations in Fig. 5.8. T h a t is, th e system saturates after some iterations. This clearly shows th a t th e base sta tio n sw itching occurs as soon as a hot spot is detected in th e system and after some iteratio n s th e switching converges.

45

------!----------------

40

35

/ 1 < I1  1 1 ··· Ill'll r .................I'll / /

30

U ) Ç Ic Ü .^25
20

..................

I 1 4 / ............. i ..... /

15

4
1 / / .... 4 " 1 t
·alllllllilllllll*

10

1 1 l_ i------------- ---------------- ______ _____
Iteration (n)

F ig u re 5.8: Base station switching.

60

5.2.3

S IN R w ith Load V ariation

In order to show the variations of the SINR with the network load conditions, we have performed simulation for the above mentioned simulation setup. We increased the total number of users distributed in the network gradually and observed the uniform SINR level that the system could achieve. We plot the observed values in Fig. 5.9 with the maximum received power at the base station in the system which is proportional to the network load.

0 .1 8 S im u la tio n -- T h e o ritic a l 0 .1 6

0 .1 4

0.12

0 .0 8

0 .0 6

0 .0 4

Qm a x

F igure 5.9: Theoretical and simulation values of SINR with total received power at a base station.

61 We have shown th a t th e theoretical value of SINR received for mobile j a t its home base sta tio n i is given in (4.30) by,

SINR,,{oo) -

We have p lo tted th e sim ulation and the theoretical results for the SINR in Fig. 5.9, which explicitly shows th a t the SINR is reduced when the m axim um of the to tal received power a t th e base stations is increased. The sim ulation and the theoretical values are in very close agreem ent w ith each other. A nother observation is th a t if we can reduce the value of th e Qmax, i.e., the m axim um received power a t th e base stations in the network, we can improve the SINR in th e system . T his will lead to load balancing.

5 .2 .4

L o a d B a la n c e d S y s te m

S I N R w ith

Q m in /Q m ax

We fu rth e r investigated the P P B P C algorithm to analyze the perform ance in load bal ancing situ ation. For the analysis, we have modified the above sim ulation setup w ith only tw o base statio n s and w ith 26 users uniformly distributed throughout the network. T he o th er param eters are the same as it was in the previous sim ulations setup. We have ru n th e algorithm for 500 different distribution of users in the network and observed th e to ta l received power ratio
Q m in /Q m a x

the base stations. For every run, th e algorithm

62 runs for 20 iterations until the system converges. This is a monte-carlo simulation and the results reveal that the SINR is maximum when the total received power at the base stations become equal. That is, the load balanced system has a higher SINR than a load unbalanced system. Fig. 5.10 clearly manifests the result we obtained.

0.074

0.072

0.07

z 0.068

0.066

0.064
N u m b e ro fb a s es ta tio n s=2 N u m b e ro fm o b ile :u s e r s=2 6

0.062
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5 0.6 mln(Q)/max{Q)

0 .7

0.8

0.9

Figure 5.10: Load balanced system provides maximum SINR.

S IN R w ith Load For. the above simulation setup, (i.e., in a 2-cell system) the system was loaded with different number of users and the variation of the SINR in the load balanced system

63 was analyzed in detail. According to the result shown in Fig. 5.11, we can conclude th a t th e SIN R decreases w ith the load. Further, we can estim ate the m axim um num ber of subscribers th a t the system can support for a given SINR. If th e required SINR is increased, th e n the num ber of mobile subscribers should be decreased according to th e curve. However, the average d a ta rate. Erlang factors and other probability factors should be considered in calculating the m axim um num ber of subscribers th a t the system could su p p o rt a t any tim e. However, these results are prim ary factors in provisioning a wireless com m unication network.

64

0.075

0.07
(0

E S
® 0.065

S r

s 9 0«
æ z
CO

c D

Ô 0.055

I
a

^ 0.05

0.045

No. of users = 20 No. of users = 22 No. of users = 24 No. of users = 26 0.4 0.5
0.7
0.8

0.04

min(Q)/max(Q)

Figure 5.11: Load balanced SINR with users.

65

2.4

-- Minimum Received power  ' ' Maximum Received power 2.2

1.8

1.6

1.4

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

min(Q)/max(Q)

F ig u re 5.12: Load at base stations with load balanced SINR.

66

Variance o f Q (n)

0.048

0.047

0.046

0.045

Z 0.044

0.043

0.042

0.041

0.04

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

N orm alized Q n difference

Figure 5.13: Load sharing gives more SINR than a load unshared system.

For the same simulation setup, we have observed previously that the maximum re ceived power at the base station is minimized when the load is balanced. Fig. 5.10 is the evidence for the higher SINR at this point. Fig. 5.13 shows the SINR versus the difference between the total received power at the base stations. It clearly shows th at the SINR is high when the difference between the total received power is smaller. T hat is, the system performs better at the load balanced situation.

67 Hence, in order to increase the SINR, decreasing the m aximum received power at the base sta tio n is im portant as shown in Fig. 5.12. T h at is, the load should be shared am ong th e base stations.

5 .2 .5

D y n a m ic L oad S h arin g F e a tu r e o f P P B P C

T he algorithm was further analyzed by introducing a hot-spot when the system reached th e sa tu ra tio n point. To analyze the effect, a cellular system is created as defined in th e previous sim ulation setup. However, the hot-spot was not initially created in the system . T he system was allowed to run for 40 iterations with uniform user distribution th ro u g h o u t th e cell. After the 40*^ iteration is completed, 20 additional users were

uniform ly d istrib u te d inside the cell served by the base station located at (4,4). T he hot-spot base statio n (4,4) is assigned as the home base station for all the newly created mobile statio n s. A t this stage, determining the newly created mobiles' transm it power is a problem . We cannot directly assign the mobile transm it power inversely proportional to th e distance from the base station. Because the system 's mobile transm it power is determ ined according to the congestion level of the base station as well as the distance from th e base station. To reduce the complexity, we calculated the average mobile

tra n sm it power of th e system at the 40^^ iteration and assigned th a t power for all the newly c reated 20 mobiles as their transm it power. T he algorithm was allowed to run for an o th er 40 iteratio n s for further analysis.

68

-0

. 0*

Figure 5.14: The cell at saturation before Figure 5.15: The hot-spot base station bebecoming a hot-spot. fore the algorithm starts.

"0

Figure 5.16: The footprint after the hot-spot saturation.

69 W hen the algorithm detects a new hot-spot, the algorithm adaptively changes the mobile tran sm it power and its home base station coverage area. The algorithm runs repeatedly until the system saturates. Fig. 5.14 shows the footprint of the network at the first saturation point. At this tim e, there is no hot-spot users detected and all the users are uniformly distributed among th e cells. Fig. 5.15 shows the footprint of the cellular system immediately after a hot-spot is introduced. In this figure, the number of mobile stations around (4,4) is higher and the base statio n 's coverage area is also large compared to all other base statio n coverage area in the system. W hen th e algorithm detects the hot-spot, the base station dynamically adjust its coverage area and shares the load among the adjacent base stations. T h at is, the more distanced users of the hot-spot base stations link up with its lightly loaded adjacent base stations. Hence, the coverage area of the hot-spot will reduce and the adjacent base stations will extend its coverage area towards the hot-spot base station. Fig. 5.16 shows the footprint of the system at the saturation of the algorithm following the introduction of th e hot-spot. The hot-spot base station's coverage area can be easily compared in these figures.

5 .2 .6

C o m p a r iso n w ith H a n ly 's A lg o r ith m

In |4], Hanly proposed an algorithm to achieve cell breathing which is similar to our proposed algorithm . Next, through simulation, we compare our algorithm w ith Hanly s

70 algorithm in certain situation.

In Hanly's algorithm, each base station measures the total interference power in the reverse link in the network. Every mobile station communicates with its surrounding base stations by measuring the interference power at each base station. Then it calculates its transm it power to every base station to achieve the required quality of service. Then, the mobile station will select its home base station which requires the minimum mobile transm it power. That is, the mobile station selects its home base station in such a way th at the interference is reduced. The reverse link gain could be calculated by measuring the pilot power strength received by the mobile station. Then it calculates the transm it power in order to achieve the required SINR at the surrounding base station at the reverse link. Then it takes the minimum transmit power calculated and determines its home base station and switch to or stays with its associated home base station. T hat is, a mobile station will select its home base station which requires the minimum mobile transm it power in such a way that the interference is reduced. In a heavily congested cell, a mobile station which is in the overlapping cellular region could transmit at a lower power level if it belongs to a less crowded neighboring cell. However, this algorithm needs high intensive computation since it has to calculate transm it power for surrounding base stations iteratively. There are excessive amount of signaling to iteratively update the information of other cell's interference power within acceptable delay. Therefore, the control channel should have relatively high bandwidth. Also the base station should have relatively large storage capacity to store the broadcast information from all base

71 stations in th e system. Therefore, this algorithm is very difEcuIt in im plem entation point of view. We use this algorithm for the comparison purposes with our PP B P C algorithm .

C o m p a riso n o f D y n a m ic S IN R V ariation

19

X )e o e o e 0 o e (

4· Hanly - PPBPC

18

17

1 1 1

^

)o e o o o $ o e o >
h+ h + h -h -

f
16

I I 11111111 I! II il II II 1II II11-14+ 1 1 '6' 11 II II u 

H44 1 1 H4-I- 1 1 til l III-

n

L U

2

I
14 13

+

12

+

11
10 20

--

30

40

50

60

70

80

Iteration (n)

F ig u r e 5 .1 7 : T he Eft/Io variation with iterations (after 40*^^ iteration, a new set o f m obile users w as introduced)

^Ve have analyzed th e SINR variation w ith the to tal num ber of users using both

72 algorithm. The quality of the signal in terms of average ^ is analyzed when introducing the users when the system is in saturation. Fig. 5.17 shows the variation of average with the number of iterations. These ^ results are compared with Hanly's [4] algorithm, and it is shown in the same figure. Hanly's algorithm works in such a way that the mobile transmit power is adjusted to achieve the required SINR in each iteration. Hence, the algorithm attem pts to achieve the required SINR, and the mobile transmit power may be increased or decreased accord ing to the load conditions. Fig. 5.17 shows the ^ for Hanly's algorithm and PPB PC algorithm. In Hanly's algorithm, the sudden increase in the total number of mobile transm it power after the 40*^ iteration increases the total interference power. As the total interference power increases suddenly, there is a sudden drop in the achieved ^ in the 40*^ iteration as seen in Fig. 5.17. However, the mobile transmit power was adjusted to compensate for the power drop in the SINR. Throughout the iterations of Hanly's algorithm, mobile transmit power is adjusted to achieve the required SINR level.

The ^ of the PPBPC algorithm was very low at the beginning of the algorithm. Throughout the iterations of the algorithm, the algorithm achieved a higher quality signal after around 8*'' iteration. From 8*^ to 40*^' iteration, the system converges and achieve a constant When the hot-spot is introduced after the 40`^ iteration, the total was suddenly decreased to a lower value. The

interference is increased and hence the

system wide SINR of the PPBPC algorithm does not have a direct control on the quality of the signal. T hat is, the system has no direct control for increasing or decreasing the

73 SIN R as done in th e H anly's algorithm. However, this adjusts the pilot power of the h o t-spot base station and shares the load of the hot-spot base station dynamically to its adjacent base stations and reduces the total interference power throughout the iteration of th e P P B P C algorithm . Hence, the total interference power is gradually reduced and th e achieved ^ is increased to another level through the following iterations. However, the algorithm did not achieve the earliest signal quality level th a t was m aintained before the 40*^ iteration. T h a t is, because the to tal interference power was increased by the newly introduced mobile users. C om paring the signal quality level, is not enough for comparing the performance

of th e algorithm . Because, the SINR heavily depends on the interference power, th a t is directly proportional to the mobile transm it power. Hence, comparing the mobile tra n sm it power is indispensable.

74 C om parison o f D ynam ic M obile Transm it Pow er Variation

8

- - PPBPC -Q- Hanly
7

6

h

E (0
h

I

!5 1 53

g
2

.j

0 0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Iteration (n)

Figure 5.18: Total mobile transmit power variation with iterations.

Fig. 5.18 shows the mobile transm it power variation with iterations. At the initial stage the mobile transm it power decreases or increases depending on the initial mobile transm it power or the initial total received power assigned to the base station to initiate the algorithm. During the iterations of the execution of the algorithm, the total mobile

75

tran sm it power of the algorithm saturates to a certain value. In H anly's algorithm, the to ta l mobile transm it power saturated through the iterations up to the 40*^ iteration as shown in Fig. 5.18. At the 40*^ iteration, due to the newly introduced mobiles, the interference power is increased. Therefore, to achieve the required SINR, the mobiles in crease their to ta l transm it power. Hence after the 40*^ iteration, the algorithm increases the mobile transm it power until the system converges by achieving the required SINR. T he probability of having sudden increase in total mobile transm it power is very less in p ractical system. Because a large num ber new calls will not be initiated at the same tim e, and the algorithm adjust the mobile power very quickly as shown in the Fig. 5.18. Therefore, there will not be a chance for the sudden increase in the practical system. A com bined call admission control mechanism could be introduce to prevent these kind of spikes.

In the P P B P C algorithm, the total mobile transm it power is at a constant level at th e satu ratio n before the 40^'^ iteration. At the 40*^ iteration, the to ta l mobile transm it power is suddenly increased. This will increase the total received power at the base statio n . Hence, the hot-spot base station transm its a pilot power which is inversely

proportional to the total received power at the base station. Hence, the total received power at the mobile station will be very less, which leads for the mobile station to in crease its tran sm it power higher. However, due to the load sharing, the mobile transm it power is reduced gradually throughout the algorithm 's iterations. After some iterations of th e P P B P C algorithm , th e total mobile transm it power reaches a saturation value.

76 To increase the required SINR, in the PPBPC algorithm, the value of the reverse hnk constant Kr can be adjusted dynamically. According to the Kr, the value of the to tal mobile transm it power will be increased or decreased. Here, the algorithm can be improved by adaptively changing the reverse link power constant Kr in the future work.

77 C o m p a riso n o f S tan d ard D e v ia tio n o f th e T otal R eceiv ed P ow er a t th e B a se S ta tio n s T he stan d ard deviation of the total received power of the base stations was compared for b o th H anly's and PP B P C algorithm. Fig. 5.19 shows the variation of the standard deviation of the to tal received power at base stations with iterations. The standard deviation becomes constant throughout the iteration of the algorithm. This is also one of th e evidence th a t our algorithm saturates after some iterations. Also this is another evidence th a t the algorithm adaptively adjusts and saturats if a hot-spot is introduced or in o th er words if the environment changes. In Fig. 5.19, the variance of the total received power is higher for the P P B P C algo rith m com pared to the H anly's algorithm. In this result, the load sharing in the Hanly's algorithm perform s better than the load sharing of the PP B P C algorithm . However, th e load sharing may vary according to the load conditions, achieved SINR, the mobile tra n sm it power. Hence, for the direct comparison, all these factors should be considered. However, the above results show th a t the P P B P C algorithm can be used for the load sharing in th e mobile communication systems.

78

1 PPBPC Hanly
1.8
(0



.. ^ 0 ^ i 1 1 1 __1 ..... 9 1 1 1 . 1....... * 9 / 1 Î 1 f I / N 1j m w tw i 0oeoeo0(> x>eoeo00(X )()0O

(0

2

® 1.4

§.

.1 1.2

i

I 0.8
I
S0.6
CD

§ O 0.4 z O O 0 Ô Ô Ô O O < /0oeoe<x)O
0.2 ------------- 1

)0 O O O O $ O O O `

H

-

1 ..........
20
30

L_,

10

40 Iteration (n)

50

60

70

80

F igure 5.19: The standard deviation of the total received power at the BSs.

79

5.3

Sum m ary of R esults

In the previous chapter, we have showed th a t the proposed algorithm will achieve an SIN R balanced system theoretically in a homogeneous user environment provided th a t th e forward link and reverse link are equal. Convergence of the algorithm and the

existence of m inim um average mobile transm it power were also analyzed mathem atically. It was inevitable to analyze and validate the algorithm in practical situations. Hence, we have im plem ented our proposed pilot power based power control algorithm using an appropriate sim ulation model. Further, the results were compared with th a t of

H anly's [4] algorithm . The results obtained in this simulation study are summarized as follows:

1. T he load sharing mechanism is triggered when a hot-spot is detected in the system w hen im plem enting the proposed algorithm . The algorithm adaptively adjusts its coverage area and directs the base statio n 's more distanced users to link up with its adjacent lightly loaded cell's base stations. Hence, around a hot-spot, the cell coverage area is reduced. This effect is propagated system-wide until the system reached a fixed point.

2. T he load sharing starts to occur when there detects a hot-spot and consequently th e algorithm facilitates the SINR to improve adaptively. W ith the iterations of th e algorithm , th e system-wide uniform SINR is improved. The theoretical and sim ulation results are in very close agreement.

80 3. The load balanced system performs better than a load unbalanced system. W hen other system parameters are kept constant, if the difference of the total received power among base stations decreases, the SINR increases giving rise to load bal anced system. That is, by minimizing the maximum mobile transm it power the PPBPC algorithm increases the system-wide uniform SINR. 4. When a congestion is experienced, the total received power variance is increased and hence the SINR is reduced. However, the algorithm adaptively adjusts its mobile transm it power and the coverage area to improve the SINR.

C h a p ter 6

C o n clu sio n s and F uture W ork

C onclusion s

I

N this thesis we have presented an algorithm which computes the mobile transm it power and also performs the base station assignment. In this proposed algorithm

each base statio n transm its its forward link pilot power inversely proportional to the to ta l reverse link received power. The mobile station senses the strongest pilot power received and determ ines its home base station. The power assignment is also based on the received pilot power. If the reverse link and forward link are reciprocal as usually in TD -C D M A system s, the base station assignment and mobile transm it power assignment can easily and simply be done based on received pilot power in the proposed algorithm. In th e homogeneous user environment where the required bit rate and bit error rate are equal, th e uniform SINR is achieved system-wide and the sim ulation results are the
81

82 evidence for the feasibility of the algorithm. Unlike previous power control algorithms in the literature, our proposed method does not require prior knowledge of the channel gains between the users and the base stations, and our proposed scheme does not require extensive computations as well. By transforming the equations of the PPBPC algorithm in to matrix forms, we have shown that the PPBPC algorithm could be optimized by the Perron-Forbenius theory as done in other power control methods. Dynamic propagation of cell assignment leads to reassignment of the base station system-wide which reduces the total mobile transmit power. We have also shown th at the load balancing system performs better than a load unbalanced system. Our simulation study shows that the load balanced system occurs when the base station's maximum received power is minimized. The PPBPC algorithm offers flexibility in the achievable required SINR and the capacity in the system by dynamically adjusting the value of h{n), which depends on constants K f and Kr, th at are used in adjusting the forward and reverse link power respectively.

Future Work
In this thesis, the algorithm was proposed and the performance was evaluated for the homogeneous (i.e., with equal required transmission bit rate and the bit error rate). Multiple classes of users were not considered in our study. Practically, the general

83 com m unication system will have different classes of users in term s of required quality of services. O ur system can be extended by modifying the same system to work for different classes of mobile users. W hen a mobile moves, it might have a line of sight with a different base station other th a n the home base station. Also if the obstacles are removed from another base station, the pilot power signal strength may become higher th an its home base sta tio n 's received pilot power. If th e pilot power strength is almost equal for the mobile stations which are alm ost a t the border of both base stations' footprint, there will be higher possibility for th e mobile stations to have sudden switching. To avoid this kind of

unnecessary switchings a threshold-based base station assignment could be introduced in our algorithm . T he quality of service or the system performance is most im portant in any com m unication system. There is no control on the system-wide SINR in implementing the proposed algorithm . In an unusual situation, if the load is suddenly increased, there is a possibility for the system-wide SINR to drop below a certain limit. This will lead to the system -wide network outage. Hence, it is indispensable to improve the system by introducing a mechanism to m onitor the SINR. A well defined call admission control m echanism should be implemented along w ith our algorithm in the system. O ur algorithm does not consider the shadowing effects in the system. The careful analysis of the shadowing effects will reveal more accurate results in the system.

Bibliography
[1] T. S. Rappaort, Wireless communications: principles and practice, 2nd Edition. Prentice-Hall, 2002.

[2] P. Stavroulakis, Interference Analysis and Reduction fo r Wireless Systems, First Edition. Artech House Inc., June 2003.

[3] K. Gilhousen and et al., "On the capacity of a cellular CDMA system," IEEE Trans. Veh. TechnoL, vol. 40, pp. 303-312, May 1991.

[4] S. Hanly, "An algorithm for combined cell-site selection and power control to max imize cellular spread spectrum capacity," IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 13, pp. 1332-1340, September 1995.

[5] I.

E.

Consortium,

"http://w w w .iec.org/online/tutorials/tdm a/topic06.htm l,

TDMA versus CDMA," Online Education, Feb 2004.

[6] M. A. Khan, "Handbook of game theory, non-cooperative games with many players, volume 3, chapter 46," http://w w w .elsevier.nl/hes/books/ll/03/046/1103046.htm .
84

85

[7] R. P. K. Gilhousen, M. Jacobs and L. Weaver, "Increased capaticy using CDMA for mobile satellite comm unication.," IE E E Trans. Veh. TechnoL, vol. 8, pp. 503-- 514, May 1990.

[8] D. G. S. A. G randhi Grandhi, R. Vijayan and J. Zander, "Centralized power con trol in cellular radio systems," IE E E Trans. Veh. TechnoL, vol. 42, pp. 466-468, November 1993.

[9] J. Zander, "Performance of optim um transm itter power control in cellular radio system s," IE E E Trans. Veh. TechnoL, vol. 41, pp. 57-62, February 1992.

[10] J. Zander, "D istributed cochannel interference control in cellular radio systems," IE E E Trans. Veh. TechnoL, vol. 41, pp. 305-311, August 1992.

[11] G. J. Foschini, "A simple distributed autonomous power control algorithm and its convegence," IE E E Trans. Veh. TechnoL, vol. 42, pp. 641-646, November 1993.

[12] J. X. Qiu and J. W . Mark, "A dynamic load sharing algorithm through power control in cellular CDMA," Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, vol. 3, pp. 1280 -1284, Sept. 1998.

[13] A. S. A npalagan and E. S. Sousa, "A combined rate/pow er/cell control scheme for delay insensitive apphcations in CDMA systems," In Proc. IE E E Globecom, pp. 256-260, 2000. [14] F. R. G antm acher, The theory of matrices, vol. 2, Chelsea, New York, 1990.

86 [15] K. L. F. Rashid-Farrokhi and L. Tassiulas, "Downlink and uplink capacity enhance ments in power controlled cellular systems, vol.2," In Proc. IEEE VTC, pp. 647 651, 4-7 May 1997. [16] D. Mitra, "An asynchronous distributed algorithm for power control in cellular radio systems," In ^th W INLAB Workshop on Third Generation Wireless Information Networks, 1993. [17] J. T. Drew Fudenberg, "Game theory," http://www.gam etheory.net, Feb 2004. [18] P. Lancaster and M. Tismenetsky, The theory of matrices, 2nd Edition. Academic press. New York, 1985. [19] A. S. Anpalagan, "Dynamics of slow receive power control in cellular CDMA net works," In Proc. of Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications, pp. 921-925, October 2002.

[20] A. S. Anpalagan and E. S. Sousa, "On the receive power allocation in a cellular multimedia CDMA system with fixed base station assignment," In Proc. IEEE VTC-Spring, pp. 1338-1342, May 2000.

