!

MPC MAJOR RESEARCH PAPER

Purchasing Negativity: Public Opinion on "Super PAC" Advertisements during the 2012 American Presidential Election Jessica Chambers

Supervisor: Dr. Gregory Levey

The Major Research Paper is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Professional Communication

Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada

July 21, 2014

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper and the accompanying Research Poster. This is a true copy of the MRP and the research poster, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research paper and/or poster to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP and/or poster by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP and/or my MRP research poster may be made electronically available to the public.

i !

Abstract
This major research paper is a qualitative study of American "Super PAC" advertising during the 2012 American presidential election. Super PACs, a type of "political action committee," have the ability to collect unlimited funds to advertise on behalf of candidates and parties. Super PACs have attracted criticism from scholars due to the Super PACs' negativity against opposing candidates. Using Albert Bandura`s Social Cognitive Theory of Mass Communication, and existing literature on political advertising, this study explores public opinion on negative television commercials. It employs data collected by The Super PAC App ­ a mobile application that recorded individual reactions to political advertising. It also employs qualitative content analysis on 20 negative Super PAC advertisements using codes created by political scientist John Geer. The results suggest that users of the App generally disliked negative Super PAC advertisements. Furthermore, the results indicate there are certain characteristics within negative advertisements that make them more liked or disliked by users of the App.

ii !

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Dr. Gregory Levey, who is equally as fascinated by this topic as I am. Thank you for encouraging me to "keep pace" with my completion plan, even when it was difficult. I would also like to thank my second reader, Dr. Catherine Schryer, who provided extremely helpful advice early on in the writing process, and clarified many of my questions about qualitative analysis.

iii !

Table of Contents
Author's Declaration ................................................................................................. i Abstract .................................................................................................................... ii Acknowledgements ................................................................................................. iii Table of Contents .................................................................................................... iv List of Figures & Appendices ................................................................................... v Introduction ..............................................................................................................1 Review of the Literature ........................................................................................... 8 Methodology ........................................................................................................... 22 Findings and Analysis ............................................................................................ 32 Conclusion .............................................................................................................. 48 References .............................................................................................................. 52 Appendix ................................................................................................................ 63

iv !

List of Figures & Appendices
Figures
Table Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table 4 Description Subsample Inclusion Criteria Advertisements included in the Subsample Categories created from the Codes Continuum of advertisements from most liked to most disliked Page 24 28 29 32

Appendices
Appendix Description Page Appendix A Randomized list of Super PAC advertisements 62 considered for Subsample inclusion Appendix B Detailed Categories & Codes Appendix C Content Analysis from NVivo 66 71

v !

Introduction
In 2010, the Supreme Court of the United States rendered judgment on two cases that changed how political advertising is conducted. In Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (FEC) and SpeechNow.org v. FEC, the Supreme Court ruled that contributing money to political causes is protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution (Gaughan 2012). 1 The act of donating to political activities is now interpreted as the expression of an individual's opinion. Following this landmark decision, some political action committees (PACs) were authorized to collect unlimited donations to advertise on behalf of candidates.2 These organizations morphed into an "advertising auxiliary" for official campaigns, and were later dubbed "Super PACs" (Farrar-Meyers & Skinny 2012). Super PAC advertisements are notable in their negativity against opposing candidates (Brooks & Murov 2012). Political science scholars recognize that negative television advertising has increased in popularity in recent years, but they often question whether negativity is effective or acceptable to the electorate. Nevertheless, candidates must take advantage of Super PACs to help them campaign, or risk being !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
The First Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits congress from passing any law that infringes on the right to freedom of speech (U.S. Constitution Amendment I). 2 A political action committee (PAC) is "any committee, association, or organization that accepts contributions or makes expenditures for the purpose of influencing the 2 A political action committee (PAC) is "any committee, association, or organization that accepts contributions or makes expenditures for the purpose of influencing the election of an individual to public office" (Sabato & Ernst 2007).
1

1

!

outmatched (Gaughan 2012). The $6 billion spent by Super PACs in 2012 dwarfs the $1.2 billion that candidates invested in similar activities (Nader 2013). In this context, it is worth noting that President Barack Obama initially criticized the Supreme Court's decision in 2010, but ultimately accepted the support of Super PACs for his re-election campaign (Tarr & Beneson 2012). Scholars have, as of yet, had little time to study the results of the 2012 election. However, some of those who have studied the election have employed creative methods to analyze data on public opinion. For instance, two graduate students developed a mobile and web application called the Super PAC App which allowed viewers to fact-check the allegations made by organizations in television commercials, and to share their own viewpoints (Super PAC App 2012). The data the Super PAC App collected during the 2012 election can provide interesting insights into what Americans thought while they viewed these advertisements, and will play a key role in this paper. This study aims to update current understandings about the perception of political advertising in the United States. Drawing on social cognitive theory and existing literature on political advertising, I will explore individual reactions to Super PAC advertisements using data collected by the Super PAC App. I aim to answer the following questions: RQ1: Do users of the Super PAC App like or dislike negative advertisements? RQ2: What are the characteristics of negative advertisements that are liked by users of the Super PAC App? 2 !

RQ3: What are the characteristics of negative advertisements that are disliked by users of the Super PAC App? The results of this study may help address a research gap surrounding agency in political participation. While there is extensive research available on possible subconscious effects of political advertising, there is less research on what voters actually think about these advertisements. Exploring what the electorate truly thinks about this new type of advertising may help discover if concerns about Super PACs are warranted.

Legal Background
As stated above, scholars have previously studied public perceptions of negative advertising. However, Super PACs are a recent addition to elections in the United States. Therefore, it is important to understand the political context surrounding Super PACs, because they have challenged traditional norms of political participation. First, it should be noted that official political campaigns in the United States are subject to donation limits to "avoid the potential for quid pro quo corruption or, at the very least, the appearance of quid pro quo corruption" (Nader 2013).3 These rules apply to candidates, parties, and PACs; and were included in the Federal Election Campaign Act 1971 and the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act 2002 (Johnson-Cartee & !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
3

Quid pro quo is defined as "perversion or destruction of integrity in the discharge of public duties by bribery or favour" (Dimino, Smith & Solimine, 2011). The Supreme Court, in an attempt to safeguard politics from corruption, interpreted in Buckley v. Valeo (1976) that quid pro quo was corruption. This ruling upheld contribution limits.

3

!

Copeland 1997; Dowling & Wichowsky 2013). However, many citizens have objected to campaign limits throughout the last half-century because they were believed to impede the First Amendment. As Nader (2012) writes, for "...free speech absolutists, any attempt to limit or prohibit political spending is akin to restricting freedom of speech for everyone" (pg. 45). Following several constitutional challenges, the expression of the First Amendment through political donations was recognized in 2010. These decisions struck down many of the donation limits outlined in the Bipartisan Act (Kimmel 2012). Similarly, the Supreme Court determined that independent PACs that were not associated with candidates did not meet the requirements of quid pro quo, as money could not directly influence a candidate. Critics of these new policies have a number of concerns. First, they clarify that although candidates and parties do not have direct access to the funds collected by Super PACs, they do benefit from their services. Second, they argue that America's wealthiest citizens now have a stronger ability to finance campaigns that are favourable to their interests. Additionally, some of these donors have found loopholes and regulatory gaps that allow them to hide their identities, making it difficult to hold these individuals to account (Dowling & Wichowsky 2013). Nevertheless, proponents argue every American is equal at the ballot box. Although advertisements may sound particularly convincing,

4 !

it does not guarantee that the electorate will vote for the supported candidate.

Theoretical Positioning
Many argue that this new legal environment has challenged prevailing theories on political advertising. However, before I discuss the existing literature, I will first outline the theoretical positioning of this paper. This project will study political advertising from a

sociopsychological lens, specifically drawing on Albert Bandura's (2001) Social Cognitive Theory of Mass Communication. Bandura's perspective on human cognition and action will provide a framework to help determine why Americans may like or dislike political messages. Social cognitive theory proposes that humans have agency ­ they are "...self-developing, proactive, self-regulating and self-reflecting, not just reactive organisms" (Bandura 2001, pg. 94). Bandura's theory directly contrasts with that of other behavioural psychologists, such as B.F. Skinner, (1974) who argues human behaviour is directly influenced by the environment without the potential of personal intervention. Bandura argues learning occurs through symbolic modeling, where people observe the behaviours of others. Later, individuals weigh these symbols against others they've observed to determine how they should act in a given situation.

5 !

Bandura outlines several motivators that influence the types of behaviours people will model. First, an individual's self-regulation depends on discrepancy reduction, meaning individuals proactively strive to eliminate any contrary symbols of acceptable behaviour. People desire self-efficacy, and aspire to understand how to act appropriately in all situations. Therefore, they will constantly weigh new symbols to determine if they are applicable. In contrast, individuals may also engage in exonerative comparison, where an individual would justify normally immoral behaviours for its "utilitarian standards" (Bandura 2001, pg. 104). Bandura suggests the media's impact on modeling has increased in recent years, especially with growing television viewership. He writes: Television representations of realities reflect ideological bents in their portrayal of human nature ... heavy exposure to this symbolic world may eventually make the televised images appear to be the authentic state of human affairs (Bandura 2001, pg. 107). Bandura argues the expression of emotion through this medium, and overall desensitization to certain behaviours, has made this social construction of reality particularly persuasive. Social cognitive theory would suggest that voters do not simply vote for a candidate because an advertisement tells them to do so. Rather, they incorporate a variety of beliefs into this decision (McGuire & Ohsfeldt 1989). Most of the prevailing scholarly opinions on political behaviour are consistent with this belief. The literature outlined below

6 !

generally recognizes the regular and conscious interaction voters have with political messages.

7 !

Review of the Literature
Having established the theoretical positioning of this study, I will now consider previous studies directed at negative advertising. The literature surveyed in this paper examines prevailing opinion on the purpose of negative political advertisements, the effect these messages have, and sentiment towards these advertisements. Existing research conducted on Super PAC advertisements is also included, as is research on new communication mediums and how they can help scholars understand public opinion.

Negativity in Advertising
Definition and Purpose
First, it is important to define negativity in advertising. Negative political advertising is defined as "any criticism leveled by one candidate against another during the campaign" that exhibits a high level of normativity4 (Geer 2006a, pg. 30; Procter & Schenck-Hamlin 1996). The main goal of negative advertising is to differentiate a candidate from their opponent (Geer 2006a; Martinez & Degal 2010). "Candidates all favour a strong economy, for example. Such information would not help voters differentiate the candidates. Instead, voters need to know specific positions of candidates on the issues so as to differentiate the contenders" (Geer 2006a, pg. 103). Some scholars feel so strongly about the !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
4

Procter & Schenck-Hamlin (1996) argue negative political advertisements exhibit a "normative" style because they "fit a common pattern, possessing similar modes of attack and style" (pg. 147).

8 !

importance of political differentiation that they prefer the term "comparative advertising" to "negative advertising" (Hill 1989, pg. 14). This differentiation component is said to help acquire the attention of undecided voters and convert them to a particular side (Garramone et. al. 1990, Johnson-Cartee & Copeland 1991, Tinkham & Weaver-Lariscy 1993, Brians & Wattenberg 1996, Martin 2004, Craig et. al. 2005). Martin (2004) writes: "Negative campaigns frequently focus on attacking the issue positions of one another and may incidentally raise awareness within the citizenry about the range of problems to be dealt with" (pg. 552).

Necessity of Negative Advertising
Not all scholars agree that negativity is the only way to achieve differentiation. Jamieson (1992), for example, is critical of the negative tactics used by political candidates, and labels most negativity as "distortion, deception, and distraction" (pg. 206). Although negativity appears to help viewers differentiate, Jamieson argues that the tactics employed by candidates purposefully distract from the real issues. On the other hand, Geer (2006a) argues that negativity "creates a competitive dynamic that should yield a richer information environment" (Geer 2006a, pg. 13). Geer highlights that "democratic theory" in the United States is predicated on the opposition's duty to criticize those in power (Geer 2006a, pg. 12). This debate is frequent amongst scholars, and is exhibited across a large variety of literature. 9 !

Why Engage in Negativity?
Although some scholars, like Geer (2006a), argue the

differentiation aspect of negative advertising is the manifestation of a healthy democracy, not all candidates choose to be negative. There are a number of theories on why this may be the case. Harrington & Hess (1994) argue that the public's opinion on a candidate's personality ultimately determines if they will pursue a negative campaign. Some candidates strive to divert focus away from their personal shortcomings by attacking their opponents. Other scholars propose that incumbents and challengers pursue negativity differently. Geer (2006a) finds that the subject of negative advertising depends on the target: incumbents use character attacks against their opponents, while challengers use policy attacks against the incumbent.

Does Negative Advertising Work?
As noted above, scholars recognize that negativity is a tactic employed by candidates to help distinguish themselves from their opponents. However, there is a debate on whether negativity actually works to change the electorate's vote. Some scholars have found evidence that negativity is effective in having the electorate vote for an attacker (Ansolabehere et. al. 1994, Bullock 1994, Kaid 1997, Naman 2000, Carraro & Castelli 2010). Other scholars assert that negativity only works in certain circumstances. First, the subject of the advertisement must remain relevant and include evidence to back up their claims, or voters 10 !

will easily reverse their opinions (Kahn & Kenney 2004, Paek et al. 2005). Second, advertisements must be strategically placed within acceptable television programming. For example, Kaid, Chanselor & Hovind (1992) have found evidence that political advertisements shown during news broadcasts are effective, while advertisements shown during

entertainment programming are not. Third, the success of negativity depends on position of the candidate. Many scholars have found that employing negative advertising hurts incumbents, but helps challengers (Tinkham & Weaver-Lariscy 1993, Lau & Pomper 2004). Alternatively, a significant number of scholars believe negative advertisements are not effective in altering public opinion (Pinkleton 1997, Robideaux 2004, Brader 2005). Some scholars have even found a "backlash" effect, where viewers begin to prefer the targets of advertisements, while liking the sponsor less (Haddock & Zanna 1997, Carraro & Castelli, 2010). Others have found evidence that viewers dislike both the sponsor and the target after viewing a negative advertisement (Bullock 1994, Kern & Just 1995).

The Impact of Negative Advertising
Having considered the definition and usefulness of negative advertising, I will now briefly address concerns scholars have on the longterm impact of negativity. Studying impact in detail would be outside the scope of this paper, but it is important to briefly outline these arguments because they encompass a large portion of the literature on negative 11 !

advertising. First, Granato & Sunny Wong (2004) suggest that negative advertising may prevent "message crystallization," meaning that negativity distracts voters from grasping and understanding the issues (pg. 356). Similarly, Lodge et. al. (1995) found that voters often do not remember specifically why a negative advertisement denounced a particular candidate, but they instead remember the impression and judgment of the candidate that advertisement left with them. Some scholars argue that these impressions, and overall cynicism, may ultimately deter voters from participating in elections. Scholars have dubbed this the negativity-demobilization hypothesis (Ansolabehere et al. 1994, Houston, Doan & Roskos-Ewoldsen 1999, Min 2004). Matsusaka (1993) hypothesizes negativity in modern campaigns may be responsible for declining voter turnout in recent years, and Ansolabehere et al. (1994) have found negative advertisements may decrease voting intentions by as much as five per cent (pg. 829). Stevens (2009) suggests that the more negative an advertisement is, the more likely an individual is to be demobilized. Furthermore, he finds that judgments formed from a single negative advertisement may affect the voter's overall impression of the election. However, not all scholars are convinced that the negativitydemobilization hypothesis exists. Some scholars have found no evidence to suggest that attack advertisements demobilize the electorate (e.g., Finkel & Geer 1998; Lau, Sigelman, Heldman and Babbitt 1999; 12 !

Wattenberg & Brians 1999; Brooks 2006; Jackson, Mondak & Huckfeldt 2009). Other scholars question whether advertisements are the only variable responsible for negativity-demobilization. Ridout & Fowler (2012) have found evidence that mass media framing of advertisements is what illuminates negativity in the eyes of the electorate. They argue that the media has a larger impact in whether the public will recognize negativity in advertisements. Similarly, the geographic location of a voter may have an impact in socializing voters on how to react to negativity. Sides et. al. (2003) have found evidence that residents of Illinois are demobilized by negative advertisements, while residents of California are mobilized.

What does the electorate think about negative advertising?
As noted above, the literature on attack advertisements is focused on answering questions relating to the usefulness of negative advertising, and the effect negativity has on the electorate. However, there is much less literature dedicated to determining the actual opinions of voters on the subject of negative advertising. Interestingly, studies that use "liking" and "disliking" as variables only seek to answer questions about an advertisement's effectiveness in altering a vote, not an individual's personal feelings about it. For example, Mathews & Dietz-Uhler (1998) use "like" and "dislike" in their study of "in-group" and "out-group"

13 !

perception of negative advertising.5 However, the authors equate "like" to "likelihood" that the study participant would vote for a particular candidate, rather than their feelings toward the advertisement overall. There are few studies that look at the perception of negative advertising outside of effectiveness. The scholars that have studied this topic have come to several conclusions on the electorate's impressions of negativity. First, scholars suggest that viewers may like negative advertisements as long as they are focused on the issues (Schenck-Hamlin, Procter & Rumsey 2000). On the other hand, advertisements that focus on character and personality tend to increase cynicism about politics. Similarly, Brooks & Geer (2007) argue that the electorate does not necessarily dislike negativity, but instead dislikes incivility, which may be the true result of demobilization in recent years. In addition to the contrast between issue and character based attacks, scholars argue that the source's credibility and the type of claims used in the attack determine if voters will approve (Dermody and Scullion 2003). Voters approve of advertisements "based on legitimate criticism" but disapprove of advertisements that engage in

"unsubstantiated" attacks (Dermody and Scullion 2003, pg. 93). Third, scholars believe that partisanism may determine what advertisements are liked and disliked by certain individuals. Some !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
5

Matthews & Dietz-Uhler (1998) define the "in-group" as study participants that are assessing the behaviour of candidates in their own political parties. The "out-group" are study participants that are assessing the behaviour of candidates in opposing political parties (pg. 1903).

14

!

scholars suggest that partisan orientation matters because voters will support negative advertising when it is sponsored by their candidate of choice, and similarly will disapprove of advertising targeting their party (Martinez & Degal 1990). However, other scholars suggest partisanism is not infallible. Mathews & Dietz-Uhler (1998) found that partisans do not necessarily support candidates within their party that develop attack advertisements. Instead, they are often criticized for threatening the reputation of the party itself. Finally, long-term political standards may also impact personal opinions. Searing, Wright & Rabinowitz's (1976) primacy principle suggests that information that is learned the earliest is the most persistent. If an individual has always held an opinion on a particular issue, it is suggested they will support advertising that is consistent with those beliefs. These beliefs are unlikely to change, even with the introduction of convincing negative Super PAC advertisements.

Super PAC and Third Party Advertising
Having considered the extensive literature on negative advertising, it is now necessary to assess how Super PAC advertising fits into this literature. As mentioned in the introduction, the 2012 presidential election was significant because it marked the introduction of the Super PAC. There is currently limited research that has been conducted on Super PACs since the conclusion of the 2012 election. Nevertheless, some scholars have provided interesting insight into how Super PACs may have reshaped campaign advertising. First, it is important to note that 85 per 15 !

cent of "group" advertising in the 2012 election was negative, compared to 51 per cent in 2008 (Fowler & Ridout 2013). Fowler & Ridout (2013) hypothesize the increasing negativity is due to the establishment of Super PACs. Regardless of this sharp increase, scholars have differing opinions whether Super PACs have as much influence as was previously feared. Some scholars believe that advertisements purchased by independent groups may be more effective than advertisements created by candidates or parties. Brooks & Murov (2012) argue "...a trait-based attack ad sponsored by an unknown independent group is more effective than an identical ad sponsored by a candidate in the eyes of the public overall" (pg. 402). They suggest that having a third party acknowledge the flaws of an opponent may be more credible than if it came from another candidate. On the other hand, some scholars suggest that Super PACs may not be as persuasive as previously thought. First, Dowling & Wichowsky (2013) found that the public is actually suspicious of advertisements from groups that do not disclose their donors. As noted in the introduction, Super PACs have been widely criticized for using regulatory loopholes to hide their donors' identities. Second, Smith and Kimball (2012) doubt that Super PACs have more of a reach than candidates and parties. In 2012, the Independence USA PAC spent nearly

16 !

three times as much on its candidates than what its competitors did.6 Yet, these candidates only beat their opponents by up to twelve percentage points. Gulati (2012) argues "...at some point, each additional dollar spent and each additional television ad aired is subject to the law of diminishing returns" (pg. 417). All candidates will be adequately funded, so a larger investment does not guarantee a particular candidate will win.

Negative Advertising and Social Cognitive Theory
Having examined scholarly opinion on the impact of negative advertising, it is now necessary to consider how this literature fits in with social cognitive theory. First, Geer's (2006a) theory that negative advertising helps voters differentiate between candidates is consistent with the idea that self-regulation requires the incorporation of new symbols to determine future behaviour. Voters weigh the messages provided to them before making a decision ­ and negative messages may be the strongest. Similarly, Geer's (2006a) recognition of negative advertising as a "necessary evil" is consistent with exonerative comparison (Bandura 2001). Although some argue humans are not inherently negative, scholars believe negativity may be in the country's best interest. The arguments posed by Geer's (2006a) opponents are also consistent with social cognitive theory ­ specifically the negativitydemobilization hypothesis and message crystallization (Granato & Sunny Wong 2004). Voters require confidence and self-efficacy in their !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
6

Independence USA PAC was created by the former Mayor of New York, Michael Bloomberg, to assist in the election of candidates to mostly local and state contests.

17 !

abilities to understand politics. Negativity in this case could make it difficult for the electorate to process all of the information. In summary, the literature on negative advertising suggests that scholars are focused on the macro-level effects of negative advertising, and less with the micro-level sentiment of Americans. While previous scholarly direction is important, it does highlight a gap in the literature that can be addressed in this MRP. When considering social cognitive theory, the agency of the electorate is important to consider. As stated above, voters incorporate a variety of beliefs into their voting decisions, and arguments by a Super PAC may not necessarily sway an individual's decision making.

Measuring Public Opinion
The above discussion of the literature emphasizes the major themes surrounding negative advertising. It is important to note, though, that scholarly studies on advertising rely on detailed research into political sentiment, which has become considerably difficult to conduct in recent years. In the past, it was a widely held belief that randomized telephone surveys were the best method to measure public opinion (Archer & Berdahl 2011). Telephone surveys were inexpensive, had high response rates, and created the most representative samples. However, Ansolabehere & Schaffner (2011) argue that previous methods of public opinion collection are no longer desirable or viable. They suggest that up to forty per cent of Americans are not accessible by landline telephones 18 !

because of the increase in exclusive mobile phone use, and the reluctance of many to answer calls from unknown callers. Scholars have since endeavoured to find survey methods more suitable for the 21st century. Some scholars have found success in online surveys, while others have found success in measuring Twitter sentiment (O'Connor et. al., 2010; Shirazi et. al., 2011; Desouza & Bhagwatwar 2012; Skoric et al. 2012; and Stieglitz & Dang-Xuan, 2012). Ansolabehere & Schaffner (2011) determined that the differences between the results of political Internet surveys and telephone surveys on the same topic were too small to be statistically significant. The authors recognize that selfselection bias is a common critique against the use of Internet polls; however, they argue the process of weighting after telephone surveys demonstrates that previous surveying techniques are not ideal either. There are several other limitations that impact new measurement technologies. First, communication platforms used within authoritarian countries are more likely to express anti-government sentiment than democratic countries. For example, Skoric et. al. (2012) found that opposition parties in Singapore were "overhyped" on Twitter compared to the ruling party, possibly because the mainstream media focused on the ruling party. This pattern suggests these platforms either cater to a subset of a population, or the electoral results themselves could have been skewed. Second, countries with compulsory voting laws also limit the predictive power of technological platforms. Political opinion estimates 19 !

gathered from online sources will be limited to those that are politically engaged. However, the final result of elections will include large segments of the population who vote because they are legally required to (pg. 2590). Third, scholars warn against the assumption that entire populations are online. Desouza & Bhagwatwar (2012) note that regular access to smartphones and the Internet continues to be a luxury in North America. Fourth, scholars suggest that there may be some theoretical issues with communication technologies. Goggin (2011) argues that the technologies most widely used today were developed by companies who themselves have biases. This form of technological determinism being conducted by companies may theoretically limit how scholars can collect public opinion data (Baym, 2010). Finally, in light of the recent National Security Agency (NSA) data collection scandal, users may refuse to participate in these platforms if they are concerned about their personal privacy (Sinha 2014).7 In conclusion, the literature demonstrates scholars have been studying the negativity in advertisements for several decades. They have endeavoured to understand why certain candidates use negativity, if negative advertising actually works, identify possible effects of advertisements on voting behaviour, and to hypothesize how Super PACs !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
7

The "NSA data collection scandal" refers to allegations that the NSA collects mass amounts of data from online sources without warrants. Many scholars and journalists dubbed this discovery a "scandal" because this practice is argued to contradict the United States Constitution (Sinha, 2014).

20

!

have changed the political landscape. However, studies on the sentiment toward political advertising are limited, as are studies on new survey technologies. This major research paper will therefore combine these two topics in order to add to the literature in a unique way.

21 !

Methodology
Data Collection
Before outlining my analysis methodology in detail, I will provide a brief introduction to the data collection technology being used. As noted, the data used in this study was collected by the Super PAC App. The App was developed by Jennifer Hollett, a Master of Public Administration student at Harvard's Kennedy School of Governance; and Dan Siegel, a Master of Business Administration student at MIT's Sloan School of Management (Hollett & Siegel 2012). The Super PAC App initially began as an assignment for Hollett and Siegel's social television course, but it later launched Siegel's digital media start-up Glassy Media (Hollett 2013). Hollett and Siegel's motivation was to encourage Super PACs and political parties to remain transparent and accountable throughout the election (Hollett & Siegel 2012). The Super PAC App was funded by The Knight Foundation, a non-profit organization that supports innovation in journalism (Knight Foundation 2012, August 22). The App was later sponsored by Newsweek and the Daily Beast, and was featured on CNN (Keller & Carter 2012, September 14; Sutter 2012, August 22). The Super PAC App was inspired by the popular music-recognition mobile application Shazam (Hollett 2013). When an individual views a political advertisement broadcast on television, they can open the Super PAC App on their iPhone and hold it up to the advertisement being shown. The App listens to the audio and identifies the advertisement for 22 !

the user. The App shows the user who sponsored the advertisement, how much money has been raised for the organization, and directs users to articles that fact-check the advertisement's claims. With this information available to them, users were encouraged to anonymously vote love, fail, fishy, or fair. These categories were inspired by the voting categories on the popular website BuzzFeed.com (Hollett 2013). For this study, love will be equated to liking an advertisement, while a failure will be equated to disliking an advertisement. Fishy and fair were not included in the study because these categories were used significantly less often than love and fail. Although the Super PAC App was originally created to allow users to easily fact-check claims made in these advertisements, its voting feature ultimately became the most used function of the App (Hollett 2013). The App became so popular that the data collection software was made available on computer browsers, so users without iPhones could participate (Keller & Carter 2012). The App collected nearly 40,000 votes from users between August 22 and November 13, 2012 (Hollett 2013). The developers uploaded the App's data and code to their website to demonstrate their own commitment to transparency. This major research paper focuses exclusively on the voting component of the App. It should be noted that since the data from the Super PAC App is freely available online, has no policy prohibiting research, and did not collect identifying features of participants, it is 23 !

exempt from Research Ethics Board review.8 To be sure, this data has its limitations. As explained previously, scholars have concerns with new public opinion collection methods. Ansolabehere & Schaffner (2011) found that online public opinion polling might be becoming more accurate than telephone surveys. However, since the App did not collect personal information, the data cannot be weighed to counteract oversampling of certain demographics (such as age, location or partisan affiliation). Similarly, self-selection bias is likely to have occurred through this method of data collection (Archer & Berdahl 2011). It can be hypothesized that individuals particularly interested and knowledgeable about politics would choose to download the App. This bias is another reason why political science scholars have overwhelmingly preferred random telephone polling to online methods: researchers want to reach all individuals regardless of their political opinions.9 Finally, as mentioned by Desouza & Bhagwatwar (2012), new technologies, such as mobile applications, continue to serve only small !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Ryerson University's Research Ethics Board (2014) currently follows the guidelines set out by Queen's University in their Digital Data Collection Policy (2008). 9 Skoric et. al., (2012) suggest that telephone polls may not be the best predictor of elections. In their study, the authors found that Twitter can be an accurate predictor of elections, except in countries with mandatory voting. In those countries, politically active individuals participated in discussions on social media as much as individuals in countries with non-mandatory voting. However, at the ballot box, politically active voices were mixed with other citizens who were obligated to vote. This logic suggests that self-selection bias may be an acceptable bias in political research. In an era of declining voter turnout in non-mandatory voting countries, measuring only voters, and not the entire citizenry, is essential for pollsters that want to predict electoral outcomes (Putnam 1995). Of course, this study does not strive to predict outcomes of elections; however, Skoric et. al.'s findings provide a new way to look at self-selection bias.
8

24

!

subsets of the population. Thankfully, the Super PAC App was expanded into a regular website, allowing more individuals ­ not just iPhone users ­ to use its services. However, this expansion did not completely eliminate possible accessibility biases.

Subsample Creation
Having discussed the data collection software and its limitations, I will now outline how I organized the thousands of opinions collected by the App. I created a manageable subsample for analysis by selecting 20 specific national Super PAC advertisements that were chosen using seven criteria.
Table 1: Subsample Inclusion Criteria 1. Must have originated from a Super PAC 2. Must have been a national advertisement 3. Must have been persuasive in its orientation 4. Must have received 20 or more votes on the App 5. Must have reached 55% like or 55% dislike threshold 6. Must be a negative advertisement 7. Subsample may include up to three advertisements per Super PAC

First, the advertisement must have originated from a Super PAC. Candidate, party, non-profit, or regular PAC advertisements were eliminated from the data pool. Second, advertisements must have been broadcast nationally. I wanted to avoid hyper-local issues from skewing the overall findings. Third, I eliminated commercials created purely for satirical purposes -- such as advertisements from comedian Stephen Colbert's Super PAC: Americans for a Better Tomorrow, Tomorrow (Colbert 2012). Fourth, advertisements that received less than 20 25 !

sentiment votes were eliminated to ensure the opinions of a few users did not skew the data. Advertisements that met the first four criteria were then randomized using the RAND function on Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Office 2014). I then tested each advertisement for the three final subsample criteria, starting at the top of the list: 1) Was it clear that users definitively liked or disliked the advertisement? 2) Was the advertisement negative? 3) Would including this advertisement ensure diversity within the subsample overall. To determine if users definitively liked or disliked an

advertisement, I set a minimum threshold of 55 per cent like or 55 per cent dislike. To determine if an advertisement met the threshold, I manually counted the votes for love and fail and determined the percentage in either direction. If an advertisement did not meet the threshold, it would have been eliminated from consideration. However, I did not encounter any advertisements that did not meet the threshold. The next step was to assess the advertisements for their negativity. Advertisements included in the sample must have been negative, with the goal of attacking an opponent. Some Super PACs created positive advertisements that spoke favourably about a particular candidate, but studying them would be outside the scope of this paper. To assess the negativity, I conducted preliminary content analysis.

26 !

The codes I used for my content analysis were developed by John Geer (2006) for his book In Defense of Negativity. Geer performed content analysis on American political advertisements from 1960 to 2000 ­ gathered from the Julian P. Kanter Political Commercial Archive at the University of Oklahoma. Geer's aim was to code the advertisements with as much detail as possible. He focused on three types of appeals ­ policy, traits and values ­ which are contained in a codebook 15 pages in length (Geer 2006b). Geer also tested for intercoder reliability with a research assistant, and achieved 91 per cent reliability.10 Several scholars and organizations have developed similar frameworks to assess advertisements (Kaid & Johnston 1991, Benoit, 1999, Goldstein & Freedman 2002, American National Elections Studies 2012). However, I chose Geer's framework because it is extremely detailed and has been well received among political scientists, with many subsequent studies, such as Gilens, Vavreck & Cohen (2007), Shah et. al. (2007), and Valentino et. al. (2011) citing or using Geer's framework. It is also freely available online. In Geer's (2006b) codebook, his traits code section is dedicated to contrasting positivity and negativity, which is what I used to confirm whether a Super PAC advertisement was negative. I imported Geer's codes into NVivo for Mac Beta, the Apple-compatible adaptation of the !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
10

Intercoder reliability is defined by Archer & Berdahl (2011) as "the extent to which different coders reach the same conclusions and establish the same values when coding" (pg. 375).

27 !

popular qualitative research application (QSR International 2014). Three advertisements were eliminated from the list because they were positive: "Paul Ryan ­ For a Stronger America" and "Next Year, President Romney in Jerusalem" by the Emergency Committee for Israel; and "Now You See the Problem" by Restore Our Future.11 The final criterion was established to ensure there was some diversity in the subsample. Some of the most popular and well-funded Super PACs created nearly 50 advertisements during the campaign, making it possible that two or three Super PACs would overwhelm the subsample. Therefore, I set a limit of three advertisements per Super PAC. The first three advertisements from a specific Super PAC were included in the subsample, and subsequent advertisements were eliminated from consideration. Using the above method, the final advertisement included in the subsample was the 40th advertisement on the list, and 20 advertisements were eliminated. Nine Super PACs were ultimately included (see Appendix A)

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
11

These advertisements all argue Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney and his running mate, Paul Ryan, have strong leadership qualities and deserve to hold office (Geer 2006b, Code T29).

28

!

Table 2: Advertisements Included in the Subsample

Super PAC American Bridge 21st Century American Bridge 21st Century American Bridge 21st Century American Crossroads American Crossroads American Crossroads Campaign for American Values Campaign for American Values Emergency Committee for Israel Emergency Committee for Israel Freedom's Defense Fund Let Freedom Ring America Let Freedom Ring America Let Freedom Ring America Planned Parenthood Votes Priorities USA Action Priorities USA Action Priorities USA Action Restore Our Future Restore Our Future

Advertisement Title Look Who's Demanding To See Romney's Tax Returns Romney on Immigration Romney: The Etch-A-Sketch Candidate Build Obama's War on Women Wah Wahhh New Morning Faith in the Public Square: Obama vs. Romney Whose Democratic Party? O Jerusalem Obama Keep The Change European Prices Muslim Brotherhood Jennifer Mitt Romney: "Get Rid of Planned Parenthood" Extremely Dangerous Small-Minded We The People Mother's Day Another Month

Sentiment 74% like 58% like 70% like 64% dislike 73% dislike 64% dislike 72% dislike 75% dislike 66% dislike 62% dislike 82% dislike 80% dislike 78% dislike 76% dislike 62% like 78% like 82% like 77% like 65% dislike 67% dislike

29 !

Method of Analysis
Having outlined the subsample and inclusion criteria, I will now summarize how I analyzed this information. I continued to perform content analysis by importing the rest of Geer's (2006a) codes into NVivo. Geer's codebook has over 1000 codes; however, the majority of them were not used because they were not directly applicable to the 2012 election. Geer's codes provided a solid foundation for the open coding stage.12 52 codes were ultimately applied to the written and oral content of the subsample (see Appendix B & C). I then engaged in axial coding to identify codes that had similar themes that could be grouped together.13 Eight code categories were established.
Table 3: Categories Created from the Codes Category Name 1. Symbolism Description This category includes symbols that "represent" Americans, or principles Americans admire or respect (Willmoore & Carey 1995). These codes do not reference specific political positions in the campaign, but rather allude to enduring ideals held by most Americans. This category includes references to the 2012 campaign specifically, and the conduct of an opposing candidate. References to this conduct include "negative campaigning" and mentions of campaign spending. Example "We the people, the middle class, who move our country forward. Work hard, raise families and keep America strong."

2. Campaign

"Or what Obama's allies are doing now. Shameful, dishonest attacks. With no record to run on, it's the only strategy Obama has left."

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Lindlof & Taylor (2011) define open coding as the "initial, unrestricted coding of data (pg. 250). 13 Lindlof & Taylor (2011) define axial coding as the creation of categories by making connections between codes assigned during open coding (pg. 252).
12

30

!

3. Ideology

4. Conduct

This category includes mentions of the political ideology of an opponent. References to ideology include mentions of extremism, or explicitly calling opponent "liberal" or "conservative." This category includes allegations that an opponent is deceiving or misleading the public. It also includes attributes of candidates that make it hard for the electorate to relate to them or support them. This category includes references to one of the "most important issues of the campaign" (Cushman 2013). Topics include the economic crisis of 2008, unemployment and job creation, taxation, and the adequate management of government spending. This category includes references to religion and the freedom to practice one's religion. This category also includes allegations that a candidate does not support religion or religious activities. The category includes references to a candidate's positions on foreign policy ­ specifically mentioning war, terrorism and diplomacy. Most of the advertisements in the subsample surrounded issues in Israel and Egypt. This category outlines any attacks on a candidate's private life that has no relevant connection to the candidate's professional qualifications

"The extreme right is aptly named."

"Clearly there's a problem with [Romney's] tax returns, otherwise he would release them." "Exactly three years after President Obama's government stimulus plan, Jennifer's story shows how it's just not working." "Obama has canceled National Day of Prayer events at the White House and he is trying to coerce churches into violating their believes." "President Obama, you invited the Muslim Brotherhood to the White House, legitimizing the group that wants to undermine America and destroy Israel." "Ann Romney (wife of Mitt Romney) raised five boys. She successfully battled breast cancer and multiple sclerosis. But what is White House insider Hilary Rosen saying about Ann Romney?"

5. Jobs & Economy

6. Religion

7. Foreign Policy

8. Personal

31 !

Findings and Analysis
The methodology I applied to my subsample highlighted a number of trends among negative Super PAC advertisements. In this analysis, I will begin by answering the first research question, and explain a framework I used to understand the Super PAC voting results. Next, I will discuss how symbolism acted as a stand-alone trend among

advertisements. Finally, I will answer the second and third research questions by identifying what it is about a negative advertisement that makes it liked or disliked. When looking purely at the numbers, the answer to the first research question is clear: users of the Super PAC App tend to dislike negative advertisements. 7 of the 20 advertisements in the subsample are liked, while 13 of the 20 are disliked. However, further analysis of the subsample reveals that another variable may have affected that result. Advertisements that are disliked are sponsored by right-leaning Super PACs, while advertisements that are liked are sponsored by left-leaning Super PACs. Since this pattern occurs in every advertisement in the subsample, I did not take this as a coincidence. I believe some form of user bias may have influenced the results ­ Democrats and left-leaning users may have voted in the App in larger numbers. This theory would confirm Martinez & Degal's (1990) belief that partisans dislike advertisements that are inconsistent with their political views. Unfortunately, as stated previously, no personal 32 !

characteristics were gathered from users. I cannot confirm if user bias actually influenced the results, nor can I weigh the results to mitigate against the effects of such bias.
Table 4: Continuum of Advertisements from most liked to most disliked Like 82% Small Minded 78% Dangerous 77% We the People 74% Look Who's Demanding to See Romney's Tax Returns 70% Romney: The Etch A Sketch Candidate 62% Romney on Planned Parenthood 58% Romney on Immigration -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------62% O' Jerusalem 64% Build 64% Wah Wahh 65% Mother's Day 66% Whose Democratic Party 67% Another Month 73% Obama's War on Women 74% New Morning 75% Faith in Public Square 76% Jennifer 78% Muslim Brotherhood 80% European Prices 82% Keep the Change Dislike

Furthermore, grouping advertisements into two categories based on whether they were liked or disliked would not have generated significant findings, as these groups would only explain what Democrats like or dislike about negative advertisements. Instead, sorting the advertisements from the subsample on a continuum from most liked to most disliked helped me identify patterns and trends within the subsample.14 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14

There is a wide range of sentiment scores in the subsample. For example, the advertisement "Small Minded" is 82 per cent liked, and "Romney on Immigration" is

33

!

Symbolism
Before going into detail about what features of negative advertising are liked or disliked by users of the App, I will briefly touch on an interesting trend that arose during the preliminary stages of analysis: symbolism is found in nearly every advertisement in the subsample. The codes in the Symbolism category include content that uses images, and values that add underlying meaning to messages. There are several different types of symbols in the subsample. First is the presence of "Americana" ­ images and values that have traditionally been associated with the American "brand" (Willmoore & Carey 1995). EXAMPLE 1 - Obama has repeatedly left God out when reciting the most important words in our founding documents.
("Faith in the Public Square," Campaign for American Values)

EXAMPLE 2 - To rebuild the American Dream, we need a president who believes in the American Dream.
("Build," American Crossroads)

! The above examples use the traditional American images of "founding documents" and "the American Dream" as fundamental ideals that viewers are expected to hold in high regard. The advertisement by Campaign for American Values argues that the "founding documents" legally guard American liberties, and therefore overlooking certain pieces of it (in this case, God) implies one is not truly committed to it. 15 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! !
58 per cent liked ­ a difference of 24 per cent. That same difference exists between "Romney on Immigration" at 58 per cent liked and "Whose Democratic Party" at 66 per cent disliked. 15 The "founding documents" include, among others, the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights (Chaplin Library of Rare Books, 2011).

34

!

Similarly, the advertisement by American Crossroads suggests that "the American Dream" is an ideal that all Americans should strive toward.16 The advertisement claims President Obama does not support small business, an important feature of "the Dream" (Samuel 2012). For that reason, the advertisement argues he is against the American Dream, and is not worthy of his position as president. Another group of symbols in the subsample is comprised of political campaign symbols. One popular example is President Obama's 2008 slogan "change," which is used to compare his original campaign promises to his actual performance (Obama for America 2008). EXAMPLE 3 - That's not the change I voted for.
("New Morning," Campaign for American Values)

EXAMPLE 4 - Tell Barack Obama he can keep his change.
("Obama Keep the Change," Freedom's Defense Fund)

In both examples, it is suggested that President Obama did not meet the electorate's expectations, or he made decisions his supporters did not agree with. Super PACs also use President Obama's 2012 campaign slogan "forward" and Mitt Romney's slogan "believe" for similar purposes (Balz 2013). EXAMPLE 5 - Move our country forward.
("We the People," Priorities USA Action)

EXAMPLE 6 - We need a president who believes in the American Dream. ("Build," American Crossroads)

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16

The "American Dream" was coined by James Truslow Adams in 1931, and is defined as "the dream of a better, richer, and happier life for all citizens of every rank, which is the greatest contribution we have made to the thought and welfare of the world" (Cullen 2003).

35

!

The advertisement by American Crossroads is interesting because it uses two symbols in one sentence. Although Mitt Romney is not explicitly mentioned in "Build," Romney's slogan is used with the "American Dream" symbol, perhaps to encourage the viewer to create a connection between the two. Finally, "the middle class" is also a popular symbol in the subsample. EXAMPLE 7 - Mitt Romney's budget plan will hurt the middle class. ("We the People," Priorities USA Action) What is interesting about use of this symbol is it is never actually defined in any of the commercials it is featured in.17 Advertisers may presume the majority of Americans will hear "middle class" and immediately identify with it. This example demonstrates that advertisers believe symbols can be employed without definitions or clarification. However, it is interesting to note that advertisements that include symbols are evenly spread across the like and dislike categories. It is possible that users simply do not notice the use of symbols in advertisements. It may also mean that symbols are not particularly convincing.

What makes an advertisement `Liked' or `Disliked'?
Users liked advertisements that attack the professional behaviour of candidates.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
17

It is worth noting that while the middle class is a term regularly used to describe the "average American," many economists cannot agree on what constitutes the middle class, and question if the middle class continues to exist in its classic form (Bledstein 2001).

36

!

I will now compare characteristics that are present in Super PAC advertisements that make them liked or disliked by users of the App. The results from the subsample suggest that users like when advertisers reveal undesirable behaviour in candidates. Specifically, users like when an advertisement exposes "unscrupulous" behaviour during the campaign, highlight the "extreme" views of a candidate, or prove that a candidate has changed their position over time. Codes that discuss a candidate's campaign behaviour are collected in the Campaign category. There are a wide variety of campaign behaviours that advertisements attacked, including allegations that opponents were collecting too much money, were catering to special interests, or were engaging in smear campaigns. Users tend to like advertisements that highlight this conduct in candidates. For example, "Extremely Dangerous" by Priorities USA Action argues that donations by wealthy supporters to the Republican Party and right-wing Super PACs would adversely impact the election. EXAMPLE 8 - Charles and David Koch have been using their vast fortune to help fund conservative think tanks and politicians.
("Extremely Dangerous," Priorities USA Action).

This advertisement targets the Koch Brothers, well-known billionaires who financially supported organizations that sought to defeat President Obama (Fang 2013). 78 per cent of users liked this advertisement, suggesting that viewers like when advertisements show the origins of campaigns resources.

37 !

Users also like when "extreme" candidates are featured in advertisements. Extremism is collected in the Ideology category, which includes references to "extreme" behaviours, or specific ideologies such as "liberalism" or "conservatism." In "Extremely Dangerous," the

advertisement quotes several prominent Republicans demonstrating their alleged "extreme" beliefs. EXAMPLE 9 ­ Newt Gingrich: "I think dictatorial is a strong word but it may frighteningly be the right word." Glenn Beck: "He's not with the terrorists, I'm not saying that, but he is sympathetic to their cause." Michele Bachmann: "I want people in Minnesota armed and dangerous on this issue."
("Extremely Dangerous," Priorities USA Action)18

The advertisement later encourages viewers to "stand up and fight back," which appears to have resonated with the 78 per cent of viewers that liked the advertisement. Finally, advertisements that claim a candidate changed their position on an issue ­ known colloquially as "flip-flopping" ­ tends to be liked by users of the App (Verdon 2008). In an American Bridge 21st Century advertisement called "Romney: The Etch-A-Sketch Candidate," Romney's is alleged to have changed his formal position women's rights and gun control. The advertisement also includes a clip of Mitt Romney's senior campaign strategist, Eric Fehrnstrom, on CNN. !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
18

Newt Gingrich and Michele Bachmann were candidates for the Republican nomination for president. The nomination ultimately went to Mitt Romney. Glenn Beck is a conservative radio talk show host (Balz 2013).

38 !

EXAMPLE 10 - Well I think you hit a reset button for the fall campaign. Everything changes. It's almost like an Etch-A-Sketch: you can kind of shake it up and we start all over again.
("Romney: The Etch-A-Sketch Candidate," American Bridge 21st Century)

The above quote suggests that Mitt Romney's team sees "flip-flopping" as an acceptable practice when transitioning from primaries to general elections. 70 per cent of viewers liked this advertisement, suggesting that consistency in one's conviction is what viewers look for in candidates. This result is consistent with Balz, (2013) who argues that Fehrnstrom's appearance on CNN solidified Mitt Romney's image as a wavering politician. This image may have ultimately contributed to Romney's electoral loss. Romney is not the only candidate said to be inconsistent. The aversion to "flip-flopping" may also be present in "O Jerusalem" by the Emergency Committee for Israel. The advertisement alleges that President Obama changed his position on Jerusalem's status as capital of Israel. The advertisement also demonstrates his administration's reluctance to face this issue head on. The example below features a conversation between Associated Press writer Matthew Lee and U.S. State Department spokesperson Victoria Nuland. EXAMPLE 11 ­ Lee: "You seem to be suggesting you do not regard Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, is that correct?" Nuland: "I have just spoken to this issue. I have nothing further to say on it." ("O Jerusalem," Emergency Committee for Israel) Although this advertisement is disliked by 62 per cent of users, it is interesting to note that the advertisement is more liked by users than 39 !

most of the disliked advertisements in the subsample. This finding suggests that users tend to like advertisements more if they highlight "flip-flopping" in candidates.

Users disliked advertisements that make unsubstantiated attacks on a candidate's professional conduct.
As stated, users of the App tended to like negative advertisements that showcase a candidate's unprofessional behaviour. However, users only like advertisements that provide evidence that this misconduct took place. There were some advertisements in the subsample that allege a candidate was unprofessional, but then attempt to prove it with incomplete quotes, or quotes taken out-of-context. These advertisements are among the most disliked advertisements in the subsample. There are no specific codes or categories associated with this finding; however, the presence of this style became visible during the coding process. For example, "Jennifer" by Let Freedom Ring America features a woman speaking to President Obama in an online town hall about her husband's unemployment.19 EXAMPLE 12 ­ President Obama: "I don't know your husband's specialty, but I can tell you that there's a huge demand around the country for engineers." Jennifer: "We're not getting that."
("Jennifer," Let Freedom Ring America)

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
19

President Obama has hosted several "town hall" meetings online throughout his presidency, on platforms such as Twitter, Facebook and Google+ Hangouts (Katz, Barris & Jain, 2013).

40 !

While most of the conversation between President Obama and Jennifer is presented in order, her quote "we're not getting that" is included every time he responds to her. The use of the same audio and video suggests that she did not say that particular line multiple times in the real conversation. This advertisement is disliked by 76 per cent of users. In another Let Freedom Ring America advertisement, "European Prices," President Obama is asked in an interview with John Harwood of CNBC if he thought high gasoline prices could help Americans. EXAMPLE 13 ­ Harwood: "Could these high prices help us?" President Obama: "I think that I would have preferred a gradual adjustment" ("European Prices," Let Freedom Ring America). President Obama's quote sounds like it has been cut off, suggesting that the quote may have been taken out-of-context. This advertisement is the second most disliked advertisement in the subsample at 80 per cent. These findings suggest that users like advertisements that highlight misconduct in candidates, as long as the allegations are substantiated. This conclusion is consistent with the existing literature, particularly Dermody & Scullion, (2003) who also found that advertisements must have adequate evidence for them to be acceptable to viewers.

Users only like attacks on a candidate's personal life if it is relevant to the responsibilities of the presidency.
Similarly to the above findings, users also have consistent opinions on how best to deal with misconduct that occurred outside the 41 !

professional sphere. Users liked advertisements that question areas of a candidate's personal life only if it could directly impact their professional life. This misconduct is exemplified in the fourth Conduct category, most notably in advertisements that question the maintenance of Mitt Romney's personal wealth.
20

In "Look Who's Demanding to See

Romney's Tax Returns" by American Bridge 21st Century, Romney is criticized for not releasing ten years worth of his tax returns for public scrutiny. EXAMPLE 14 - The costs of not releasing the returns are clear, therefore he must have calculated that there are higher costs.
("Look Who's Demanding to See Romney's Tax Returns," American Bridge 21st Century)

Although Mitt Romney's personal finances are a private matter, any evidence of fraudulent conduct would have the public question his integrity. What was particularly interesting about this advertisement is that it stresses that Romney is going against a precedent ­ followed by all modern candidates ­ that was initiated by his own father, who ran for president in 1968 (Valenzano & Edwards 2014). The advertisement also highlights this fact. EXAMPLE 15 - Everybody releases about 12 years, and actually, it's a practice started by none other than George Romney, his dad, back in '68. ("Look Who's Demanding to See Romney's Tax Returns,"
American Bridge 21st Century)

The above advertisement shows left and right-leaning political pundits questioning why Romney would choose to not release his tax returns,

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
20

Mitt Romney was widely noted for being the wealthiest presidential candidate in American history, with a personal net worth of $200 million (Balz 2013).

42 !

implying that his behaviour is suspicious across party lines. 74 per cent of users liked this advertisement. Once again, Balz (2013) argues that the discussion surrounding Romney's tax returns was detrimental to his campaign. He states: "...Romney had yet to define himself ­ and to the extent that he had, it was as a wealthy patrician who was unapproachable to the average voter" (Balz 2013, pg. 235). These advertisements were successful in defining Romney's image for him. Users of the Super PAC App appear to like that these personal qualities were revealed to them. Lodge et. al.'s (1995) work is consistent with these findings. Users may have forgotten the exact evidence against Romney; however, they may not have been able to get the negative image of Romney out of their head.

Users disliked advertisements that conducted irrelevant attacks on a candidate's personal life.
Although users like when advertisements addressed Mitt Romney's finances, they dislike all other advertisements that attack his personal life. The Personal category includes codes from the advertisement "Mother's Day" by Restore Our Future, which defends Mitt Romney's wife Ann from attacks by supporters of President Obama. EXAMPLE 16 - Ann Romney raised five boys. She successfully battled breast cancer and multiple sclerosis. But what is White House insider Hilary Rosen saying about Ann Romney? "Guess what, his wife has actually never worked a day in her life."
("Mother's Day," Restore Our Future)

43 !

The advertisement defends Ann Romney's decision not to work because of her dedication to her children, and her affliction with multiple sclerosis. This advertisement is disliked by 65 per cent of users, which suggests that although this advertisement is a rebuttal, users still dislike any advertisement relating to a candidate's personal life. This finding is consistent with Schenck-Hamlin, Procter and Rumsey's (2000) findings on personal-based attacks. The authors found that viewers approve of issue-based attacks, but personal attacks may increase cynicism about politics. Further study on other personal attack advertisements would clarify this hypothesis; however, "Mother's Day" is the only personal attack advertisement in the subsample.

Users dislike advertisements relating to religion or foreign policy, but have no strong opinion about advertisements relating to the economy.
Another interesting pattern that arose in the subsample is the division in sentiment between different types of issues. Users appear to have specific opinions toward certain policy issues, but have less of an opinion about other areas. There are several issue-based advertisements that are disliked by users. The most popular topic is captured in the Religion category, which includes references to gay marriage and freedom of religion. EXAMPLE 17 - Obama is trying to force gay marriage on this country." ("New Morning," Campaign for American Values) ! ! ! 44 !

EXAMPLE 18 - [President Obama] is trying to coerce churches into violating their believes.
("Faith in the Public Square: Obama vs. Romney," Campaign for American Values)

Users overwhelmingly dislike these advertisements, with 72 per cent disliking "New Morning" and 75 per cent disliking "Faith in the Public Square." Users also dislike advertisements in the Foreign Policy category. In the advertisement "Muslim Brotherhood" by Let Freedom Ring, President Obama is alleged to support the Muslim Brotherhood regime in Egypt. EXAMPLE 19 - President Obama, you invited the Muslim Brotherhood to the White House, legitimizing the group that wants to undermine America and destroy Israel.
("Muslim Brotherhood, Let Freedom Ring America)

Similarly, "Whose Democratic Party" by Emergency Committee for Israel argues that the Democratic Party did not support their Israeli allies because they did not include them in their party platform. Again, these advertisements are extremely disliked, with "Muslim Brotherhood" at 78 per cent disliked and "Whose Democratic Party" at 66 per cent disliked. Advertisements that discussed jobs and the economy, meanwhile, do not have strong sentiment in either direction. This finding is surprising because scholars, pundits and opinion polls agreed that jobs and the economy were the most important issues in the 2012 election (Cushman 2013). For example, in "Build" by American Crossroads, President Obama is quoted as saying he does not support small businesses. 45 !

EXAMPLE 20 - People who have worked hard, started a business, and created jobs cannot believe what President Obama is saying about them. "If you have a business... you didn't build that! Somebody else made that happen!" ("Build," American Crossroads) This advertisement has one of the lowest dislike scores among disliked advertisements at 64 per cent. There are a number of reasons why religion and foreign policy may be a contentious topic, while the economy is not. First, as Granato & Sunny Wong (2004) suggest, negative advertising may be distracting viewers from the important issues. There is evidence in the subsample to support this claim. When looking at the number of users that voted on each advertisement, participation appears to be highest for the advertisements that discuss the personal characteristics of candidates. The advertisement "Look Who's Demanding to see Romney's Tax Returns" by American Bridge 21st Century received 509 votes, the highest in the subsample. Voters may have been less interested in the issues, and more concerned about the person running for president. Another possible reason for the dichotomy between issues may be Searing, Wright & Rabinowitz's (1976) primacy principle. The authors argue that certain political attitudes are steadfast because they are established so early on. Attitudes on religion and Israel could have been established early in life, whereas the economy could be an area that people are passionate about, while not having an established perspective on how it can be best handled. Voters may be interested in critiques of 46 !

President Obama's handling of the economy, but they are not receptive to critiques of Israel's status as an autonomous country.

Connections to Social Cognitive Theory
In summary, the results of this study suggest that there are specific trends and sentiments toward Super PAC advertisements. These findings are also consistent with social cognitive theory. When assessing symbolism, it suggests that advertisements strategically use symbols to encourage viewers to engage in Bandura's (2001) symbolic modeling and self-regulation. Voters are argued to be constantly adjusting their political beliefs as new information becomes available. These

advertisements contrast the policies of opposing candidates with symbols Americans are already devoted to, in the hopes that the established symbol will triumph. Another interesting trend is the different sentiments within policy areas. Searing, Wright & Rabinowitz's (1976) primacy principle may suggest that Bandura's (2001) symbolic modeling only occurs when individuals do not already have an established, long-term belief about a policy. Human beings may be "self-reflecting organisms," but perhaps some existing opinions are more persistent.

47 !

Conclusion
The aim of this pilot study is to update current understandings about the perception of negative advertising to discover what characteristics of Super PACs are liked or disliked by users of the Super PAC App. The results suggest that users may have particular sentiments on negativity, which is consistent with Bandura's (2001) belief that individuals weigh a variety of messages before establishing an opinion. Furthermore, the findings also suggest that there may be a level of normativity in negative advertisements, as demonstrated by the frequent use of symbolism. This study suggests that there are certain characteristics of negative advertising that users find acceptable or unacceptable. First, users like advertisements that attack a candidate's professional behaviour, but only if these attacks are substantiated. This finding is consistent with Dermody and Scullion's (2003) theory that voters like advertisements "based on legitimate criticism" (pg. 93). Second, users dislike attacks on a candidate's personal life, unless this behaviour could impact their conduct as president. Schenck-Hamlin, Procter & Rumsey (2000) similarly found that voters approve of issue-based attacks, but are cynical about personal attacks. Third, users dislike any content regarding religion or foreign policy, but have less of an opinion on the economy. This finding is consistent with Searing, Wright & Rabinowitz's (1976)

48 !

primacy principle, suggesting that opinions on religion are steadfast, whereas opinions on the economy are not. While the findings of this study are intriguing, there are a number of significant limitations. First, it became clear during my analysis that some form of partisan bias may have affected the results. This bias indirectly helped substantiate Mathews & Dietz-Uhler's (1998) theory that partisan inclinations determine what political advertising voters deem appealing. However, since the App did not collect any personal information, it was not possible to weigh the results to counteract this bias. Similarly, other demographic information ­ such as age and location -- could also not be weighed to ensure a representative subsample was created. Finally, the sample itself was restricted to users of the Super PAC App. As Desouza & Bhagwatwar (2012) suggest, not all Americans have access to the technology required to participate. What these limitations demonstrate is that the findings of this study cannot be confidently applied to the American population in general. Nevertheless, there is great opportunity for further study of this topic and platform. First, future versions of the App could be adapted to make it more accommodating for scholarly study. I recommend that the App be modified to collect the demographics of its users voluntarily, which would assist in future scholarly study. I believe a strong rationalization as to the purpose and benefit of personal information collection would be acceptable to many future users of the App. For 49 !

future scholarly research, I recommend that further research on this topic be conducted quantitatively. This format would confirm whether findings such as mine are statistically significant. Quantitative study could be conducted using the 2012 results, but a study incorporating the 2016 results that are weighed with demographics would perhaps be the most compelling. The need for additional research on negativity and Super PACs has been confirmed with more recent Supreme Court rulings on American campaign finance laws. Although many scholars were initially concerned about how Super PACs would change the political landscape, many did not predict that the Citizens United and SpeechNow.org cases would have inspired similar changes for candidates and parties as well. In McCutcheon v. FEC (2014), the appellant, Shaun McCutcheon, claimed that "aggregate contribution limits" prevented him from exercising his First Amendment rights. 21 McCutcheon argued he was not able to contribute to every political candidate he favoured in the 2012 election. The Supreme Court found that aggregate limits infringe on the First Amendment, citing a precedent from FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life (2007). Chief Justice Roberts argued "...the Court must err on the side of protecting political speech rather than suppressing it" (McCutcheon v. !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
21Aggregate

campaign finance limits were contained in the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002, and "restrict how much money a donor may contribute in total to all candidates and committees" (McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission 2014, pg. 1). Before the 2014 ruling, aggregate limits were set at $74,600 per person, per campaign cycle.

50

!

FEC, 2014, pg. 2). Despite this ruling, the Supreme Court upheld a candidate's maximum limit at $2,600. Critics condemned this ruling, arguing it was a further move toward the "deregulation of American political campaigns" (Toobin 2014, April 3). By citing the precedent in FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, the Court prioritizes the protection of the First Amendment over quid pro quo corruption. Toobin (2014) suggests this ruling may inspire further challenges to campaign finance laws ­ possibly with the ultimate elimination of candidate and party aggregate contribution limits. The potential for future legal challenges highlight the need for continued study of negativity and campaign advertising. The negativitydemobilization hypothesis proposed by many scholars, such as Ansolabehere et. al. (1994) and Stevens (2009), is a compelling theory that could be validated in future elections, should negativity continue to be prevalent. Bandura's (2001) suggestion that humans have agency may have unintended consequences ­ instead of using political information to make a decision, voters may choose not to make a decision at all.

51 !

References
American Bridge 21st Century (2012, March 21). Romney: The Etch A Sketch Candidate [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6NArPUFLRI&feature=plcp American Bridge 21st Century (2012, June 21). Romney on Immigration. [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ESnsaTNTdYM&feature=plcp American Bridge 21st Century (2012, July 16). Look Who's Demanding to See Romney's Tax Returns. [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uZHiYfuQxBE&feature=plcp American Crossroads (2012, June 15). American Crossroads: "Wah Wahhh" [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6xsvXbfnwSg&feature=plcp American Crossroads (2012, July 11). American Crossroads: "Obama's War on Women" [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M-ky5Obzk5A&feature=plcp American Crossroads (2012, July 24). American Crossroads: "Build" [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ae9SjPEsRf0&feature=plcp American National Election Studies (2012). Retrieved March 3, 2014 from http://www.electionstudies.org. Archer, K. & Berdahl, L. (2011). Explorations: Conducting Empirical Research in Canadian Political Science, Second Edition. Toronto, ON: Oxford University Press. Ansolabehere, S. & Schaffner, B. (2011). Re-examining the validity of different survey modes for measuring public opinion in the US: Findings from a 2010 multi-mode comparison. In AAPOR Conference, Phoenix 1-31. Balz, D. (2013). Collision 2012: Obama vs. Romney and the Future of Elections in America. New York: Viking. Bandura, A. (2001). Social Cognitive Theory of Mass Communication. In Bryant, J. & Zillman, D. (Eds.), Media Effects: Advances in Theory and Research. (3rd ed., 94-124). New York: Routledge.

52 ! !

Baym, N. (2010). Personal Connections in the Digital Age. Boston, MA: Polity Press. Benoit, W. (1999). Seeing Spots: A Functional Analysis of Presidential Television Advertisements, 1952-1996. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers. Bledstein, B. (2001). Storytellers to the Middle Class. In Bledstein, B. & Johnston, R. (Eds.), The Middling Sorts: Explorations in the History of the American Middle Class. New York: Routledge. Brader, T. (2005). Striking a Responsive Chord: How Political Ads Motivate and Persuade Voters by Appealing to Emotions. American Journal of Political Science. 49(2), 388-405. Brians, C. & Wattenberg, M. (1996). Campaign Issue Knowledge and Salience: Comparing Reception from TV Commercials, TV News and Newspapers. Brooks, D. (2006). The Resilient Voter: Moving Toward Closure in the Debate over Negative Campaigning and Turnout. The Journal of Politics. 68(3), 684-696. Brooks, D. & Geer, J. (2007). Beyond Negativity: The Effects of Incivility on the Electorate. American Journal of Political Science. 51(1), 1-16. Brooks, D. & Murov, M. (2012). Assessing Accountability in a Post-Citizens United Era: The Effects of Attack Ad Sponsorship by Unknown Independent Groups. American Politics Research. 40(3), 383-418. Bullock, D. (1994). The Influence of Political Attack Advertising on Undecided Voters: An Experimental Study of Campaign Message Strategy. (Doctoral Dissertation, University of Arizona). Retrieved from http://arizona.openrepository.com/arizona/bitstream/10150/186608/1/a zu_td_9424941_sip1_m.pdf Campaign for American Values (2012, August 27). New Morning [Video file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oye4rhUa2Fk&feature=plcp Campaign for American Values (2012, September 18). Faith in the Public Square: Obama vs. Romney. [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0hrJ9oz4Zrk&feature=plcp Carraro, L. & Castelli, L. (2010). The Implicit and Explicit Effects of Negative Political Campaigns: Is the Source Really Blamed? Political Psychology. 31(4), 617-645.

53 ! !

Chaplin Library of Rare Books. (2011). The Founding Documents of the United States. Williams College. Retrieved on May 9, 2014 from http://chapin.williams.edu/exhibits/founding.html Colbert, S. (2012). The Colbert Super PAC: Americans for a Better Tomorrow, Tomorrow. Retrieved April 3, 2014 from www.colbertsuperpac.com. Craig, S., Kane, J. & Gainous, J. (2005). Issue-Related Learning in a Gubernatorial Campaign: A Panel Study. Political Communication. 22(4), 483-503. Cullen, J. (2003). The American Dream: A Short History of an Idea that Shaped a Nation. New York: Oxford University Press. Cushman, C. (2013). The Issues. In Johnson, D. (Ed.). Campaigning for President 2012: Strategies and Tactics. New York: Routledge. Dermody, J. & Scullion, R. (2003). Exploring the Consequences of Negative Political Advertising for Liberal Democracy. Journal of Political Marketing. 2(1), 77-100. Desouza, K. & Bhagwatwar, A. (2012). Citizen Apps to Solve Complex Urban Problems. Journal of Urban Technology. 19(3), 107-136. Dimino, M., Smith, B. & Solimine, M. (2011). Voting Rights and Election Law. Dayton, OH: Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., a member of the LexisNexis Group. Dowling, C. & Wichowsky, A. (2013). Does It Matter Who's Behind the Curtain? Anonymity in Political Advertising and the Effects of Campaign Finance Disclosure. American Politics Research. 41(6), 965-996. Emergency Committee for Israel (2012, July 27). O Jerusalem [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2xPVKXpYktM&feature=plcp Emergency Committee for Israel (2012, August 1). Next Year, President Romney in Jerusalem [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ac-SjZR2gkI&feature=plcp Emergency Committee for Israel (2012, August 30). Paul Ryan ­ For A Stronger America [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DEpbki--yo&feature=plcp Emergency Committee for Israel (2012, September 12). Whose Democratic Party? [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cE4S2uvFPZI&feature=plcp 54 ! !

Fang, L. (2013). The Machine: A Field Guide to the Resurgent Right. New York: The New Press. Farrar-Myers, V. & Skinner, R. (2012). Super PACs and the 2012 Elections. The Forum. 10(4), 105-118. Finkel, S. & Geer, J. (1998). A Spot Check: Casting Doubt on the Demobilizing Effect of Attack Advertising. American Journal of Political Science. 42(2), 573-595. Fowler, E. & Ridout, T. (2013). Negative, Angry, and Ubiquitous: Political Advertising in 2012. The Forum. 10(4), 51-61. Freedom's Defense Fund (2011, December 13). Obama Keep the Change [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5MGhsixeIZ4&feature=plcp Garramone, G., Atkin, C., Pinkleton, B. & Cole, R. (1990). Effects of Negative Political Advertising on the Political Process. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media. 34(3), 299-311. Gaughan, A. (2012). The Futility of Contribution Limits in the Age of Super PACs. The Drake Law Review. 60, 755-806. Geer, J. (2006a). In Defense of Negativity: Attack Ads in Presidential Campaigns. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Geer, J. (2006b). Codebook for Geer's Content Analysis of Presidential Ads from 1960 to 1996. Vanderbilt University. Retrieved on March 3, 2014 from www.sitemason.vanderbilt.edu/files/llyr8A/geercodebook.doc Gilens, M., Vavreck, L. & Cohen, M. (2007). The Mass Media and the Public's Assessment of Presidential Candidates, 1952-2000. The Journal of Politics, 69(4). 1160-1175. Goldstein, K. & Freedman, P. (2002). Lessons Learned: Campaign Advertising in the 2000 Elections. Political Communication, 19(1), 5-28. Granato, J. & Sunny Wong, M. (2004). Political Campaign Advertising Dynamics. Political Research Quarterly. 57(3), 349-361. Gulati, G. (2012). Super PACs and Financing the 2012 Presidential Election. Society. 49(5), 409-417. Harrington, J. & Hess, G. (1996). A Spatial Theory of Positive and Negative Campaigning. Games and Economic Behavior. 17, 209-229. 55 ! !

Hill, R. (1989). An Exploration of Voter Responses to Political Advertisements. Journal of Advertising. 18(4), 14-22. Haddock, G. & Zanna, M. (1997). Impact of Negative Advertising on Evaluations of Political Candidates: The 1993 Canadian Federal Election. Basic and Applied Social Psychology. 19(2), 205-223. Hollett, J. (2013, September, 24) Shazam for Politics. Speech presented at Social Media Week, Toronto, ON. Hollett, J. & Siegel, D. (2012). Super PAC App: Bringing Transparency Within Earshot. Report submitted for MAS 571, Social Television: Creating New Connected Media Experiences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Retrieved through email communication on April 26, 2014. Houston, D., Doan, K. & Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. (1999). Negative Political Advertising and Choice Conflict. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied. 5(1), 3-16. Jackson, R., Mondak, J. & Huckfeldt, R. (2009). Examining the Possible Corrosive Impact of Negative Advertising on Citizens' Attitudes toward Politics. Political Research Quarterly. 62(1), 55-69. Johnson-Cartee, K. & Copeland, G. (1991). Negative Political Advertising: Coming of Age. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. Johnson-Cartee, K. & Copeland, G. (1997). Inside Political Campaigns: Theory and Practice. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers. Jamieson, K. (1992). Dirty Politics: Deception, Distraction, and Democracy. Cambridge: Oxford University Press. Kahn, K., & Kenney, P. (2004). No Holds Barred: Negativity in U.S. Senate Campaigns. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. Kaid, L. (1997). Effects of the Television Spots on Images of Dole and Clinton. American Behavioral Scientist. 40(8), 1085-1094. Kaid, L., Chanselor, M. & Hovind, M. (1992). The Influence of Program and Commercial Type on Political Advertising Effectiveness. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media. 41(3), 303-320. Kaid, L. & Johnston, A. (1991). Negative versus Positive Television Advertising in U.S. Presidential Campaigns, 1960-1988. Journal of Communication, 41(3), 53-64 Katz, J., Barris, M. & Jain, A. (2013). The Social Media President: Barack Obama and the Politics of Digital Engagement. New York: Palgrave 56 ! !

Keller, M. & Carter, A. (2012, September 14). Campaign 2012: The Election Beast. The Daily Beast. Retrieved April 21, 2014 from http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2012/09/14/interactive-dailybeast-super-pac-app-election-ad-tracker.html Kern, M. & Just, M. (1995). The Focus Group Method, Political Advertising, Campaign News, and the Construction of Candidate Images. Political Communication. 12, 127-145. Kimmel, D. (2012). Public Corruption Concers and Counter-Majoritarian Democracy Definition in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission. Chicago-Kent Law Review. 87, 265-297. Knight Foundation. (2012, August 22). New Super PAC App allows users to find out what organizations, money, and claims are behind presidential ads. Retrieved April 21, 2014 from http://www.knightfoundation.org/pressroom/press-release/new-super-pac-app-allows-users-find-out-whatorgan/ Lau, R. & Pomper, G. (2004). Negative Campaigning: An Analysis of U.S. Senate Elections. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. Lau, R., Sigelman, L., Heldman, C. & Babbitt, R. (1999). The Effects of Negative Political Advertisements: A Meta-Analytic Assessment. American Political Science Review. 93(4), 851-875. Let Freedom Ring America (2012, April 19). European Prices [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Zn2n928b3A&feature=plcp Let Freedom Ring America (2012, May 10). Jennifer [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eHiyJAv6wuU&feature=plcp Let Freedom Ring America (2012, September 13). Muslim Brotherhood [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DQkSFU75LC0&feature=plcp Lindlof, T. & Taylor, B. (2011). Qualitative Communication Research Methods, third edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Inc. Lodge, M., Steenbergen, M. & Brau, S. (1995). The Responsive Voter: Campaign Information and the Dynamics of Candidate Evaluation. The American Political Science Reviewm 89(2), 309-326. Martin, P. (2004). Inside the Black Box of Negative Campaign Effects: Three Reasons Why Negative Campaigns Mobilize. Political Psychology. 25(4), 545-562. 57 ! !

Martinez, M. & Delegal, T. (1990). The Irrelevance of Negative Campaigns to Political Trust: Experimental and Survey Results. Political Communication and Persuasion. 7, 25-40. Matsusaka, J. (1995). Explaining Voter Turnout Patterns: An Information Theory. Public Choice. 84(1), 91-117. Matthews, D. & Dietz-Uhler, B. (1998). The Black-Sheep Effect: How Positive and Negative Advertisements Affect Voters' Perceptions of the Sponsor of the Advertisement. Journal of Applied Social Psychology. 28(20), 1903-1915. McCutcheon et al. v. Federal Election Commission, 572 U.S. (2014). Retrieved May 26, 2014 from http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/13pdf/12536_e1pf.pdf McGuire, R. & Ohsfeldt, R. (1989). Self-Interest, Agency Theory, and Political Voting Behavior: The Ratification of the United States Constitution. The American Economic Review. 79(1), 219-234. Microsoft Office. (2014). RAND Function. Retrieved on April 3, 2014 from http://office.microsoft.com/en-ca/excel-help/rand-functionHP010342816.aspx Nader, M. (2013). Political Hate Machines: Outside Groups and the 2012 Presidential Campaign Advertising Market. (Doctoral Dissertation, University of Nebraska-Lincoln). Retrieved April 15, 2014 from http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1030&context =poliscitheses Naman, M. (2000). The Effects of Negative Political Direct Comparative Television Advertisements on Voter Evaluations and Voting Decisions of Viewers. (Master's Dissertation, University of South Alabama). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 1398262) Obama for America. (2008). Change We Can Believe In: Barack Obama's Plan to Renew America's Promise. New York: Three Rivers Press. O'Connor, B., Balasubramanyan, R., Routledge, B. & Smith, N. (2010). From Tweets to Polls: Linking Text Sentiment to Public Opinion Time Series. Carnegie Mellon University Research Showcase. Retrieved March 3, 2014 from http://repository.cmu.edu/tepper/559 Paek, H., Pan, Z., Sun, Y., Abisaid, J. & Houden, D. (2005). The Third-Person Perception as Social Judgment: An Exploration of Social Distance and Uncertainty in Perceived Effects of Political Attack Ads. Communication Research. 32(2), 143-170. 58 ! !

Pinkleton, B. (1997). The Effects of Negative Comparative Political Advertising on Candidate Evaluations and Advertising Evaluations: An Exploration. Journal of Advertising. 26(1), 19-29. Planned Parenthood Votes (2012, March 14). Mitt Romney: "Get Rid of Planned Parenthood" [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xthySc5BPG4&feature=plcp Priorities USA Action (2011, April 28). Extremely Dangerous [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vtTGafwYzI8&feature=plcp Priorities USA Action (2012, August 17). Priorities USA Action: "Small-Minded" [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ikmhAnYU3I&feature=plcp Priorities USA Action (2012, September 8). Priorities USA Action: "We The People" [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cLIf8mRvzeU&feature=plcp Procter, D. & Schenck-Hamlin, W. (1996). Form and Variations in Negative Political Advertising. Communication Research Reports. 13(2), 147-156. Putnam, R. (1995). Bowling Alone: America's Declining Social Capital. Journal of Democracy, 6(1), 65-78. QSR International (2014). NVivo for Mac Beta. Retrieved on April 25, 2014 from http://www.nvivoformac.com. Queen's University. (2008) Exemption Policy re: Research Ethics Review for Projects Involving Digital Data Collection. Retrieved on February 2, 2014 from http://www.queensu.ca/ors/researchethics/GeneralREB/PoliciesandProc edures/digitaldatapolicy.pdf Restore Our Future (2011, December 7). Now You See the Problem [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f4uTKnhjH1M&feature=plcp Restore Our Future (2012, May 9). Mother's Day - Restore Our Future [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mV6Dn8qMzig&feature=plcp Restore Our Future (2012, August 13). Another Month [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pUcHSndDbqQ&feature=plcp 59 ! !

Ridout, T. & Fowler, E. (2012). Explaining Perception of Advertising Tone. Political Research Quarterly. 65(1), 62-75. Robideaux, D. (2004). A longitudinal examination of negative political advertising and advertisement attitudes: a North American example. Journal of Marketing Communications. 10, 213-224. Ryerson University Research Ethics Board (2014). Human Ethics ­ Frequently Asked Questions. Retrieved on June 25, 2014 from http://www.ryerson.ca/research/services/ethics/human/faq.html Sabato, L. & Ernst, H. (2007). Encyclopedia of American Political Parties and Elections, Second Edition. New York: Infobase Publishing. Samuel, L. (2012). The American Dream: A Cultural History. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. Schenck-Hamlin, W., Procter, D. & Rumsey, D. (2000). The Influence of Negative Advertising Frames on Political Cynicism and Politician Accountability. Human Communication Research. 26(1), 53-74. Searing, D., Wright, G. & Rabinowitz, G. (1976). The Primacy Principle: Attitude Change and Political Socialization. The British Journal of Political Science. 6(1), 83-113. Shah, D., Cho, J., Nah, S., Gotlieb, M., Hwang, H., Lee, N., Scholl, R. & McLeod, D. (2007). Campaign Ads, Online Messaging, and Participation: Extending the Communication Mediation Model. Journal of Communication, 57. 676-703. Shirazi, A., Rohs, M. Schleicher, R., Kratz, S., Müller, A. & Schmidt, A. (2011, May 7). Real-Time Nonverbal Opinion Sharing through Mobile Phones during Sports Events. Paper presented at The Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Vancouver BC. Sides, J., Grossmann, M., Trost, C. & Lipsitz., K. (2003). Candidate Attacks and Voter Aversion: The Uncertain Link between Negativity and Campaign Satisfaction. Paper presented at the American Political Science Association Conference, Philadelphia, PA. Sinha, G. A. (2014). NSA Surveillance Since 9/11 and the Human Right to Privacy. Loyola Law Review, New Orleans. Retrieved from http://ssrn.com/abstract=2327806 Skinner, B. F. (1974). About Behaviorism. New York: Random House.

60 ! !

Skoric, M., Poor, N., Achananuparp, P., Lim, E. & Jiang, J. (2012). Tweets and Votes: A Study of the 2011 Singapore General Election. 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2583-2591. Smith, J. & Kimball, D. (2012). Barking Louder: Interest Groups in the 2012 Election. The Forum. 10(4), 80-90. Stevens, D. (2009). Elements of Negativity: Volume and Proportion in Exposure to Negative Advertising. Political Behaviour. 31, 429-454. Stieglitz, S. & Dang-Zuan, L. (2012). Political Communication and Influence through Microblogging ­ An Empirical Analysis of Sentiment in Twitter Messages and Retweet Behaviour. 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 3500-3509. Super PAC App. (2012). Who Are We? Retrieved February 3, 2014 from http://www.superpacapp.org/who.html Sutter, J. (2012, August 22). 'Super PAC App' knows when political ads stretch the truth. CNN. Retrieved April 21, 2014 from http://www.cnn.com/2012/08/22/tech/mobile/super-pac-appcampaign/ Tarr, D. & Beneson, B. (2012). Elections A to Z, Fourth Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd. Tinkham, S. & Weaver-Lariscy, R. (1993). A Diagnostic Approach to Assessing the Impact of Negative Political Television Commercials. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media. 37(4), 377-398. Toobin, J. (2014, April 3). The John Roberts Project. The New Yorker. Retrieved May 26, 2014 from http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/comment/2014/04/the-johnroberts-project-beyond-mccutcheon.html?currentPage=all Constitution of the United States. (1791). Amendment I. Retrieved May 26, 2014 from http://www.archives.gov/exhibits/charters/bill_of_rights_transcript.htm l Valentino, N., Brader, T., Groenendyk, E., Gregorowicz, K., & Hutchings, V. (2011). Election Night's Alright for Fighting: The Role of Emotions in Political Participation. The Journal of Politics, 73(1), 156-170.

61 ! !

Valenzano, J. III & Edwards, J. (2014). `Death by Taxes': A Postmortem on Romney's Tax-Return Apologia. In Denton, R. Jr. (Ed) The 2012 Presidential Campaign: A Communication Perspective. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. Verdon, T. (2008). Attacking Ethos: The Rhetorical Use of Uncertainty in the 2004 Election. (Doctoral Dissertation, University of Southern Mississippi). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3326730) Wattenberg, M. & Brians, C. (1999). Negative Campaign Advertising: Demobilizer or Mobilizer. The American Political Science Review. 93(4), 891-899. Willmoore, K. & Carey, G. (1995). The Basic Symbols of the American Political Tradition, second edition. Washington DC: Catholic University of America Press.

62 ! !

Appendix A: Subsample Creation

Below are the Super PAC advertisements randomized. I started at the top of this list, tested for the three remaining criteria, and then moved to the second advertisement and so on. As stated in the methodology, I first determined if the advertisement was at least 55% liked or 55% disliked. Second, I performed content analysis to confirm if the advertisement was positive or negative. Third, if three advertisements from the same Super PAC had already been chosen, subsequent advertisements from that Super PAC were not considered. Advertisements that were not included in the subsample are crossed out on this list.
Ad Title Build Obama's War on Women Whose Democratic Party? Obama Keep The Change Look Who's Demanding To See Romney's Tax Returns European Prices Next Year, President Romney in Jerusalem Negative Positive Negative Negative 8 378 5 Negative 21 Negative 83 36 65 229 42 38 131 21 Positive or Negative or More than 3? Negative # of likes # of dislikes Overall Sentiment 64% dislike 73% dislike 66% dislike 80% dislike 74% like 80% dislike

Super PAC

American Crossroads American Crossroads Emergency Committee for Israel PAC Freedom's Defense Fund American Bridge 21st Century Let Freedom Ring America PAC Emergency Committee for Israel PAC

63

!

Wah Wahhh Extremely Dangerous Romney on Immigration Romney: The Etch A Sketch Candidate Muslim Brotherhood Romney's Nugent Problem Actually Happened Mitt Romney: Member of the 47%? 12 Debate Fact Check: American Bridge Corrects the Lies Debate Romney vs. Romney? Mitt Romney: "Get Rid of Planned Parenthood" Repeat Negative 23 14 62% like Repeat Repeat Repeat Repeat Repeat Negative 18 67 Negative 68 29 70% like 78% dislike Negative 110 77 58% like Negative 25 7 78% like

American Crossroads Priorities USA Action American Bridge 21st Century American Bridge 21st Century Let Freedom Ring America PAC American Bridge 21st Century American Crossroads American Bridge 21st Century American Bridge 21st Century American Crossroads American Bridge 21st Century Planned Parenthood Votes

Negative

55

101

64% dislike

64

!

Jennifer Small-Minded Mother's Day Paul Ryan - For A Stronger America Reform Promises Repeat Positive Negative 10 19 65% dislike Negative 49 11 82% like

Negative

7

23

76% dislike

Paul Ryan's Wheel of Lies Another Month New Morning Words Run, Joe. Run Romney: I Said 'Let Detroit Go Bankrupt' Missing Workers Repeat Repeat Repeat Repeat Negative 10 Negative 10 21 29

Repeat 67% dislike 74% dislike

Let Freedom Ring America PAC Priorities USA Action Restore Our Future Emergency Committee for Israel PAC Let Freedom Ring America Political Action Committee American Bridge 21st Century Restore Our Future Campaign for American Values American Crossroads American Crossroads American Bridge 21st Century Let Freedom Ring America Political Action Committee

65

!

Faith in the public square: Obama vs. Romney Now You See the Problem Quantum of Easing The Romney-Mourdock Ticket Sack It 12 VP Debate Fact Check: American Bridge Corrects the Lies We The People Mitt Romney: A Mass. Failure O Jerusalem Negative 13 Repeat 22 62% dislike Negative 31 9 Repeat 77% like Repeat Repeat Repeat Positive

Campaign for American Values PAC Restore Our Future, Inc. American Crossroads American Bridge 21st Century American Crossroads American Bridge 21st Century Priorities USA Action American Bridge 21st Century Emergency Committee for Israel PAC

Negative

5

15

75% dislike

66

!

Appendix B: Codes
Code V01 V05 V17 V13 V20 V21 V50 V55 V62 V73 V76 I920 I017 Liberty/Statue of Liberty Equality America is strong/Keep America Strong Forward Believe Example "Now we really know he feels about small business ... the backbone of America. "We the people" # 2 2 4 1 2 1 1 1 2 Destroying the Western civilization from within 2 1 Rebuild Country Smear Campaign 2 2 "Who move our country forward" The American Dream is being lost. Code Title Greatness/Spirit of America/Best America/Great Resources Founding Documents/ Founding Fathers Change

Below are the codes derived from Geer's (2006b) codebook, and the categories created during the axial coding stage.

Category Symbols

Description This category includes symbols that "represent" Americans, or principles Americans admire or respect (Willmoore & Carey 1995). These codes do not reference specific political positions in the campaign, but rather allude to enduring ideals held by most Americans. Some symbols include references to the American Dream and quotes from founding documents.

"That's not the change I voted for" "We need someone who believes in the American Dream" Our liberty comes from God All men are created equal "Keep America strong."

The American Way/The American Dream/American Values Don't turn back/Don't let opponent set nation back/don't undo all we've done Rights

Campaign

This category includes references to the 2012

"...Endowed with certain inalienable rights." "We can't rebuild America by tearing down the middle class." "Taking on the politics of fear and smear."

67! !

!

I820 I828 I838 Special interests have too much power Opponent spends/raised too much money 2 1

campaign specifically, and the conduct of an opposing candidate. References to this conduct include "negative campaigning" and mentions of campaign spending.

Conduct of the Campaign

1

T182 I017 T176 I887 I888 I887 Opponent is Liberal Opponent is Conservative Opponent is ideologically extreme Risky/dangerous/gambles/ extreme Smear Campaign

There is no Alternative

"Or do what Obama's allies are doing now. Shameful, dishonest attacks." "Billionaire Koch Brothers Donate $88 Million to Fight Obama" "The money coming from secret right-wing millionaires will air more than two hundred million dollars worth of TV ads." Translation: Vote for me, or you'll probably die 1 2 1 The extreme right is aptly named." 2 1 2 "Judgeships, and government jobs for leftist cronies. " "Santorum and Gingrich might force the governor's to tax so far to the right it would hurt him with moderate voters"

Ideology

This category includes mentions of the political ideology of an opponent. This includes references to extremism or explicitly calling opponent "liberal" or "conservative."

"Taking on the politics of fear and smear." "Just plain extreme"

Conduct T107 T108

T101

Aloof/Inaccessible Wealthy, Upper Class Flip Flop

"The best thing to do is just get everything out in the open"

1 1 1 "...Revelations in the news media is that he has several offshore investments" "Well I think you hit a reset button for the fall campaign."

This category includes allegations that an opponent is deceiving or misleading the public. It also includes attributes of candidates that make it hard for the electorate to relate to them or support

68!

!

!

them. T128 T155 V28 V39 V60 I101 I103 I109 I116 I132 Mismanagement of Economy Economic Policy/Plan Crisis/critical times Private/free enterprise/marketplace/small business Hardwork/energy/talent Avoids issues/unsure where he stands/vague 2 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 4

T120

Dishonest/Misleading/broke promises/runs from record Immoral/slick/unethical/shifty

4

Jobs & Economy

This category includes references to one of the "most important issues of the campaign" (Cushman 2013). Popular mentions include the economic crisis of 2008, unemployment and job creation, taxation, and the adequate management of government spending.

"What's Mitt Hiding: Demand to see his tax returns." "Clearly there's a problem with the tax returns otherwise he would release" "Well I think you hit a reset button for the fall campaign everything changes" "People who have worked hard, started a business"

Fights Corporations/Corporate Interests Doesn't support small businesses Unemployment too high/ lost jobs Raised taxes/taxes too high

I165 I167 I232

2 6 1 Too many loopholes for rich/corporations/tax cuts for rich Excessive government spending

"We've worked for everything we've gotten." "The economic crisis of 2008." "Exactly three years after President Obama's government stimulus plan" "There is a war on women. It's called the Obama economy." "Big financial institutions, corporations" "Now we really know he feels about small business" "Since President Obama took office, the semiconductors and electronics manufacturing sector has lost 21,500 jobs" "Raising taxes on the average family by up to $2000" "While giving a tax break up to $250,000 to multimillionaires." "Translation: I need another $5 trillion"

69!

!

!

I265 I267 I560 V08 T132 I487 I522 V12 V32 I613 Iran War Safety/security from violence Freedom of Religion Anti Gay Rights Not Religious God or some religious connection/faith Anti-Family/ hurts family/ hurts middle class Cut government regulation 1 I 5 1 1 2 1 1 1

Failed government programs

"It's just not working."

1

Religion

This category includes references to religion and freedom to practice a religion. This category also includes allegations that a candidate does not support religion or religious activities.

Foreign Policy

The category includes references to a candidate's positions on foreign policy ­ specifically war, terrorism and diplomacy. Most of the advertisements in the subsample surrounded issues in Israel and Egypt. I617 I643 I648

"If anything government gets in our way." "We can't rebuild America by tearing down the middle class." "America was founded on the idea and our liberty comes from God" "So why was God booed by Obama's delegates" "Well, Obama is trying to force gay marriage on this country." "[Obama] is trying to coerce churches into violating their believes." "War, war, and more war."

Handling of Jerusalem/Capital of Israel Support Israel Diplomacy/Negotiations

1 1 3

"Muslim Brotherhood's top leaders even write about taking over America." "They [Muslim Brotherhood] want to conquer Israel and renew long severed ties with Iran" "Jerusalem will remain the capital of Israel, and it must remain undivided." "What has Obama done? He denies that Israel even has a capital city." "Jerusalem policy... it's permanent status issue. It's got to be resolved through

70!

!

!

negotiations between the parties" I650 I665 I684 T118 I540 Family Values Lazy Might use Nuclear Weapons Terrorism out of Control Foreign/Economic Aid 1 1 2 2 2

Personal

This category outlines any personal attacks or "mudslinging" that have no relevant connection to the candidate's professional qualifications.

"You send them 1.5 billion of our taxpayer dollars [to the Muslim Brotherhood" "He's not with the terrorists, we are not saying that, but he is sympathetic to their cause" "A country building nuclear weapons to slaughter the Israeli people" "Ann Romney has never gotten her ass out of the house." "Ann Romney raised five boys."

71! !

!

Appendix C: Content Analysis

The following pages contain screenshots of the coding process from the NVivo for Mac application.

"Build" ­ American Crossroads (Continued next page)

72! !

!

"Build" Continued...

73! !

!

"Obama's War on Women" ­ American Crossroads (Continued next page)

74! !

!

"Obama's War on Women" continued...

75! !

!

"Whose Democratic Party?" ­ Emergency Committee for Israel PAC

76! !

!

"Obama Keep the Change" ­ Freedom's Defense Fund

77! !

!

"Look Who's Demanding to See Romney's Tax Returns" ­ American Bridge 21st Century

78! !

!

"European Prices" ­ Let Freedom Ring America PAC

79! !

!

"Next Year, President Romney in Jerusalem" ­ Emergency Committee for Israel PAC

80! !

!

"Wah Wahhh" ­ American Crossroads (Continued next page)

81! !

!

"Wah Wahhh" continued...

82! !

!

"Extremely Dangerous" ­ Priorities USA Action (Continued next page)

83! !

!

"Extremely Dangerous" continued...

84! !

!

"Romney on Immigration" ­ American Bridge 21st Century

85! !

!

"Romney: The Etch A Sketch Candidate" ­ American Bridge 21st Century

86! !

!

"Muslim Brotherhood" ­ Let Freedom Ring America PAC

87! !

!

"Mitt Romney" Get Rid of Planned Parenthood" ­ Planned Parenthood Votes

88! !

!

"Jennifer" ­ Let Freedom Ring America PAC

89! !

!

"Small-Minded" ­ Priorities USA Action

90! !

!

"Mother's Day" ­ Restore Our Future

91! !

!

"Paul Ryan ­ For a Stronger America" ­ Emergency Committee for Israel PAC

92! !

!

"Another Month" ­ Restore Our Future

93! !

!

"New Morning" ­ Campaign for American Values

94! !

!

"Faith in the Public Square: Obama vs. Romney" ­ Campaign for American

Values PAC

95! !

!

"We the People" ­ Priorities USA Action

96! !

!

"O Jerusalem" ­ Emergency Committee for Israel PAC (Continued next page)

97! !

!

"O Jerusalem" continued...

98! !

!

