Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Philosophy Publications and Research Philosophy

1-1-2008

Can God Choose a World At Random?
Klaas J. Kraay
Ryerson University, kraay@ryerson.ca

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/philosophy Part of the Philosophy Commons Recommended Citation
Kraay, Klaas J., "Can God Choose a World At Random?" (2008). Philosophy Publications and Research. Paper 3. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/philosophy/3

This Contribution to Book is brought to you for free and open access by the Philosophy at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Philosophy Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Can God Choose a World At Random?* Forthcoming in Nagasawa, Y. and Wielenberg, E. [Eds.] New Waves in Philosophy of Religion, Palgrave MacMillan, 2008. Klaas J. Kraay Ryerson University

On what basis does God choose a possible world to make actual? Theists typically claim that God freely selects exactly one world on the basis of its axiological characteristics. But suppose that (a) there are infinitely many unsurpassable worlds from which to choose; or else that (b) there are no unsurpassable worlds, but instead an infinite hierarchy of increasingly better worlds. On each of these scenarios, philosophers have alleged that God is unable rationally to choose a world for actualization. In the former case, God lacks sufficient reason to select any particular world, since there are infinitely many other equally good candidates. In the latter case, God lacks sufficient reason to select any particular world, since for any world there are infinitely many better candidates. These considerations generate arguments for atheism, as follows. On theism, God is supposed to be the explanation for this world's being actual, and God requires sufficient reasons for action. So on either scenario (a) or (b), since there is an actual world, and since God could not have had a sufficient reason for selecting it, this world was not actualized by God. In response, defenders of theism have urged that God need not have sufficient reason for choosing a world on (a) or (b): God may defensibly choose a world at random. In what follows, I evaluate this reply. I conclude that it succeeds only on the enormously implausible assumption that there is exactly one randomizer available to God.

1. Creation and the Axiological Status of Worlds. Theism holds that there exists a being who is unsurpassable in power, knowledge, and goodness, and who is the creator and sustainer of all that is. In contemporary analytic philosophy of religion, the act of creation is construed like this: God surveys the set of actualizable worlds,1 and freely selects exactly one for actualization on the basis of its axiological properties. Discussions of creation, then, typically assume that worlds have axiological status, and that they can (at least in principle) be evaluated: some are good, others are bad; some are better, others are worse.2 I will proceed on these assumptions. Philosophers disagree about what the axiological properties relevant to worlds are, but they can be divided into two kinds: world-good-making properties (WGMPs) and world-badmaking properties (WBMPs). The overall axiological status of a world, ceteris paribus, depends on these properties.3 To simplify matters, let's assume necessitarianism: the actual set of WGMPs and WBMPs could not possibly have had different members than it does.4 Finally, let's assume, again for simplicity, that all worlds are both commensurable and comparable with respect to these properties.5

2. Three Hierarchies of Worlds; Three Arguments for Atheism. The axiological considerations from Section 1 suggest that there are three candidate hierarchies of actualizable worlds worth considering: (1) Famously, Leibniz and others have held that there is exactly one unsurpassable world. (Hereafter, I'll call this view EOUW.) (2) Alternatively, one might agree that some actualizable world is unsurpassable, but deny that just one is.6 On this view, it is generally thought that for any world w having axiological status s, there is a trivially different variant w that also has axiological status s. Moreover, it is typically thought that there are infinitely many such variants.7 On this view (hereafter IMUW), there are infinitely many unsurpassable worlds. (3) Some philosophers have claimed that there are no unsurpassable worlds (hereafter NUW).8 On this view, there is an infinite hierarchy of increasingly better worlds. Objections to theism have been leveled on each hierarchy: (1) Famously, on EOUW it has been urged, a priori, that a perfect being would actualize the unique best world, and a posteriori, that this expectation has not been met. In short, it is claimed that the actual world is surpassable, and that this disconfirms theism.9 (2) It has been claimed, a priori, that IMUW is inconsistent with theism. If there are infinitely many unsurpassable worlds, God would not have sufficient reason to actualize any particular one.10 But on theism, God is supposed to be the explanation for this world's being actual, and God requires sufficient reasons for action. So, since there is an actual world, it was not actualized by God.11 (3) Finally, it has been suggested, a priori, that NUW precludes theism. If there are no unsurpassable words, God cannot have sufficient reason for actualizing any particular world, since there are infinitely many better worlds that could be actualized instead. But again, on theism, God is supposed to be the explanation for this world's being actual, and God requires sufficient reasons for action. So, since there is an actual world, it was not actualized by God.12 Since the three hierarchies are mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive,13 these three objections constitute an unpalatable trilemma for theism. Recently, however, two ways out have been suggested for the theist: on both IMUW and NUW, philosophers have urged, God can defensibly select a world to actualize at random. In Section 3, I set out the motivation for this move, and in the remainder of the paper, I evaluate it.14 3. Sufficient Reasons and Randomization. The objections to theism on IMUW and NUW both concern God's choice of which world to actualize. They both allege that, in the face of these respective hierarchies, God's choice of a

2

world cannot be rational, since God cannot have sufficient reason to actualize any particular world. On IMUW, it is claimed, God has insufficient reason to select any particular world, since there are infinitely many equally good candidates. And on NUW, it is claimed, God has insufficient reason to select any particular world, since for any world there are infinitely many better candidates. It is sometimes thought that the problem for theism here is this: granting that God could have no principled reason for selecting a world in these scenarios, God would be paralyzed, stymied, or hamstrung ­ unable to actualize any world.15 This is a mistake. No matter which hierarchy of worlds is correct, if theism is true, God cannot fail to actualize some world or other. On theism, which world is actual depends upon God. God may freely decide to create, say, creatures or a universe. If God creates, then God is responsible for the resulting world's being actual. If, on the other hand, God creates nothing, the resulting world is bare ­ save for whatever uncreated existents (such as numbers) there are. But here, too, God is responsible for this world's being actual. Accordingly, on theism, it is impossible that God fail to actualize some world or other. The problem for theism on IMUW and NUW, then, is not that God ­ while existing ­ is somehow frustrated in his desire to actualize a world. The problem is much more serious: if God must have a sufficient reason for selecting a world to actualize, then IMUW and NUW are both logically incompatible with theism. In response, philosophers have denied that God must have a sufficient reason for selecting a world to actualize on IMUW and NUW.16 They point out that in ordinary human affairs, when rational choice is thwarted by the absence of sufficient reasons, practical considerations make it reasonable for us to choose at random. These philosophers urge that God may do the same, while remaining unsurpassable in all relevant respects.17 If this is defensible, then the objections to theism on IMUW and NUW are defanged. In Section 4, I consider whether God could choose a world at random on IMUW, and in Section 5, I consider the same question on NUW. In both cases, I conclude that this is a defensible strategy for God only on the enormously implausible assumption that there is exactly one randomizing device or procedure available. 4. Randomization on IMUW. Suppose that IMUW is correct. Lloyd Strickland (2006) urges that, on this view, God need not have sufficient reason for his choice of world: God can defensibly choose at random. In this section, I evaluate Strickland's claim. Suppose that there is exactly one possible randomizing device or procedure that God could use. If so, then provided that the principle of sufficient reason admits an exception in this context, this seems like a satisfactory solution for the theist.18 But Strickland says that "... prima facie it seems possible that there will be more than one such [device or] procedure available to God, and if there are many ...then it seems possible, even quite likely, that some, or even all, of them will be equally good but not bettered by any other" (2006, 153). Strickland offers no defence of either claim. Let's consider each in turn. Why think that there is more than one randomizing device or procedure on IMUW? Randomizing devices are physical objects which output a random number. It is well known that there are numerous indeterministic features or processes in the actual world. Accordingly, theists should not find it difficult to imagine that God could construct a variety of indeterministic devices to generate random numbers.19 In addition, it seems plausible to

3

suppose that for any randomizing device, there could be another trivially different device ­ perhaps even infinitely many such devices. Moreover, devices could be combined in various ways to generate new devices. As for non-physical randomization procedures, if there are any, there are many. The reason is simple: for any randomization procedure r, it's possible to construct a different randomization procedure s which uses r, and then performs a mathematical operation on the deliverances of r to generate a new result. Perhaps, for example, s takes the result of r and adds one (or indeed any other number). This new result is every bit as random as the deliverances of r, although the procedure is different. Finally, hybrids are possible: combinations of devices and procedures. Accordingly, it seems extremely plausible to grant that there is more than one randomizer on IMUW. I now turn to Strickland's second undefended claim: that some randomizers are unsurpassable. How might one defend such a claim? Randomizers, like other things, are presumably to be evaluated with respect to their axiological properties, like good-making properties and bad-making properties.20 Certain plausible good-making properties of randomizers seem to have intrinsic maxima. Perhaps, for example, simplicity of construction or method is a good-making property of randomizers. Perhaps speed of operation is another. These properties both seem to have intrinsic maxima, and reflection on them might suggest that there is at least one unsurpassable randomizer. (The alternative, after all, is difficult to imagine: surely there couldn't be more and more eversimpler or ever-faster randomizers, ad infinitum!21) On the other hand, it is less clear that other good-making properties of randomizers have intrinsic maxima: consider, for example, aesthetic properties. Here it might seem difficult to imagine how some randomizer could be unsurpassably beautiful. The overall axiological status of a randomizer, ceteris paribus, depends on the axiological properties it exhibits. But it is difficult to tell exactly what role any given property plays in the overall axiological status of a randomizer, and how the various properties work together to shape this overall axiological status. Accordingly, it is far from clear that Strickland is entitled to assume that some ­ let alone all! ­ randomizers are unsurpassable. In what follows, I consider both alternatives: I first consider the issue on the assumption that there are unsurpassable randomizers (4.1) and I then consider the issue on the assumption that there are no such randomizers, but instead an infinite hierarchy of increasingly better randomizers (4.2). 4.1. Unsurpassable Randomizers on IMUW. Suppose that, on IMUW, the idea of an unsurpassable randomizer is coherent. This suggests three possibilities: either there is exactly one such randomizer, or else there are multiple but finitely many such randomizers, or else there are infinitely many. I'll take each in turn. Suppose first that there is exactly one unsurpassable randomizing device or procedure available to God on IMUW. If so, it is reasonable to expect that God would use it. (After all, it is available for use, and surely God would be surpassable for using a surpassable randomizer when an unsurpassable one is available.) But it is implausible to think that there is exactly one unsurpassable randomizer, since it is plausible to suppose that for any unsurpassable randomizer, there is a trivially different randomizer which has the same axiological status.22 If there are multiple unsurpassable randomizers, there are either finitely many or infinitely many. I consider these scenarios next.

4

Suppose that there are multiple but finitely many unsurpassable randomizers available to God. One might expect that God would be entitled to select any one of these: they're equivalent, after all. But, as Strickland points out, it's difficult to see how God could rationally select exactly one for use. God's choice of a randomizer will itself either be random or non-random. A non-random choice cannot be rational, since there is no sufficient reason for selecting any one randomizer from such a set. But a random choice of randomizers cannot be rational either: this way regress lies.23 (Since this argument will be appealed to again below, it will be helpful to name it: Argument A.) In the face of this dilemma, Strickland suggests that God should use all of the finitely many unsurpassable randomizers: ... if God is faced with ten different-but-equally good random-selection procedures [or devices] to choose from, there is nothing to prevent Him from selecting them all in the way that there is something preventing Him from selecting all equally best worlds. And the decision to select all available selection procedures can hardly be said to be irrational either, unlike the remainder of God's options, which are to choose none of the procedures, or just one of them (for which He would of course have no reason at all). So if there are ten procedures [or devices] God can simply select and run them all, and then pool the results. If one of the equally best worlds is selected more often than any other, then that is the world He [actualizes], and if the combined results of all the random procedures [or devices] do not favour any one world over the others, then God can simply run all of them again until a clear winner does emerge (2006, 154). Strickland's pooling method represents an attempt to do something in the face of a difficult choice between randomizers: choose them all. But difficulties beset this method. First, it is not evident what it would take for a "clear winner" to emerge: how much does a world need to be "favoured", exactly, before clarity is achieved? Second, even if the necessary and sufficient conditions for clarity could be established, it remains possible that these conditions never be satisfied, even over infinitely many poolings. And even if we waive these difficulties, a third, more serious one, remains. Strickland offers no reason for thinking that this pooling method is a principled method of world-selection for God. He offers no grounds for thinking that it is more desirable to use all of the finitely many randomizers, rather than just one, nor does he offer any reason for thinking that it is desirable to actualize a world that is "the clear winner" of such a process. Absent an argument for either claim, it is difficult to see why this method should be thought preferable to any other method.24 (Since these three objections will be appealed to again below, it will be helpful to give them a collective name: Argument B.) Nor is there a defensible via media, such as pooling the results of more than one but not all of the finitely many unsurpassable randomizers. (Strickland does not consider this alternative). For this to work, God would require a principled method of selecting this proper subset of randomizers whose outputs are to be pooled. No non-random selection method is rational, since there can be no sufficient reason for selecting any particular proper subset: all randomizers in the set are equivalent, after all. And no random method can rational either, for this way regress lies.25 (Since this argument will be appealed to again below, it will be helpful to name it: Argument C.) I conclude, then, that if there are

5

multiple but finitely many unsurpassable randomizers on IMUW, God cannot select a world for actualization at random. Suppose, finally, that there are infinitely many unsurpassable randomizers. One might then think that God has three alternatives: he might choose (a) one from the infinite set; (b) every member of the set; or (c) more than one but not every member of the set. Unfortunately, none of these alternatives is acceptable. God cannot select one randomizer from the infinite set of unsurpassable randomizers, for the reasons given above as Argument A. Nor can Strickland's suggestion be redeployed in this context: God cannot hope to arrive at a rational choice by pooling the results of every member of the infinite set of equivalent randomizers, for the reasons given above as Argument B. And there is no acceptable via media between these extremes: God cannot rationally select more than one but not all of the unsurpassable randomizers from this infinite set, in order to then pool the results. Such a method would involve selecting either a finite or an infinite proper subset from the set of all randomizers, and in either case, Argument C would apply. 4.2. No Unsurpassable Randomizers on IMUW. One alternative remains: suppose that there are no unsurpassable randomizers on IMUW: for every randomizer r, there is an axiologically superior randomizer r+1.26 Again, three choices seem to be available: God could (a) use one of the randomizers; (b) use them all and pool the results; or (c) use a proper subset and pool the results. Unfortunately, none of these is defensible. First, God cannot select one randomizer from this set. God's selection must either be random or non-random. The former leads to regress, as noted in Argument A. The latter is indefensible: no non-random selection of a randomizer can be rational, since, no matter which randomizer is selected, there is always more reason to select another, better one. Second, God cannot defensibly use all members of an infinite set of randomizers and pool the results, for the reasons given above as Argument B. Third, God cannot use a proper subset of randomizers and pool the results. After all, God's selection of a proper subset must either be random or non-random. The former alternative leads to regress, as noted in Argument C. The latter alternative is indefensible: no non-random selection of a proper subset of randomizers can be rational, since, no matter which subset is selected, there is always more reason to select another, better subset of randomizers.27 I have considered various proposals for God's random selection of a world on IMUW, first on the hypothesis that there are multiple unsurpassable randomizers (4.1), and then on the hypothesis that there are none (4.2). In both cases, I have urged that randomization is not a defensible strategy for God. Accordingly, the only scenario on which God can rationally select a world for actualization on IMUW is the one I've urged is extremely implausible: the view that there is exactly one randomizing device of procedure available to God. I now turn to a randomization proposal on NUW. 5. Randomization on NUW. NUW holds that there is an infinite hierarchy of increasingly better actualizable worlds. As noted above, it has been suggested, a priori, that NUW precludes theism. Daniel and Frances Howard-Snyder (1994: 260-267) reply with the following thought-experiment: 28

6

Jove is an essentially unsurpassable being who desires to actualize a world, but who is unable to actualize a best actualizable world, there being none. Jove divides the set of all actualizable29 possible worlds into two subsets based on certain axiologically relevant criteria.30 Worlds in the better subset are given unique integer ordinals: the worst of the lot is `1', the second-worst `2', and so on.31 Jove selects from the better subset at random, and world no. 777 is actualized. The Howard-Snyders claim that in this story, Jove's "...creating a world inferior to one he or some other possible being could have created does nothing to impugn his status as essentially ...unsurpassable in any respect whatsoever" (1994, 261).32 In other words, the Howard-Snyders think that God can defensibly select a world at random on NUW. On the Howard-Snyders' model, world-actualizing-actions involve two steps: (1) God selects a partition principle to bisect the set of all actualizable worlds; and (2) God decides on a logically subsequent decision method ­ randomization ­ to select a world for actualization from the better subset. The Howard-Snyders claim that it is plausible to suppose (or at least not clearly plausible to deny) that there is a unique best partition principle, and they stipulate that God acts on it (1996, 423). They further claim that, for all we know, there is a unique best randomizer, and they stipulate that God uses it (1994, 266). Elsewhere, I have criticized the Howard-Snyders' claim that it is plausible to suppose that there is a best partition principle (Kraay 2005). Here, however, I set aside this worry, and consider only what the Howard-Snyders say about randomization. Suppose that there is exactly one possible randomizing device or procedure that God could use on NUW. If so, then this seems like a satisfactory solution for the theist. But it is extremely implausible to think that there is just one possible randomizer available to God on NUW (for the reasons offered in Section 4). Accordingly, it is reasonable to suppose that there are multiple randomizers on IMUW. In the final section, I distinguish four multiple randomizer scenarios, and I suggest that none is defensible. 5.1. Four Randomizing Scenarios on NUW. Suppose, on NUW, that the idea of an unsurpassable randomizer is coherent (as the Howard-Snyders suppose). If so, it seems that there are three possibilities: either there is exactly one unsurpassable randomizer; multiple but finitely many such randomizers; or else infinitely many such randomizers. I take up each in turn. Afterwards, I consider a fourth scenario: perhaps, pace the Howard-Snyders, there are no unsurpassable randomizers on NUW. If there is exactly one unsurpassable randomizer on NUW, as the Howard-Snyders' thought-experiment stipulates, it is reasonable to expect that God would use it. (After all, it is available for use, and God would surely be surpassable for using a surpassable randomizer when an unsurpassable one is available.) But as I argued in 4.1, there is reason to think that if there is one unsurpassable randomizer, there are multiple such randomizers. Accordingly, the Howard-Snyders are not entitled to stipulate that there is exactly one unsurpassable randomizer, and so we must turn to the remaining possibilities. Suppose that there are multiple but finitely many unsurpassable randomizers. Three alternatives seem to be available: God could (a) use one of the randomizers; (b) use them all and pool the results, in the spirit of Strickland; or (c) use a proper subset and pool the results. Unfortunately, none of these alternatives is defensible. God's selection of one

7

randomizer from a finite set of unsurpassable randomizers must either be non-random or random. But, as Argument A shows, neither is acceptable. Similarly, God cannot use them all and pool the results, for the reasons given as Argument B. And, as Argument C shows, God cannot rationally choose a proper subset of unsurpassable randomizers in order to then pool the results. Next, suppose that there are infinitely many unsurpassable randomizers available on NUW. Again, three alternatives seem to be available: God could (a) use one of the randomizers; (b) use them all and pool the results; or (c) use a proper subset and pool the results. Unfortunately, none of these alternatives are defensible, as shown by arguments A, B, and C, respectively. Finally, suppose that there are no unsurpassable randomizers on NUW: for every randomizer r, there is an axiologically superior randomizer r+1. This view, in fact, is extremely plausible on NUW. Consider what I urged in Section 4: for any randomization procedure r, it's possible to construct a different randomization procedure s which uses r, and then performs a mathematical operation on the deliverances of r to generate a new result. Perhaps, for example, procedure s takes the result of r and adds one (or indeed any other number). Procedure s is just as random as procedure r, and there is good reason for thinking it better than r: in every case, s will deliver a better result than r ­ a superior world. On the plausible view, then, that there are no unsurpassable randomizers on NUW, three alternatives again seem to be available: God could (a) use one of the randomizers; (b) use them all and pool the results; or (c) use a proper subset and pool the results. Unfortunately, none of these alternatives is defensible, for the reasons given in Section 4.2. I conclude, then, that on the extremely plausible assumption that there are multiple randomizers on NUW, no defensible randomizing scenarios are available to God. 6. Conclusion In Section 2, I set out the three hierarchies of possible worlds: either there is exactly one unsurpassable world, or infinitely many, or none. In the remainder, I considered arguments for atheism on the latter two hierarchies. On IMUW, it is claimed that God has insufficient reason to select any particular world, since there are infinitely many equally good candidates. On NUW, it is claimed that God has insufficient reason to select any particular world, since for any world there are infinitely many better candidates. In response, philosophers have suggested that on both scenarios, God need not have a sufficient reason: God can defensibly select a world at random. In Section 4, I argued that randomization is a defensible strategy for God on IMUW only on the extremely implausible view that there is exactly one randomizer available for use. In Section 5, I made the same case on NUW. I conclude, then, that these randomization proposals fail to show how God could defensibly select a world for actualization on IMUW and NUW, respectively. If the theist wishes to block the arguments for atheism on IMUW and NUW, a different account of God's world-choosing activity is needed.33

8

Notes
* Ancestors of this paper were presented to (a) the British Society for Philosophy of Religion Conference (Oxford, UK, September 11-13, 2007), and to the Canadian Society of Christian Philosophers Annual Meeting (Saskatoon, Canada, May 30, 2007). I am grateful to Daniel Hill, Jonathan Strand, and Brandon Watson for helpful comments on drafts, and to the editors of this volume, Yujin Nagasawa and Erik Weilenberg. Finally, I am grateful for the generous research support I received from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (20052007).

1 It has been plausibly argued that not every possible world is within God's power to actualize (Alvin Plantinga 1974, 169-174). Accordingly, I hereafter restrict my focus to the set of actualizable worlds. 2 States of affairs can bear axiological properties: properties which, ceteris paribus, tend to make these states of affairs good or bad. Since worlds can be understood to be (maximally compossible) states of affairs, it is reasonable to suppose that worlds can bear axiological properties too. 3 The ceteris paribus clause is important, because it may be that certain good-making properties cease to make worlds better past a certain point, or in certain combinations. The same goes, mutatis mutandis, for WBMPs. So, while the goodness of a world depends on its axiological properties, this dependency may not be simple. 4

The rival view, which I call contingentism, holds that the actual set of WGMPs and WBMPs might have had different members.

5 One might deny that all worlds can be evaluated with respect to a stable set of WGMPs: this is to hold that there are incommensurable pairs of worlds. Alternatively, one might deny that all worlds can be compared. This can be done in two ways: (1) one might hold that there are pairs of worlds which are both incommensurable and (hence) incomparable; and (2) one might hold that there are pairs of commensurable worlds that are nevertheless incomparable. For simplicity, I set these niceties aside. 6

For a thorough list of philosophers who hold this view, see Lloyd Strickland (2006, 141).

7 For example, suppose that w differs from w by having one more grain of sand on one beach than w does (and whatever is required for this, and whatever ensues from this). It seems reasonable to suppose that for any world w, there are infinitely many such minor variants. Each is a distinct world, and, since the variations are sufficiently minor, all have the same axiological status. 8

See, for example, Richard Swinburne (1979, 114).

9

This is, of course, a version of the problem of evil. In response, some theists (notably, Robert Adams 1972) have rejected the a priori claim, while others ­ too many to mention here ­ have denied the a posteriori claim, or at least suggested that it has not been (or cannot be) justified. A small qualification: while I here suggest that arguments for the surpassability of the actual world are a posteriori, Ian Wilks has offered a plausible counterexample: a priori introspection of one's own thoughts, desires, intentions, and the like, might well convince one that the actual world could be better. (In slogan form: male cogito ergo malum est.) In what follows, I ignore this special case. Blumenfeld (1975, 166; 1995, 396) and Strickland (2006, 142-3) attribute this worry to Leibniz. For more on this charge, see Blumenfeld (1995, 396) and Donald Turner (2003, 147).

10

11

9

12 To put the point differently, no being can be unsurpassable on NUW, since no matter what world a putatively unsurpassable being actualizes, that being could be surpassed by a being who actualizes a better world. For arguments in this vein, see Philip Quinn (1982), Stephen Grover (1988), William Rowe (1993, 2004), and Jordan Howard Sobel (2004). 13 I here assume that there is no principled middle ground between the claim that there is exactly one unsurpassable universe, and the claim that there are infinitely many. 14

In what follows, I set aside EOUW and the argument for atheism that it generates.

15 Blumenfeld expresses this idea (on NUW) as follows: "The nature of such a continuum apparently would keep God fixed eternally on the brink of decision, stymied by the endless and ever more attractive objects of possible choice" (1975, 170). Later, Blumenfeld calls this "... the collapse of the possibility of decision, the metaphysical paralysis of the divine motivational system" (1975, 172). 16 Lloyd Strickland (2006) makes this case on IMUW, and Daniel and Frances Howard-Snyder (1994) urge it on NUW. As Grover (2003, 148) notes, such a position is untenable if the principle of sufficient reason holds exceptionlessly. 17

Nicholas Rescher (1969, 156-7) maintains that it is absurd for God to use a randomizer, since, given his essential omniscience, God would foreknow the deliverances of any device or procedure used. Strickland (2006, 151) replies that it is reasonable to suppose that there are no truths concerning the deliverances of randomizers. The Howard-Snyders (1994, 266) agree. On this view, there is simply nothing for God to foreknow, in which case God's lack of knowledge on this point does not count against his omniscience. This is a reasonable reply. Another reasonable reply is to take Rescher head-on and argue that, even if there are truths about the results of randomizers, God's knowledge of them presents no problem for random selection. Space does not permit an exploration of this, but such a reply could be modeled on some of the theistic responses to the problem of divine foreknowledge and human freedom.

18 En passant, I register a small worry: does God have sufficient reason to use the first result produced by the randomizer? A critic might object that God has just as much reason to use the result produced by the randomizer on its second running, and on its third, etc. This, of course, leads to regress. I'm not convinced that this worry is decisive, but there is no space to argue so here. 19 Any such device, it should be noted, would be part of the world selected for actualization on the basis of that device's use. This will serve to fix certain parameters of that world: for example, nothing logically inconsistent with the existence of this device could be part of the resulting world. 20

I assume, for simplicity, that all randomizers are commensurable and comparable with respect to a stable set of axiological properties.

21 To argue otherwise, one would have to shoulder the burden of proving that randomizers asymptotically approach the relevant limits (of perfect simplicity and instantaneous operation, respectively).

This is an application of the general argument for the existence of multiple randomizers given above in Section 4. Brandon Watson isn't persuaded:
22

[Kraay] overlooks the possible response that, if God Himself is considered the randomizing device, then the reply to the claim that there is only one unsurpassable

10

randomizer doesn't work, since that reply assumes that the randomizer is something distinct from God that is selected by Him. And it would be hard to argue that God couldn't Himself be a randomizer with someone who is already claiming that God can choose randomly (http://branemrys.blogspot.com/2007/04/notes-and-links.html). I grant that if God can plausibly be deemed a randomizer, theists should expect this randomizer to be unsurpassable. But can God really be (considered) a randomizer? Traditional monotheists will surely deny that God is (to be thought) a physical randomizing device or a non-physical randomizing procedure.
23

Strickland (2006, 153-4). The Howard-Snyders (1994, 266) also note this.

24 It is plausible to think that pooling the results of a set of randomizers is, in effect, just another randomization procedure. But if so, then Strickland cannot claim that this procedure surpasses all others, since ex hypothesi there are multiple unsurpassable randomizers. I thank Jonathan Strand and Daniel Hill for helping me to see this. 25 Even if there were a principled way for God to select a proper subset, the considerations advanced as Argument B would still apply. 26 The Howard-Snyders deem this to be an epistemic possibility (1994, 266). In Section 5.1., I will deem this view plausible on NUW. 27

A better subset might be a set comprised of wholly better members, for example, or a set comprised of better members on average. Of course, any such subset could in turn be surpassed by another, ad infinitum. Even if there were a principled way for God to select a proper subset, the considerations advanced as Argument B would still apply.

28 Their stated targets are Quinn (1982) and Rowe (1993). Random selection on NUW is also endorsed by Swinburne (1979, 115) and Leftow (2005, 275). 29

The Howard-Snyders appear to assume that every possible world is actualizable: "Out of his goodness, Jove decides to create. Since he is all-powerful, there is nothing but the bounds of possibility to prevent him from getting what he wants" (1994, 260). But see note 1.

30 The Howard-Snyders say little about what the sorting criteria might be ­ they merely offer candidates: "For example, he puts on his left worlds in which some inhabitants live lives that aren't worth living and on his right worlds in which every inhabitant's life is worth living; he puts on his left worlds in which some horror fail to serve an outweighing good and on his right worlds in which no horror fails to serve an outweighing good. (We encourage the reader to use her own criteria)" (1994, 260). 31 The Howard-Snyders assume for simplicity that there are no ties: each world has a unique axiological status. If there are ties (as is plausible to suppose) then I presume that the HowardSnyders would say that God should use the randomizer twice: once to select a world ordinal, and then once more to select a world from the set of worlds having that axiological status.

The Howard-Snyders here speak of `creating' possible worlds, but, strictly speaking, possible worlds are states of affairs which can neither be created nor destroyed, so `actualizing' is a better term.
32

11

33

Jonathan Strand, commenting on an earlier draft of this paper, offers such an account: he suggests that God could "just pick" a world for actualization, without using either a randomizing device or procedure. On this model, God's selection of a world is utterly arbitrary ­ there is no basis for God's choice whatsoever ­ but it is not random. Space does not permit a detailed examination of this model, but I note two worries. First, this model may not be coherent, since it may be illegitimate to stipulate that "just picking" is not a randomizing procedure. Second, supposing this account is coherent, I suspect that there will be grave concerns about the unsurpassability of a being who "just picks" a world for actualization.

References Adams, R. `Must God Create the Best?', Philosophical Review 81 (1972) 317-332. Blumenfeld, D. `Is the Best Possible World Possible?', Journal of Philosophy 84 (1975) 163-177. ______ `Perfection and Happiness in the Best Possible World', in Jolley, N. [Ed.] Cambridge Companion to Leibniz (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), p.382-410. Grover, S. `Why only the Best is Good Enough', Analysis 48 (1988) 224. ______ `This World, `Adams Worlds', and the Best of All Possible Worlds', Religious Studies 39 (2003) 145-163. Howard-Snyder, D. and Howard-Snyder, F. `How an Unsurpassable Being can Create a Surpassable World', Faith and Philosophy 11 (1994) 260-268. ______ `The Real Problem of No Best World', Faith and Philosophy 13 (1996) 422-425. Kraay, K. `William L. Rowe's A Priori Argument for Atheism', Faith and Philosophy 22 (2005) 211234. Leftow, B. `No Best World, Creaturely Freedom', Religious Studies 41 (2005) 269-285. Plantinga, A. The Nature of Necessity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974). Quinn, P. `God, Moral Perfection, and Possible Worlds', in God: The Contemporary Discussion, [F. Sontag and M.D. Bryant, Eds.], (New York: The Rose of Sharon Press, Inc., 1982), p.197-213. Rescher, N. `Choice Without Preference: A Study of the History and of the Logic of the Problem of `Burdian's Ass'', in N. Rescher, Essays in Philosophical Analysis, (Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Press, 1969), p.111-157. Rowe, W. `The Problem of Divine Perfection and Freedom', in Reasoned Faith [Stump, E., Ed.], (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2003), p.223-33. ______ Can God Be Free?, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004). Sobel, H. Logic and Theism: Arguments for and Against Beliefs in God (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).

12

Strickland, L. `God's Problem of Multiple Choice', Religious Studies 42 (2006) 141-157. Swinburne, R. The Existence of God (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979) Turner, D. `The Many-Universes Solution to the Problem of Evil', in Gale, R., and Pruss, A. The Existence of God, International Research Library of Philosophy, (Aldershof: Ashgate, 2003), p. 1-17.

13

