Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research 12-1-1997 Politics and Public Administration

Review [untitled]
Susan Ferguson
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics Part of the Political Science Commons Recommended Citation
Ferguson, Susan, "Review [untitled]" (1997). Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research. Paper 3. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics/3

This Other is brought to you for free and open access by the Politics and Public Administration at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

784

Recensions /Reviews

for extending to women radicalrights over all stages of the reproductive process." Women are rational,self-interestedand without any naturalimpulse to care for infants. Hobbes's view not only gives women rights over children they bear, but suggests that to wardoff a returnto a state of nature:"the state would have to provide the supportand inducementsfor women (and men as ways" (195). well) to have and care for childrenin appropriate I think Makus is correctto find a deep correspondencebetween Hobbes theorists of women's rights. I am less conand contemporarycontractarian vinced than she is that this is a promising way forwardfor feminist understandings of reproductiveactivity and family life. Contractualtheories focus on self-interestedadultsand suggest that children'srights follow from adults' voluntarilyassumed obligations.I believe, by contrast,that contractis not the relations best way to groundliberalfeminism, and thattheoriesof parent-child can and should begin with a considerationof children's needs. This is not the place to conduct this largerdebate.But by providinga carefulreadingof classic works of political philosophy and insightful reflections on how these texts are related to policy issues concerning reproductionand family life, Makus makes a significant contributionto that debate and to our understandingof feminist thought. both the historyof political theoryand contemporary MARY LYNDONSHANLEY VassarCollege Finding a New Feminism: Rethinking the Woman Question for Liberal Democracy PamelaGrandeJensen,ed. Lanham:Rowman& Littlefield, 1996, pp. ix, 246 Feminist Interpretations of Mary Wollstonecraft MariaJ. Falco, ed. UniversityPark:PennsylvaniaStateUniversityPress, 1996, pp. xiv, 234 Since the beginning of the second wave, feminists have criticallyengaged the canon of Western political thought in a systematic effort to tease out and underminemasculinistassumptions,on the one hand, and to drawattentionto neglected feminine contributions,on the other. The publicationof these two collections is testimonyto the success of feminism's efforts to remapthe contoursof political theory. Both texts addressthe tensions and accommodationsthatarise within libto the volume edited by Jensen suggest that eral feminism. The contributors feminist critiqueshave too easily dismissed liberalismwithoutfully appreciating its potential to resolve women's claims to both equality and difference. They attemptto salvage a differentsort of liberalismfor feminism. The articles in the volume edited by Falco, while defending Mary Wollstonecraft's presence at the table of liberaltheorists,arguethattheir subjectis in fact a liberal with a difference. As a re-evaluationof the feminist critiqueof varioustheorists,Finding a New Feminismhas certainstrengths,especially insofaras it resists facile analyses of its subjects' approachesto gender.Its claims aboutthe liberaltradition, however, are underminedby an extraordinarily amorphousdefinitionof liberalism. Liberalfeminism, accordingto its poststructuralist critics, faltersin the face of an intractabledilemma:if women vie for equality with men, they risk effacing the specificity of theiridentity,but if women's differenceis acknowlor undesiredged and accountedfor, equality becomes either an unattainable able goal. The contributorsto this volume dispute this claim, arguinginstead

Recensions /Reviews

785

that equality and difference can coexist if the liberal political ordercomes to of ancientthought. embracethe notion of communitycharacteristic The contributors point to Sophocles', Aristotle's and Aristophanes' premise that the whole (thatis, community)cannot be self-sufficing unless its distinct constituentsare permittedself-expression.The ancients,they suggest, are thus able to incorporatewomen into the polis as actors in their own right and/or treat women and women's association with privatelife as essential to the community.Elementsof this approachto communityare presentin liberal thought,they suggest. it faltersearly on. Indeed, It is a provocativeargument,but unfortunately the essayists examine a dubious group of liberals. While Hobbes and Locke are mentionedin passing, the articlesengage directly with Machiavelli,Montesquieu, Rousseau and Henry James. Even the inclusion of Rousseau might be expected to requiresome explanation,but what little is offered must be read between the lines. Finding a New Feminism's attemptto "teleport" ancient concepts into liberaltheory runsinto difficultieson otherfronts.The writersare largely convincing in their argumentthat women are presentin and accordedsome value in ancient thought. They are less adept, however, at arguing that this fact Even more troublesomeis the essayists' unamountsto sexual egalitarianism. of an essentializednotion of difference-women are decritical incorporation fined fundamentallyas mothers. As a commentary on various ancient and early modern theorists, the volume edited by Jensen can be an interesting addition to feminist critique of the canon. As a vision of liberal feminism, it has a long way to go. Feminist Interpretationsof Mary Wollstonecraft,on the other hand, is draw generally a more convincing commentaryon liberalism.Its contributors attentionto those complexities of Wollstonecraft'sthought that are too often neglected in standardaccounts of liberal feminism. Where this is best argued (by VirginiaL. Muller and Penny A. Weiss), readersare alertedto Wollstonecraft's roots in the Paineiteradicaldemocratictradition(and its supportfor the French Revolution)-roots which set her well apart from the liberalism of eitherLocke or Mill. At the same time, Muller, Weiss and others offer too one-sided an appraisal. Wollstonecraft'seconomic egalitarianismand sympathyfor workingclass women is emphasized, but her acceptance of capitalistforms of private property,and the limits this imposes on her project for women's emancipation, is not. Moreover, contributorssuggest Wollstonecraftposes a radical challenge to modernity'sdistinctionbetween public and privatesphereson the basis thatshe sees activitiesand virtuesin both spheresas mutuallydependent. This argumentis puzzling. As Jensen's book illustrates,similar views can be to Montesquieuand Machiavelli,for example, but few would claim attributed these theoristswere, on this basis, particularly progressive. Wollstonecraft's distinctive qualities are similarly overstated in two of three articles discussing gender and the subjective construction of the female philosopher. Only Miriam Brody manages to offer a well-balanced interpretation.Brody skillfully deconstructs Wollstonecraft's adoption and adaptationof Enlightenmentrhetoricto illustrate how Wollstonecraft "feminizes" the rhetoricalconcepts and practices that dominated intellectual life in the eighteenth century. As a woman writing in a man's world, she argues, Wollstonecraft creates a specifically female space, but she does so by appropriatingthe sexualized images and "othering" discourse on which that tradition is founded, and transposing these into maternal symbols in which the "other" becomes the (mediocre) woman of fashion. This refor-

786

Recensions /Reviews

mulation, Brody suggests, revises Enlightenment rhetoric without revolutionizing it. One of a series entitledRe-readingthe Canon,FeministInterpretations of Mary Wollstonecraft places its subjectalongside the likes of Plato, Marx and Wittgenstein(Arendt is the only other woman). The article defending Wollstonecraft's stature is particularlynoteworthy:Penny A. Weiss very simply, but with acumen, moves between Rousseau's and Wollstonecraft'sworks to illustratetheir parallel relevance-as social critics of civilization, education, morality and so forth. Another contributionoffers an annotated "conversation" between the two thinkers,which highlightsnot only theirwell-rehearsed differences but also the surprisinglysubstantialareas of general agreement:it is provocativethough not sufficientlycontextualizedto be fully informative. are among the most rigorouslyargued Brody's and Weiss's contributions chaptersin the collection. The less impressivechapters(like one which combs Wollstonecraft's texts for evidence of childhood sexual abuse and another which discusses Wollstonecraft'srelevancetoday) rely more on inferencethan to FeministInterpretations of groundedanalysis. Thus, while the contributions are uneven, the collection generallysucceeds in illustratMary Wollstonecraft ing the depthand importof Wollstonecraft'sthought. SUSAN FERGUSON RyersonPolytechnic University

