   URBAN AND PLACE-BASED ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION IN THE ONTARIO SECONDARY SCHOOL CURRICULUM

by

Laila Mnyusiwalla B.A.Sc. ­ Chemical Engineering 2004, University of Toronto B.Ed. ­ Intermediate/Senior 2005, University of Toronto

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the Program of Environmental Applied Science and Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2016 © Laila Mnyusiwalla 2016

Declaration I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

  

ii  

Abstract Urban and Place-based Environmental Education in the Ontario Secondary School Curriculum By Laila Mnyusiwalla Environmental Applied Science and Management Program, Ryerson University Master of Applied Science, 2016 This study reviews the Ontario secondary school curriculum in light of recommendations made by the 2007 Bondar Report, "Shaping Our Schools, Shaping Our Future". It analyzes curriculum expectations and enrollment data for the purpose of reporting upon and providing recommendations for urban and place-based environmental education (U&PBEE). The extent and prescriptiveness of U&PBEE coverage by subject, course, grade, and course progression or pathway are reported upon. These findings are contextualized through the perspectives of diverse stakeholder groups at the "Education Experts' Workshop: Implementing 2007 Bondar Report's Intended Outcomes in 2015" hosted by Ryerson University in April 2015. EE in Ontario does not have its own discrete compulsory courses and despite having been "embedded" in the curriculum, the important arenas of U&PBEE are being applied inconsistently across the mandatory curriculum. Poor enrolment in senior electives shows that the focus of students remains elsewhere, fracturing EE's progression in secondary schools.

  

iii  

Acknowledgements I would like to thank my supervisor, Dr. Michal Bardecki for guiding me through this daunting task. It was a difficult process but a great learning experience. I would also like to thank Dr. Lynda McCarthy for providing me with the opportunities that I needed to deepen my understanding of EE in Ontario.

  

iv  

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements List of Tables List of Figures List of Appendices List of Abbreviations 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1 The Importance of Environmental Education 1.2 Defining Key Terms 1.2.1 Environmental Education 1.2.2 Place-Based Environmental Education 1.2.3 Urban Environmental Education 1.3 Thesis Objectives 2. LITERATURE REVIEW 2.1 Context for EE 2.1.1 Environmental Education 2.1.2 Assessment of Environmental Literacy 2.1.3 Approaches to Environmental Education 2.1.4 Field Study and Place-Based EE 2.1.5 Urban Environmental Education 2.2 The Ontario Curriculum and EE Policy 2.2.1 Curriculum Policy Documents 2.2.2 History of EE in Ontario ­ Past to Present 2.2.3 Barriers to the Implementation of EE in Ontario 2.3 Conclusions 3. METHOD 3.1 Education Experts' Workshop: Implementing 2007 Bondar Report's Intended Outcomes in 2015 3.2 Curriculum Review 3.2.1 Selection of Courses for Curriculum Review 3.2.2 Approach to Curriculum Review 35 35 40 ii iii iv vii viii ix x 1 1 2 2 2 4 6 8 8 8 11 13 14 17 20 21 23 29 32 33 33

  

v  

3.2.3 Curriculum Review Method 3.2.3.1 Identify Curriculum Expectations Related with Place-Based and/or Urban EE Content 3.2.3.2 Identify Curriculum Expectations Related to Place-Based EE 3.2.3.3 Identify Curriculum Expectations Related to Urban EE 3.2.3.4 Requirement of Field Study/Outdoor Education 3.2.3.5 Identify Curriculum Expectations that are Participatory with Action Outcomes 3.3 Enrolment in EE Elective Courses and Course Offering 4. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 4.1 Summary of Observations from the Education Experts' Workshop: Implementing 2007 Bondar Report's Intended Outcomes in 2015 4.1.1 Policy Awareness and Shared Vision 4.1.2 Barriers to the Implementation of EE 4.1.3 Outdoor Education 4.1.4 Other Concerns 4.2 Curriculum Review 4.2.1 Urban and/or Place-Based EE Content by Theme 4.2.2 Urban EE Content Summary 4.2.3 Place-Based EE Content Summary 4.2.4 Involving Field Study and Action Outcomes 4.3 Enrolment in EE Elective Courses and Course Availability 4.3.1 Grade 9 and 10 Electives 4.3.2 Grade 11 Electives 4.3.3 Grade 12 Electives 5. CONCLUSIONS Appendix A ­ Main Data Set Appendix B1 ­ EEW Invitation Appendix B2 ­ EEW Participants List Appendix B3 - EEW Draft Agenda References

41 41 43 46 48 49 49 51 51 51 53 56 57 58 58 63 66 69 71 72 74 77 81 86 119 120 121 122

  

vi  

List of Tables
Table 1: Formative Experiences of Environmental Educators Contributing to Personal Concern for the Environment ­N = 232 (Palmer, 1993) Table 2: O.S.S.D. Requirements (OME, 2014) Table 3: Description of Course Types (OME, 2014) Table 4: Mandatory Courses Identified For Curriculum Review Table 5: Themes in Urban and Place-based EE Table 6: Place-Based EE Classification, Rationale, and Examples Table 7: Urban EE Classification, Rationale, and Examples Table 8: Urban and/or Place-based EE Content by Course Table 9: Urban and/or Place-based EE Content by Grade Table 10: Urban and/or Place-based EE Content by Theme Table 11: Urban and/or Place-based EE Content by Course Type Table 12: Direct Urban EE Content Summary Table 13: Indirect Urban EE Content Summary Table 14: Direct Place-Based EE Content Summary Table 15: Indirect Place-Based EE Content Summary Table 16: Field Study and Action Outcome Content Summary Table 17: Secondary Enrolment 2012-2013 (OnSIS, 2013) Table 18: Grade 9 and 10 Elective Courses with Urban and/or Place-Based EE Content Table 19: Grade 9 and 10 Course Availability and Enrolment Table 20: Grade 11 Elective Courses with Urban and/or Place-Based EE Content Table 21: Grade 11 Course Availability and Enrolment Table 22: Grade 12 Elective Courses with Urban and/or Place-Based EE Content Table 23: Grade 12 Course Availability and Enrolment 79 76 78 73 75 36 38 39 43 45 48 59 60 61 63 64 65 67 68 70 71 72 15

  

vii  

List of Figures
Figure 1: Proportion of the Population Living in Rural Areas, Canada, 1851 to 2011 (Statistics Canada, 2011) Figure 2: Realms of Urban and Place-Based EE Figure 3: Curriculum Structure (OME, 2014) Figure 4: Course Pathways Figure 5: Place-Based EE Categorization Process Figure 6: Urban EE Categorization Process 5 22 39 44 47 4

  

viii  

List of Appendices Appendix A: Main Data Set Appendix B1: EEW Invitation Appendix B2: EEW Participants List Appendix B3: EEW Draft Agenda 86 119 120 121

  

ix  

List of Abbreviations COEO DEEPER EE EEW EEON GGH OISE OME OnSIS OSEE OSSD PD PLC RUW SHSM TDSB U&PBEE Council of Outdoor Educators of Ontario Deepening Environmental Education in Pre-Service Education Resource Environmental Education Education Experts' Workshop Environmental Education Ontario Greater Golden Horseshoe Ontario Institute for Studies in Education Ontario Ministry of Education Ontario School Information System Ontario Society for Environmental Education Ontario Secondary School Diploma Professional Development Professional Learning Committees Ryerson Urban Water Specialist High Skills Major Toronto District School Board Urban and Place-Based Environmental Education

  

x  

1. INTRODUCTION 1.1 The Importance of Environmental Education Promoting environmental literacy and engagement in youth is of utmost importance in our current climate of rapid growth and change. The continued depletion of natural resources, increased severity of pollution of the land, air and water, and anthropogenic climate change are dire concerns that demand our attention. Moreover, environmental systems and our relationship to them have become increasingly more complex highlighting the need for educated, involved and empowered citizens. Promoting good citizenship is, in fact, one of the main purposes of publicly funded secondary schools (Reimers, 2006). In the global age, the goals of citizenship extend beyond individual goals of productivity and success. They include preparing students to address political conflict and environmental challenges. Reimer (2006) warns that problems arise when education is poorly coupled with larger societal goals and turns its gaze inward. Preparing students for self-referenced goals, the next level of schooling, future employment, and teaching content without context are examples of secondary schooling with too narrow a focus. Canada is the second largest country in the world. It is a land "rich in fresh water, maritime access, forests, and mineral resources" and despite having a very small proportion of the world's population, "it has a potentially large role to play in creating solutions to the planet's urgent ecological problems" (Doyle & MacGregor, 2013). According to Statistics Canada (2011), Ontarians account for nearly 40% of all Canadians, making Ontario central to Canada's environmental policy and practice. Catalysts for environmental change in Ontario and a critical mass to enact it are needed more than ever. Secondary schools play a significant role in preparing citizens to shape the future of their communities, regions and planet. They must continue to reflect on their role and evolve to meet the needs of a changing world.

  

1  

1.2 Defining Key Terms 1.2.1 Environmental Education (EE) There are three components to education in the province of Ontario; policy, curriculum, and practice. The purpose of this study is to examine various aspects of EE curriculum in secondary schools; more specifically, their coverage of place-based and urban themes. Curriculum documents were selected as the basis of this study because they are the primary means in which policy is made into practice. They also provide clear expectations regarding the coverage of specific EE topics, and skills. The document that guides current EE policy in Ontario is titled, Shaping Our Schools, Shaping Our Future: Environmental Education in Ontario Schools (2007), and it defines EE as: Education about the environment, for the environment, and in the environment that promotes an understanding of, rich and active experience in, and an appreciation for the dynamic interactions of: 1) the earth's physical and biological systems, 2) the dependency of our social and economic systems on these natural systems, 3) the scientific and human dimensions of environmental issues, 4) the positive and negative consequences, both intended and unintended, of the interactions between human-created and natural systems. (OME, 2007b) Within the field of EE, there are a number of themes and subtopics. This study chose to examine curriculum related to place-based EE, because it plays an important role in connecting students to their surroundings, and urban EE, because it reflects the imminent and complex problems humans will face as the Earth's population increases. 1.2.2 Place-Based Environmental Education Rooting environmental education in one's own community and outdoor environment is a growing trend in the conceptualization of EE. Often referred to as "place-based" environmental education, this type of EE fosters student

  

2  

engagement and connection to their immediate environment, grassroots innovation, and environmental stewardship. A study conducted by Puk and Behm in 2003 assessed the inclusion of outdoor education in Ontario secondary schools. This study disseminated 500 surveys to secondary school science and geography teachers in every board (Puk & Behm, 2003). When asked how much time they taught outside the school, 85.5% of grade 9/10 teachers and 77% of grade 11/12 science and geography teachers said that they either did not teach outdoors at all or taught outdoors for less than 5 hours per course (Puk & Behm, 2003). Reengaging youth in their municipalities, communities, schools, and environment is essential to successful EE. Shaping Our Schools, Shaping Our Future's (OME, 2007b) vision of EE addressed some of these shortcomings by recognizing the importance of making opportunities for place-based EE a regular part of the classroom (Borland, 2015). Following the publication of Shaping Our Schools, Shaping Our Future (OME, 2007b), the Ministry of Education released a document titled Standards for Environmental Education in the Curriculum (OME, 2008). The Standards for Environmental Education "are statements that, taken together, describe the nature and scope of environmental education as it will be reflected throughout the revised curriculum. The standards will help curriculum writers devise and incorporate environmental education expectations and opportunities across the curriculum" (OME, 2008). One of three major themes in The Standards for Environmental Education in the Curriculum (2008) is Community. The standards related to community recommend that the curriculum provide students with opportunities to: 1) engage in authentic learning situations and interactions in their local environment (e.g., natural, built, cultural); 2) explore and appreciate the outdoors, to help develop their understanding of the local environment; 3) develop and communicate a sense of connection with the local and global environments; and 4) demonstrate environmental stewardship by thinking globally and acting locally. (OME, 2008)

  

3  

1.2.3 Urban Environmental Education Cities are home to the majority of the world's population and this percentage continues to grow. According to Statistics Canada's (2011) Census of Population, "the proportion of people living in rural areas in Canada has steadily declined since 1851, when nearly 9 in 10 Canadians lived in a rural area. This decline is largely related to changes in the structure of the Canadian economy". Figure 1 defines rural areas as those with a population under 1000 and a population density below 400 inhabitants per square kilometer (Statistics Canada, 2011). It demonstrates a decline in the percentage of rural inhabitants from 1851 to 2011. The positive and negative environmental influence of cities extends far beyond their borders through pollution of "the commons", consumption of and access to resources, and innovations that promote sustainability. Regardless of whether youth reside in an urban or rural setting, they require knowledge of urban environments to access the bigger picture of how society operates and the challenges that it faces. Urban EE is a branch of EE that emphasizes high population density, competition for space, and complex resource and waste   

Figure 1: Proportion of the population living in rural areas, Canada, 1851 to 2011 (Statistics Canada, 2011)

  

4  

management systems (North American Association for Environmental Education (NAAEE), 2015) It deals with "specific urban social and environmental issues and opportunities" (NAAEE, 2015) such as smog, access to green space, and roof top gardens. Urban EE programs "contribute to human well-being and environmental integrity in cities" (NAAEE, 2015). Young people in both urban and rural environments need to be aware of the issues facing cities because they are not insular. Cities are huge consumers of natural resources and producers of waste and as they continue to grow, their problems have a great impact on the viability of our planet. The Ministry of Education recognizes the complexity and multidisciplinary nature of urban EE in the learning component of Shaping Our Schools, Shaping Our Future (2007) stating: "Environmental education will draw on effective learning strategies including inquiry, problem solving, critical thinking, and assessing alternatives - that engage students personally in their own learning, connect them to the world they live in, and give them the systems thinking and futures thinking they will need to become discerning, active citizens." (OME, 2007b, p5). Figure 2 demonstrates how place-based and urban EE fit within the greater context of environmental education. Each of these fields is defined as a subset of environmental education. When place-based EE occurs in an urban setting, the two fields overlap. Urban EE themes, such as public transit and

ENVIRONMENTAL  EDUCATION  

PLACE-BASED       EE  

  URBAN  EE  

Figure 2: Realms of Urban and Place-Based EE

  

5  

access to green space, are integral to place-based studies in urban settings because they are dominant features of those environments. Over the years, the definition of "environment" has grown from one that includes only natural elements to one that encompasses both anthropogenic and natural elements. The urban environment has limited "green space" and as urban centers grow, opportunities for interaction with the natural environment decrease (Turner et al., 2004). There is a growing disconnect between urban youth and nature as varied pursuits compete for their attention. Clearly described in Richard Louv's popular 2008 book, Last Child in the Woods, Louv argues that the youth of today are afflicted with a "nature deficit disorder" (Louv, 2008). Contributing to the disconnect with nature are too much time indoors and in front of screens, too little freedom to explore nature (especially in cities), and debilitating parental safety concerns which Louv calls the "bogey-man syndrome" (Louv, 2008). The need for urban youth to reconnect with the natural green space to which they have access is beginning to be recognized. With a stronger connection to place-based nature, urban dwellers understand the need for sustainable planning, protection of green space, and access to resources. Cities of the western world have seen a decline in the representation of youth in community planning and participation (Checkoway et al., 2003; Vancouver Working Group [VWG], 2006). It is the responsibility of those in power to provide opportunities for connection, self-efficacy, and engagement to foster a healthy youth population (VWG, 2006). Part of this comes from changing the perception of youth by adults and the public to one that focuses on their strengths and capabilities and views them as "competent citizens" capable of shaping their environment (Checkoway et al., 2003; VWG, 2006). 1.3 Thesis Objectives In light of the changes made to EE in Ontario following the publication of Shaping Our Schools, Shaping Our Future (2007), how rooted is the new Ontario curriculum in place-based and urban environmental studies? The purpose of this study is to examine what Ontario is currently doing to connect youth to the place

  

6  

in which they live and to help them understand the nature of cities. It does so by analyzing the Ontario secondary school curriculum and course enrollment data and reporting on the opinions of those present at the Education Experts' Workshop (EEW) hosted by Ryerson University. More specifically, the objectives of this thesis are to: 1) determine the extent of urban and placed-based EE coverage in the mandatory Ontario secondary school curriculum; 2) assess the prescriptiveness of the curriculum in this regard; and 3) provide curriculum, pedagogy, and programming recommendations to promote urban and place-based EE. To accomplish these objectives, the following sources are used: 1) secondary curriculum and environmental policy documents, 2) enrollment data from the Ministry of Education, and 3) observations from the Education Experts' Workshop (EEW) hosted by the Faculty of Science at Ryerson University and Ryerson Urban Water (RUW) on furthering EE in Ontario. 1

                                                                                                                 1  On a personal note, my background and work experience are in the field of education. I have
been working as a science, math, guidance counsellor, and chemistry teacher of secondary school students in the Toronto District School Board since 2006. Having worked at both private and public schools in my career, and in schools with very diverse student bodies, I have a good sense of the Ontario secondary school education system and the way in which it operates. With this experience, I bring my own biases and perspective on EE to this study. I have attempted to include these biases in an equitable manner as one of many participants in the EEW.

      7  

2. LITERATURE REVIEW The contextual review of this thesis has been divided into two main sections. The first provides a context for EE by describing its history and definition at an intergovernmental level. It then discusses assessment of environmental literacy and describes approaches to EE within education systems. Finally it situates place-based EE, and urban EE within the field. The second section is less broad, focusing on the province of Ontario. It describes the structure and framework of the Ontario secondary school curriculum, and provides an overview of the current state of EE in the province of Ontario. 2.1 Context for EE 2.1.1. Environmental Education Numerous great thinkers have influenced the evolution of EE but many ascribe its origins in the UK to Sir Patrick Geddes (1854-1933) (Palmer, 1998). Geddes, a Scottish Professor of Botany and founder of town and country planning, pioneered pedagogical approaches that placed learners into their environment (Palmer, 1998). He is responsible for opening the first field studies center in 1892, the Outlook Tower in Edinburgh, where he developed innovative methods of "Civic and Regional Surveying" (Palmer, 1998). Geddes ideas became widespread amongst the teaching community laying the groundwork for modern EE (Palmer, 1998). It is difficult to pinpoint the first use of the term Environmental Education (EE). It is a practice that has always been in use but the term itself has increased in frequency with environmental disasters, concerns and movements worldwide since the mid 20th century. Around this time, many parties were attempting to define the term EE to make its purpose clear (Stevenson, Brody, & Dillon, 2012). The concept of EE developed by William Stapp in 1969 during a graduate seminar in the School of Natural Resources at the University of Michigan was formative in the field (Stevenson, Brody, & Dillon, 2012). Stapp defined EE as

  

8  

follows: Environmental education is aimed at producing a citizenry that is knowledgeable concerning the biophysical environment and its associated problems, aware of how to help solve these problems, and motivated to work toward their solution (Stapp, 1969). This definition represented a significant shift from resource based "conservation education" to a concept that encompassed the community and its associated problems and collective effort towards finding solutions (Stevenson, Brody, & Dillon, 2012). Stapp's (1969) definition and objectives formed the basis for future definitions of EE. During the 1970s, the involvement of key international organizations increased the visibility of EE and lead to a common understanding of the term (Neal, 1994). In 1970, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) held an "International Working Meeting on Environmental Education in the School Curriculum" defining EE as: The process of recognizing values and clarifying concepts in order to develop skills and attitudes necessary to understand and appreciate the inter-relatedness among man, his culture, and his biophysical surroundings. Environmental education also entails practice in decisionmaking and self-formulation of a code of behaviour about issues concerning environmental quality (IUCN, 1970). At the International Workshop on Environmental Education held in Belgrade in 1975, the International Environmental Education Program (IEEP) was created (Neal, 1994). It produced the first intergovernmental EE goal statement: To develop a world population that is aware of, and concerned about, the environment and its associated problems, and which has the knowledge, skills, attitudes, motivations and commitment to work individually and collectively toward solutions of current problems and the prevention of new ones (UNESCO, 1975). Belgrade was followed in 1977 by the first intergovernmental Conference on Environmental Education, held in Tbilisi, USSR (UNESCO, 1978). Organized by

  

9  

UNESCO and attended by 66 member states, the report created by the conference still provides the framework for EE development in the world today (UNESCO, 1978). The conference and previous international collaboration has led to a common view of the principles and objectives of environmental education. The final report of the UNESCO conference outlines three goals of environmental education: 1) to foster clear awareness of, and concern about, economic, social, political and ecological interdependence in urban and rural areas; 2) to provide every person with opportunities to acquire the knowledge, values, attitudes, commitment and skills needed to protect and improve the environment; and 3) to create new patterns of behaviour of individuals, groups and society as a whole towards the environment. (UNESCO 1978) The first goal differentiates between urban and rural areas. It also emphasizes the complexity of current environmental issues through its mention of interdependence among a variety of fields. The second and third goals provide opportunities to learn about the environment to enact meaningful, positive, change. Also included in the Tbilisi report is the recurrent theme of EE being: 1) about the environment (knowledge and understanding), 2) for the environment (promoting values, attitudes and positive action), and 3) in the environment (using the environment and first-hand experience as a resource). (UNESCO, 1978) Following the UNESCO conference, a World Conservation Strategy was developed in 1980 (Neil, 1994). To reinforce this message of sustainable development and conservation, the World Commission on Environment and Development  presided by Gro Harlem Brundtland, produced the report Our Common Future in 1987 (Brundtland,1987). Education was identified as a major theme of this report and questions about the direction that EE would take helped spark the second major U.N. conference in 1992 on the environment (Neil, 1994). The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), informally known as, the Earth Summit, took place in Rio de Janeiro

  

10  

and was attended by 172 governments with108 at the level of head of state or government (UNESCO, 2005). A summary of the key points related to EE made during the Earth Summit are found in Chapter 36 of the Action Programme for the 21st century (Agenda 21). Chapter 36, Promoting Education, Public Awareness and Training, is organized into three program areas: 1) reorienting education towards sustainable development; 2) increasing public awareness; and 3) promoting training. (UNESCO, 1992) In this document, education, both formal and informal, are identified as "critical for promoting sustainable development and improving the capacity of the people to address environment and development issues" as well as "indispensable to changing people's attitudes" (UNESCO, 1992). In response to Chapter 36 of Agenda 21, the UN General Assembly adopted the 2005-2014 Decade of Education for Sustainable Development (UNESCO, 2005). Their primary goals were to integrate education for sustainable development in national policies and educational systems and to raise awareness of the goals of sustainable development in the public and private sectors (UNESCO, 2005). 2.1.2 Assessment of Environmental Literacy The categories used to assess environmental literacy identified at the 1977 Intergovernmental Conference on Environmental Education continue to be used today comprising: 1) awareness, 2) knowledge, 3) attitudes, 4) skills, and 5) participation. (UNESCO, 1978) Of these categories, some are more easily assessed than others, lending themselves to data collection on participation in various programs, or knowledge/skill based surveys, and tests. Methods that have been used by researchers include monitoring participation in voluntary programs (Igbokwe ,

  

11  

2012) as an indicator of progress and analyzing the frequency of use of outdoor education centers (Kopar, 2013). Although attractive, concrete forms of assessment can be limiting, providing a narrow or incomplete picture of environmental literacy. Furthermore, it is difficult to interpret even simple forms of assessment without a baseline for environmental literacy, which Ontario does not yet have (Igbokwe, 2012). Recent national assessments in EE involving K-12 students have been performed in other parts of the world: South Korea (2002 ­ 2003), Israel (2004 ­ 2006), the United States (2006 ­ 2008), and Turkey (2007 ­ 2009) (Stevenson, Brody, & Dillon, 2012). The International Handbook of Research on Environmental Education (Stevenson, Brody & Dillon, 2012) acknowledges the great differences between these assessments and the enormous resources required to perform them, but commends their undertaking and underscores the benefits of going through this process and learning from the results. Using these results as a basis for comparison for future studies within the same country or between countries where applicable is recommended (Stevenson, Brody, & Dillon, 2012). Generally speaking, EE educators, researchers, and policymakers are beginning to realize how difficult it is to define and assess what is considered to be the ultimate goal of EE: creating environmentally responsible behavior (Stevenson, Brody, & Dillon, 2012). The International Handbook of Research on Environmental Education (2013) goes on to say that the development of proenvironmental behavior or any behavior change "is not a simple process and that behavior change reflects nonlinear rather than linear theories of knowledge". Stevenson, Brody, and Dillon (2012) warn that research results in EE are unlikely to provide a silver bullet for developing policy and practice and that there is danger in reducing the evolution of EE to a set of practical recommendations. Environmental education research is relatively young, with many EE journals only having started in the past 15-20 years (Stevenson, Brody, & Dillon, 2012). According to the International Handbook of Research on Environmental Education (2012), EE research is an emerging field with "trends" in curriculum and learning research being discussed over "traditional methods". Some

  

12  

researchers go so far as to warn that if EE research is to be seen as a "cultural innovation process", that encourages "theory development", it may take the form of an "open-ended, reflexive process, not too fixed by the boundaries of research traditions and methodological frameworks, even though these are helpful to provide a mapping of an emerging field" (Stevenson, Brody, & Dillon, 2012). 2.1.3 Approaches to Environmental Education Defining EE content is a difficult task due to the environment's all encompassing nature and pervasiveness in so many fields. The Tbilisi report (UNESCO, 1978) aptly comments on the broad scope of EE content being both a strength and a weakness because EE either "becomes equated with the whole of education, thus essentially losing its identity, or else selected features must be singled out for a focus of teaching and learning tasks" (Neil, 1994). With either extreme, there is the risk of losing important aspects of EE. A combined method can overcome this problem where EE is seen as both an overarching "approach" to education but also as containing "discrete content" (Neil, 1994). Some arrangements used in secondary schools to tackle cross-curricular themes such as EE include; integrating topics into various subject curriculum, separately timetabling EE (e.g. separate course), short-block timetabling (e.g. series of subject based topics lasting for varying periods of time), and long-block timetabling (e.g. activity week) (Neil, 1994). Continuity is also a factor that must be considered in designing an EE program. Without it, EE loses its status as an overarching theme. Students undergo significant growth and development over the course of secondary school and are able to build complexity in their understanding and a relationship to the environment as they mature. The subject-based structure of secondary schools in Ontario is a serious impediment to cross-curricular work. It is possible to work within the rigidly timetabled subject silos of secondary schools using some combination of the arrangements listed above but there are criteria that need to be met to do so. These include the provision of sufficient teacher training, and the development of a coherent and clear implementation plan, which ensures continuity and

  

13  

progression throughout the secondary curriculum (UNESCO, 1978; Neil, 1994). It is clear that Ontario has made EE a priority through the publication of Shaping Our Schools, Shaping Our Future (OME, 2007b) and the policies that followed. What is unclear is whether Ontario's approach to EE in secondary schools is accomplishing its goals. 2.1.4 Field Study and Place-Based EE The Handbook of Environmental Education (Neil, 1994) opens with the belief that, "no educational programme of work in this area can be successful without individual commitment and personal concern". The word "concern" for the environment is also used in the first goal of the Tbilisi conference (UNESCO, 1978). The Handbook of Environmental Education (Neil, 1994) then describes a preliminary British study conducted by Palmer in 1993, which examines the formative experiences of environmental educators that contributed to their personal concern for the environment. Autobiographical statements from 232 individuals were collected, and subjected to a content analysis (Palmer, 1993). The themes within these statements were then coded into the 13 categories shown in Table 1. The results show that a large number of environmental educators made reference to memorable experiences outdoors, which contributed to "enjoyment of the outdoors" and "environmental care and concern" (Palmer, 1993). The second most frequent category listed in Table 1, is "Education/Courses" (Palmer, 1993). The potential for formal schooling to create "personal concern" for the environment is significant and this study concurs that the inclusion of field study or place-based education is a vital component.

  

14  

Table 1: Formative Experiences of Environmental Educators Contributing to Personal Concern for the Environment ­ Number of Subjects Studied N = 232 (Palmer, 1993) Outdoors Education/Courses Parents/Close relatives Organizations TV/Media Friends/Other individuals Travel abroad Disasters/Negative issues Books Becoming a parent Keeping pets/Animals Religion 211 136 88 83 53 49 44 41 35 20 14 13

Place-based education has been linked to environmental education (EE) since its inception. It endeavors to provide purpose and relevance to the study of the environment and works towards the development of an engaged citizenry with the tools necessary to shape their communities. Woodhouse and Knapp (2000) describe the key components of place-based education as: 1) emerging from the particular attributes of place; 2) being inherently multidisciplinary; 3) being inherently experiential; 4) having a philosophical agenda that is broader than "learning to earn"; and 5) connecting the individual, community, and environment. (Woodhouse & Knapp, 2000) Environmental place-based education shares the components described by Woodhouse and Knapp (2000) but focuses on environmental study rather than social, economic, historical, or political study. Community connections are vital to the success of place-based EE and show a    15  

number of benefits to students and communities. Sanders' (2003) article in the Journal of Education and Urban Society, describes community involvement in schools as important for effective school functioning, economic competitiveness, student well being, and community health and development. In Scandinavian and German-speaking countries, the notion of "action competence" has been an important concept in EE since the 1980s (Barratt & Hacking, 2011). There is a definite link between pedagogy associated with action competence and placebased education (Barratt & Hacking, 2011). In teaching students about their communities, they are empowered to develop solutions to local problems. In many ways, traditional secondary schooling methods of sitting at desks in subject-specific classrooms are in direct contraction with place-based education EE (Smith, 2007). Despite this apparent obstacle, it has become more widespread in the past 20 years and many of its characteristics have been incorporated in curriculum models worldwide with varying success. Barratt and Hacking (2011) provide a rationale for our growing interests in place-based education describing it as "a post-positivist reaction to: globalization; centralized, abstracted curricular and standards-driven approaches; and challenges to the notion of community and voice". The idea of using first-hand experience and out-of-classroom study is an important aspect of place-based EE. Despite the fact that this approach is commonly referred to as field study, it does not require extensive travel or access to natural areas. The "field" includes the built environment, school grounds, and even the school building. For example, a school waste audit is considered to be field study. The British National Association for Field Studies Officers describe field study as: 1) giving relevance to topics which could otherwise remain as secondhand learning; 2) concerning with real people, real situations, and real issues; 3) enabling students to record, analyse, present and interpret their own investigations; 4) providing pupils with opportunities to talk about their own world, to

  

16  

listen to others and to share their knowledge; 5) providing pupils with opportunities to look closely at aspects of a local environment and introduce the idea of environmental responsibility; and 6) providing opportunities for pupils to work cooperatively using academic, practical and social skills. (Neil, 1994) More recent definitions of place-based EE have recognized the importance of applying a critical lens (Gruenewald, 2003). In an increasingly complex world, environmental issues are multidimensional involving dissident perspectives and diverse stakeholders. Recognizing that many of our environmental problems are a direct result of social injustice is fundamental to real EE (Gruenewald, 2003). Educators and researchers have shown the enormous benefits of using placebased education within the context of ecojustice (Lowenstein, Martusewicz, & Voelker, 2010), to empower marginalized groups, and forge intergenerational partnerships (Mannion & Adey, 2011), especially in secondary schools where the range in student age is small. The degree to which critical thinking is present in place-based EE curriculum is difficult to assess because it is primarily determined by pedagogical style over content. The province of Ontario recognizes the benefits of place-based EE and assessing the degree to which it has embedded place-based EE into its secondary curriculum is one of the main goals of this study. With a provincially mandated curriculum, standardized over a large, diverse, region, it can be challenging to include outdoor education and community-specific study. Traditional EE programs often focus on fundamental ecological concepts or global issues of environmental sustainability. Accessing a different scale, placebased EE allows students to examine their communities and regions as complex, relevant areas of study to create future citizens who would engage in communitybased environmental stewardship and innovation. 2.1.5 Urban Environmental Education According to the World Health Organization [WHO] (2015), greater than 50% of

  

17  

the global population lives in urban areas, up from 34% in 1960, and this percentage continues to grow. With the majority of the world's population living in urban areas, it is imperative that the structure, function, and factors that affect the health of cities be studied in our schools. The global population trend of urban intensification is echoed in the province of Ontario where considerable population growth is expected over the next 15 years (Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing [OMMAH], 2005). Ontario's "Places to Grow" plan outlines a strategy for growth that limits the amount of agricultural and forested land utilized for human residences and businesses (OMMAH, 2005). The first region to have a designated "Places to Grow" plan in place is the Greater Golden Horseshoe (GGH) area (OMMAH, 2005). According to the OMMAH (2005), Ontario's GGH area is "one of the fastest growing regions in North America" with the population expected to grow by 3.7 million (from 2001 to 2031) to 11.5 million people. To curb the environmental impact of population growth, the plan recommends intensifying growth in pre-existing inhabited areas, designating urban growth boundaries, re-utilizing brownfield sites, re- energizing public transit, and investing in urban infrastructure (OMMAH, 2005). Ontario's cities will undergo significant change over the next 15 years and they will need the help of educated and involved citizens to ensure that they grow successfully. While cities are sometimes viewed as entities existing outside of nature, urban EE seeks to understand cities as evolving ecosystems shaped by natural and anthropogenic forces that include a social, political and economic perspective (NAAEE, 2015). Recognized as "incredibly complex, sources of pollution, and large consumers of natural resources, cities are compelled to be engines of innovation, fostering human and social capital and promoting environmental stewardship" (NAAEE, 2015). Godfrey (2010) writes in his article on urban sustainability about the convergence of environmental and urban studies and the growing consensus that "the battle for global sustainability will be won or lost in cities". The historical, architectural, cultural, socioeconomic, and political domains once dominated urban studies (Godfrey, 2010). Cities were considered to be "man made" and therefore, outside of nature while environmental studies

  

18  

were limited to the study of rural or undeveloped areas with a focus on conservation; two different worlds. Fortunately, these worlds intersected when concerns about interactions between the built and natural environment/systems grew (Godfrey, 2010). This concern gave rise to a plethora of new interdisciplinary studies, such as "environmental economics, history, literature, and science; urban ecology and environmental planning; sustainable development; and political ecology and environmental justice" (Godfrey, 2010). Major themes that have arisen from the convergence of urban and environmental studies, as described by Godfrey (2010), have been summarized in the list below. These themes are referred to in the Methods section of this study to aid in the screening of urban EE content in the Ontario secondary school curriculum. The headings listed in brackets are the ones that are employed by this study in subsequent sections. 1) Urban Political Ecology ­ Governance [Politics]: "Critically examines governmental policy, societal response, and environmental impacts of urbanization". It involves the study of environmental governance, rights and responsibilities and the forces that shape them. 2) Urban Political Ecology ­ Ecojustice [Sociogeographic]: Population characteristics linked to equitable access to resources. This area of study "stresses the importance of environmental justice, socioeconomic equity, and participatory governance in ecological change, including a fair distribution of both amenities and problems". 3) Urban Systems [Systems]: The term "urban metabolism" is used to describe a "city's biophysical exchanges and accompanying regional transformations of nature". Requiring inputs and outputs that must be distributed and managed, cities must maximize cyclical process and minimize linear ones to promote sustainability. These processes include access to, and consumption and distribution of water, energy, food, waste, and other materials.

  

19  

4) Urban Geography ­ City Form [Planning]: Land use studies with emphasis on sustainable design, preserving urban wilderness/green space, urban environmental restoration, and urban agriculture. Examples include "public parks, backyard or rooftop gardens, collective spaces for community gardening, green squares and plazas, reclaimed waterfronts and waterways, and public beaches". 5) Urban Geography ­ City Form [Immigration and Settlement]: Although not explicitly discussed by Godfrey (2010), the study of settlement trends and their impact on infrastructure is implicit to urban EE. Perhaps taken for granted, it provides secondary school students with essential context and a future outlook on the life and growth of cities. 6) Urban Geography ­ Ecology [Ecological]: Concentration of buildings, impermeable surfaces, pollution, and waste create urban environmental issues such as smog, flooding, "heat islands", habitat destruction, and loss of biodiversity. These problems are not unique to cities but are representative of them. (Godfrey, 2010) 2.2 The Ontario Curriculum and EE Policy Education is the responsibility of the provincial government in Canada. The Education Act legislates the duties and responsibilities of the Minister of Education, school boards, supervisory officers, principals, teachers, parents, and students (OME, 2014). In Ontario, the Ministry of Education is responsible for the development of curriculum policy and resource documents. School boards and schools are responsible for implementing them. Curriculum policy documents "identify what students must know and be able to do at the end of every grade or course in every subject in Ontario publicly funded schools" (OME, 2014). They are organized by subject (i.e. The Arts, Science, Business Studies, Canadian and World Studies) and by grade level with one document for grades 9/10 and another for grades 11/12 for each subject.

  

20  

Resource documents "support implementation of policy and their use is a local decision. An example of a resource document is: Environmental Education, Scope and Sequence of Expectations, Grades 9-12, 2011" (OME, 2014). In 2003, the Ministry established a curriculum review cycle "to ensure that the curriculum remains current, relevant, and developmentally-appropriate" (OME, 2014). Each year, a number of subject areas enter the review process. The extent of changes to the curriculum as a result of the review process is variable ranging from few changes to entire strand replacement. The curriculum review cycle involves: 1) research, 2) analysis and synthesis, 3) revision and feedback consultation, 4) editing and publication, and 5) training and implementation. (OME, 2014) The early process involves comparison with other jurisdictions, subject research, and the use of focus groups comprised of educators from all Ontario school boards (OME, 2014). Consultations with stakeholders including the Minister's Advisory Council on special education, faculties of education, employers, parents, students, universities, colleges, other ministries, and NGOs are conducted (OME, 2014). The entire process results in recommendations actualized by writing teams from school boards across the province (OME, 2014). The documents are reviewed for content and alignment with government policies and frameworks before they are published and implemented in classrooms (OME, 2014). 2.2.1 Curriculum policy documents Curriculum policy documents consist of three components: 1) the front matter provides critical foundational information about the curriculum itself and about how learning connects to Ministry of Education policies, programs, and priorities; 2) the curriculum expectations (overall and specific expectations) are

  

21  

the knowledge and skills that students are expected to demonstrate in each subject at each grade level by the end of the grade; and 3) additional supports, glossaries and overviews are included to provide further guidance and information to support the implementation of the curriculum. (OME, 2014) An example of course curriculum structure can be found in Figure 3. Within each curriculum policy document, there are a number of courses. Each course has several strands (formerly known as units). Strands are defined by a set of overall expectations, which have their own specific expectations. The overall expectations "describe in general terms the knowledge and skills that students are expected to demonstrate by the end of each course" (OME, 2014). The specific expectations serve the same purpose but provide greater detail. Expectations vary greatly in their nature depending on the subject, course, and objective. They range from the very explicit or direct in their content (i.e. definitions, laws) to the general or indirect in their content (i.e. skills based, investigative). Within a specific expectation it is not unusual to find examples and/or sample questions (OME, 2014). The examples and sample questions

Figure 3: Curriculum Structure (OME, 2014)

  

22  

provide clarification, guidance and/or possible directions for study. It is often not possible to pursue all of the possible opportunities described in the examples and sample questions section. The specifics are for departments, teachers, and students to decide upon in their individual schools and classrooms. This can serve as both a benefit and a detriment. The benefit is that it empowers educators and students to take control of their own education and tailor lessons to their needs and interests. On the other side of the coin, important concepts can be covered superficially or ignored if they not made prescriptive enough. One of the objectives of this study is to examine what proportion of urban and placebased EE content is directly mandated in curriculum policy documents and what proportion is presented as a possible avenue for study. Together, policy frameworks, resource documents, and curriculum policy documents guide EE in Ontario. Their vision, content, wording, and use, must therefore have clarity and cohesiveness to be effective. With public education being such a highly contested domain rife with competing priorities (i.e. literacy, numeracy, equity), the Ministry's goals for environmental education must be strongly worded and clearly visible to the parties implementing them. They must also be supported and continuously assessed if they are to thrive. 2.2.2 History of EE in Ontario ­ Past to Present Over the past several decades, the province of Ontario has seen many changes in its approach and commitment to environmental education (EE) in secondary schools. From the late 1980s to the late 1990s Ontario secondary schools offered two Environmental Science courses in grade 10 and 12 containing units such as microbiology, environmental health hazards, environmental air and water quality (Puk & Makin, 2006). With these courses designated as "electives", just over a quarter of schools in Ontario were offering them (Cundiff, 1989). Under the Conservative government of Premier Mike Harris in 1998, the "stand-alone" Environmental Science courses dedicated to EE were removed from the curriculum (Puk & Behm, 2003). Furthermore, the funding and infrastructure for outdoor education programs was cut (Kopar, 2013).

  

23  

In their stead, the Ministry made a decision to "infuse" environmental science content into other subjects such as biology, physics, chemistry and geography (Puk & Makin, 2006). Described by many as a "patchwork approach" rather than a concrete plan, the new model did not sit well with the public (Puk & Behm, 2003; Environmental Education Ontario, 2003). General concern arose from these changes as was indicated by the creation of a number of grassroots organizations such as EEON (Environmental Education Ontario) and OSEE (Ontario Society for Environmental Education). Of particular significance was the aforementioned study by Puk and Behm (2003) which was published in the Canadian Journal of Environmental Education in 2003 and titled "The Diluted Curriculum: The Role of Government in Developing Ecological Literacy as the First Imperative in Ontario Secondary Schools". This study disseminated 500 surveys to secondary school science and geography teachers in every board, asking them to report on the coverage of materials from the cancelled Environmental Science course in their other subjects (Puk & Behm, 2003). Teachers were asked if they taught certain topics, how much time they spent teaching these topics, and how much time they spent per course teaching outdoors (Puk & Behm, 2003). The study's results showed poor coverage in the new curriculum of the topics formerly included in the Environmental Science courses concluding that: The data collected from the surveys demonstrate that grade 9/10 and grade 11/12 science and geography teachers are, in fact, spending very little time teaching ecological concepts. There is a limited and ineffective emphasis on learning about environmental science topics or promoting ecological literacy in the current curriculum guidelines. The results of the study indicate the failure of the "infusion model" for ecological education (Puk & Behm, 2003, p.1). With all of these changes taking place within a provincial and international climate of growing concern for EE, constructive action had to be taken. In 2007, under the Liberal government of Premier Dalton McGuinty, concerted efforts

  

24  

were made to improve the condition of EE in Ontario schools (Kopar, 2013). The Ministry of Education's Curriculum Council convened a Working Group on Environmental Education with the mandate, "to analyze needs and research successful approaches to teaching and learning about the environment in elementary and secondary schools" (Ontario Ministry of Education [OME], 2007). Chaired by Dr. Roberta Bondar, the panel published a report in 2007 titled Shaping Our Schools, Shaping Our Future (OME, 2007b). This report, which will be referred to as "the Bondar Report", demonstrated a great step forward in reshaping EE in the province of Ontario. It provided a clear definition for EE and presented the following vision for EE in Ontario. Ontario's education system will prepare students with the knowledge, skills, perspectives, and practices they need to be environmentally responsible citizens. Students will understand our fundamental connections to each other and to the world around us through our relationship to food, water, energy, air, and land, and our interaction with all living things. The education system will provide opportunities within the classroom and the community for students to engage in actions that deepen this understanding (OME, 2007b). In addition to the vision statement, the report stated its intended outcomes, and offered a series of recommendations for an integrated approach to EE in Ontario. The most significant change that came from the Bondar Report's recommendations was the integration of EE into all grade and subject curriculum (OME, 2009). This was a significant shift from stand-alone courses to an integrated approach where the responsibility for EE lies with all educators. The report identified three core policy components for the successful implementation of EE in Ontario: 1) Leadership and Accountability, 2) Curriculum, and 3) Teaching and Resources. (OME, 2007b) The first component recommends development of clear EE policy and programs, assessment mechanisms for monitoring student achievement, accountability

  

25  

measures for school boards and schools, and environmentally responsible operations and facilities management (OME, 2007b). The second component recommendations are listed in greater detail as they are central to this study. The curriculum recommendations are as follows: 1) Increase cross-curricular focus by embedding EE expectations in all subjects, disciplines, and grades; 2) Map the scope and sequence of EE expectations across the curriculum and incorporate review cycles; 3) Incorporate in front matter, and other appropriate sections of curriculum documents, information stressing policy vision of EE and subject specific considerations; 4) Ensure that the elementary and secondary curriculum is written to include an environmental perspective and that it meets the established standards through the curriculum review process; 5) Ensure that the curriculum provides an opportunity for elementary students to study explicitly an environmental topic in each grade, and that curriculum expectations, particularly in the elementary grades, specify that students explore and investigate their local environment, and contrasting environments outside their local area, wherever reasonable for the subject matter; 6) Ensure that all secondary students are exposed to EE though its substantial presence in compulsory Grade 9 Geography, Grade 9 and 10 Science, and Grade 10 Civics expectations (in recognition that secondary students have reached a critical capacity to engage more deeply in environmental education); 7) Identify and support opportunities to engage students in environmental action projects within the current Civics course; 8) Ensure that secondary students have the opportunity to take at least one additional course with an environmental focus during their senior high school program (preferable in Grade 11 to maintain continuity); 9) Identify interdisciplinary links for environmental education at the

  

26  

secondary level so that schools can offer integrated programs of courses with an environmental theme; 10) Develop a Specialist High Skills Major2 program offering in the environment, energy, or natural resources sectors and share effective practices associated with these and other integrated environmentally themed learning opportunities; and 11) Encourage and support cooperative education teachers and leaders to develop and share a wide variety of environmental placement opportunities that meet ministry policy and guidelines, through partnerships with local business education councils, training boards, and employers. *In addition, it is suggested that students be encouraged to fulfill, in an environmental endeavor, some of the 40 hours of community involvement required for graduation. (OME, 2007b) The final component recommends the inclusion of pre-service and in service EE programs as well as resource development to build teacher confidence and capacity to teach EE. Following the release of the Bondar Report, the Ontario Ministry of Education published the policy framework, Acting Today, Shaping Tomorrow: A Policy Framework for Environmental Education in Ontario Schools (OME, 2009). The framework describes strategies and actions, which are assigned to the school, board and ministry levels to develop accountability. It also recognizes the importance of place-based education and "increasing student engagement by fostering active participation in environmental projects and building links between schools and communities" (OME, 2009). The key actions described by the policy framework include: 1) Adopting an integrated approach that embeds  environmental curriculum expectations in the majority of grades and subjects; 2) Creating and Updating of EE Resource Documents                                                                                                                 
2

Students receive the SHSM seal on their diploma when they: "complete a specific bundle of 810 courses in the student's selected field; earn valuable industry certifications including first aid and CPR qualifications; and gain important skills on the job with employers." (OME, 2014)

  

27  

(a) Environmental Education: Scope and Sequence of Expectations (2011) ­ a document highlighting opportunities for the inclusion of EE in secondary school curriculum courses (OME, 2011); (b) Ready, Set, Green! (2007) ­ a document  sharing school and student projects across the province that demonstrate engagement in environmental stewardship (OME, 2007a); 3) Creating Environmental Plans/Frameworks and EE Professional Learning Committees (PLC) at the school and board levels; 4) Supporting EE for teachers through the creation of pre-service teacher programs, additional qualification courses, and PD opportunities; 5) Offering community linked experiences and programs such as the Specialist High Skills Major (SHSM); and 6) Improving the management of resources, operations, and facilities. (OME, 2009) The Bondar Report and policy framework came at a time when EE was gaining recognition. It shed light on the inadequacies of EE in Ontario and was well received by the mainstream media and the general public as a step in the right direction; however, it was not without its critics. An article by Bruce Pardy (2010) in the Ontario Journal for Outdoor Education was particularly critical of Ontario's new EE policy. Pardy's (2010) first point of contention is that "rather than seeking to develop independent thinking about environmental issues, the framework's primary objective is to instill orthodox environmental values". He identifies a lack of critical thinking, too great a knowledge/skills focus, and oversimplification of environmental issues. Pardy's second critique is that of shallow integration of EE into a rigid system that does not enable students to experience the world outside the classroom (Pardy, 2010). Successes and impediments to the implementation of recommendations made by the Bondar Report are still in the process of being identified. They are discussed in more detail in the next section. In 1999, the Ontario government added a grade 10 Civics class and 40 hours of community service to its secondary school graduation requirements  

  

28  

(Henderson et al., 2007). These changes were made with the goal of improving youth civic engagement and they occurred in conjunction with the removal of the fifth year of high school. Mandatory community service may require students to volunteer for a set number of hours for credit, or it may involve "service-learning, where the goals or lessons of service are reinforced by the course curriculum" (Henderson et al., 2007). The latter have been seen to be more effective in improving civic responsibility (Henderson et al., 2007). Shortly before the release of the Bondar Report, the Ontario government released news that it was creating a new Program Enhancement Grant with a value of $35 million (Kopar, 2013). Alongside the changes in EE, the grant's funds were to be equally available to programs in arts, music, physical education and outdoor education with a maximum of $7500 per school (Kopar, 2013). In 2012, the Ministry made a portion of the grant more directly applicable to outdoor education by transferring $20 million to outdoor learning activities provided by school boards or by third party organizations, such as community agencies (Kopar, 2013). 2.2.3 Barriers to the Implementation of EE in Ontario In 2010, Tan and Pedretti performed a study at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (OISE) identifying the "challenges and complexities" to implementing EE in the province of Ontario. They collected 300 responses to an internet-based survey questionnaire, and conducted 24 teacher interviews from across the province (Tan & Pedretti, 2010). The majority of individuals in the study group were secondary school teachers with ~58% working in urban areas and ~40% based in the Greater Toronto Area (Tan & Pedretti, 2010). The key results of Tan and Pedretti's 2010 study are described as: Our findings suggest that there is a significant gap between teachers' views of what environmental education should be and what they currently practice. Challenges and complexities identified by participants include overcrowded curriculum, lack of resources, lack of alignment between curriculum and existing ministry expectations, low priority of environmental

  

29  

education in schools, access to the outdoors, apathy, and the nature of sociopolitical action (Tan & Pedretti, 2010). Echoing some of the concerns raised by Tan and Pedretti's study, is a Masters research paper by Chowdhury (2015) at O.I.S.E. which used four semi-structured teacher interviews to explore the implementation of EE in Ontario. Chowdhury's (2015) recommendations included raising teacher awareness of EE policy documents, and improved accountability measures for EE programming and policy implementation. A follow-up study performed by Pedretti et al. in 2012, looked at Ontario teachers' perspectives of environmental and outdoor education. Their survey of 377 Ontario teachers showed a lack of professional development and pre-service education in these areas and that the majority of knowledge in these domains came from personal studies/interest (Pedretti et al, 2012). Varied commitment to and comfort with EE and outdoor education were also noted. Interestingly, 60% of surveyed teachers supported the integration model for EE with the others lobbying for stand-alone courses and alternative approaches. Those teachers opposed to the integration model may have shared Pardy's concerns of shallow integration or may have struggled with the practical difficulties of a full integration. A study by Steele (2011), which followed the work of six secondary science teachers in Ontario as they integrated EE into their science lessons, demonstrates the juxtaposition between conventional science and EE pedagogies. Despite the fact that science is considered to be an excellent vehicle for EE because of its overlapping content, the way in which traditional science is taught is at odds with EE (Steele, 2011). Some of the impediments that surfaced in Steele's (2011) study included "the scientific knowledge base that is deemed necessary for students, the approval of colleagues, issues of assessment and evaluation, and the influence of textbooks". Steele (2011) also references Stevenson (2007)'s list of school-related barriers to implementing EE which include: 1) the problems with classroom management that result in more highly structured teaching approaches and focus on content learning,

  

30  

2) the necessity of evaluation and grading of students that is far more easily managed with content knowledge and cookbook activities, and 3) science itself is considered an objective inquiry and thus the teaching (and evaluation of learning) of science has remained objective. (Stevenson, 2007) While these studies exhibit differing objectives and methods, many of them indicate the need for greater teacher preparedness. In 2013, the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (OISE) hosted a roundtable discussion to develop a strategy for EE in initial teacher education programs. The roundtable and resource guide that was produced was titled DEEPER, Deepening Environmental Education in Pre-Service Education Resource (OISE, 2013). It was created to address the feelings of unpreparedness felt by teachers to implement EE in their classrooms (OISE, 2013). DEEPER was also a much needed step in addressing the key action item raised by the policy framework, Acting Today, Shaping Tomorrow (2009), to support teachers through "the creation of pre-service teacher programs" (OME, 2009). Another such initiative that has yet to occur is the National Roundtable in Environment and Sustainability Education in Pre-service Teacher Education, which will be hosted by Trent University from July 14-16, 2016. Subject association groups in Ontario have existed in traditional subjects such as Mathematics, Science, and English, for decades. They consist of educators that are interested in sharing innovative ideas, approaches, lessons, and resources in their discipline. Most are funded through a membership fee model but the more established ones, like the Science Teachers' Association of Ontario (STAO), can also be subsidized by the government. New to these groups is the creation of EE teacher communities such as the Ontario Society for Environmental Education (OSEE) and The Council of Outdoor Educators of Ontario (COEO). They are currently quite small and are often underpublicized. This limits their funding and ability to thrive as they rely heavily on membership fees and volunteer efforts.

  

31  

2.3 Conclusions Ontario is finally starting to recognize the importance of EE to the future of its citizens and the planet as a whole. The momentum that Ontario has generated with the Bondar Report must not be lost. Ontario must continue to learn from itself and the international community. Place-based and urban studies are at the heart and forefront of EE and the extent to which they are focused on in secondary school studies has a great impact on the environmental literacy of youth in the province. If EE in Ontario is to grow, the wings that it needs to be successful, the barriers in its way need to be removed. Students and educators who are passionate about EE are making progress but should not have to fight this hard for opportunities and resources. For those who do not share this passion or expertise, EE needs to be made a priority through raised awareness and training. Part of the solution is continuing to draw attention to the problem until it cannot be ignored.

  

32  

3. METHOD To assess the depth and breadth of the Ontario secondary school curriculum in place-based and urban EE, this study uses three different methods. The first method identifies urban and place-based EE implementation barriers through a summary of the perspectives of educators offered at the Education Experts Workshop. The second involves a content analysis of curriculum expectations in mandatory courses to identify opportunities for urban and place-based EE and assess their prescriptiveness. The mandatory courses examined were those in which EE was made prominent as per the Bondar Report. The curriculum expectations within them are classified as either overall or specific expectations, and contain examples, and sample questions. To analyze prescriptiveness, these expectations were categorized as directly related to urban and place-based EE if they required its study. Expectations that provided the opportunity to study urban and place-based EE without requiring it, were categorized as indirect. The third method identifies elective courses with substantial urban and place-based EE content and examines enrollment and course offerings subsequent to the Bondar Report. Together, these methods were used to assess the progression and continuity of urban and placed-based EE in secondary schools. Since this study utilizes EEW workshop observations, a content analysis of curriculum expectations, and examination of enrolment data, it contains three methods. These methods are expounded upon in the sections that follow. 3.1 Education Experts' Workshop: Implementing 2007 Bondar Report's Intended Outcomes in 2015 On April 1 2015, the Faculty of Science at Ryerson University and Ryerson Urban Water (RUW) hosted the Education Experts' Workshop: Implementing 2007 Bondar Report's Intended Outcomes in 2015. The Education Experts' Workshop (EEW) brought together 31 representatives from the Ontario Ministry of Education (OME), the Ministry of the Environment and Climate Change (MOECC), NGOs doing EE-related work, extracurricular education centers, conservation authorities, Faculties of Education, principals, and teachers for the   

33  

shared purpose of: a) Discussing the evolution and current state of EE in Ontario schools (K-12); b) Identifying existing barriers to the successful implementation of EE; and c) Producing a comprehensive and shared plan, which addresses the challenges raised. A full participant list, EEW agenda, and invitation can be found in Appendix B. The format for the workshop was a series of roundtable discussions. The roundtables, facilitated by Ryerson faculty members, were first organized by peer group to share their expertise and perspective on the evolution, current state, and impediments to EE in Ontario. The second set of roundtables consisted of mixed stakeholder groupings designed to collaborate on a shared vision for overcoming the challenges raised by the first roundtables. Several note takers were present at each of the tables. They consisted of Ryerson faculty members, and graduate students (including myself). The EEW was designed to be the first in a series of dialogues that examines the challenges faced in moving EE to the forefront of K-12 public education. Convergent with the purpose of this study, the topics of EE curriculum, placebased EE, and urban EE were discussed at length by the stakeholder groups present at the workshop. After the event, the following steps were taken to apply the information gathered at the workshop to the third objective of this study in order to provide curriculum and programming recommendations which further urban and placebased EE. 1) Collection of observations (hand written notes, formal summaries, chart paper group summaries) from note takers present at each of the roundtables, 2) Review of observation to identify congruencies between note takers and common threads in participant perspectives, 3) Consolidation of the predominant perspectives on the current state of EE and barriers to its implementation in the form of a white paper titled Education Experts' Workshop: Implementation of The Bondar Report 2007

  

34  

(EEW, 2015), 4) Dissemination of white paper to EEW participants for review and feedback, and 5) Preparation of synopsis applicable to urban and place-based EE inclusive of a discussion that provides perspective, purpose, and recommendations to the curriculum review and enrolment data analysis. Similar to case studies and interviews, workshops and roundtable discussions are subjective in nature. Although difficult to substantiate, these types of studies provide vital information on how policy is made into practice. 3.2 Curriculum Review This section describes the curriculum review performed on specific mandatory courses for urban and place-based EE content. First, it lists the courses identified for review and explains the rationale for their selection. Then it describes how urban and place-based EE curriculum expectations were recognized and the criteria used to classify them as having a "direct" or "indirect" relation to these topics. Finally, it explains the process by which curriculum expectations having urban or place-based EE content were further analyzed to identify opportunities for field study and/or participatory and action outcomes. 3.2.1 Selection of Courses for Curriculum Review To obtain a secondary school diploma in the province of Ontario, a student must meet the requirements listed in Table 2. Of the thirty credits outlined in Table 2, eighteen are mandatory. Credits are obtained upon successful completion of a course. Courses generally have a value of one credit with rare exceptions like Civics and Citizenship (CHV2O) and Career Studies (GLC2O), which count as half credits. The curriculum review section of this study only focused on the credits that students are required to take to obtain their O.S.S.D.. These are the only courses taken by every Ontario secondary school student and as such, they represent a standard environmental curriculum across the province. Within the eighteen mandatory credits in Table 2, some offer more

  

35  

selection than others. For example, the Group 1, 2, and 3 requirements are very broad, and the Arts requirement can be taken in courses ranging from visual arts and drama, to graphic design and music. To narrow the focus of this study to one that was manageable for graduate study and select credits that truly represented a standardized environmental curriculum, the Arts and Group 1, 2, Table 2: O.S.S.D. Requirements (OME, 2014)

· · ·

12 optional credits 40 hours of community involvement activities the provincial literacy requirements (OSSLT)

and 3 requirements were not included in the review. Recommendations within the Bondar Report regarding credits with the greatest potential for EE content prompted further narrowing of the study to credits in Geography, Science, and Civics. The Bondar Report states:

  

36  

Since virtually all secondary students, to meet diploma requirements, take courses in Grade 9 Geography, Grade 9 and 10 Science, and Grade 10 Civics, it is important that expectations related to environmental education be prominent in these courses. Currently, courses in Grade 9 geography and Grade 10 science offer a number of opportunities for environmental education. This focus should be reinforced to complement and extend student knowledge, skills, and perspectives (OME, 2007b). In addition to the courses recommended by the Bondar Report, the following credits were also included in this study: 1) Career Studies ­ included because it is often delivered in conjunction with Civics, and 2) Workplace Environmental  Science ­ included because it can count as a second mandatory science credit (prerequisite is grade 9 academic or applied science). The courses identified by this study can be available at multiple levels known as course types (i.e. open, academic, applied, and workplace). Descriptions of each of these course types are provided in Table 3. In general, grade 9 and 10 courses are only offered as academic, applied and open. These courses lead to grade 11 and 12 university, mixed, college, and workplace course types. Grade 9 academic courses lead to grade10 academic courses, which are prerequisites for the grade 11 and 12 university, and mixed level courses. Grade 9 applied courses lead to grade 10 applied courses, which are prerequisites for the grade 11 and 12 mixed, college and workplace courses. Open courses usually have no prerequisites in grade 9 and 10, and applied or open prerequisites in grade 11 and 12. As such, a student can take multiple pathways through the mandatory curriculum and still meet their O.S.S.D. requirements. These pathways are outlined in Figure 4. Since the pathways through the Ontario curriculum stem from two main course types in grade 9, they are often referred to as the academic and applied pathways. The difference between urban and placebased EE coverage in the academic and applied pathways was also assessed by this study. Table 4 provides a complete list of all of the courses that were

  

37  

identified for review by this study. Table 3: Description of Course Types (OME, 2014) COURSE  TYPE   DESCRIPTION  
Academic  courses  develop  students'  knowledge  and  skills   through  the  study  of  theory  and  abstract  problems.  These   courses  focus  on  the  essential  concepts  of  a  subject  and   explore  related  concepts  as  well.  They  incorporate  practical   applications  as  appropriate   Applied  courses  focus  on  the  essential  concepts  of  a  subject,   and  develop  students'  knowledge  and  skills  through  practical   applications  and  concrete  examples.  Familiar  situations  are   used  to  illustrate  ideas,  and  students  are  given  more   opportunities  to  experience  hands-on  applications  of  the   concepts  and  theories  they  study.   Open  courses  are  the  only  type  of  course  offered  in  most   subjects  other  than  those  listed  above.  They  are  designed  to   prepare  students  for  further  study  in  a  subject,  and  to  enrich   their  education  generally.  Open  courses  comprise  a  set  of   expectations  that  are  appropriate  for  all  students.   Open  courses  are  designed  to  broaden  students'  knowledge   and  skills  in  subjects  that  reflect  their  interests  and  to  prepare   them  for  active  and  rewarding  participation  in  society.  They   are  not  designed  with  the  specific  requirements  of   universities,  colleges,  or  the  workplace  in  mind.   Workplace  preparation  courses  are  designed  to  equip   students  with  the  knowledge  and  skills  they  need  to  meet  the   expectations  of  employers,  if  they  plan  to  enter  the  workplace   directly  after  graduation,  or  the  requirements  for  admission  to   certain  apprenticeship  or  other  training  programs.  

Academic  

Applied

Open (gr. 9/10)

Open (gr. 11/12)

Workplace

   Also included in the O.S.S.D requirements in Table 2, is the mandatory community service requirement. This study does not focus on the mandatory service requirement because data on the nature of activities (i.e. environmental or not) is very difficult to obtain. Currently, mandatory service forms are completed by hand. A supervisor and guidance counselor approve the activity before it is recorded as a total number of hours in an electronic database. There is currently no electronic database which includes a description of the activities nor is there any requirement that it be environmental in nature.   

  

38  

Grade   9/10  
Academic   (D)  

Grade   11/12  
University   (U)   University/ College  (M)  

Applied  (P)  

Open  (O)  

College  (C)  

Open  (O)  
Figure 4: Course Pathways Table 4: Mandatory Courses Identified for Curriculum Review GRADE   9   9   10   10   9   9   10   10   *11   COURSE  TITLE   Issues  in  Canadian  Geography   Issues  in  Canadian  Geography   Civics  and  Citizenship   Career  Studies   Science   Science   Science   Science   Environmental  Science   TYPE   Academic   Applied   Open  (0.5  credits)   Open  (0.5  credits)   Academic   Applied   Academic   Applied   Workplace   COURSE   CODE   CGC1D   CGC1P   CHV2O   GLC2O   SNC1D   SNC1P   SNC2D   SNC2P   SVN3E     

*Included because it can count as second mandatory science credit (prerequisite is grade 9 academic or applied science)

To describe a curriculum expectation in the sections that follow, the headings below are used. A full list of urban and place-based EE expectations containing these headings can be found in Appendix A.    39  

1) Grade (9, 10, 11 or 12), 2) Course Title, 3) Course Type (e.g. Academic, Applied, Open, Workplace), 4) Course Code (an abbreviation used to identify the subject, grade level and course type), 5) Strand, 6) Expectation Type (overall or specific), 7) Expectation, 8) Examples, and 9) Sample Questions - Not all expectations include examples and sample questions. 3.2.2 Approach to Curriculum Review To review the mandatory courses identified for curriculum review a qualitative content analysis was conducted. A constant comparative approach was used to create and define the criteria used to code the data (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). According to Hsieh and Shannon (2005), the method can be defined as an "open and explorative approach, such as in the form of a thematic analysis in which categories are constructed inductively". In other words, the researcher is required to compare data to create categories that undergo content and definition changes as the data are compared and categorized. For this reason it is thought of as an inductive or evolutionary approach rather than deductive approach which clearly defines at the outset what will be found (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). In this study, themes, identified by the literature review, were used to determine if curriculum expectations were related to urban and place-based EE. The criteria used to identify these themes and their prescriptiveness, such as the presence of key words, were defined and redefined using a constant comparative approach. Curriculum expectations are qualitative and diverse in nature. Their focus ranges from a skills basis to a content basis and their prescriptiveness varies as a result. A constant comparative approach is well suited to these kinds of data because it can be constructed based on the type of language present in curriculum

  

40  

expectations and evolves to accommodate its variability. 3.2.3 Curriculum Review Method To identify curriculum expectations related to urban and place-based EE, clear criteria had to be established . This proved to be a challenge because of the variability in data and the breadth of the topics themselves. Urban and placebased EE themes that emerged from the literature review were used as a starting point. These themes were used to identify expectations related to urban and place-based EE. In this way, the approach to classifying expectations was deductive with pre-established criteria. Inductive elements were introduced to the method as the curriculum expectations were reviewed. To determine if any of the themes applied to an expectation, a combination of key words and subject matter distinctive of the curriculum documents were established. These criteria evolved using a constant comparative approach. Furthermore, the set of themes itself was expanded to include additional themes consistent with urban and place-based EE. The presence or absence of themes and key words was then used to categorize the data. Raw counts of curriculum expectations were used to provide an indication of content coverage. It should be noted that the Ministry of Education does not equally weigh curriculum expectations. There are no Ministry criteria stipulating that equal amounts of time be spent on each curriculum expectation as they are very diverse in nature and lend themselves to different instructional strategies. The methods used to perform the curriculum review are described in detail in the sections that follow. 3.2.3.1. Identify Curriculum Expectations with Place-Based and/or Urban EE Content Using the six themes derived from Godfrey's (2010) convergence of urban and environmental studies in the literature review (Section 2.1.5), 1) Urban Political Ecology ­ Governance [Politics], 2) Urban Political Ecology ­ Ecojustice [Sociogeographic], 3) Urban Systems [Systems],

  

41  

4) Urban Geography-City Form [Planning], 5) Urban Geography ­ City Form [Immigration and Settlement], 6) Urban Geography ­ Ecology [Ecological], and one theme derived from Woodhouse and Knapp's (2000) key components of place-based education, 7) Sustainability, seven themes were highlighted as opportunities to pursue place-based and/or urban EE. They are typical of both urban and place-based EE. The theme of "Sustainability" stemmed from the concept that place-based education: is inherently experiential (i.e. includes participatory action or service learning); has a philosophical agenda that is broader than "learning to earn"; and connects the individual, community, and environment (Woodhouse and Knapp, 2000). Upon reviewing the curriculum expectations, an eighth theme, 8) Climate. was added to the list to include expectations related to place-based climate study which had not been accounted for by the original seven themes. Within each of the courses listed in Table 4, curriculum expectations (overall or specific), their associated examples, and sample questions were screened for content in any of these eight themes. Curriculum expectations were also selected if they offered the opportunity to study these themes but did not necessitate an environmental focus. Table 5 summarizes and describes the eight themes identified by the literature and curriculum review. The way in which these themes were applied to the curriculum expectations is described in the sections that follow.

  

42  

Table 5: Themes in Urban and Place-based EE

Topic  
Politics   Sociogeographic   Systems   Planning   Immigration  and   Settlement   Ecological   Sustainability   Climate  

Description   governance  /  rights  /  responsibilities   general  population  characteristics   waste,  transportation,  energy,  food,  water   land  use   population  (settlement  and  infrastructure  impact)   immigration  (infrastructure  impact  -urban  vs.  rural)   pollution  problems,  local  biota   community  action,  projects,  and  sustainable  practices   temperature,  precipitation,  wind,  humidity  

3.2.3.2 Identify Curriculum Expectations Related to Place-Based EE. The curriculum expectations containing the themes outlined in Section 3.2.3.1, were further analyzed for the presence of direct and indirect place-based EE content. As previously mentioned, direct content requires the topic to be taught while indirect content provides an opportunity for it to be taught. An overview of the place-based categorization process is outlined in Figure 5. Curriculum expectations were initially placed into one of three groups based on the scale of the study. This was established using a key word search described in the rationale column of Table 6. The initial three groups are as follows: A. Place-based EE ­ if the scale of study was regional/municipal or smaller and specific to a student's own region, B. Indirect place-based EE ­ if the scale of study was regional/municipal or smaller but did not specify a student's own region, and C. Neither ­ If the scale of study was not regional/municipal or smaller. Within category A, place-based EE, curriculum expectations were further categorized according to the prescriptiveness of their environmental focus. This was a less concrete process than the first because an environmental focus is difficult to define with key words. In general, expectations with an indirect focus tended to occur "in" the environment but were not necessarily, "for" and "about" it. Examples have been provided in Table 6 to provide clarity. These subcategories are as follows:

  

43  

i. ii.

Direct place-based EE ­ if it had a clear environmental focus, and Indirect place-based EE ­ if provided an opportunity to study the environment but did not require it.

The overall outcome is that curriculum expectations were classified into three categories: 1) Direct place-based EE (Ai) ­ if they were local studies with a clear environmental focus, 2) Indirect place-based EE (B, Aii) ­ if they provided an opportunity for local study OR if they were local studies without a clear environmental focus, and 3) Neither (C) ­ if they were not local studies. See Table 6 below for a summary of the major categories, the key word rationale behind their initial grouping, and curriculum expectation examples.

Related  to  Place-based   and/or  Urban  EE  

Place-based  EE  (focus   on  student's  own   municipality,   community,  region,   area)    

2.    Indirect  Place-based   EE  (focus  on  a   municipality,   community,  region,   area)  

3.    Neither  (does  not   focus  on  municipality,   community,  region,  area   but  will  have  some   degree  of  environmental   focus)  

1  Direct  Place-based  EE   (clear  focus  on   environment)  

2.    Indirect  Place-based   EE  (provides   opportunity  for   environmental  study)  

Figure 5: Place-Based EE Categorization Process

  

44  

Table 6: Place-Based EE Classification, Rationale, and Examples
Categorization   2.  (B)    Indirect  Place- based   Rationale   Environmental  and   substitutable  for  place- based         KEY  WORDS  ­  "a   community",   "communities",  "a  region",   "a  city"   Substitutable  for   environmental  and  place- based         KEY  WORDS  -"your   community",  "their   community",  "area  in   which  you  live",  "area  in   which  they  live",  "your   region",  "local"   Environmental  and  place- based      KEY  WORDS  -"your   community",  "their   community",  "area  in   which  you  live",  "area  in   which  they  live",  "your   region",  "local"      Environmental  but  not   place-based         Examples   "What  would  the  costs  and  benefits  of   developing  a  wind  and/or  solar  farm  be   for  your  community,  a  community  in   southern  Alberta,  or  another  location  of   your  choice?"­  CGC1D  (C2.4)*      Analyse  the  impact  of  a  selected  project   on  a  community­  CGC1P  (E2.4)*      Describe  the  major  demographic   characteristics  of  present-day  Canada   and  compare  them  to  those  of  your   community  or  local  area.  ­  CGC1P   (D3.2)*      Describe  a  variety  of  ways  in  which  they   could  make  a  civic  contribution  at  the   local,  national,  and/or  global  level-   CHV2O  (C1.2)*  

2.  (Aii)    Indirect  Place- based  

  

Describe  different  types  of  land  use   within  their  community  and  explain   reasons  for  their  location.  ­  CGC1P   (E3.1)*      Assess  the  effectiveness  of  a  local   initiative  of  personal  interest  that  seeks   to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  a   terrestrial  or  aquatic  ecosystem  ­   SNC1P  (B1.2)*   3.  (C)    Neither   Analyse  ways  in  which  human  actions   have  increased  or  decreased  the   production  of  greenhouse  gases.  SNC2P   (D1.2)*      Assess  the  social  and  environmental   impact  of  the  production  or  use  of  a   common  element  or  simple  compound.   -  SNC1P  (C1.2)*   * The code in brackets helps to locate an expectation within Appendix A and the Ontario curriculum documents. The letter corresponds to the strand, the first number corresponds to the overall expectation and the second number corresponds to the specific expectation.

1.  (Ai)    Direct  Place- based  

  

45  

Furthermore, any direct expectations with place-based EE content present in only the examples and sample questions were treated as "indirect place-based EE". The purpose of examples, and sample questions is to suggest options for the expectation. In other words, they provide possible avenues for study but do not require it. 3.2.3.3 Identify Curriculum Expectations Related to Urban EE A similar categorization process was performed for urban EE. The curriculum expectations containing the themes outlined in Section 3.2.3.1, were further analyzed for direct and indirect urban EE content. An overview of the urban categorization process is outlined in Figure 6. A curriculum expectation was categorized as having a direct relation to urban EE if it contained key words such as "urban", "municipal" or "city", which are used as synonyms for the word city. They also fell in this category if they contained key words that are characteristic of cities such as "high population density", "high rise apartment buildings" and "public transit". Also falling under the direct relation category, were expectations within three of the six themes derived from Godfrey's (2010) article on the convergence of urban and environmental studies. The themes of Planning, Systems, Politics (municipal) were selected because they are characteristic of the complex structure and governance of cities. To be classified as having an indirect relationship to urban EE, Godfrey's (2010) remaining three themes of Ecology (general anthropogenic factors) and Immigration and Settlement (access to resources), and Sociogeography (population trends, social and economic systems) had to be present. These themes are more widespread and although equally important features of cities, they are also commonly applied to other settings or fields. See Table 7 below for a summary of the major categories, the key word and thematic rationale behind their grouping, and curriculum expectation examples. The categorization system used for urban EE was less robust than the method used for place-based EE because it used more themes and fewer key words. As such, there were occasional exceptions to the rules due to tone or emphasis in wording. An

  

46  

example of such an exception is "Explain the influence of Canada's natural characteristics on the spatial distribution of its population - CGC1P (B2.2)" which was classified as Sociogeographic but directly related to urban EE. This expectation clearly looks at the impact of the environment on population. Alternatively, the majority of Sociogeographic expectations such as "Identify factors that influence the demographic characteristics of settlements across Canada ­ CGC1D (D3.2)" were not as overt in their link to the environment. These factors could also include jobs, infrastructure, and training.

Related  to  Place-based   and/or  Urban  EE  

1.    Direct  Urban  EE   (containing  key  words   or  themes  of  "Planning",   "Systems"  and   "Politics")  

2.    Indirect  Urban  EE   (containing  themes  of   "Ecological",   "Sociogeographic"  and   "Immigration  and   Settlement")  

3.    Neither    

Figure 6: Urban EE Categorization Process As with the place-based method, any direct expectations with urban EE only present in the examples and sample questions were treated as "indirect urban EE" as their purpose is to provide examples and/or suggest options for the expectation itself.

  

47  

Table 7: Urban EE Classification, Rationale, and Examples
Categorization   Direct  Urban  EE   Rationale   Examples   Assess  the  impact  of  urban  growth  on   natural  systems  ­  CGC1D  (E2.1)      Explain,  with  reference  to  issues  of  civic   importance,  the  roles  and   responsibilities  of  different  levels  of   government  in  Canada  ­  CHV2O  (B2.2)      Explain  how  changes  in  land  use  can   affect  the  growth  or  decline  of  different   parts  of  a  community  ­  CGC1P  (E2.3)         KEY  WORDS  -  "urban",   "municipal",  "city",  "high   population  density",  "high  rise   apartment  buildings",  "public   transit"      and/or      THEMES:       Systems  (waste,  transportation,   food,  water)        Planning  (land  use  analysis)      Politics  (municipal  governance)      Indirect  Urban  EE   THEMES:     Ecological  (general   anthropogenic  factors  such  as   paving  over  land,  vehicle   emissions),        Sociogeographic  (social  or   economic  systems,  general   analysis  of  population  trends)        Immigration  and  Settlement   (urban  vs.  rural,  geographic   population  patterns,   infrastructure  impact)      Neither           

Analyse  the  effect  of  factors  related  to   human  activity  on  terrestrial  or  aquatic   ecosystems  by  interpreting  data  and   generating  graphs  ­  SNC1P  (B2.5)         Identify  factors  that  influence  the   demographic  characteristics  of   settlements  across  Canada  ­  CGC1D   (D3.2)      Explain  how  human  activities  in  their   local  region  can  have  an  impact  on   natural  processes  ­  CGC1P  (B1.4)   Classify  the  climate  of  their  local  region   using  various  tools  or  systems  (e.g.,   Ecoregions  of  Canada,  bioclimate   profiles),  and  compare  their  region  to   other  regions  in  Ontario,  Canada,  and   the  world  ­  SNC2D  (D2.8)  

3.2.3.4 Requirement of Field Study/Outdoor Education This purpose of this section is to identify urban and/or place-based EE curriculum that requires field study or outdoor education. This is one of the key characteristics of place-based education described in the literature review. To be

  

48  

classified as requiring field study, the expectation does not have to occur outside of school property or even be outdoors. An example of indoor field study on school property could be asking students to conduct a school waste inventory to assess recycling practices. In field studies, students must leave the four walls of their classroom and have first-hand experiences studying the "field". 3.2.3.5 Identify Curriculum Expectations that are Participatory with Action Outcomes The purpose of this section is to identify urban and/or place-based EE expectations that involve a real world issue and require a product or action that is useful outside the classroom. This can take the form of community or school action (i.e. the greening of school grounds), writing letters to politicians regarding environmental concerns, and creating local land use improvement plans. 3.3 Enrolment in EE Elective Courses and Course Offerings The province of Ontario has published secondary curriculum for hundreds of courses in various subjects, grades, and types. The majority of these courses are found in senior grades (11 and 12) and are designated electives because they are not an O.S.S.D. requirement. Graduate studies do not provide sufficient time and resources to perform a curriculum review of every elective. As such, course titles were reviewed for potential links to any of the eight urban and placebased themes and a list of relevant courses was compiled. Student enrollment and course offering data for these courses was obtained from the Ministry of Education for the 2012-2013 school year. This was the most recent year of data available, officially three years after the publication of the policy framework, Acting Today, Shaping Tomorrow (OME, 2009). The Ontario School Information System [ONSIS] was used to provide context to these values by providing data on the total number of public secondary schools in Ontario and the number of students registered in each grade 9-12 for the 2012 school year. Using both the Ministry and ONSIS data sets, the percentage of students in each grade pursuing the electives of interest could be calculated. The data analysis can be found in

  

49  

Section 4.3 of Analysis and Discussion. It provides some insights into the continuity of urban and place-based EE throughout the secondary school years.

  

50  

4. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION The analysis and discussion section of this document follows the same sequence as the Methods (Section 3). It begins with a summary of observations from the EEW, followed by the curriculum review of mandatory courses, and finishes with the enrollment data analysis. 4.1 Summary of Observations from the Education Experts' Workshop: Implementing 2007 Bondar Report's Intended Outcomes in 2015 The summary of observations from the EEW in the sections that follow provide insight into the barriers experienced by educators and administrators in implementing place-based and urban EE. They have been clustered into four groups. The first discusses how well policy is translated to educators, the second describes systemic barriers to implementing EE in classrooms, the third looks at barriers to outdoor education, and the last discusses additional barriers to implementing EE. 4.1.1 Policy Awareness and Shared Vision As a result of the Bondar Report, documents such as Acting Today, Shaping Tomorrow (OME, 2009), defining the province's new EE policies and strategies were developed. These documents are described in Section 2.2.2. Participants at EEW expressed their concerns about disparities in their awareness of these documents and the vision described within them. Exposure ranged from not knowing of their existence, particularly in the case of new teachers, to general familiarity, observed with administrators. With the exception of Ministry representatives, and EE academics, few stakeholder groups present at the workshop referred to the documents on a regular basis. This raises the concern that the vision of EE developed by the Ministry of Education has not been adequately translated to those who work most closely with students. Chowdhury's (2015) graduate study at OISE examining the implementation of EE in Ontario also recommended raising teacher awareness of policy documents. Pre-service efforts such as DEEPER will likely address many

  

51  

of these issues for new teachers (Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, 2013) but exposure for other stakeholder groups would have to be provided through alternate means. One of the most significant changes that came from the Bondar Report's recommendations was integrating EE into the curriculum as a whole (OME, 2009). Teachers at EEW acknowledged that they work most closely with curriculum documents and have far more familiarity with them than policy and strategy documents. They also discussed their efforts to follow the curriculum as closely as possible while also using their professional judgment to adapt it to meet the needs of their students. One of the barriers to implementing EE that was perceived by the participants of EEW, was an overcrowded curriculum. Participants commented that the result of an overcrowded curriculum was the inability to meet all course requirements or having to "rush through them". This barrier has been well documented by other parties (Tan & Pedretti, 2010). Moreover, some teachers stated that the EE curriculum lacked "absolute wording", providing opportunities to incorporate EE but not insisting that they be pursued. They commented that with an already overcrowded curriculum and the time constraints placed upon teachers, opportunities to incorporate EE were being overlooked in favor of other initiatives such as literacy and numeracy. Administrators echoed these statements with their own crowded policy domains consisting of areas such as wellness and STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics). Definitive wording requires that the environment be studied rather than suggesting the environment as a possible avenue for study. Assessing the extent to which this type of wording is present in curriculum documents is one of the objectives of this study. A lack of clear direction and strong wording in Ontario's integrated model runs the risk of perpetuating the marginalization of EE to the field of science. This is a pitfall for the integration model, a "shallow integration" (Pardy, 2010) reminiscent of Premier Mike Harris's "patchwork approach" (Puk & Behm, 2003). Without clear implementation to ensure continuity and progression (UNESCO, 1978; Neil, 1994), EE loses its place as an

  

52  

overarching theme. In an integrated approach, all stakeholders share the responsibility of EE and they must be fully cognizant of their role in promoting it. This constitutes a truly shared vision. Stakeholders must have good working knowledge of EE policy goals and the goals themselves should be explicit in curriculum policy documents. If too many of the expectations related to EE are ambiguous and their importance is not otherwise emphasized, then EE becomes optional rather than essential. 4.1.2 Barriers to the Implementation of EE Even with a shared vision and deep awareness of the integrated model, participants identified problems in implementing successful EE in schools. Having insufficient "opportunities to communicate with peers" and other stakeholders in both "structured and unstructured formats" was raised as a concern. There are countless EE resources available to teachers online and in textbooks; however, place-based EE in particular, needs to be personalized. Place-based EE is rooted in communities and their regional environments and is an important component of EE. It requires teachers to have professional development (PD) time to locally develop or personalize resources so that they are region specific. Furthermore, to effectively engage students, EE must be contemporary and continuously updated to address timely issues. The interdisciplinary nature of EE also necessitates collaboration between secondary school departments, which can be accomplished through PD. This is particularly true of urban EE, which frequently involves multiple fields of study (i.e. political, social, economic, and ecological). Participants at EEW also identified the issue of subject teachers "opting out" of EE because they lack expertise or comfort with the material and relegate it to its traditional science vehicle. As a more structured form of PD, the creation of additional qualification courses in EE, and DEEPER has improved teacher confidence and ability. These initiatives target new and interested teachers but

  

53  

do not address the majority of experienced teachers. More system-wide structures need to be in place to promote EE if all educators are to prioritize learning. Discussions at the EEW also revealed that "no teacher truly identified as an environmental educator" regardless of their involvement in senior environmental electives. Their explanation for this was that in schools offering these electives, there was often only one section and therefore no community of teachers with which to collaborate. The availability and enrollment in electives containing urban and place-based EE is examined by this study. These factors could also contribute to a sparse community of EE educators if the courses are not widely offered or not well attended. Subject association groups in EE do exist and help to connect teachers of these courses but they are still relatively new and growing in size. According to the participants of EEW, much of the EE programming that takes place in schools is a direct result of volunteer efforts on the part of teachers, students and administrators. Consequently, stakeholders agreed that it is applied inconsistently across the province with a broad range in the actions taking place at each school. Administrators, in particular, acknowledged the importance of recognizing volunteer efforts to maintain enthusiasm and a positive climate of change. Widespread examples of participatory programming discussed at the workshop included the Ontario EcoSchools certification program and Ontario Envirothon.3 Representatives from EcoSchools at the EEW acknowledged that the considerable amount of work required by individual teachers acted as a deterrent from participation in the program. Some boards in the province of Ontario have taken the route of making                                                                                                                  3  Ontario EcoSchools is a non-profit education and certification program for K-12 schools in the
province (Ontario EcoSchools, 2016). The certification process (from bronze to platinum) is based on teamwork and leadership, energy conservation, waste minimization, school ground greening, curriculum, and environmental stewardship (Ontario EcoSchools, 2016). There are currently over 4000 schools with Ontario EcoSchools certification in the province (Ontario EcoSchools, 2016). Envirothon is a five-person team competition involving interactive field study and workshops in the areas of forests, wildlife, soils and aquatic ecosystems (Forests Ontario, 2016). It requires a registration fee and is currently attended by over 200 schools and 10 000 students in the province of Ontario (Forests Ontario, 2016).  

  

54  

participation in EcoSchools mandatory. This is an interesting approach with great potential to improve EE in schools but it cannot be seen as a one-stop shop as its focus is on facility operations and participation over curriculum. Participants at the EEW raised the issue of having one of these areas overshadow the other. Without clear instruction, the weight that school boards and schools place on each of these areas is subjective. Ontario EcoSchools has the potential to develop into a more comprehensive platform if key stakeholders choose to make it so but in the interim, schools must be wary of using certification as justification for inaction in EE curriculum development. Elementary and secondary schools operate very differently from each other and often differ in size. Principals at the EEW recognized the potential advantage of smaller elementary schools with fewer administrators in realizing environmental goals. Large secondary schools posed more problems for implementing school wide efforts. There is currently very little in Acting Today, Shaping Tomorrow (OME, 2009) with regards to EE programming in secondary schools. The policy framework mandates the creation of environmental plans and frameworks at the school and board level but does not specify what they should contain (OME, 2009). The approach that is taken by each board and school depends greatly on the interest, passion, and resources available to individuals (Pedretti et al., 2012). One of the objectives of this study is to assess the extent to which participatory and action outcomes are present in the urban and place-based EE curriculum. If this type of programming is deeply embedded in the curriculum, then reliance on inconsistent voluntary effort is no longer necessary. Not directly related to this study but interesting to note were the solutions to concerns of EE program and PD financing. Participants applauded local solutions such as the Toronto District School Board's (TDSB) Environmental Legacy Fund, which raises money through the sale of carbon credits and solar panel generated energy. They also acknowledged the need for local solutions to be recognized and advertised as model examples of supports to provincial funding.

  

55  

4.1.3 Outdoor Education Participants at the EEW acknowledged that schools need to forge lasting relationships with their communities and explore simple ways to get outside. Some of the ways that were discussed included making use of school grounds and community sites, inviting community experts into the classroom, bringing in specialized kits or local samples, using public transit or walking to sites, streamlining field trip paperwork, identifying subsides, and using virtual tours. Participants suggested that once these avenues have been identified for a specific school, they need to be fostered so that they become habitual. Among the organizations contributing to the discussion at EEW were the Ontario Science Centre, the Ontario Clean Water Agency, and Evergreen. Most of the external organizations present provided off site locations with unique programming, non-traditional learning for students, and professional development opportunities for teachers. While many of their programs were well attended, they worked diligently to forge curriculum connections and tried to offer field trip subsidies to remove funding barriers. Some of the obstacles that they faced involved; overcoming safety concerns; increasing teacher, student, and parent comfort levels with the outdoors; and, shifting the focus of outdoor education from recreational to promoting environmental literacy. They expressed the importance of teacher engagement on field trips to motivate and inspire students. To make visits more meaningful to students and promote attendance in their programs, many organizations were trying to provide pre, during, and post visit resources, develop a narrative for yearly visits, and offer teacher PD. Teachers recognized the value in field trips but missed out on opportunities due to the time constraints of an overcrowded curriculum, the complexities of field trip logistics and paperwork, concerns over safety and comfort levels, accessibility (particularly in the case of urban schools), and funding. The concerns raised by EEW participants of overcrowded curriculum, access to the outdoors (Tan & Pedretti, 2010), and comfort levels (Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, 2013) are well documented by other parties. One of the objectives of this study is to assess the extent to which field studies are

  

56  

embedded in the urban and place-based curriculum. Field studies are an important component of place-based EE and EE as a whole because they foster "personal concern" (Neil, 1994). If field study requirements are widespread, then the province can focus its efforts on overcoming logistical barriers. As mentioned by the participants of EEW, field studies do not need to be costly. 4.1.4 Other Concerns With representatives from a variety of schools with very different student bodies, some felt that "academic" schools pursued environmental initiatives more. In these settings it was speculated that: students were better at navigating their own environmental pursuits; parents were more likely to be educated about environmental issues; and school communities were better able to advocate for environmental change. Teachers involved in the Model Schools for Inner Cities (Toronto District School Board [TDSB], 2011) program with the Toronto District School Board were present at EEW. This program focuses on schools where large numbers of students live in poverty. It provides additional resources to allow students "to participate fully and equally in their schools and communities" and "improves student achievement through focused supports and opportunities" (TDSB, 2011). Teachers at EEW who were part of this program discussed the need for a concerted effort in inner city schools to make the environment a priority and empower students to shape their communities. One of the recommendations of the Bondar Report was to map EE progression through the curriculum and provide opportunities for EE in senior grades. An important component of this study is to examine the enrollment in and availability of urban and place-based EE electives. This will provide some insight into the continuity of EE throughout the high school years. It will also be interesting to note if these data agree with the statements made by EEW participants regarding "academic" students. Data have been grouped by course type to see if there are significant differences in enrollment or availability. The curriculum review component of this study has also been grouped by course type and can provide inform the same concerns.

  

57  

4.2 Curriculum Review The curriculum review of the mandatory courses identified in Section 3.2.1., has been summarized and discussed in this section of the document. It is organized as per the Methods Section 3.2.3., starting with raw counts of expectations containing urban and place-based EE themes. The expectations containing urban and place-based EE content were then analyzed for direct and indirect wording to determine if they provided opportunities for study or required it. They were also reviewed to determine the total number and range of urban and place-based field study and participatory/action outcome requirements. Discussion in this section focuses of the frequency of raw counts within various grades, subjects, and course types. 4.2.1 Urban and/or Place-Based EE Content by Theme A total of 675 expectations were reviewed for urban and place-based EE content. Of these, 124 contained themes related to urban or place-based EE. This accounts for ~18% of all expectations reviewed. Considering that these courses are not stand-alone EE courses, the frequency with which these themes are present is substantial. This aligns well with the Bondar Report's curriculum recommendations in Section 2.2.3 to "Ensure that all secondary students are exposed to EE though its substantial presence in compulsory Grade 9 Geography, Grade 9 and 10 Science, and Grade 10 Civics expectations" (OME, 2007b). The 124 expectations and their categorization can be found in Appendix A (OME, 2014). Table 8 provides a summary of the 124 expectations listing raw counts by course.

  

58  

Table 8: Urban and/or Place-based EE Content by Course             #  of  expectations  (n)      #  of  expectations   containing  themes    (n)      %  of  course   expectations   containing  themes  (%)   44   41   27   4.8   12   15   5.3   1.1   23            GRADE  

COURSE   CODE  

COURSE  TITLE  

9   9   10   10   9   9   10   10   11        

CGC1D   CGC1P   CHV2O   GLC2O   SNC1D   SNC1P   SNC2D   SNC2P   SVN3E  

Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Civics  and   Citizenship   Career  Studies   Science   Science   Science   Science   Environmental   Science   TOTALS   %  of  TOTAL  

Academic   Applied   Open  *   half   course   Open   Academic   Applied   Academic   Applied   Workplace  

TYPE  

70   68   45   42   90   86   95   89   90  
675  
N/A  

31   28   12   2   11   13   5   1   21   124   100  

Table 9 lists raw counts by grade. It should be noted that Environmental Science (SVN3E) is the only grade 11 course and is not designated as a mandatory course therefore it has been omitted from Table 9. The table shows that urban and place-based content is more prevalent in grade 9 ­ 26% over grade 10 ­ 7.4%. This is not surprising given that students take Issues in Canadian Geography (CGC1D/CGC1P) in Grade 9. As seen in Table 8, CGC1D ­ 44% and CGC1P ­ 41% had the greatest percentage of urban and placebased EE expectations. The difference seen between coverage in grade 9 and

  

59  

10 should be noted for the purpose of ensuring progression and continuity. O.S.S.D. requirements are designed with a broad range of mandatory courses assigned to grades 9 and 10 and more choice and electives assigned to the senior years as students develop their post-secondary plans. It is interesting to note that the only subjects that students are compelled to take over multiple years are English and Mathematics (OME, 2014). These subjects are present in the curriculum as discrete courses, but literacy and numeracy are considered to be overarching themes and the responsibility of all subject teachers (OME, 2014). EE has not been treated in the same manner as literacy and numeracy. It has been infused in the curriculum but does not have its own compulsory courses. Urban and place-based EE becomes more widespread and less evenly distributed in the senior years because of increased course options and the wide range of EE content within them. Policy documents recognize this shift in senior years when they ensure EE's "substantial presence" in grade 9 and 10 courses and provide "opportunities" for EE in senior years (OME, 2007b). With most students receiving their urban and place-based EE in grade 9 and 10, it should be a prevalent feature of these years. Table 9: Urban and/or Place-based EE Content by Grade #  of   expectations   (n)   314   271   #  of  expectations   containing  themes     (n)   83   20   %  of  grade   expectations   containing  themes   (%)   26   7.4   GRADE   9   10     

With respect to theme distribution, summarized in Table 10, most of the 124 expectations fell under the category of Planning ­ 27% or Ecological ­ 44%. The Sciences, SNC1D ­ 11 of 11, SNC1P ­ 12 of 13, SNC2D ­ 3 of 5, and SNC2P ­ 1 of 1, all had a clear Ecological focus. Most expectations were not multidisciplinary falling only under one theme. This is apparent when row totals are compared to number of expectations containing themes (i.e. SNC1D contained 11 relevant expectations with a total of 13 themes assigned to them 60  

Table 10: Urban and/or Place-based EE Content by Theme
Immigration  and   Settlement   Sociogeographic  

   COURSE   CODE  

  
COURSE   TITLE  

   TYPE  

Sustainability  

#  of   expecta- tions   containing   themes    (n)  

Number  of  expectations  related  to:  
Planning   Systems   Climate   Ecology   Politics  

GRADE  

  

9  

Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Civics  and   Citizenship   Career   Studies  

Academic  

CGC1D  

31  

13  

3  

1  

3  

0  

8  

12  

4  

9  

Applied  

CGC1P  

28  

13  

5  

1  

1  

0  

5  

4  

7  

CHV2O  

10  

Open  

12  

5  

0  

4  

0  

5  

0  

1  

0  

GLC2O  

10  

Open  

2  

0  

0  

2  

0  

0  

0  

0  

0  

9  

Academic  

SNC1D  

Science  

11  

1  

11  

0  

0  

1  

0  

0  

0  

9  

Applied  

SNC1P  

Science  

13  

0  

12  

1  

0  

0  

0  

0  

0  

10  

Academic  

SNC2D  

Science  

5  

1  

3  

0  

1  

1  

1  

0  

0  

10  

Applied  

SNC2P  

Science   Environme- ntal   Science  

1  

0  

1  

1  

0  

0  

0  

0  

0  

11           

Workplace  

SVN3E  

21  
124   100  

0   33   27  

19   54   44  

0   10  

0   5  

2   9  

0   14   11  

1   18  

0   11  

TOTALS   %  of  124  

8.1   4.0   7.3  

15   8.9  

61  

corresponding to a ratio 1.2). Issues in Canadian Geography (CGC1D/CGC1P) tended to be slightly more multidisciplinary covering multiple themes (i.e. CGC1D contained 31 relevant expectations with a total of 44 themes assigned to them corresponding to a ratio of 1.4). The theme of Planning was most prevalent in Issues in Canadian Geography CGC1D ­ 13 of 31, and Issues in Canadian Geography CGC1P ­ 13 of 38 with some content in Systems, Sociogeography, and Immigration & Settlement. Civics and Citizenship (CHV2O) was evenly distributed between Planning ­ 5 of 12, Sustainability ­ 4 of 12, and Politics ­ 5 of 12 and had an expectation to theme ratio of 1.3. The analysis shows that specific subjects gravitate towards their own set of themes and are not particularly multidisciplinary in their approach to urban and place-based EE. Table 11 contains expectations grouped according to the major grade 9 and 10 pathways. There does not appear to be a large difference between the two pathways. A deeper comparison can be found by comparing academic and applied courses of the same grade and subject. For example, Science SNC1D ­ 12% and Science SNC1P ­ 15% in Table 8. This type of comparison also shows no remarkable differences between pathways in grade 9 and 10. Nevertheless, a student that chooses to take Environmental Science SVN3E ­ 23% instead of Science SNC2D ­ 5.3% or Science SNC2P ­ 1.1% as their second mandatory science credit would have more exposure to urban and place-based EE. This is a rare event, as seen in Section 4.3, which shows that only 4 % of grade 11 students chose to take Environmental Science (SVN3E). The concerns expressed by some of the participants of EEW regarding "academic" students being more involved in EE is not significantly reflected in this data analysis although there are slightly more expectations seen the academic stream. Their observations may also have been rooted in mandatory or voluntary programming differences between streams rather that curriculum differences.

  

62  

Table 11: Urban and/or Place-based EE Content by Course Type #  of   expectations  (n)   255   243   #  of  expectations   containing   themes    (n)   47   42   %  of  course  type   expectations   containing  themes   (%)   18   17   COURSE   TYPE   Academic   Applied     

4.2.2 Urban EE Content Summary Tables 12 and 13 provide a summary of expectations within the 124 that were related to urban EE. The expectations have been grouped by course and classified as either direct or indirect in their relation to urban EE. As seen in Table 12, of the 124 curriculum expectations related to urban and place-based EE, 22 of them had a direct relation to urban EE. This corresponds to 18 % of the 124 expectations but only 3.3% of the total 675 expectations reviewed. All but one was found in Issues in Canadian Geography. The percentage of course content in Issues in Canadian Geography that was directly related to urban EE was CGC1D ­ 17% and CGC1P ­ 13%. The majority of expectations were related to the themes of Planning or Systems and they were found within the "Livable Communities" strand of Issues in Canadian Geography (OME, 2014). Slightly more direct urban expectations were present in the academic stream than the applied stream. Again, these differences are small but it is possible that the themes of Systems, characteristic of complex urban environments, may be better suited to the "academic" stream, which tends to combine topics and study them in more depth. Modifications can be made to make this theme more accessible to "applied" learners. Like the combined urban and place-based results of Section 4.2.1, these data show a minor correlation to the observations made regarding "academic" learners at EEW.

63  

Table 12: Direct Urban EE Content Summary Total  #   of   COURSE   expecta- CODE   tions  in   course     (n)   CGC1D   70   Expecta- tions   directly   related  to   urban  EE   (n)   12   %  of  Course   expecta- tions   directly   related  to   urban  EE   (%)   17  

GRADE   COURSE  TITLE  

TYPE  

9  

9   10   10   9   9   10   10   *11  

Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Civics  and   Citizenship   Career  Studies   Science   Science   Science   Science   Environmental   Science  

Academic  

Applied   Open  *   half  course   Open   Academic   Applied   Academic   Applied   Workplace  

CGC1P   CHV2O   GLC2O   SNC1D   SNC1P   SNC2D   SNC2P   SVN3E  

68   45   42   90   86   95   89   90  

9   1   0   0   0   0   0   0  

13   2.2   0   0   0   0   0   0        

TOTALS   675   22            *  included  because  prerequisites  are  either  9  academic  or  applied   science  

As seen in Table 13, there were a total of 49 expectations with an indirect relation to urban EE. This corresponds to 40% of the 124 expectations and 7.3% of the total 675 expectations reviewed. They were found in Issues in Canadian Geography CGC1D ­13% and Issues in Canadian Geography CGC1P ­ 12%, Science SNC1D ­10% and Science SNC1P ­ 8.1%, and Environmental Science, SVN3E ­18%. Within Issues in Canadian Geography (CGC1D/CGC1P) the majority of expectations were found in the "Changing Populations" strand and were related to Immigration and Settlement. In Science (SNC1D/SNC1P) the expectations were found in the biology strand titled "Sustainable Ecosystems" and had an Ecological focus. Environmental Science (SVN3E) saw expectations in a few different strands but the majority had an Ecological focus. Again, this    64  

speaks to the compartmentalization of secondary school subjects, which is at odds with the multidisciplinary field of EE (Smith, 2007). In summary, virtually all of the direct and indirect urban EE content was found in the grade 9 curriculum. The lack of urban EE content at the grade 10 level. was seen earlier in the combined urban and place-based EE results of Section 4.2.1. This trend is more apparent in the field of urban EE where older students may be better able to grasp its complexity. Table 13: Indirect Urban EE Content Summary %  of   Total  #   Expecta- Course   of   tions   expecta- expec- indirectly   tions   tations   related  to   indirectly   in   urban  EE   related  to   course     (n)   urban  EE   (n)   (%)   70   9   13  

GRADE  

COURSE  TITLE  

TYPE  

COURSE   CODE  

9  

9   10   10   9   9   10   10   *11     

Issues  in   Canadian   Academic   Geography   Issues  in   Canadian   Applied   Geography   Civics  and   Open  *  half   Citizenship   course   Career  Studies   Open   Science   Academic   Science   Applied   Science   Academic   Science   Applied   Environmental   Workplace   Science        

CGC1D  

CGC1P   CHV2O   GLC2O   SNC1D   SNC1P   SNC2D   SNC2P   SVN3E   TOTALS  

68   45   42   90   86   95   89   90   633  

8   0   0   9   7   0   0   16   49  

12   0   0   10   8.1   0   0   18     

Of the 675 expectations studied, 11% had urban EE content with only 3.3% constituting direct content. The 7.3% having an indirect link to urban EE dealt with general pollution and population characteristics (i.e. vehicle emissions, age distribution) rather than specifically urban issues or environmental/geographic    65  

population characteristics (i.e. public transit systems, population density). By definition, these indirect expectations have a weak link to urban EE. Furthermore, if they are found in the examples or sample questions sections of an expectation, which many of the are, they must compete with an overcrowded curriculum, apathy, and lack of resources (Tan & Pedretti, 2010) as well as the feelings of unpreparedness and lack of policy awareness expressed by the participants at EEW. Considering that these courses form the basis of urban EE for the majority of high school students, the prevalence of direct expectations does not seem particularly high. 4.2.3 Place-Based EE Content Summary Tables 14 and 15 provide a summary of expectations that were related to place-based EE. The expectations have been grouped by course and classified as either direct or indirect in their relation to place-based EE. As seen in Table 14, of the 124 curriculum expectations related to urban and place-based EE, 15 of them had a direct relation to place-based EE. This corresponds to 12% of the 124 expectation but only 2.2% of the total 675 expectations reviewed. As with urban EE, most were found in Issues in Grade 9 Geography CGC1P ­12%; however, it is interesting to note that no expectations were found in the academic stream, CGC1D ­ 0%. The majority of expectations were situated in the "Livable Communities" strand and focused on the theme of Planning. One possible explanation for this result is that applied course are designed to be more "practical", "concrete" and "hands-on" and therefore make better use of placebased EE, which is rooted in the familiar and accessible (OME, 2014). They also lend themselves well to the applied concept of Planning. Academic courses, on the other hand, tend to focus more on theory and abstract concepts (OME, 2014). The value place-based EE should not be absent from the academic stream because it helps to build "personal concern" (Neil, 1994) and relevance. The only other course with significant direct place-based content was Environmental Science SVN3E ­ 4.4%. The majority of expectations were related to Ecology. As with the trends in urban EE, the subject silos of secondary

  

66  

schools compartmentalize EE themes (Smith, 2007), few expectations are present in grade 10, and the less frequented Environmental Science (SVN3E) pathway contains more coverage of place-based EE than the traditional grade 10 Science route. Table 14: Direct Place-Based EE Content Summary Total  #   of   COURSE   expecta- CODE   tions  in   course     (n)   CGC1D   70   Expecta- %  of  Course   tions   expecta- directly   tions   related  to   directly   place- related  to   based  EE   place-based   (n)   EE  (%)   0   0  

GRADE   COURSE  TITLE  

TYPE  

9  

9  

Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Civics  and   Citizenship  

Academic  

Applied  

CGC1P  

68  

8  

12  

10   10   9   9   10   10   *11     

Open  *   half   course   Career  Studies   Open   Science   Academic   Science   Applied   Science   Academic   Science   Applied   Environmental   Workplace   Science        

CHV2O   GLC2O   SNC1D   SNC1P   SNC2D   SNC2P   SVN3E   TOTALS  

45   42   90   86   95   89   90   633  

0   0   0   2   1   0   4   15  

0   0   0   2.3   1.1   0   4.4     

As seen in Table 15, there were a total of 18 expectations with an indirect relation to place-based EE. This corresponds to 15% of the 124 expectations and 2.7% of the total 675 expectations reviewed. They are spread throughout the curriculum with the majority in Issues in Canadian Geography CGC1D ­5.7% and Issues in Canadian Geography CGC1P ­ 8.8%, Civics and Citizenship, CHV2O ­ 8.9%, and Career Studies, GLC2O ­ 4.8%. There were slightly more

  

67  

expectations present in the applied stream. It is interesting to note that very few place-based expectations are located in the Science curriculum. Perhaps this speaks to the juxtaposition between conventional science and EE pedagogies observed by Steele (2011). Some of the impediments to place-based EE that he raises include overemphasis on "the scientific knowledge base that is deemed necessary for students" rather than application of those skills to a real-life context, and "the influence of textbooks" which are based on a provincially standardized curriculum and tend not to include community-specific study (Steele, 2011). Table 15: Indirect Place-Based EE Content Summary Total  #   of   COURSE   expecta- CODE   tions  in   course     (n)   CGC1D   70   Expecta- %  of  Course   tions   expecta- indirectly   tions   related  to   indirectly   place- related  to   based  EE   place-based   (n)   EE  (%)   4   5.7  

GRADE  

COURSE   TITLE  

TYPE  

9  

9  

Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Civics  and   Citizenship   Career   Studies   Science   Science   Science   Science   Environment al  Science     

Academic  

Applied  

CGC1P  

68  

6  

8.8  

10   10   9   9   10   10   *11     

Open  *   CHV2O   half  course   Open   Academic   Applied   Academic   Applied   Workplace      GLC2O   SNC1D   SNC1P   SNC2D   SNC2P   SVN3E   TOTALS  

45   42   90   86   95   89   90   633  

4   2   0   0   1   0   1   18  

8.9   4.8   0   0   1.1   0   1.1     

Of the 675 expectations studied, a total of 4.9% had some place-based EE    68  

content. This is significantly lower than the percentage of expectations containing urban EE. An indirect link to place-based EE was found in 2.2% of them, meaning that they provided an opportunity for local study or were local studies without a clear environmental focus. Indirect place-based EE content faces the same obstacles as urban EE, observed by Tan and Pedretti (2010), but also has its own unique set of impediments, which include safety concerns and access to the outdoors. The participants of EEW discussed many of these and ways in which they could be overcome through simple excursions, making use of school grounds, and forging lasting community partnerships. 4.2.4 Involving Field Study and Action Outcomes Table 16 provides a summary of expectations that were related to field study or required an action outcome. The expectations have been grouped by course. As seen in Table 16, only six expectations involving regional field study were found in the curriculum. Five of the six were found in Environmental Science (SVN3E). These expectations required students to conduct field studies on the water quality, soil quality, and biodiversity as well as conduct a waste audit of their home or school. One expectation was also found in Science (SNC1P) requiring students to graph and interpret electricity consumption data from meters at home or in the community. With the majority of field study found in the Environmental Science (SVN3E) a small proportion of students are reaping its benefits. Participatory expectations with action outcomes were even more rare in the mandatory curriculum with only two in Civics and Citizenship (CHV2O) providing students with the opportunity to communicate their local environmental ideas or data to an intended audience. These two expectations were not directly related to urban and place-based EE as the environment was listed as one of many examples. Curriculum recommendation #7 in Section 2.2.2 made by the Bondar report makes the suggestion to "Identify and support opportunities to engage students in environmental action projects within the current Civics course". There are currently very few expectations within Civics and Citizenship (CHV2O)

  

69  

course that allow for this kind of expansion. Table 16: Field Study and Action Outcome Content Summary Expecta- Expecta- Total  #  of   tions   tions   expecta- COURSE   involving   involving   tions  in   CODE   regional   participation   course     field   with  action   (n)   study  (n)   outcomes  (n)   CGC1D   70   0   0  

GRADE   COURSE  TITLE  

TYPE  

9  

9   10   10   9   9   10   10   *11     

Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Issues  in   Canadian   Geography   Civics  and   Citizenship   Career  Studies   Science   Science   Science   Science   Environmental   Science  

Academic  

Applied  

CGC1P  

68   45   42   90   86   95   89   90   633  

0   0   0   0   1   0   0   5   6  

0   2   0   0   0   0   0   0   2  

Open  *   CHV2O   half  course   Open   GLC2O   Academic   SNC1D   Applied   SNC1P   Academic   SNC2D   Applied   SNC2P   Workplace   SVN3E   TOTALS  

      "Action competence" (Barratt & Hacking, 2011) is an important goal of

successful EE, which requires experience and knowledge. Part of this experience should be acquired in secondary schools if students are to become active citizens with the tools necessary to enact positive change in their environment. Local field study and action outcomes can also be viewed as measures of community involvement. Community connections are vital to "community health and development" and "student well-being" (Sanders, 2003). Alternative education models incorporate long periods of field study by immersing students in nature for multiple days. For many, this can be a unique and rewarding experience that deepens their connection to the environment. In the province of Ontario, field studies and action outcomes appear to be sparse in the    70  

mandatory curriculum. 4.3 Enrolment in EE Elective Courses and Course Availability A curriculum review of urban and place-based EE content in mandatory subjects was undertaken. The vast majority of these courses are found in grades 9 and 10. A curriculum review was not performed on elective courses related to urban and place-based EE; however, statistics on course availability and enrolment can provide some insight into the effectiveness of EE progression plans and integration into the curriculum. As per the recommendations made by the Bondar Report, students should be offered opportunities to pursue EE in the senior grades (grades 11 and 12) to provide continuity and reinforce the importance of EE (OME, 2007b). Table 17 provides a basis for reference for secondary enrolment by grade in the 2012-2013 school year. As of 2012-2013, there were 3,978 elementary and Table 17: Secondary Enrolment 2012-2013 (OnSIS, 2013) Grade   Grade  9*   Grade  10   Grade  11   Grade  12   Total   Number  of  Students   in  Public  Schools   100,856   103,040   108,061   153,408   638,220   Number  of  Students  in   Roman  Catholic  Schools   49,341   50,318   51,849   67,724   219,232   Total   150,197   153,358   159,910   221,132   684,597  

Data includes public and Roman Catholic schools and school authorities. Data excludes private schools, publicly funded hospital and provincial schools, care, treatment and correctional facilities, summer, night and adult continuing education day schools. Data are based on headcount of students. * Data includes students designated as "Pre-Grade 9".

913 secondary schools in the province of Ontario (OnSIS, 2013). Since these data are specific to one school year, they do not depict any trend in course offerings and enrolment. Using Table 17, and enrollment and course availability data provided by the Ministry of Education, Tables 19 ­ 24 were generated. They are grouped by grade and contain enrollment as a percentage of the overall number of students    71  

in that grade. They also contain course availability as a percentage of the total number of secondary schools in Ontario. All of the courses in these tables were selected based on their relevance to urban and place-based EE themes. Given the time constraints and limited resources of graduate study, a full-scale curriculum review could not be performed on all electives. 4.3.1 Grade 9 and 10 Electives Tables 18 and 19 provide a summary of grade 9 and 10 electives related to urban and place-based EE. Table 18 lists the courses selected for analysis and identifies their link to urban and place-based EE themes. Table 19 summarizes course availability and enrollment. In grade 9, the only elective course offered was Food and Nutrition (HFN1O). Although 19% of schools offered the course, only 4.5% of grade 9 students were registered in the course. This is not surprising as there is little opportunity to take electives at the grade 9 level. Most
Table 18: Grade 9 and 10 Elective Courses with Urban and/or Place-Based EE Content Course   Code  

Course  Name    

Grade    

Urban  and/or  Place-Based  EE  Theme(s)  

HFN1O  

Food  and   Nutrition  

   HFN2O  

   Food  and   Nutrition   Green   Industries   Transportation   Technology  

THJ2O   TTJ2O  

Planning  (regional  food  production,  urban   agriculture)   Grade  9   Climate  (regional  food  production)   Ecological  (regional  food  production)   Systems  (food  distribution)         Planning  (regional  food  production,  urban   agriculture)   Grade  10   Climate  (regional  food  production)   Ecological  (regional  food  production)   Systems  (food  distribution)   Politics  (green  incentives)   Grade  10   Sustainability  (resource  availability)   Planning  (land  use)   Grade  10   Systems  (transportation)  

students have room for only one true elective course in this grade because in

  

72  

addition to mandatory courses in Mathematics, English, Science, and Geography they choose to fulfill their Arts, Health and Physical Education, and French as a Second Language requirements (see Table 2 in Section 3.2.1). Table 19: Grade 9 and 10 Course Availability and Enrolment
Course   Code   Course  Name     Grade     Course   Type   Open   (Grade  9  -   12  level)   #  of   %  of   #  of   %  of   Schools   Schools   Students   Students   Offering   Offering   Taking   Taking   Elective   Elective   Course   Course*   170      503   19      55   6686      24963   4.5      16  

HFN1O     

Food  and   Nutrition      Food  and   Nutrition  

Grade  9     

   Open   HFN2O   Grade  10   (Grade  9  -   12  level)   Open   Green   THJ2O   Grade  10   (Grade  9  -   Industries   12  level)   Open   Transportation   TTJ2O   Grade  10   (Grade  9  -   Technology   12  level)   * % of students in grade

68  

7.4  

1254  

0.8  

534  

58  

17403  

11  

In grade 10, there is more selection with respect to course offerings, partially due to these increased opportunities to pursue electives. If Arts, Health and Physical Education, and French as a Second Language requirements are met in grade 9, the only mandatory courses are History, Civics and Citizenship (0.5 credits), Careers (0.5 credits), Mathematics, English and Science. In grade 10, 55% of schools offered Food and Nutrition (HFN2O) with 16% of grade 10 students taking the course, and 58 % of schools offered Transportation Technology (TTJ2O) with 11% of students taking the course. Only 7.4% of secondary schools in Ontario offered Green Industries (THJ2O) with 0.8% of students taking the course. Green Industries (THJ2O) contains the most obvious link to urban and place-based EE. Many reasons can contribute to poor availability of a course. These include a lack of expertise in teachers, lack of interest by students, timetabling conflicts, poor perceived need for future

  

73  

endeavors, or a combination of these factors. It is difficult to pinpoint the cause without more information. All of the electives courses offered in grades 9 and 10 are open, which means that they are appropriate for a broad range of students and do not have prerequisites. The curriculum review in Section 4.2 showed that most urban and place-based EE is found in grade 9. Options to further studies with grade 10 electives become even more important with content lacking in the mandatory grade 10 courses. 4.3.2 Grade 11 Electives Tables 20 and 21 follow a similar format to Table 18 and 19 but focus on grade 11 electives. In Grade 11, students must think more carefully about their "exit plan" post-secondary school. There are four major destinations that students pursue: university, college, skilled trade and apprenticeship programs, and workplace. As seen in the course type column in Tables 20 and 21, courses exist in every pathway for students interested in continuing EE in grade 11. This aligns well with the Bondar Report curriculum recommendation #8 in Section 2.2.2 of this document, "Ensure that secondary students have the opportunity to take at least one additional course with an environmental focus during their high school program (preferable in Grade 11 to maintain continuity)" (OME, 2007b). The percentage of schools offering these courses is less than 25%, with the exception of Understanding Canadian Law (CLU3M) which is offered in 79% of schools and taken by 20% of students, Environmental Science (SVN3M) which is offered in 29% of schools and taken by 3.0% of students, and Travel and Tourism: A Geographic Perspective (CGG3O) which is offered in 62% of schools and taken by 9% of students. The latter two courses contain the most obvious links to urban and place-based EE and despite the fact that availability is high, enrollment is low. A second group of courses with availability in the range of 10 25% consist of Housing and Home Design, HLS3O ­ 20%, Understanding Canadian Law, CLU3E ­ 18%, and World History since 1900: Global and Regional Interactions, CHT3O ­ 14%. The last course has the most obvious link to place-based EE and also has the highest enrolment at 10%. The final group

  

74  

experiences the lowest availability (<10%) and enrolment (<1%) and consists of Politics in Action (CPC3O) and Regional Geography (CGD3M).
Table 20: Grade 11 Elective Courses with Urban and/or Place-Based EE Content       Course  Name           
Housing  and  Home   Design   Environmental   Science         Environmental   Science   Understanding   Canadian  Law  in   Everyday  Life   Understanding   Canadian  Law   Politics  in  Action:   Making  Change  

Course   Code  

Grade    

Urban  and/or  Place-Based  EE  Theme(s)  

HLS3O  

Gr.11  

Planning  (land  use  and  zoning)   Sociogeographic  (population  distribution)   Politics  (affordable  housing)   Sustainability  (materials,  energy)   Ecological  (pollution,  habitat  restoration  and   protection)   Politics  (responsibilities,  jurisdictions)   Ecological  (pollution,  habitat  restoration  and   protection)   Politics  (responsibilities,  jurisdictions)   Politics  (environmental  responsibilities,   governance)   Politics  (environmental  responsibilities,   governance)   Politics  (environmental  responsibilities,   governance)   Sustainability  (community  action)   Planning  (land  use,  zoning)   Sociogeographic  (population  distribution)   Immigration  and  Settlement  (growth,  access  to   resources)   Planning  (land  use,  zoning)   Sociogeographic  (population  distribution)   Immigration  and  Settlement  (growth,  access  to   resources)   Ecological  (pollution,  habitats)   Sociogeographic  (population  distribution)   Climate  (characteristics  of  region)   Systems  (accessibility)     

SVN3E  **  

Gr.  11  

SVN3M  

Gr.  11  

CLU3E   CLU3M   CPC3O  

Gr.  11   Gr.  11   Gr.  11  

CGD3M  

Regional  Geography  

Gr.  11  

CHT3O  

World  History  since   1900:  Global  and   Regional  Interactions   Travel  and  Tourism:   A  Geographic   Perspective  

Gr.  11  

CGG3O  

Gr.  11  

  

75  

Table 21: Grade 11 Course Availability and Enrolment
Course   Code      Course  Name        Housing  and   Home  Design   Environmental   Science   Grade     Course  Type   #  of   Schools   Offering   Elective   %  of   Schools   Offering   Elective   #  of   Students   Taking   Course   %  of   Students   Taking   Course*  

HLS3O   SVN3E   **  

Gr.11  

Open  (Grade   9  -  12  level)   Workplace   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   University/   College   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   Workplace   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   University/   College   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   Open  (Grade   9  -  12  level)   University/   College   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   Open  (Grade   9  -  12  level)  

187  

20  

2047  

1.3  

Gr.  11  

390  

43  

5827  

3.6  

SVN3M  

Environmental   Science  

Gr.  11  

263  

29  

4760  

3.0  

CLU3E  

Understanding   Canadian  Law  in   Everyday  Life  

Gr.  11  

167  

18  

2047  

1.3  

CLU3M  

Understanding   Canadian  Law  

Gr.  11  

722  

79  

32427  

20  

CPC3O  

Politics  in   Action:  Making   Change  

Gr.  11  

12  

1.3  

144  

0.1  

CGD3M  

Regional   Geography   World  History   since  1900:   Global  and   Regional   Interactions   Travel  and   Tourism:  A   Geographic   Perspective  

Gr.  11  

5  

0.5  

130  

0.1  

CHT3O  

Gr.  11  

131  

14  

16263  

10  

CGG3O  

Gr.  11  

Open  (Grade   9  -  12  level)  

565  

62  

14523  

9.1  

* % of students in grade ** not considered to be true elective because it can count as the second mandatory science requirement (with grade 9 academic/applied science as a prerequisite)

  

76  

As previously discussed in Section 2.2.2, the Environmental Science courses offered at the Workplace (SVN3E) and University/College (SVN3M) level received considerable attention when they were removed in 1998 under the Harris government (Puk & Behm, 2003). With these course reinstated, we see 43% of schools offering Environmental Science (SVN3E) and 3.6% of students taking the course and 29% of schools offering Environmental Science (SVN3M) and 3.0% of students taking the course. It should be noted, as explained in Section 3.2.1, that only the SVN3M is considered to be a true elective as the SVN3E can count as a student's second mandatory science requirement with only grade 9 academic or applied science as a prerequisite. Availability and enrollment data for the Environmental Science courses is quite telling, as these courses were once stand-alone courses, representing EE in the curriculum. Their availability is widespread but enrollment appears to be low considering the attention given to them. Participants at EEW cited poor availability of Environmental Science courses within a school as a barrier to collaboration and identifying as an environmental educator. It is difficult to substantiate these statements using the data provided because there is no information on how many sections of each course are offered within a given school. 4.3.3 Grade 12 Electives Similar to grade 11, Tables 22 and 23 show a greater number of courses related to urban and place-based EE themes than grade 9 and 10. Greater course availability is reflective of increased freedom to take more electives in senior years. Again, the course type column indicates that courses exist in every pathway but there is only one course offered at the workplace level. The percentage of schools offering the following courses is greater than 25% for Environment and Resource Management, CGR4M ­ 27%, World Issues: A Geographic Analysis, CGW4U ­ 61%, Food and Nutrition Sciences, HFA4M ­ 40%, and Challenge and Change in Society, HSB4M ­ 58%. The proportion of grade 12 students taking these courses ranged from ~2.6% to 11%. The highest enrolment was seen in Challenge and Change in Society (HSB4M).

  

77  

Table 22: Grade 12 Elective Courses with Urban and/or Place-Based EE Content
Course   Code   Course  Name   Grade   Urban  and/or  Place-Based  EE  Theme(s)  
Planning  (land  use  and  zoning)   Sociogeographic  (population  distribution)   Immigration  and  Settlement  (growth,  access  to   resources)   Planning  (land  use)   Systems  (linear  vs.  cyclical)   Ecological  (pollution,  habitat  protection)   Politics  (government  incentives  and  policy)   Systems  (materials,  energy)   Planning  (land  use)   Politics  (policy,  jurisdiction)   Sustainability  (community  action)   Planning  (land  use,  zoning)   Sociogeographic  (population  distribution)   Immigration  and  Settlement  (growth,  access  to   resources)   Politics  (governance)   Planning  (land  use)   Systems  (linear  vs.  cyclical)   Ecological  (pollution,  habitat  protection)   Politics  (government  incentives  and  policy)   Sociogeographic  (population  distribution)   Planning  (land  use)   Systems  (linear  vs.  cyclical)   Ecological  (pollution,  habitat  protection)   Politics  (government  incentives  and  policy)   Sociogeographic  (population  distribution)  

CGO4M  

Spatial   Technologies  in   Action  

Gr.  12  

CGR4E  

Living  in  a   Sustainable  World  

Gr.  12  

CGR4M  

Environment  and   Resource   Management   World  Issues:  A   Geographic   Analysis   World   Geography:   Urban  Patterns   and  Interactions   World   Geography:     Human  Patterns   and  Interactions  

Gr.  12  

CGW4U  

Gr.  12  

CGU4C  

Gr.12  

CGU4U  

Gr.12  

HFA4M  

Food  and   Nutrition  Sciences  

Gr.12  

Planning  (regional  food  production,  urban   agriculture)   Climate  (regional  food  production)   Ecological  (regional  food  production)   Systems  (food  distribution)  
Planning  (land  use,  zoning)   Sociogeographic  (population  distribution)   Immigration  and  Settlement  (growth,  access  to   resources)   Politics  (governance)  

HSB4M  

Challenge  and   Change  in  Society  

Gr.12  

  

78  

Table 23: Grade 12 Course Availability and Enrolment
Course   Code   Course   Name   Grade     Course   Type  
University/   College   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   Workplace   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   University/   College   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   University   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   College   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   University   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   University/   College   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)   University/   College   Preparation   (Grade  11  &   12  level)  

#  of   %  of   #  of   Schools   Schools   Students   Offering   Offering   Taking   Elective   Elective   Course  

%  of   Students   Taking   Course*  

CGO4M  

Spatial   Technologies   in  Action  

Gr.  12  

21  

2.3  

409  

0.2  

CGR4E  

Living  in  a   Sustainable   World  

Gr.  12  

62  

6.8  

398  

0.2  

CGR4M  

Environment   and  Resource   Management  

Gr.  12  

248  

27  

5661  

2.6  

CGW4U  

World  Issues:   A  Geographic   Analysis   World   Geography:   Urban   Patterns  and   Interactions   World   Geography:     Human   Patterns  and   Interactions   Food  and   Nutrition   Sciences  

Gr.  12  

558  

61  

16263  

7.4  

CGU4C  

Gr.  12  

33  

3.6  

499  

0.2  

CGU4U  

Gr.  12  

44  

4.8  

1049  

0.5  

HFA4M  

Gr.  12  

369  

40  

16972  

7.7  

HSB4M  

Challenge  and   Change  in   Society  

Gr.  12  

533  

58  

24816  

11  

* % of students in grade

The remaining courses had low availability (<10%) and enrolment (<1%) and consisted of Living in a Sustainable World (CGR4E), Spatial Technologies,

  

79  

(CGO4M), World Geography: Urban Patterns and Interactions (CGU4C), and World Geography: Human Patterns and Interactions (CGU4U). The latter three courses have clear links to urban EE and the themes of Systems and Planning. It would be interesting to note if these courses are better attended in an urban setting. As it stands, the majority of students are not pursuing these courses. Living in a Sustainable World (CGR4E), is the only workplace elective offered in grade 12 therefore it is particularly interesting to note that it experiences low availability and enrolment. It also contains obvious links to place-based education, which is well suited to the learning style of the applied stream. For students pursuing a workplace exit plan, this may pose problems. To ensure continuity and equity in the curriculum, EE should be equally available in all grades and pathways.

  

80  

5. CONCLUSIONS The findings of the curriculum review show 11% of the 675 expectations studied contain some urban EE content. Considering that these courses are not stand-alone EE courses, the frequency with which these themes are present is substantial. Only 3.3% of the 675 expectations, however, had direct content. Much of the indirect content is found in the optional sections of an expectation (i.e. examples, sample questions). As such, it must overcome the barriers of an overcrowded curriculum, apathy, and lack of resources as well as the feelings of unpreparedness and lack of EE policy awareness felt by educators (Tan & Pedretti, 2010; EEW, 2015; Chowdhury, 2015). All but one of the urban EE expectations was found in grade 9. No notable difference was found between "academic" and "applied" pathways but themes were generally compartmentalized by subject (i.e. science-ecology vs. geography-planning). Place-based EE content (4.9% of 675 expectations) is less abundant than urban EE in the curriculum. Like urban EE, it is lacking in grade 10 but also in Science courses. A disproportionate number of expectations are found in the applied, as opposed to the academic, pathway. The number of expectations involving field study (5 of 675 expectations) and action outcomes (2 of 675 expectations) is limited. Analysis of grade 9 and 10 electives highlighted only 4 course options for continuing urban and place-based EE studies. In grade 11 and 12, options are far greater with 9 courses in grade 11 and 8 courses in grade 12. Availability varied from high (i.e. Understanding Canadian Law (CLU3M) offered at 79% of secondary schools) to very low (i.e. Regional Geography (CGD3M) offered at 0.5% of schools). Opportunities to continue study existed in every grade and pathway. The average enrolment in all identified elective courses for grades 912 was low (5.3%). Future studies may want to explore enrollment data over a greater time span to see how they have changed in the context of policy and curriculum changes. Combining the results of both the curriculum review and course enrollment, it is clear that the majority of grade 9 and 10 urban and place-based EE is found in   

81  

the mandatory curriculum. Approximately one fifth of the courses highlighted by the Bondar Report for their EE content (Grade 9 and 10 Geography/Science and Grade 10 Civics and Citizenships) contained material related to urban and placebased EE. This holds a lot of promise but upon closer examination, the bulk of relevant expectations are indirectly related to urban EE with few expectations related to place-based EE. Consequently, important EE content is being covered inconsistently or poorly across the province. There are currently very few requirements for field study and/or action outcomes related to place-based or urban EE in the curriculum. This is surprising given that one of three major themes in The Standards for Environmental Education in the Curriculum (2008) is Community (OME, 2008). As discussed at the EEW, partnerships between schools and local businesses, government and community need to be explored. Finding resourceful ways to get outside and exploring opportunities to bring community experiences into the classroom can help overcome funding issues. Schools must become more self-aware and forge lasting connections with their environment both in and out of the classroom. Place-based learning is a wellrecognized concept whose strong presence should be the norm in most learning models. For it to become an establishment, place-based EE needs to be encouraged and supported at all levels. With respect to pathways, there is a definitive lack of direct urban and placebased EE content at the grade 10 level. The academic pathway shows a slight tendency towards urban EE themes while the applied pathway displays a clear tendency towards place-based EE themes. These trends coincide with the description of course types, which highlight theory in academic courses and "hands-on" approaches in applied courses. Care must be taken to make complex examples of materials and energy systems, characteristic of urban EE, accessible to applied learners, and experiential learning, characteristic of placebased EE, a priority for academic learners. The compartmentalization of urban and place-based EE topics within secondary school subjects is to be expected to some extent. Alternative approaches to EE include the use of mandatory interdisciplinary projects and

  

82  

experiences applied to all secondary students within a carefully considered schedule of learning. The province of Ontario does not employ this type of approach but could consider alternative approaches to EE within its current structure. Junior students do not have many opportunities to pursue electives and there are few electives available with a strong connection to urban and place-based EE themes. At the senior level (grade 11 and 12), Ontario Secondary School Diploma (OSSD) requirements are less prescriptive and there are more opportunities in every pathway for students to pursue elective studies in urban and place-based EE. Despite this, many of the courses with clear urban and placed-based EE content do not see high enrollment. This either means that student do not see a need to take these courses (e.g. they are not a prerequisite for post-secondary studies), are not interested in their content, experience timetabling conflicts, or do not have these courses offered at their school. Despite the Ministry of Education's focus on promoting EE, inconsistent continuity in senior grades undermines its importance in the minds of students, educators, and the public. To obtain an OSSD, students must take a combination of mandatory courses and electives. Mandatory courses are the only courses taken by every Ontario secondary school student and as such, they represent a standard curriculum across the province. Currently, the only subjects that students are compelled to take over multiple years are English (4 credits) and Mathematics (3 credits) (OME, 2014). This is not surprising as literacy and numeracy are important goals of secondary school. In addition to having their own discrete courses, these themes are considered to be overarching ones and the responsibility of all subject teachers. Environmental education does not appear to hold the same clout despite the attention is has been given in recent policy changes. Despite being embedded in the curriculum, the Bondar Report only recommends a "substantial presence in compulsory Grade 9 Geography, Grade 9 and 10 Science, and Grade 10 Civics expectations" (OME, 2007b). Senior grades see even less commitment to EE in the Bondar Report ensuring that secondary

  

83  

students "have the opportunity" to take "at least one course" with an EE focus (OME, 2007b). Furthermore, poor enrolment in senior electives fractures urban and place-based EE's progression in the latter part of secondary schooling. With the shift from stand-alone EE courses to an integrated approach, content, distribution, and progression must be carefully designed. Teachers and administrators at EEW agreed that the Bondar Report's vision of EE would be better translated if EE curriculum, programming, initiatives, and community partnerships were more explicit in their wording, better promoted, or mandated consistently. Within policy documents, the goals of urban and place-based EE are often stated in such general terms that it becomes difficult to use them as a guide for curriculum development. Furthermore, curriculum documents are not worded strongly enough to necessitate instruction. There is an identifiable need to improve the intermediate steps between the definition of EE and practice. With the time constraints placed upon teachers and administrators, the volunteer efforts that sustain most urban and place-based EE initiatives are applied inconsistently. If EE is going to be considered akin to literacy and numeracy, care must be taken to ensure that it is consistently present in the curriculum. Based on the results of the curriculum review, enrollment data, and EEW, urban and place-based EE could have a stronger presence in secondary schools through the use of stronger wording in curriculum documents and the consistent mandating of EE programs. The curriculum review process must ensure focus on both gap finding and quality control to avoid overcrowding and a clear progression of urban and place-based EE topics needs to be present. Similar to the curriculum model, EE initiatives and programs need to be consistently integrated into and prioritized by board/school improvement plans. To overcome the feelings of teacher unpreparedness in EE (Tan & Pedretti, 2010; EEW, 2015) and the development of local resources, professional development opportunities must be abundant. Efforts like DEEPER (OISE, 2013) at Faculties of Education are steps in the right direction. Whether in the form of initial teacher training (e.g. pre-service education and additional qualification courses), or less structured professional development, there should

  

84  

to be more supports in place for teachers and administrators. With the agenda for public education being a highly contested domain, the visibility of urban and place-based EE policy and resources needs to be increased and the passion for environmental studies, reignited. For effective implementation of EE, collaboration between subject teachers and communication between diverse stakeholders must be improved upon. It is clear that cultivating an environmentally literate youth who are empowered to shape their future is a process that continues to evolve.   

  

85  

Appendices Appendix A ­ Main Data Set (OME, 2014)

COURSE  TITLE  

Expectation  Code  

Expectation  Type   (Overall  or   Specific)  

COURSE  CODE  

TYPE  

STRAND  

EXPECTATION  

Urban  EE   (Direct   /Indirect   /  None)  
N  

Place- Based  EE   (Direct  /   Indirect  /   None)  
N  

  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

GRADE  

Academic  

CGC1D  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.1  

A1.1  formulate  different  types  of  questions   to  guide  investigations  into  issues  in   Canadian  geography  (e.g.,  factual  questions:   What  factors  need  to  be  considered  when   analysing  the  impact  of  expanding  a   highway?;  comparative  questions:  What  are   the  differences  in  energy  resource   availability  between  Ontario  and  Alberta?;   causal  questions:  How  does  the   infrastructure  of  this  community  support   environmental  sustainability?)     A1.5  use  the  concepts  of  geographic  thinking   (i.e.,  spatial  significance,  patterns  and   trends,  interrelationships,  geographic   perspective)  when  analysing  and  evaluating   data  and  information,  formulating   conclusions,  and  making  judgements  about   geographic  issues  relating  to  Canada  (e.g.,   use  the  concept  of  spatial  significance  to   evaluate  competing  land-use  options,  such   as  fruit  farming  and  urban  development;   apply  the  concept  of  patterns  and  trends  to   temperature  and  precipitation  data  to  assess   how  the  climate  of  a  region  has  changed   over  time;  use  the  concept  of   interrelationships  to  assess  how  changes  in   technology  affect  industry,  employment,   and  the  consumption  of  natural  resources;   use  the  concept  of  geographic  perspective   to  analyse  the  environ-  mental,  social,   political,  and  economic  impacts  of   globalization  on  various  First  Nations,  Métis,   and  Inuit  communities)  

Academic  

CGC1D  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.5  

N  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.6  

A1.6  evaluate  and  synthesize  their  findings   to  formulate  conclusions  and/or  make   judgements  or  predictions  about  the  issues   they  are  investigating     

N  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A2.3  

A2.3  apply  the  concepts  of  geographic   thinking  when  analysing  current  events   involving  geographic  issues  (e.g.,  to  identify   locational  factors  that  affect  the  importance   of  an  issue;  to  identify  patterns  and  trends   that  provide  context  for  an  issue;  to  identify   interrelationships  that  clarify  the  factors   involved  in  an  issue;  to  understand  the   implications  of  different  aspects  of  an  issue   and/or  different  points  of  view  about  the   issue)  in  order  to  enhance  their   understanding  of  these  issues  and  their  role   as  informed  citizens  

N  

N  

86  

  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Academic  

CGC1D  

B.  Interactions   in  the  Physical   Environment  

Specific  

B1.2  

B1.2  analyse  interrelationships  between   Canada's  physical  characteristics  and  various   human  activities  that  they  support  (e.g.,   mountainous  landforms  support  recreation;   water  bodies  and  flat  land  facilitate  urban   development  and  transportation)   B1.3  assess  environmental,  economic,  social,   and/or  political  consequences  for  Canada  of   changes  in  some  of  the  Earth's  physical   processes  (e.g.,  warming  in  the  North  is   leading  to  a  shorter,  less  reliable  ice  season   and  changes  in  plant  and  animal  populations   [environmental],  threatening  traditional   Inuit  culture  [social],  expanding   opportunities  for  resource  exploitation   [economic],  and  creating  conflict  between   nation  states  over  territorial  claims   [political])   B1.4  explain  how  human  activities  can  alter   physical  processes  and  contribute  to   occurrences  of  natural  events  and   phenomena  (e.g.,  paving  over  land  can  alter   drainage  patterns  and  cause  sink  holes;   some  agricultural  practices  can  contribute  to   soil  erosion;  deforestation  can  make  slopes   vulnerable  to  landslides)   B3.2  explain  how  geological,  hydrological,   and  climatic  processes  formed  and  continue   to  shape  Canada's  landscape  (e.g.,  folding   and  faulting  formed  and  continue  to  shape   Canada's  western  mountains;  glacial   recession  left  scoured  landscape  in  Ontario's   north  and  fertile  landscape  in  the  south  and   shaped  the  Great  Lakes  drainage  system;   winds  continue  to  change  landform  features   in  the  badlands  of  Alberta)  

D  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

B.  Interactions   in  the  Physical   Environment  

Specific  

B1.3  

N  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

B.  Interactions   in  the  Physical   Environment  

Specific  

B1.4  

I  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

B.  Interactions   in  the  Physical   Environment  

Specific  

B3.2  

N  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

C.  Managing   Canada's   Resources  and   Industries  

Specific  

C1.1  

C1.1  describe  strategies  that  industries  and   governments  have  implemented  to  increase   the  sustainability  of  Canada's  natural   resources  (e.g.,  green  belts,  tourism   restrictions  in  environment-  ally  fragile   regions,  wildlife  culling,  rehabilitation  of   aggregate  quarries,  sustainable  yield   management  of  forests  and  fisheries,   recovery  of  minerals  from  mine  tailings,   community  composting,  recycling  and   recovery),  and  evaluate  their  effectiveness   C2.4  assess  the  feasibility  of  using  selected   renewable  and  alternative  energy  sources   (e.g.,  solar,  wind,  tidal,  hydro)  to  augment  or   replace  existing  power  sources  in  various   parts  of  Canada  

N  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

C.  Managing   Canada's   Resources  and   Industries  

Specific  

C2.4  

N  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

C.  Managing   Canada's   Resources  and   Industries  

Specific  

C3.4  

C3.4  analyse  the  main  factors  (e.g.,   availability  of  resources,  distance  to  market,   transportation  costs,  government  incentives,   labour  force)  that  need  to  be  considered   when  determining  the  location  of  sites  for   different  types  of  industries  (e.g.,  resource   extraction  industries,  manufacturing   industries,  service  industries,  knowledge- based  industries,  cultural  industries)  

D  

N  

87  

  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Academic  

CGC1D  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D1.1  

D1.1  analyse  the  impact  of  selected   population  trends  on  people  living  in   Canadian  communities  (e.g.,  aging   population  increases  demand  for  health  care   and  institutional  support;  increasing   population  density  affects  housing,  job,  and   transportation  needs;  increased  number  of   working  parents  with  responsibilities  for   both  child  and  elder  care  affects  family  life   and  housing  needs;  neighbourhoods  that   consist  largely  of  a  single  ethnic  or  cultural   group  pose  challenges  to  social  integration;   growth  of  First  Nations,  Métis,  and  Inuit   populations  increases  need  for  education,   housing,  health  care,  infrastructure,  and   resolution  of  land  claims  and  rights  disputes)   and  their  implications  for  the  future  (e.g.,   aging  population  will  further  increase   demand  for  health  care,  retirement  housing,   and  transit  support;  increased  diversity  of   newcomers  will  increase  demand  for   language  training)  

I  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D2.1  

D2.1  identify  factors  that  influence  where   immigrants  settle  in  Canada,  and  assess  the   opportunities  and  challenges  presented  by   immigration  and  cultural  diversity  in  Canada   (e.g.,  expansion  of  business  opportunities,   cultural  enrichment,  global  engagement  and   citizenship;  neighbourhood  segregation  and   lack  of  social  integration,  hate  crimes)  

I  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D2.2  

D2.2  evaluate  strategies  used  to  address  the   needs  of  various  immigrant  groups  within   communities  (e.g.,  provision  of  language   training,  celebration  of  traditions  from   various  cultures,  provision  of  cultural  and   social  support  services  in  several  languages,   addressing  hate  crimes  through  community   policing  and  education)   D2.3  analyse  social,  political,  and  economic   impacts  of  Canada's  immigration  and   refugee  policies            D3.2  identify  factors  (e.g.,  job  opportunities,   accessibility  of  transportation  and   communication  networks,  availability  of   social  services,  availability  of  natural   resources,  cultural  attitudes)  that  influence   the  demographic  characteristics  of   settlements  across  Canada  (e.g.,  ethnic   composition,  age-sex  distribution,  types  of   employment,  levels  of  education)   D3.3  analyse  the  major  demographic   characteristics  of  the  Canadian  population   (e.g.,  rate  of  natural  increase,  growth  rate,   age-sex  distribution,  dependency  load,   doubling  time,  cultural  background)  

I  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D2.3  

I  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D3.2  

I  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D3.3  

I  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D3.4  

D3.4  compare  settlement  and  population   characteristics  of  selected  communities  in   Canada  with  those  in  other  parts  of  the   country  and  the  world        

I  

N  

88  

  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Academic  

CGC1D  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D3.5  

D3.5  analyse  trends  in  the  migration  of   people  within  Canada  (e.g.,  increase  in  First   Nations,  Métis,  and  Inuit  peoples  moving   into  urban  centres,  rural  residents  moving  to   urban  centres,  people  from  central  and   eastern  provinces  moving  to  northern   Alberta  and  the  Northwest  Territories)  

I  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D3.1  

D3.1  describe  patterns  of  population   settlement  in  Canada  (e.g.,  linear,  scattered,   clustered),  and  assess  the  importance  of   various  factors  in  determining  population   size,  distribution,  and  density  (e.g.,   landforms;  climate;  proximity  to  food  and   water  sources;  connections  to   transportation,  communications,  energy,   and  economic  networks)   E2.2  analyse  various  economic,  social,  and   political  impacts  of  urban  growth  (e.g.,  cost   of  expanding  infrastructure  and  public   services;  health  impacts,  such  as  faster   spread  of  disease  in  densely  populated   communities,  increases  in  asthma  attacks  as   a  result  of  poor  air  quality,  and  stress  related   to  crowding;  traffic  congestion  and  related   economic  costs;  conflict  over  development   priorities)  

D  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E2.2  

D  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E1.2  

E1.2  analyse  the  sustainability  of  existing   and  proposed  transportation  systems,   locally,  provincially,  nationally,  and   internationally,  and  assess  options  for  their   future  development  (e.g.,  widening   highways,  creating  high  occupancy  vehicle   lanes,  creating  bike  lanes,  improving  mass   transit  infrastructure,  upgrading  train   corridors,  opening  the  Northwest  Passage  to   international  shipping)  

D  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E2.1  

E2.1  assess  the  impact  of  urban  growth  on   natural  systems  (e.g.,  impact  of  urban   sprawl,  vehicle  use,  and  waste  disposal  on   water  and  air  quality)           E2.  Impacts  of  Urban  Growth  :  analyse   impacts  of  urban  growth  in  Canada  (FOCUS   ON  :  Spatial  Significance;  Geographic   Perspective)         E3.1  analyse  the  characteristics  of  different   land  uses  in  a  community  (e.g.,  size  and   distribution  of  transportation  corridors,   differences  in  residential  types,  location  of   industrial  land),  and  explain  how  these   characteristics  and  their  spatial  distribution   affect  the  community  

D  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Overall  

E2    

D  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E3.1  

D  

I  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E1.1  

E1.1  analyse  the  effects  of  food  production   practices,  distribution  methods,  and   consumer  choices  on  the  sustainability  of   Canada's  food  system        

D  

N  

89  

  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E1.4  

E1.4  analyse  factors  that  affect  the  social   and  economic  sustainability  of  communities   (e.g.,  diversified  economy;  investment  in   public  services  and  infrastructure,  such  as   transportation  networks,  health  and  social   services,  recreational  and  cultural  facilities;   educational  opportunities;  recognition  of   heritage;  diverse  neighbourhoods)   E1.5  propose  courses  of  action  that  would   make  a  community  more  sustainable  (e.g.,   improving  community/neighbourhood   amenities,  establishing  local  markets,   replacing  individual  ownership  of  equipment   with  cooperative  ownership,  sharing  cars,   introducing  a  rental  bike  network,  expanding   the  amount  of  green  space)  

N  

I  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E1.5  

N  

I  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E2.3  

E2.3  describe  strategies  that  urban  planners   use  to  control  urban  sprawl  (e.g.,  green   belts,  high  density  residential  infill,   gentrification),  and  analyse  examples  of   their  implementation  

D  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E3.2  

E3.2  explain  how  the  natural  environment   may  influence  land-use  patterns  within  the   built  environment  (e.g.,  roads  tend  to  be  on   flatter  land;  parks  are  often  near  water)         E3.3  analyse  a  land-use  map  or  official  plan   for   a  specific  community,  and  describe  the   spatial  significance  of  the  community's  land- use  pattern      A1.1  formulate  different  types  of  questions   to  guide  investigations  into  issues  in   Canadian  geography  (e.g.,  factual  questions:   What  are  the  cultural  backgrounds  of  people   living  in  your  community?;  comparative   questions:  Which  uses  of  energy  have  the   highest  consumption?;  causal   questions:"How  can  increasing  the  use  of   public  transit  contribute  to  better  air  quality   in  your  community?)   A1.2  select  and  organize  relevant  data  and   information  on  geographic  issues  from  a   variety  of  primary  and  secondary  sources   (e.g.,  primary:  raw  data  from  field  work,   both  quantitative  and  qualitative;  statistics;   photographs;  satellite  images;  secondary:   newspaper  columns,  books,  atlases,   geographic  magazines,  websites,  graphs,   charts,  published  maps),  ensuring  that  their   sources  represent  a  diverse  range  of  views   A1.4  interpret  and  analyse  data  and   information  relevant  to  their  investigations,   using  various  tools,  strategies,  and   approaches  appropriate  for  geographic   inquiry  (e.g.,  use  data  about  their  way  of   living  and  use  of  resources  to  calculate  their   ecological  footprint  and  compare  it  to  the   ecological  footprints  of  people  in  Canada   and  other  parts  of  the  world;  use  graphic   organizers,  such  as  cross-classification  tables   or  ranking  ladders,  to  interpret  the  potential   economic,  political,  social,  and/or   environmental  impacts  of  an  industry  that   wants  to  establish  itself  in  their  community)  

D  

N  

Academic  

CGC1D  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E3.3  

D  

I  

Applied  

CGC1P  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.1  

N  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.2  

N  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.4  

N  

N  

90  

  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Applied  

CGC1P  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A.15  

A1.5  use  the  concepts  of  geographic  thinking   (i.e.,  spatial  significance,  patterns  and   trends,  interrelationships,  geographic   perspective)  when  analysing  and  evaluating   data  and  information,  formulating   conclusions,  and  making  judgements  about   geographic  issues  relating  to  Canada  (e.g.,   use  the  concept  of  spatial  significance  to   assess  the  characteristics  of  locations  for   different  types  of  land  use  when  planning   city  spaces;  use  the  concept  of  patterns  and   trends  to  analyse  the  impact  of  earthquakes   on  urban  structures;  use  the  concept  of   interrelationships  to  guide  personal   behaviours  that  may  affect  the  natural   environment;  use  the  concept  of  geographic   perspective  to  analyse  the  environmental,   social,  political,  and/or  economic  impacts  of   building  a  highway  or  energy  pipeline   through  the  lands  of  a  First  Nation,  Métis,   and/or  Inuit  community)  

N  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.6  

A1.6  evaluate  and  synthesize  their  findings   to  formulate  conclusions  and/or  make   judgements  or  predictions  about  the  issues   they  are  investigating     

N  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

A.  Geographic   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A2.3  

A2.3  apply  the  concepts  of  geographic   thinking  when  analysing  current  events   involving  geographic  issues  (e.g.,  to  identify   locational  factors  that  affect  the  importance   of  an  issue;  to  identify  patterns  and  trends   that  provide  context  for  an  issue;  to  identify   interrelationships  that  clarify  factors   involved  in  an  issue;  to  understand  the   implications  of  different  aspects  of  an  issue   and/or  different  points  of  view  about  the   issue)  in  order  to  enhance  their   understanding  of  these  issues  and  their  role   as  informed  citizens  

N  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

B.  Interactions   in  the  Physical   Environment  

Specific  

B1.4  

B1.4  explain  how  human  activities  in  their   local  region  can  have  an  impact  on  natural   processes  (e.g.,  vehicle  use,  chimney   emissions,  and  barbecue  and  lawn  mower   usage  contribute  to  smog  and  can  change   the  acidity  of  lake  water;  blasting  and  drilling   may  trigger  land  instability;  removing  trees   and  paving  over  land  change  the  amount  of   water  going  into  the  soil  and  back  into  the   air;  expansion  of  highways  can  lead  to  more   animals  being  struck  by  vehicles  and  can  also   disrupt  animal  migration  patterns  and   separate  animals  from  their  food  supplies,   thus  endangering  their  populations)  

I  

I  

Applied  

CGC1P  

B.  Interactions   in  the  Physical   Environment  

Specific  

B2.2  

B2.2  explain  the  influence  of  Canada's   natural  characteristics  (e.g.,  climate,  soils,   topography,  proximity  to  water,  natural   resources)  on  the  spatial  distribution  of  its   population  

D  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

B.  Interactions   in  the  Physical   Environment  

Specific  

B3.1  

B3.1  describe  the  natural  characteristics   (e.g.,  landscape,  weather,  drainage,   vegetation,  wildlife)  of  their  local  area  or   region,  and  explain  their  significance  for  the   region      B3.2  compare  the  natural  characteristics  of   their  local  community  with  the  natural   characteristics  of  other  communities  across   Canada           

N  

D  

Applied  

CGC1P  

B.  Interactions   in  the  Physical   Environment  

Specific  

B3.2  

N  

D  

91  

  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Applied  

CGC1P  

C.  Managing   Canada's   Resources  and   Industries  

Specific  

C1.1  

C1.1  identify  major  sources  of  energy  used   in  Canada  (e.g.,  fossil  fuels,  nuclear,  hydro),   and  assess  the  viability  of  alternative  energy   options  for  various  communities  across   Canada      C2.3  assess  the  economic,  environmental,   social,  and  political  significance  of  a  specific   industry  for  their  local  area  or  another  area   of  their  choice         D1.1  assess  economic,  social,  and   environmental  impacts  of  major  population   trends  in  Canada  today  (e.g.,  aging  of  the   population;  increasing  cultural,  linguistic,   and  social  diversity;  changes  in  family   structure)   D1.2  describe  some  opportunities  (e.g.,   cultural  enrichment,  new  economic   opportunities)  and  challenges  (e.g.,   communication  barriers,  ghettoization)  that   may  arise  for  communities  whose   populations  come  from  a  diversity  of  cultural   backgrounds   D1.3  describe  ways  in  which  Canadian   society  can  respond  to  the  needs  of  a   changing  population               D1.4  analyse  population  trends  in  their  local   community  or  area,  assess  related  needs,   and  recommend  appropriate  responses  to   those  needs         D2.1  analyse  current  immigration  trends  in   Canada  (e.g.,  trends  in  overall  numbers,   numbers  in  different  immigrant  categories,   countries  of  origin)     

D  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

C.  Managing   Canada's   Resources  and   Industries  

Specific  

C2.3  

N  

I  

Applied  

CGC1P  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D1.1  

I  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D1.2  

I  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D1.3  

I  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D1.4  

I  

I  

Applied  

CGC1P  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D2.1  

I  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D3.1  

D3.1  describe  key  characteristics  of  different   types  of  population  settlements  in  Canada   (e.g.,  towns,  cities,  census  metropolitan   areas,  megalopolises,  First  Nations  reserves),   and  explain  their  distribution  (e.g.,  near   rivers,  highways,  natural  resources)  

D  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

D.  Changing   Populations  

Specific  

D3.2  

D3.2  describe  the  major  demographic   characteristics  of  present-day  Canada  (e.g.,   population  density,  growth  rate,  age-sex   distribution,  cultural  diversity),  and  compare   them  to  those  of  your  community  or  local   area   E1.2  identify  various  ways  in  which   communities  in  Canada  dispose  of  their   waste  material  (e.g.,  landfilling,  composting,   incineration,  primary  and  secondary  sewage   treatment),  and  describe  potential   environmental  impacts  of  these  methods   E1.4  identify  actions  that  individuals  can   take  to  live  more  sustainably,  and  explain   the  benefits  for  their  local  community           

I  

I  

Applied  

CGC1P  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E1.2  

D  

N  

Applied  

CGC1P  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E1.4  

N  

D  

92  

  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian  Geography  

9  

Issues  in  Canadian   Geography  

9  

Applied  

CGC1P  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E2.2  

E2.2  assess  the  compatibility  of  different   types  of  land  uses  with  each  other  within   their  local  community  (e.g.,  land  uses  that   conflict  with  each  other,  land  uses  that  make   other  land  uses  more  efficient  or  less   efficient)   E2.3  explain  how  changes  in  land  use  can   affect  the  growth  or  decline  of  different   parts  of  a  community  (e.g.,  new  suburban   malls  can  drain  business  from  downtown   stores  and  lead  to  the  decline  of  a   community's  central  core;  replacing  an  old   industrial  district  with  retail  or  recreational   development,  adding  additional   transportation   capacity,  new  cultural  institutions,   amenities,  industrial  parks  can  stimulate   growth)   E2.4  analyse  the  impact  of  a  selected  project   on  a  community  (e.g.,  residential  or  resort   development,  urban  renewal,  installation  of   water  and  waste  management  systems,   creation  of  a  park  or  recreational  site,   addition  of  bike  lanes  on  major  streets,   opening  of  a  mine  near  a  reserve   community)   E3.  Patterns  of  Land  Use:  describe  patterns   of  land  use  in  their  local  community  (FOCUS   ON:  Spatial  Significance;  Patterns  and   Trends)         E3.1  describe  different  types  of  land  use   within  their  community  (e.g.,  commercial,   transportation,  industrial,  residential,   institutional,  recreational,  agricultural,  open   space),  and  explain  reasons  for  their  location  

D  

D  

Applied  

CGC1P  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E2.3  

D  

I  

Applied  

CGC1P  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E2.4  

N  

I  

Applied  

CGC1P  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Overall  

E3    

D  

D  

Applied  

CGC1P  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E3.1  

D  

D  

Applied  

CGC1P  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E3.2  

E3.2  describe  spatial  distribution  patterns   for  human  systems  and  services  in  their   community  (e.g.,  infrastructure  components,   such  as  transportation  and  energy  networks,   communication  towers,  water  and  waste   facilities)   E3.3  identify  spatial  connections  between   human  systems  and  services  in  their   community  and  the  broader  regional,   national,  and/or  global  networks  to  which   they  belong  (e.g.,  food  distribution,   communications,  transportation,  and  energy   networks)   B1.  assess  the  impact  of  human  activities  on   the  sustainability  of  terrestrial  and/or   aquatic  ecosystems,  and  evaluate  the   effectiveness  of  courses  of  action  intended   to  remedy  or  mitigate  negative  impacts;  

D  

D  

Applied  

CGC1P  

E.  Livable   Communities  

Specific  

E3.3  

D  

D  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Overall  

B1    

I  

N  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Specific  

B1.1  

B1.1  assess,  on  the  basis  of  research,  the   impact  of  a  factor  related  to  human  activity   (e.g.,  urban  sprawl,  introduction  of  invasive   species,  overhunting/overfishing)  that   threatens  the  sustainability  of  a  terrestrial  or   aquatic  eco-  system  [IP,  PR,  AI,  C]  

I  

N  

93  

  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Specific  

B1.2  

B1.2  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of   government  initiatives  in  Canada  (federal,   provincial,  municipal),  and/or  the  efforts  of   societal  groups  or  non-governmental   organizations,  such  as  Aboriginal   communities,  environmental  groups,  or   student  organizations,  with  respect  to  an   environmental  issue  that  affects  the   sustainability  of  terrestrial  or  aquatic   ecosystems  (e.g.,  wetland  restoration,   recycling  programs,  Canada­Ontario   Environmental  Farm  Plans,  stewardship  of   national  and  provincial  parks)  [AI,  C]  

I  

N  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Overall  

B2    

B2.  investigate  factors  related  to  human   activity  that  affect  terrestrial  and  aquatic   ecosystems,  and  explain  how  they  affect  the   sustainability  of  these  ecosystems;  

I  

N  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Specific  

B2.3  

B2.3  plan  and  conduct  an  investigation,   involving  both  inquiry  and  research,  into   how  a  human  activity  affects  soil   composition  or  soil  fertility  (e.g.,  changes  to   soil  composition  resulting  from  the  use  of   different  compostable  materials,  organic  or   inorganic  fertilizers,  or  pesticides),  and,   extrapolating  from  the  data  and  information   gathered,  explain  the  impact  of  this  activity   on  the  sustainability  of  terrestrial   ecosystems   [IP,  PR,  AI,  C]   B2.4  plan  and  conduct  an  investigation,   involving  both  inquiry  and  research,  into   how  a  human  activity  affects  water  quality   (e.g.,  leaching  of  organic  or  inorganic   fertilizers  or  pesticides  into  water  systems,   changes  to  watersheds  resulting  from   deforestation  or  land  development,   diversion  of  ground  water  for  industrial   uses),  and,  extrapolating  from  the  data  and   information  gathered,  explain  the  impact  of   this  activity  on  the  sustainability  of  aquatic   ecosystems  [IP,  PR,  AI,  C]   B2.5  analyse  the  effect  of  human  activity  on   the  populations  of  terrestrial  and  aquatic   ecosystems  by  interpreting  data  and   generating  graphs  (e.g.,  data  from  Statistics   Canada,  Parks  Canada,  and  other  websites   on:  the  concentration  in  water  of  chemicals   from  fertilizer  run-off  and  their  effect  on  the   growth  of  algae;  stressors  associated  with   human  use  of  natural  areas,  such  as   trampled  vegetation,  wildlife  mortality  from   motor  vehicles,  and  the  removal  of  plants,   animals,  and/or  natural  objects;  suburban   developments  and  their  impact  on  the  food   supply  for  animals  such  as  foxes  and   racoons)  [PR,  AI,  C]  

I  

N  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Specific  

B2.4  

I  

N  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Specific  

B2.5  

I  

N  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Overall  

B3    

B3.  demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the   dynamic  nature  of  ecosystems,  particularly   in  terms  of  ecological  balance  and  the   impact  of  human  activity  on  the   sustainability  of  terrestrial  and  aquatic   ecosystems.  

I  

N  

94  

  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Specific  

B3.2  

B3.2  describe  the  complementary  processes   of  cellular  respiration  and  photosynthesis   with  respect  to  the  flow  of  energy  and  the   cycling  of  matter  within  ecosystems  (i.e.,   carbon  dioxide  is  a  by-product  of  cellular   respiration  and  is  used  for  photosynthesis,   which  produces  oxygen  needed  for  cellular   respiration),  and  explain  how  human   activities  can  disrupt  the  balance  achieved   by  these  processes  (e.g.,  automobile  use   increases  the  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in   the  atmosphere;  planting  more  trees   decreases  the  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in   the  atmosphere)   B3.5  identify  various  factors  related  to   human  activity  that  have  an  impact  on   ecosystems  (e.g.,  the  introduction  of   invasive  species;  shoreline  development;   industrial  emissions  that  result  in  acid  rain),   and  explain  how  these  factors  affect  the   equilibrium  and  survival  of  ecosystems  (e.g.,   invasive  species  push  out  native  species  and   upset  the  equilibrium  in  an  ecosystem;   shoreline  development  affects  the  types  of   terrestrial  and  aquatic  life  that  can  live  near   lake  shores  or  river  banks;  acid  rain  changes   the  pH  of  water,  which  affects  the  type  of   aquatic  life  that  can  survive  in  a  lake)   C1.2  assess  social,  environmental,  and   economic  impacts  of  the  use  of  common   elements  or  com-  pounds  [AI,  C]  

N  

N  

Academic  

SNC1D  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  

Specific  

B3.5  

I  

N  

Academic  

SNC1D  

C.    Chemistry:     Atoms,   Elements,  and   Compounds  

Specific  

C1.2  

N  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Overall  

B1  

B1.  analyse  the  impact  of  human  activity  on   terrestrial  or  aquatic  ecosystems,  and  assess   the  effectiveness  of  selected  initiatives   related  to  environmental  sustainability;  

I  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Specific  

B1.1  

B1.1  analyse,on  the  basis  of  research,how  a   human  activity  (e.g.,  urban  sprawl,  use  of   pesticides  and  fertilizers,  creation  of   pollution,  human  inter-  action  with  wildlife)   threatens  the  sustainability  of  a  terrestrial  or   aquatic  ecosystem  [IP,  PR,  AI,  C]   B1.2  assess  the  effectiveness  of  a  local   initiative  of  personal  interest  that  seeks  to   ensure  the  sustainability  of  a  terrestrial  or   aquatic  ecosystem  (e.g.,  greening  their   school  grounds;  conservation   efforts  of  local  Aboriginal  communities;   naturalizing  banks  of  local  rivers  or  ponds   with  native  vegetation;  adoption  of  an   integrated  pest  management  strategy  to   combat  pests  in  a  local  garden),  and  explain   why  the  initiative  is  important  to  the   sustainability  of  the  ecosystem  [AI,  C]  

I  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Specific  

B1.2  

N  

D  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Overall  

B2  

B2.  investigate  some  factors  related  to   human  activity  that  affect  terrestrial  or   aquatic  ecosystems,  and  describe  the   consequences  that  these  factors  have  for   the  sustainability  of  these  ecosystems;  

I  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Specific  

B2.3  

B2.3  compile  and  graph  qualitative  and   quantitative  data  on  organisms  within  an   undisturbed  or  disturbed  ecosystem   (terrestrial  or  aquatic)  (e.g.,  nematode  and   earthworm  populations  in  soil  or  compost;   bird  populations  during  migration  or  winter   feeding;  tadpole  and  mosquito  larvae   populations  in  a  local  pond)  [PR,  AI,  C]  

N  

N  

95  

  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Science  

9  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Specific  

B2.4  

B2.4  plan  and  conduct  an  inquiry  into  how  a   factor  related  to  human  activity  affects  a   terrestrial  or  aquatic  ecosystem  (e.g.,  how   changes  to  soil  composition  from  the  use  of   different  compost-  able  materials  or  organic   or  inorganic  fertilizers  affect  the  types  of   plants  that  can  be  grown;  how  lower  water   levels  resulting  from  water  di-  version  affect   waterfowl  nesting  areas  and  fish   reproduction),  and  describe  the   consequences  that  this  factor  has  for  the   sustainability  of  the  ecosystem  [IP,  PR,  AI,  C]   B2.5  analyse  the  effect  of  factors  related  to   human  activity  on  terrestrial  or  aquatic   ecosystems  by  interpreting  data  and   generating  graphs  (e.g.,  data  on  the   concentration  in  water  of  chemicals  from   fertilizer  run-off  and  their  effect  on  the   growth  of  algae)  [AI,  C]   B3.  demonstrate  an  understanding  of   characteristics  of  terrestrial  and  aquatic   ecosystems,  the  interdependence  within  and   between  ecosystems,  and  the  impact   humans  have  on  the  sustainability  of  these   ecosystems.   B3.3  describe  the  complementary  processes   of  cellular  respiration  and  photosynthesis   with  respect  to  the  flow  of  energy  and  the   cycling  of  matter  within  ecosystems  (e.g.,   carbon  dioxide  is  a  by-product  of  cellular   respiration  and  is  used  for  photosynthesis,   which  produces  oxygen  needed  for  cellular   respiration),  and  explain  how  human   activities  can  disrupt  the  balance  achieved   by  these  processes  (e.g.,  automobile  use   increases  the  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in   the  atmosphere;  planting  trees  reduces  the   amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in  the   atmosphere)   B3.5  identify  some  factors  related  to  human   activity  that  have  an  impact  on  ecosystems   (e.g.,  the  use  of  fertilizers  and  pesticides;   altered  shorelines;  organic  and  conventional   farming;  urban  sprawl),  and  explain  how   these  factors  affect  the  equilibrium  and   survival  of  populations  in  terrestrial  and   aquatic  ecosystems  (e.g.,  fertilizers  change   the  fertility  of  soil,  affecting  what  types  of   plants  can  grow  in  it;  pesticides  leach  into   water  systems,  affecting  water  quality  and   aquatic  life;  shoreline  development  affects   the  types  of  aquatic  life  and  terrestrial   vegetation  that  can  live  by  lake  shores  or   river  banks;  urban  sprawl  wipes  out  fields   and  woods,  destroying  wildlife  habitats)  

I  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Specific  

B2.5  

I  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Overall  

B3  

I  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Specific  

B3.3  

N  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

B.    Biology:     Sustainable   Ecosystems  and   Human  Activity  

Specific  

B3.5  

I  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

C:    Chemistry:   Exploring   Matter  

Specific  

C1.1  

C1.1  analyse  how  the  chemical  and  physical   properties  of  common  elements  and/or   simple  compounds  affect  the  use  of   everyday  materials  that  contain  those   elements  and/or  compounds  [AI,  C]  

N  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

C:    Chemistry:   Exploring   Matter  

Specific  

C1.2  

C1.2  assess  the  social  and  environmental   impact  of  the  production  or  use  of  a   common  element  or  simple  compound  [AI,   C]  

N  

N  

Applied  

SNC1P  

E.    Physics:     Electrical   Applications  

Specific  

E2.8  

E2.8  graph  and  interpret  electricity   consumption  data  collected  over  a  period  of   time  from  electrical  meters  at  home  or  in   the  community  (e.g.,  their  school,  a  local   community  centre)  [PR,  AI,  C]  

N  

D  

96  

  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

A.  Political   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.1  

A1.1  formulate  different  types  of  questions   to  guide  investigations  into  issues,  events,   and/or  developments  of  civic  importance   (e.g.,  factual  questions:  What  form  of   government  does  Canada  have?  What  are   my  rights  and  responsibilities  as  a  citizen  in   my  local  community?;  comparative   questions:  What  are  the  similarities  and   differences  in  the  positions  of  stakeholder   groups  on  an  issue  related  to  local  transit  in   Ontario?;  causal  questions:  If  I  were  to   implement  this  plan  of  action,  what  impact   might  it  have  on  my  community?)  

N  

N  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

A.  Political   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.2  

A1.2  select  and  organize  relevant  evidence,   data,  and  information  on  issues,  events,   and/or  developments  of  civic  importance   from  a  variety  of  primary  and  secondary   sources  (e.g.,  primary  sources:  interviews,   photographs,  podcasts,  speeches,  statistics,   surveys;  secondary  sources:  investigative   news  stories,  textbooks,  most  websites),   ensuring  that  their  sources  reflect  multiple   perspectives  

N  

N  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

A.  Political   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.5  

A1.5  use  the  concepts  of  political  thinking   (i.e.,  political  significance,  objectives  and   results,  stability  and  change,  political   perspective)  when  analysing  and  evaluating   evidence,  data,  and  information  and   formulating  conclusions  and/or  judgments   about  issues,  events,  and/or  developments   of  civic  importance  (e.g.,  use  the  concept  of   political  significance  when  analysing  the   impact  of  the  Canadian  Charter  of  Rights  and   Freedoms  on  Canadian  society;  use  the   concept  of  objectives  and  results  when   analysing  the  intended  and  unintended   impact  of  a  community-planning  decision;   use  the  concept  of  stability  and  change   when  analysing  the  results  of  an  election;   use  the  concept  of  political  perspective   when  evaluating  the  positions  of  different   stakeholder  groups  on  how  best  to  foster   healthy  schools  and  determining  the  values   and  beliefs  that  underpin  these  positions)  

N  

N  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

A.  Political   Inquiry  and  Skill   Development  

Specific  

A1.7  

A1.7  communicate  their  ideas,  arguments,   and  conclusions  using  various  formats  and   styles,  as  appropriate  for  the  intended   audiences  and  purpose  (e.g.,  a  blog  on  the   results  of  environmental  action  in  their   school;  a  web  page  on  a  social  justice   issue  such  as  child  poverty  and  links  to   relevant  organizations;  a  discussion  group   on  how  best  to  foster  healthy  schools;  a   poster  that  highlights  people's  civic   responsibilities;  a  news  report  on  a  plan  to   build  a  big  box  store  in  the  local  community;   a  presentation  on  cultural  celebrations  of   various  people  within  the  local  community;  a   protest  song  to  commemorate  or  raise   awareness  about  a  violation  of  human   rights;  a  petition  calling  for  clean,   safe  water  on  First  Nations  reserves;  a   debate  on  alternative  electoral  processes;  a   work  of  art  on  the  value  of  volunteer  work)  

N  

N  

97  

  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

B.    Civic   Awareness  

Specific  

B1.1  

B1.1  describe  some  civic  issues  of  local,   national,  and/or  global  significance  (e.g.,   bullying  in  schools;  violence  in  local   communities;  accessibility  of  buildings  in  the   local  community  for  people  with  disabilities;   availability  of  recreational  facilities  in  the   local  community;  casino  development;  voter   turnout;  issues  related  to  freedom  of   information,  taxation,  water  quality;   Aboriginal  treaty  rights;  the  impact  of   consumer  choices;  human  rights  issues   related  to  racism,  child  labour,  the  rights  of   girls  or  women,  homophobia,  or  classism;   intervention  in  foreign  conflict),  and   compare  the  perspectives  of  different   groups  on  selected  issues  

N  

I  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

B.    Civic   Awareness  

Specific  

B1.4  

B1.4  communicate  their  own  position  on   some  issues  of  civic  importance  at  the  local,   national,  and/or  global  level  (e.g.,  equitable   availability  of  extracurricular  activities  in   schools,  a  local  land-use  conflict,  poverty  or   violence  in  the  local  community,  electoral   reform,  the  debate  over  Sharia  law  in   Ontario,  the  level  of  Canada's  contribution   to  international  development  assistance,   food  security,  Aboriginal  land  rights),   explaining  how  their  position  is  influenced   by  their  beliefs/values   B2.2  explain,  with  reference  to  issues  of  civic   importance,  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of   different  levels  of  government  in  Canada   (e.g.,  federal,  provincial  and  territorial,   municipal,  Aboriginal  governments)  and  of   key  figures  at  each  level  (e.g.,  members  of   Parliament  [MPs],  senators,  members  of   provincial  Parliament  [MPPs],  premiers,   mayors,  municipal  councillors,  chiefs,  band   councillors,  Métis  Senators)  

N  

I  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

B.    Civic   Awareness  

Specific  

B2.2  

D  

N  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

C.    Civic   Engagment  and   Action  

Specific  

C1.2  

C1.2  describe  a  variety  of  ways  in  which  they   could  make  a  civic  contribution  at  the  local,   national,  and/or  global  level  (e.g.,  by  serving   on  student  council  or  on  an  organization   offering  support  to  students  who  are  being   bullied;  by  reducing  the  amount  of  solid   waste  they  generate  and  by  properly   disposing  of  hazardous  waste;   by  volunteering  at  a  food  bank,  retirement   home,  hospital,  humane  society,  or   recreational  facility  in  the  local  community;   by  donating  blood;  by  participating  in   community  clean-up  or  tree-planting  days;   by  raising  funds  for  a  charity  or  a   development  NGO;  by  writing  to  or  speaking   with  their  city  or  band  councillor,  MPP,  or   MP  to  request  action  on  an  issue)  

N  

I  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

C.    Civic   Engagment  and   Action  

Specific  

C1.3  

C1.3  explain  how  various  actions  can   contribute  to  the  common  good  at  the  local,   national,  and/  or  global  level  (e.g.,  engaging   in  a  non-violent  protest  can  heighten   awareness  of  an  issue  and  pressure  for   change;  buying  fair  trade  products  helps   ensure  that  producers  are  fairly   compensated  for  the  products  they  produce;   the  organized  boycotting  of  products  can   pressure  corporations  to  change   irresponsible  practices;  donating  to  a   development  NGO  can  help  improve  the   lives  of  people  affected  by  a  natural  disaster   or  enhance  health  care  in  developing   countries;  canvassing  or  fundraising  for  an   organization  that  works  for  social  justice  can   raise  people's  awareness  of  issues  related  to   inequity  or  human  rights  abuses)  

N  

I  

98  

  

Science  

10  

Career  Studies  

10  

Career  Studies  

10  

Civics  and   Citizenship  

10  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Civics  and  Citizenship  

10  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

C.    Civic   Engagment  and   Action  

Specific  

C2.1  

C2.1  analyse  ways  in  which  various  beliefs,   values,  and  perspectives  are  represented  in   their  communities  (e.g.,  with  reference  to   different  racial,  ethnic,  and/or  religious   groups;  people   with  various  political  beliefs  and/or  social   values;  people  from  different  age  groups;   men  and  women;  First  Nations,  Inuit,  or   Métis  people;  people  in  lesbian,  gay,   bisexual,  and  transgender  [LGBT]   communities;  environmentalists;  people   with  disabilities;  people  from  different   professions  and/or  economic  circumstances;   recent  immigrants  and  new  Canadians;   business  people),  and  assess  whether  all   perspectives  are  represented  or  are  valued   equally  

N  

N  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

C.    Civic   Engagment  and   Action  

Specific  

C2.3  

C2.3  describe  various  ways  in  which  people   can  access  information  about  civic  matters   (e.g.,  websites  of  governments,  political   parties,  NGOs,  or  other  groups  and/or   institutions;  social  media;  meetings   organized  by  elected  representatives;   newspapers  or  newscasts),  and  assess  the   effectiveness  of  ways  in  which  individuals   can  voice  their  opinions  on  these  matters   (e.g.,  by  contacting  their  elected   representatives,  being  part  of  a  delegation   to  speak  on  an  issue  under  consideration  by   city  council,  organizing  a  petition,  voting,   making  a  presentation  to  a  commission  of   inquiry,  participating  in  a  political  party  or   interest  group;  by  expressing  their  views   through  the  media,  including  social  media,   or  at  a  town-hall  meeting;  through  court   challenges;  through  art,  drama,  or  music)  

N  

N  

Open  *  half   course  

CHV2O  

C.    Civic   Engagment  and   Action  

Specific  

C3.2  

C3.2  propose  different  courses  of  action  that   could  be  used  to  address  a  specific  civic   issue  (e.g.,  a  public  awareness  campaign,  a   plan  for  local  action,  a  campaign  to  pressure   for  political  action),  and  assess  their  merits  

N  

N  

Open  

GLC2O  

Preparation  for   Transitions  and   Change  

Specific  

    

­  articulate  personal,  learning,  community,   and  occupational  goals,  taking  into   consideration  the  results  from  their  personal   profile  and  their  exploration  of  selected   occupations;  

N  

I  

Open  

GLC2O  

Preparation  for   Transitions  and   Change  

Specific  

    

­  produce  a  preliminary  career  plan  that   identifies  secondary  school  courses,   activities  in  the  school  and  community,  and   postsecondary  education  options  that  will   help  them  achieve  their  goals;  

N  

I  

Academic  

SNC2D  

D.    Earth  and   Space  Science:     Climate  Change    

Specific  

D1.1  

D1.1  analyse  current  and/or  potential   effects,  both  positive  and  negative,  of   climate  change  on  human  activity  and   natural  systems  (e.g.,  loss  of  habitat  for   Arctic  mammals  such  as  polar  bears  and  loss   of  traditional  lifestyles  for  Inuit  as  Arctic  ice   shrinks;  famine  as  arable  land  is  lost  to   desertification;  an  increase  in  water-borne   disease  and  human  resettlement  as  coastal   lands  are  flooded;  expansion  of  the  growing   season  in  some  regions)  [AI,  C]  

N  

N  

99  

  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Science  

10  

Science  

10  

Science  

10  

Science  

10  

Science  

10  

Academic  

SNC2D  

D.    Earth  and   Space  Science:     Climate  Change    

Specific  

D1.2  

D1.2  assess,  on  the  basis  of  research,  the   effective-  ness  of  some  current  individual,   regional,  national,  or  international  initiatives   that  address  the  issue  of  climate  change   (e.g.,  Drive  Clean,  ENERGY  STAR,  federal  and   provincial  government  rebates  for   retrofitting  older  buildings  to  be  more   energy  efficient,  carbon  offset  programs,   community  tree-planting  programs,   municipal  recycling  programs,   Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change   [IPCC]),  and  propose  a  further  course  of   action  related  to  one  of  these  initiatives  [PR,   AI,  C]   D2.4  investigate  a  popular  hypothesis  on  a   cause-  and-effect  relationship  having  to  do   with  climate  change  (e.g.,  the  combustion  of   fossil  fuels  is  responsible  for  rising  global   temperatures;  the  concentration  of   atmospheric  CO2  is  responsible  for  rising   global  temperatures;  global  temperatures   have  been  on  the  increase  since  the   industrial  revolution;  the  severity  of   cyclones,  hurricanes,  and  tornadoes   increases  as  atmospheric  temperatures   increase),  using  simulations  and/or  time- trend  data  that  model  climate  pro-  files  (e.g.,   data  from  Statistics  Canada  and   Environment  Canada)  [PR,  AI,  C]  

N  

I  

Academic  

SNC2D  

D.    Earth  and   Space  Science:     Climate  Change    

Specific  

D2.4  

N  

N  

Academic  

SNC2D  

D.    Earth  and   Space  Science:     Climate  Change    

Specific  

D2.8  

D2.8  classify  the  climate  of  their  local  region   using  various  tools  or  systems  (e.g.,   Ecoregions  of  Canada,  bioclimate  profiles),   and  compare  their  region  to  other  regions  in   Ontario,  Canada,  and  the  world  [AI,  C]  

N  

D  

Academic  

SNC2D  

D.    Earth  and   Space  Science:     Climate  Change    

Specific  

D3.4  

D3.4  identify  natural  phenomena  (e.g.,  plate   tectonics,  uplift  and  weathering,  solar   radiance,  cosmic  ray  cycles)  and  human   activities  (e.g.,  forest  fires,  deforestation,   the  burning  of  fossil  fuels,  industrial   emissions)  known  to  affect  cli-  mate,  and   describe  the  role  of  both  in  Canada's   contribution  to  climate  change   D1.2  analyse  ways  in  which  human  actions   (e.g.,  burning  fossil  fuels,  implementing  tree- planting  programs)  have  increased  or   decreased  the  production  of  greenhouse   gases  [AI,  C]  

N  

N  

Applied  

SNC2P  

D.    Earth  and   Space  Science:     Earth's   Dynamic   Climate  

Specific  

D1.2  

N  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Overall  

B1    

B1.  analyse  selected  current  environmental   problems  in  terms  of  the  role  human   activities  have  played  in  creating  or   perpetuating  them,  and  propose  possible   solutions  to  one  such  problem;  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Specific  

B1.1  

B1.1  propose  possible  solutions,  on  the  basis   of  research,  to  a  current  practical   environmental  problem  that  is  caused,   directly  or  indirectly,  by  human  activities  [IP,   PR,  AI,  C]  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Specific  

B1.2  

B1.2  analyse  the  risks  and  benefits  to  the   environment  of  human  recreational   activities  and  the  leisure  industry  [AI,  C]     

I  

N  

100  

  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental  Science  

*  11  

Environmental  Science  

*  11  

Environmental  Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Specific  

B2.4  

B2.4  analyse  and  interpret  data  on   particulate  matter  in  air  samples  from   several  different  regions  of  Canada,  using   prepared  data  from  a  variety  of  sources   (e.g.,  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  the   Environment  ­  Air  Quality  Ontario,   Environment  Canada)  [AI]   B3.  demonstrate  an  understanding  of  some   of  the  ways  in  which  human  activities  affect   the  environment  and  how  the  impact  of   those  activities  is  measured  and  monitored.  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Overall  

B3    

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Specific  

B3.1  

B3.1  identify  the  basic  components  of  soil,   water,  and  air,  and  describe  some  of  the   effects  of  human  activity  on  soil,  water,  and   air  quality  (e.g.,  the  effects  of  industrial  or   vehicle  emissions  on  air  quality;  of  chemical   spills  on  soil  quality;  of  chlorination  on  water   quality)   B3.5  explain  the  effects  of  human  activity  on   an  aquatic  or  terrestrial  ecosystem  (e.g.,  the   impact  of  fertilizer  run-off,  acid   precipitation,  or  an  oil  spill  on  an  aquatic   ecosystem)  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Specific  

B3.5  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Specific  

B3.6  

B3.6  explain  how  human  activities  (e.g.,   agriculture,  travel,  the  purchase  of  exotic   pets,  importing  and  exporting,  releasing   domesticated  fish  into  fresh  water   environments,  the  use  of  live  bait)  have  led   to  the  introduction  of  invasive  species,  and   why  it  is  important  to  measure  and  monitor   the  impact  of  invasive  species  on  native   species   B2.2  plan  and  conduct  an  inquiry,  using   appropriate  technology,  to  compare  soil   quality  in  natural  and  disturbed   environments  (e.g.,  compare  the   phosphorous  content,  pH,  organic  matter   con-  tent,  water  content,  water-holding   capacity,  nutrient  content,  porosity,  and/or   bulk  density  of  soil  from  a  forest  or  meadow   and  soil  from  a  garden  or  farmer's  field  that   has  been  treated  with  chemical  fertilizer)  [IP,   PR,  AI]   B2.3  plan  and  conduct  an  inquiry,  using   appropriate  technology,  to  compare  water   quality  in  natural  and  disturbed   environments  (e.g.,  com-  pare  the  pH,  ion   content,  temperature,  dissolved  oxygen   content,  hardness,  turbidity,  biological   oxygen  demand  [BOD],  and/or  fecal  coliform   of  tap  water,  water  from  a  pond  or  stream,   and  water  from  a  drainage  ditch)  [IP,  PR,  AI]  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Specific  

B2.2  

N  

D  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Specific  

B2.3  

N  

D  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

B:    Human   Impact  on  the   Environment  

Specific  

B2.5  

B2.5  plan  and  conduct  a  waste  audit  of  their   home  or  school  [IP,  PR]  

N  

D  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

C.    Human   Health  and  the   Environment  

Overall  

C1  

C1.  analyse  the  effects  on  human  health  of   environmental  contaminants  and  a   significant  environmental  phenomenon;  

I  

N  

101  

  

Environmental  Science  

*  11  

Environmental  Science  

*  11  

Environmental  Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental  Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

C.    Human   Health  and  the   Environment  

Specific  

C1.2  

C1.2  analyse  how  environmental   contaminants  can  affect  the  health  of   different  populations  in  Canada  (e.g.,   mercury  contamination  in  streams  and  rivers   in  Northern  Ontario  where  Aboriginal  people   fish,  toxins  in  Arctic  sea  mammals  hunted  by   Inuit,  smog  in  large  cities)  [AI,  C]   C2.  investigate  how  different  environmental   factors  can  affect  people's  health  and  their   lifestyle  choices;  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

C.    Human   Health  and  the   Environment  

Overall  

C2    

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

C.    Human   Health  and  the   Environment  

Specific  

C2.2  

C2.2  investigate,  using  a  research  process,   and  re-  port  on  an  environmental  factor  that   can  have  an  impact  on  human  health  (e.g.,   smog,  ultraviolet  [UV]  rays,  bacteria,   pesticide  residue),  and  ex-  plain  how  their   personal  lifestyle  choices  can  affect  its   impact  (e.g.,  avoiding  strenuous  physical   activity  on  days  when  there  is  a  smog  alert   can  reduce  the  severity  of  respiratory   ailments;  lying  on  the  beach  without   sunscreen  or  sun  protective  clothing  during   peak  UV  hours  can  increase  the  risk  of  skin   cancer)  [IP,  PR,  AI,  C]  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

C.    Human   Health  and  the   Environment  

Overall  

C3  

C3.  demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the   ways  in  which  environmental  factors  can   affect  human  health  and  how  their  impact   can  be  reduced.  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

C.    Human   Health  and  the   Environment  

Specific  

C3.1  

C3.1  describe  common  environmental   factors,  including  pollution  and   environmental  contaminants  (e.g.,  air,  noise,   soil,  and  water  pollution;  UV  rays;  heat;   heavy  metals;  work-  place  chemicals;   pathogens),  and  explain  how  they  can  affect   human  health   D1.1  assess,  on  the  basis  of  research,  the   impact  that  initiatives  for  reducing  energy   consumption  and  waste  have  on  personal   lifestyles,  societal  attitudes,  and  the   environment  (e.g.,  local,  provincial,  or   national  initiatives  by  government,  business,   or  non-governmental  organizations)  [IP,  PR,   AI,  C]   D3.3  describe  methods  of  energy   conservation  (e.g.,  the  replacement  of   incandescent  bulbs  with  compact   fluorescent  bulbs,  the  replacement  of  a   manual  thermostat  with  a  programmable   one,  the  installation  of  more  energy-efficient   windows)  and  some  policies  that  are   intended  to  manage  energy  demand  in  the   home  and  the  workplace  (e.g.,  variable   pricing,  which  increases  the  price  of   electricity  during  peak  hours)   E2.3  investigate,  through  laboratory  inquiry,   field  study,  or  simulations,  some  of  the   methods  and  procedures  used  by  scientists   to  monitor  bio-  diversity  in  different   environments  (e.g.,  making  plant  tallies  in   forests;  tagging  or  marking  ground   vegetation  species  in  fields;  tagging  and   tracking  wildlife  with  the  global  positioning   system  in  remote  areas;  using  aquatic  dip   nets  for  sampling  organisms  in  shallow   ponds  or  streams)  [PR]  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

D.    Energy   Conservation  

Specific  

D1.1  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

D.    Energy   Conservation  

Specific  

D3.3  

I  

N  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

E.    Natural   Resource   Science  and   Management  

Specific  

E2.3  

N  

I  

102  

Environmental   Science  

*  11  

Workplace  

SVN3E  

E.    Natural   Resource   Science  and   Management  

Specific  

E2.4  

E2.4  conduct  an  inventory  of  a  local   environment  (e.g.,  a  field,  a  pond),  using   appropriate  techniques  and  methods  (e.g.,   plant  tallies,  tags,  keys),  and  display  the   results  graphically  [PR,  C]  

N  

D  

Expectation  Code  

COURSE  CODE  

EXAMPLES  (only  if  they  contain  reference  to  U/PB  EE)  

Examples   Urban  EE   (Direct   /Indirect  /   None)  
D   I  

Place- Based  EE   (Direct  /   Indirect  /   None)  

CGC1D  

A1.1  

e.g.  Factual  questions:  What  factors  need  to  be  considered  when  analysing  the  impact  of  expanding  a   highway?;  How  does  the  infrastructure  of  this  community  support  environmental  sustainability?   e.g.  use  the  concept  of  spatial  significance  to  evaluate  competing  land-use  options,  such  as  fruit   farming  and  urban  development;  apply  the  concept  of  patterns  and  trends  to  temperature   and  precipitation  data  to  assess  how  the  climate  of  a  region  has  changed  over  time;  use  the  concept  of   interrelationships  to  assess  how  changes  in  technology  affect  industry,  employment,  and  the   consumption  of  natural  resources;  

CGC1D  

A1.5  

D  

N  

CGC1D   CGC1D   CGC1D   CGC1D   CGC1D  

A1.6   A2.3   B1.2   B1.3   B1.4  

            water  bodies  and  flat  land  facilitate  urban  development  and  transportation        e.g.,  paving  over  land  can  alter  drainage  patterns  and  cause  sink  holes;  some  agricultural  practices  can   contribute  to  soil  erosion;  deforestation  can  make  slopes  vulnerable  to  landslides          e.g.,  green  belts,  tourism  restrictions  in  environment-  ally  fragile  regions,  wildlife  culling,  rehabilitation   of  aggregate  quarries,  sustainable  yield  management  of  forests  and  fisheries,  recovery  of  minerals   from  mine  tailings,  community  composting,  recycling  and  recovery        e.g.,  availability  of  resources,  distance  to  market,  transportation  costs,  government  incentives,  labour   force            e.g.,  resource  extraction  industries,  manufacturing  industries,  service  industries,  knowledge- based  industries,  cultural  industries   e.g.,  aging  population  increases  demand  for  health  care  and  institutional  support;  increasing   population  density  affects  housing,  job,  and  transportation  needs;  increased  number  of  working   parents  with  responsibilities  for  both  child  and  elder  care  affects  family  life  and  housing  needs;   neighbourhoods  that  consist  largely  of  a  single  ethnic  or  cultural  group  pose  challenges  to  social   integration;  growth  of  First  Nations,  Métis,  and  Inuit  populations  increases  need  for  education,   housing,  health  care,  infrastructure,  and  resolution  of  land  claims  and  rights  disputes                                                     e.g.,  aging  population  will  further  increase  demand  for  health  care,  retirement  housing,  and  transit   support;  increased  diversity  of  newcomers  will  increase  demand  for  language  training  

N   N   D   N   I  

N   N   N   N   N  

CGC1D   CGC1D  

B3.2   C1.1  

N   D  

N   N  

CGC1D   CGC1D  

C2.4   C3.4  

N   I  

N   N  

CGC1D  

D1.1  

D  

N  

CGC1D  

D2.1  

e.g.,  expansion  of  business  opportunities,  cultural  enrichment,  global  engagement  and  citizenship;   neighbourhood  segregation  and  lack  of  social  integration,  hate  crimes  

I  

N  

CGC1D   CGC1D  

D2.2   D2.3  

         

N   N  

N   N  

  

103  

CGC1D  

D3.2  

e.g.,  job  opportunities,  accessibility  of  transportation  and  communication  networks,  availability  of   social  services,  availability  of  natural  resources,  cultural  attitudes             e.g.,  increase  in  First  Nations,  Métis,  and  Inuit  peoples  moving  into  urban  centres,  rural  residents   moving  to  urban  centres,  people  from  central  and  eastern  provinces  moving  to  northern  Alberta  and   the  Northwest  Territories   e.g.,  landforms;  climate;  proximity  to  food  and  water  sources;  connections  to  transportation,   communications,  energy,  and  economic  networks   e.g.,  cost  of  expanding  infrastructure  and  public  services;  health  impacts,  such  as  faster  spread  of   disease  in  densely  populated  communities,  increases  in  asthma  attacks  as  a  result  of  poor  air  quality,   and  stress  related  to  crowding;  traffic  congestion  and  related  economic  costs;  conflict  over   development  priorities   e.g.,  widening  highways,  creating  high  occupancy  vehicle  lanes,  creating  bike  lanes,  improving  mass   transit  infrastructure,  upgrading  train  corridors,  opening  the  Northwest  Passage  to  international   shipping   e.g.,  impact  of  urban  sprawl,  vehicle  use,  and  waste  disposal  on  water  and  air  quality        e.g.,  size  and  distribution  of  transportation  corridors,  differences  in  residential  types,  location  of   industrial  land        e.g.,  diversified  economy;  investment  in  public  services  and  infrastructure,  such  as  transportation   networks,  health  and  social  services,  recreational  and  cultural  facilities;  educational  opportunities;   recognition  of  heritage;  diverse  neighbourhoods   e.g.,  improving  community/neighbourhood  amenities,  establishing  local  markets,  replacing  individual   ownership  of  equipment  with  cooperative  ownership,  sharing  cars,  introducing  a  rental  bike  network,   expanding  the  amount  of  green  space   e.g.,  green  belts,  high  density  residential  infill,  gentrification   e.g.,  roads  tend  to  be  on  flatter  land;  parks  are  often  near  water        "How  can  increasing  the  use  of  public  transit  contribute  to  better  air  quality  in  your  community?        e.g.,  use  data  about  their  way  of  living  and  use  of  resources  to  calculate  their  ecological  footprint  and   compare  it  to  the  ecological  footprints  of  people  in  Canada  and  other  parts  of  the  world;  use  graphic   organizers,  such  as  cross-classification  tables  or  ranking  ladders,  to  interpret  the  potential  economic,   political,  social,  and/or  environmental  impacts  of  an  industry  that  wants  to  establish  itself  in  their   community   e.g.,  use  the  concept  of  spatial  significance  to  assess  the  characteristics  of  locations  for  different  types   of  land  use  when  planning  city  spaces;  use  the  concept  of  patterns  and  trends  to  analyse  the  impact  of   earthquakes  on  urban  structures;  use  the  concept  of  interrelationships  to  guide  personal  behaviours   that  may  affect  the  natural  environment;  use  the  concept  of  geographic  perspective  to  analyse  the   environmental,  social,  political,  and/or  economic  impacts  of  building  a  highway  or  energy  pipeline   through  the  lands  of  a  First  Nation,  Métis,  and/or  Inuit  community  

D  

N  

CGC1D   CGC1D   CGC1D  

D3.3   D3.4   D3.5  

N   N   D  

N   N   N  

CGC1D  

D3.1  

D  

N  

CGC1D  

E2.2  

D  

N  

CGC1D  

E1.2  

D  

N  

CGC1D   CGC1D   CGC1D   CGC1D   CGC1D  

E2.1   E2     E3.1   E1.1   E1.4  

D   N   D   N   I  

N   N   N   N   I  

CGC1D  

E1.5  

N  

I  

CGC1D   CGC1D   CGC1D   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P  

E2.3   E3.2   E3.3   A1.1   A1.2   A1.4  

D   D   N   D   N   N  

N   N   N   D   N   D  

CGC1P  

A.15  

D  

N  

CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P  

A1.6   A2.3   B1.4  

          e.g.,  vehicle  use,  chimney  emissions,  and  barbecue  and  lawn  mower  usage  contribute  to  smog  and  can   change  the  acidity  of  lake  water;  blasting  and  drilling  may  trigger  land  instability;  removing  trees  and   paving  over  land  change  the  amount  of  water  going  into  the  soil  and  back  into  the  air;  expansion  of   highways  can  lead  to  more  animals  being  struck  by  vehicles  and  can  also  disrupt  animal  migration   patterns  and  separate  animals  from  their  food  supplies,  thus  endangering  their  populations  

N   N   I  

N   N   N  

CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P  

B2.2   B3.1   B3.2   C1.1  

                   

N   N   N   N  

N   N   N   N  

  

104  

CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P  

C2.3   D1.1   D1.2   D1.3   D1.4   D2.1   D3.1   D3.2   E1.2   E1.4   E2.2   E2.3  

                              e.g.,  towns,  cities,  census  metropolitan  areas,  megalopolises,  First  Nations  reserves      e.g.,  near  rivers,   highways,  natural  resources     e.g.,  population  density,  growth  rate,  age-sex  distribution,  cultural  diversity             e.g.,  land  uses  that  conflict  with  each  other,  land  uses  that  make  other  land  uses  more  efficient  or  less   efficient   e.g.,  new  suburban  malls  can  drain  business  from  downtown  stores  and  lead  to  the  decline  of  a   community's  central  core;  replacing  an  old  industrial  district  with  retail  or  recreational  development,   adding  additional  transportation   capacity,  new  cultural  institutions,  amenities,  industrial  parks  can  stimulate  growth   e.g.,  residential  or  resort  development,  urban  renewal,  installation  of  water  and  waste  management   systems,  creation  of  a  park  or  recreational  site,  addition  of  bike  lanes  on  major  streets,  opening  of  a   mine  near  a  reserve  community             e.g.,  infrastructure  components,  such  as  transportation  and  energy  networks,  communication  towers,   water  and  waste  facilities   e.g.,  food  distribution,  communications,  transportation,  and  energy  networks        e.g.,  urban  sprawl,  introduction  of  invasive  species,  overhunting/overfishing   federal,  provincial,  municipal      e.g.,  wetland  restoration,  recycling  programs,  Canada­Ontario   Environmental  Farm  Plans,  stewardship  of  national  and  provincial  parks                     e.g.,  leaching  of  organic  or  inorganic  fertilizers  or  pesticides  into  water  systems,  changes  to  watersheds   resulting  from  deforestation  or  land  development,  diversion  of  ground  water  for  industrial  uses   e.g.,  data  from  Statistics  Canada,  Parks  Canada,  and  other  websites  on:  the  concentration  in  water  of   chemicals  from  fertilizer  run-off  and  their  effect  on  the  growth  of  algae;  stressors  associated  with   human  use  of  natural  areas,  such  as  trampled  vegetation,  wildlife  mortality  from  motor  vehicles,  and   the  removal  of  plants,  animals,  and/or  natural  objects;  suburban  developments  and  their  impact  on   the  food  supply  for  animals  such  as  foxes  and  racoons)        e.g.,  automobile  use  increases  the  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in  the  atmosphere;  planting  more  trees   decreases  the  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in  the  atmosphere   e.g.,  invasive  species  push  out  native  species  and  upset  the  equilibrium  in  an  ecosystem;  shoreline   development  affects  the  types  of  terrestrial  and  aquatic  life  that  can  live  near  lake  shores  or  river   banks;  acid  rain  changes  the  pH  of  water,  which  affects  the  type  of  aquatic  life  that  can  survive  in  a   lake             e.g.,  urban  sprawl,  use  of  pesticides  and  fertilizers,  creation  of  pollution,  human  inter-  action  with   wildlife   e.g.,  greening  their  school  grounds;  conservation   efforts  of  local  Aboriginal  communities;  naturalizing  banks  of  local  rivers  or  ponds  with  native   vegetation;  adoption  of  an  integrated  pest  management  strategy  to  combat  pests  in  a  local  garden        e.g.,  nematode  and  earthworm  populations  in  soil  or  compost;  bird  populations  during  migration  or   winter  feeding;  tadpole  and  mosquito  larvae  populations  in  a  local  pond       

N   N   N   N   N   N   D   D   N   N   D   D  

N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   D   N  

CGC1P  

E2.4  

D  

N  

CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   CGC1P   SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D  

E3     E3.1   E3.2   E3.3   B1     B1.1   B1.2   B2     B2.3   B2.4  

N   N   D   D   N   D   D   N   N   I  

N   N   D   D   N   N   N   N   N   N  

SNC1D  

B2.5  

D  

N  

SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D  

B3     B3.2   B3.5  

N   I   I  

N   N   N  

SNC1D   SNC1P   SNC1P   SNC1P  

C1.2   B1   B1.1   B1.2  

N   N   D   N  

N   N   N   D  

SNC1P   SNC1P   SNC1P  

B2   B2.3   B2.4  

N   N   N  

N   D   N  

  

105  

SNC1P   SNC1P   SNC1P   SNC1P  

B2.5   B3   B3.3   B3.5  

          e.g.,  automobile  use  increases  the  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in  the  atmosphere;  planting  trees  reduces   the  amount  of  carbon  dioxide  in  the  atmosphere   e.g.,  the  use  of  fertilizers  and  pesticides;  altered  shorelines;  organic  and  conventional  farming;  urban   sprawl          e.g.,  fertilizers  change  the  fertility  of  soil,  affecting  what  types  of  plants  can  grow  in  it;   pesticides  leach  into  water  systems,  affecting  water  quality  and  aquatic  life;  shoreline  development   affects  the  types  of  aquatic  life  and  terrestrial  vegetation  that  can  live  by  lake  shores  or  river  banks;   urban  sprawl  wipes  out  fields  and  woods,  destroying  wildlife  habitats  

N   N   I   D  

N   N   N   N  

SNC1P   SNC1P   SNC1P   CHV2O  

C1.1   C1.2   E2.8   A1.1  

          e.g.,  their  school,  a  local  community  centre   e.g.,  factual  questions:  What  form  of  government  does  Canada  have?  What  are  my  rights  and   responsibilities  as  a  citizen  in  my  local  community?;  comparative  questions:  What  are  the  similarities   and  differences  in  the  positions  of  stakeholder  groups  on  an  issue  related  to  local  transit  in  Ontario?;   causal  questions:  If  I  were  to  implement  this  plan  of  action,  what  impact  might  it  have  on  my   community?        e.g.,  use  the  concept  of  political  significance  when  analysing  the  impact  of  the  Canadian  Charter  of   Rights  and  Freedoms  on  Canadian  society;  use  the  concept  of  objectives  and  results  when  analysing   the  intended  and  unintended  impact  of  a  community-planning  decision;  use  the  concept  of  stability   and  change  when  analysing  the  results  of  an  election;  use  the  concept  of  political  perspective  when   evaluating  the  positions  of  different  stakeholder  groups  on  how  best  to  foster  healthy  schools  and   determining  the  values  and  beliefs  that  underpin  these  positions  

N   N   N   N  

N   N   D   D  

CHV2O   CHV2O  

A1.2   A1.5  

N   N  

N   I  

CHV2O  

A1.7  

e.g.,  a  blog  on  the  results  of  environmental  action  in  their  school;  a  web  page  on  a  social  justice   issue  such  as  child  poverty  and  links  to  relevant  organizations;  a  discussion  group  on  how  best  to  foster   healthy  schools;  a  poster  that  highlights  people's  civic  responsibilities;  a  news  report  on  a  plan  to  build   a  big  box  store  in  the  local  community;  a  presentation  on  cultural  celebrations  of  various  people  within   the  local  community;  a  protest  song  to  commemorate  or  raise  awareness  about  a  violation  of  human   rights;  a  petition  calling  for  clean,   safe  water  on  First  Nations  reserves;  a  debate  on  alternative  electoral  processes;  a  work  of  art  on  the   value  of  volunteer  work  

N  

D  

CHV2O  

B1.1  

e.g.,  bullying  in  schools;  violence  in  local  communities;  accessibility  of  buildings  in  the  local  community   for  people  with  disabilities;  availability  of  recreational  facilities  in  the  local  community;  casino   development;  voter  turnout;  issues  related  to  freedom  of  information,  taxation,  water  quality;   Aboriginal  treaty  rights;  the  impact  of  consumer  choices;  human  rights  issues  related  to  racism,  child   labour,  the  rights  of  girls  or  women,  homophobia,  or  classism;  intervention  in  foreign  conflict  

N  

D  

CHV2O  

B1.4  

e.g.,  equitable  availability  of  extracurricular  activities  in  schools,  a  local  land-use  conflict,  poverty  or   violence  in  the  local  community,  electoral  reform,  the  debate  over  Sharia  law  in  Ontario,  the  level  of   Canada's  contribution  to  international  development  assistance,  food  security,  Aboriginal  land  rights   e.g.,  federal,  provincial  and  territorial,  municipal,  Aboriginal  governments      e.g.,  members  of   Parliament  [MPs],  senators,  members  of  provincial  Parliament  [MPPs],  premiers,  mayors,  municipal   councillors,  chiefs,  band  councillors,  Métis  Senators       e.g.,  by  serving  on  student  council  or  on  an  organization  offering  support  to  students  who  are  being   bullied;  by  reducing  the  amount  of  solid  waste  they  generate  and  by  properly  disposing  of  hazardous   waste;  by  volunteering  at  a  food  bank,  retirement  home,  hospital,  humane  society,  or  recreational   facility  in  the  local  community;  by  donating  blood;  by  participating  in  community  clean-up  or  tree- planting  days;  by  raising  funds  for  a  charity  or  a  development  NGO;  by  writing  to  or  speaking  with  their   city  or  band  councillor,  MPP,  or  MP  to  request  action  on  an  issue        e.g.,  with  reference  to  different  racial,  ethnic,  and/or  religious  groups;  people   with  various  political  beliefs  and/or  social  values;  people  from  different  age  groups;  men  and  women;   First  Nations,  Inuit,  or  Métis  people;  people  in  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  and  transgender  [LGBT]   communities;  environmentalists;  people  with  disabilities;  people  from  different  professions  and/or   economic  circumstances;  recent  immigrants  and  new  Canadians;  business  people        e.g.,  a  public  awareness  campaign,  a  plan  for  local  action,  a  campaign  to  pressure  for  political  action            

D  

D  

CHV2O  

B2.2  

D  

N  

CHV2O  

C1.2  

N  

I  

CHV2O   CHV2O  

C1.3   C2.1  

N   N  

N   D  

CHV2O   CHV2O   GLC2O   GLC2O  

C2.3   C3.2            

N   N   N   N  

N   I   N   N  

  

106  

SNC2D  

D1.1  

e.g.,  loss  of  habitat  for  Arctic  mammals  such  as  polar  bears  and  loss  of  traditional  lifestyles  for  Inuit  as   Arctic  ice  shrinks;  famine  as  arable  land  is  lost  to  desertification;  an  increase  in  water-borne  disease   and  human  resettlement  as  coastal  lands  are  flooded;  expansion  of  the  growing  season  in  some   regions   e.g.,  Drive  Clean,  ENERGY  STAR,  federal  and  provincial  government  rebates  for  retrofitting  older   buildings  to  be  more  energy  efficient,  carbon  offset  programs,  community  tree-planting  programs,   municipal  recycling  programs,  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  [IPCC]   e.g.,  the  combustion  of  fossil  fuels  is  responsible  for  rising  global  temperatures;  the  concentration  of   atmospheric  CO2  is  responsible  for  rising  global  temperatures;  global  temperatures  have  been  on  the   increase  since  the  industrial  revolution;  the  severity  of  cyclones,  hurricanes,  and  tornadoes  increases   as  atmospheric  temperatures  increase        e.g.,  forest  fires,  deforestation,  the  burning  of  fossil  fuels,  industrial  emissions   e.g.,  burning  fossil  fuels,  implementing  tree-planting  programs                            e.g.,  the  effects  of  industrial  or  vehicle  emissions  on  air  quality;  of  chemical  spills  on  soil  quality;  of   chlorination  on  water  quality                                 e.g.,  mercury  contamination  in  streams  and  rivers  in  Northern  Ontario  where  Aboriginal  people  fish,   toxins  in  Arctic  sea  mammals  hunted  by  Inuit,  smog  in  large  cities        e.g.,  smog,  ultraviolet  [UV]  rays,  bacteria,  pesticide  residue        e.g.,  air,  noise,  soil,  and  water  pollution;  UV  rays;  heat;  heavy  metals;  work-  place  chemicals;   pathogens   e.g.,  local,  provincial,  or  national  initiatives  by  government,  business,  or  non-governmental   organizations        e.g.,  making  plant  tallies  in  forests;  tagging  or  marking  ground  vegetation  species  in  fields;  tagging  and   tracking  wildlife  with  the  global  positioning  system  in  remote  areas;  using  aquatic  dip  nets  for  sampling   organisms  in  shallow  ponds  or  streams   e.g.,  a  field,  a  pond  

D  

N  

SNC2D  

D1.2  

D  

I  

SNC2D  

D2.4  

I  

N  

SNC2D   SNC2D   SNC2P   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E  

D2.8   D3.4   D1.2   B1     B1.1   B1.2   B2.4   B3     B3.1   B3.5   B3.6   B2.2   B2.3   B2.5   C1   C1.2  

N   I   I   N   N   N   N   N   I   N   N   N   N   N   N   I  

N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N  

SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E  

C2     C2.2   C3   C3.1   D1.1   D3.3   E2.3  

N   I   N   I   N   N   N  

N   N   N   N   I   N   D  

SVN3E  

E2.4  

N  

D  

Expectation  Code  

INVOLVE   REGIONAL  FIELD   STUDY   (*OUTDOOR   EDUCATION)  
No  

COURSE   CODE  

SAMPLE  QUESTIONS  

Urban  EE   (Direct   /Indirect   /  None)  
N  

Place- Based  EE   (Direct  /   Indirect  /   None)  
N  

U/PB  EE   THEME(S)  

CGC1D  

A1.1  

    

Systems   (Transportation)  

No  

  

107  

PARTICIPATORY   WITH  ACTION   OUTCOMES  

CGC1D  

A1.5  

Sample  questions:  "How  does  the  concept  of   spatial  significance  support  our  understanding  of  a   place's  distinctive  characteristics?"  "What  criteria   could  be  used  to  determine  if  the  characteristics   of  a  place  form  a  pattern?"  "Which  concept  or   concepts  of  geographic  thinking  could  be  used  to   evaluate  how  a  change  in  the  natural  environment   will  affect  people?"  "How  can  using  the  concept  of   geographic  perspective  improve  our   understanding  of  a  complex  issue?"   Sample  questions:  "What  geographic  criteria  could   be  used  when  considering  possible  changes  to   Canadian  immigration  policy?"  "Does  the  financial   benefit  of  extracting  natural  resources  justify   related  social  and/or  environ-  mental  impacts?"   Sample  questions:  "How  does  the  Canadian   government  use  issues  related  to  the  spatial   significance  of  global  oil  reserves  to  promote  the   Alberta  oil  sands?  How  might  you  use  geographic   perspective  to  assess  the  strength  of  the   government's  arguments?"  "What  kinds  of   patterns  and  trends  might  you  want  to  consider  if   you  were  analysing  a  news  story  about  climate   change?"  "What  is  the  relationship  between  the   availability  of  inexpensive  products  in  Canada  and   labour  or  environmental  standards  in  developing   countries?"  "What  concepts  of  geographic   thinking  might  help  you  assess  the  strengths  and   weaknesses  of  arguments  supporting  different   approaches  to  the  expansion  of  public  transit?"   Sample  questions:  "How  do  the  physical   characteristics  of  different  regions  influence   tourism  in  Canada?"  "How  would  a  graph  showing   seismic  activity  help  planners  make  decisions   relating  to  urban  settlement?"  "How  would  you   use  GIS  to  determine  the  best  place  to  locate  a   wind  farm?"  "How  do  soil,  climate,  and  landscape   influence  agricultural  practices  (e.g.,  contour   ploughing,  ranching,  intensive  agriculture)?"  "How   will  the  effect  of  warmer  temperatures  on  caribou   migration  affect  Inuit  and  other  Aboriginal   communities  in  Canada's  North?"     Sample  questions:  "How  might  a  warmer  climate   affect  the  skiing  industry  or  the  maple  syrup   industry  in  southern  Ontario  or  grain  farming  on   the  Prairies?"  "How  do  environ-  mental  changes   affect  plants  and  animals?  What  are  some  plants   and  animals  that  are  now  at  risk  or  may  become   so  because  of  environmental  changes?"  "How   does  a  change  in  permafrost  affect  transportation   and  infrastructure?"  "What  influence  might   warmer  temperatures  and  more  frequent  severe   storms  have  on  high-density  urban  centres  in   Canada?"  "How  can  communities  respond  to   shoreline  erosion?"   Sample  question:  "What  impact  do  exhaust   emissions  from  vehicles  have  on  our  climate?   Why?"   Sample  questions:  "How  have  climatic  processes   influenced  the  physical  features  of  the  area  in   which  you  live?  What  evidence  illustrates  that   climatic  processes  are  continuing  to  affect  the   landscape?"  "How  do  the  climatic  characteristics   of  Canada's  prairie  region  influence  the  types  of   vegetation  within  the  region?"  "How  do  the  rock   types  in  different  regions  of  Canada  affect  the   topography  of  the  Canadian  landscape?"  "How  did   glaciation  affect  drainage,  soil  quality,  and   vegetation  in  the  Canadian  Shield  as  compared  to   in  the  Great  Lakes­St.  Lawrence  Lowlands  and/or   the  Hudson  Bay  Lowlands?     Sample  questions:  "How  effective  are  the  waste   management  practices  in  your  community  in   supporting  sustainability?  What  happens  to   material  that  is  recycled  in  your  community?   Is  the  recycling  program  reducing  the  amount  of   waste  people  produce?"  "How  have  various  mine   sites  (open  pit,  quarry,  and/or  shaft  mines)  been   rehabilitated?"  "How  have  cod  stocks  responded   since  the  federal  government  closed  the  cod   fishery  in  1992?  What  problems  continue  to   prevent  the  recovery  of  the  cod  population?"  

N  

N  

Planning  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

A1.6  

I  

None  

Immigration  and   Settlement  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

A2.3  

D  

N  

Systems   (Transportation)  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

B1.2  

D  

N  

Planning  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

B1.3  

D  

N  

Climate  

No  

No  

CGC1D   CGC1D  

B1.4   B3.2  

I   N  

N   D  

Ecological   Climate  

No   No  

No   No  

CGC1D  

C1.1  

N  

D  

Systems  (Waste)  

No  

No  

  

108  

CGC1D  

C2.4  

CGC1D  

C3.4  

CGC1D  

D1.1  

CGC1D  

D2.1  

CGC1D  

D2.2  

Sample  questions:  "What  would  the  costs  and   benefits  of  developing  a  wind  and/or  solar  farm  be   for  your  community,  a  community  in  southern   Alberta,  or  another  location  of  your  choice?"  "In   what  areas  of  Canada  might  it  be  feasible  to  use   tides  as  an  energy  source?"   Sample  questions:  "How  might  the  key  location   factors  differ  for  different  kinds  of  farming  (e.g.,   corn,  dairy,  fruit)?"  "What  industrial  location   factors  make  Sault  Ste.  Marie  an  attractive  site  for   alternative  energy  development?"  "What,  in  order   of  importance,  are  the  most  significant  location   factors  for  an  entertainment  business?"   Sample  questions:  "Are  most  communities  in   Canada  being  affected  by  the  same  major   population  trends,  or  do  the  trends  and  impacts   vary  from  one  community  to  another?"  "As  the   number  of  elderly  people  increases,  what  changes   will  communities  have  to  make  to  their  infra-   structure?"  "Will  today's  major  population  trends   remain  important  in  the  future?  Why  or  why  not?   Sample  questions:  "Why  do  immigrants  settle  in  a   particular  location?"  "Should  governments   attempt  to  control  where  immigrants  settle  in   Canada?"  "Why  are  workers  from  other  countries   sometimes  brought  into  Canada  on  a  temporary   basis  instead  of  being  allowed  to  enter  as   immigrants?"  "What  types  of  incentives  might   companies  and/or  governments  offer  to   encourage  people  to  settle  in  a  particular   location?"   Sample  questions:  "What  support  may  newcomers   need  to  settle  comfortably  into  a  community  (e.g.,   assistance  with  jobs  and  housing,  language   training)?"  "What  are  the  advantages  and   disadvantages  of  providing  supports  for  immigrant   groups  within  a  community?"   Sample  questions:  "What  are  the  costs  and   benefits,  for  refugees  and  for  Canada,  of  admitting   refugees?"  "What  criteria  should   be  considered  to  determine  the  number  of   refugees  Canada  accepts?"  "How  do  you  think   Canada's  immigration  needs  and  refugee   obligations  may  change  in  the  future,  and  how   might  those  changes  affect  the  categories  under   which  immigrants  are  admitted?"  "In  what  ways   can  a  community's  ethnic  and  cultural   composition  influence  the  way  it  looks  and  the   way  it  functions?"   Sample  questions:  "Why  do  people  live  where   they  do?  What  would  you  do  to  attract  people  to  a   particular  location?"  "How  can  an  industry   influence  the  demographics  of  a  community?"   Sample  questions:  "How  do  the  demographic   characteristics  of  your  community  compare  with   more  general  national  characteristics?"  "How  is   the  percentage  of  working-age  people  (20­65)  in   the  total  population  changing?  What  are  the   implications  of  this  change?"  "What  is  the  age   distribution  in  your  community,  and  how  does  it   affect  your  community  now?"   Sample  questions:  "Choose  two  communities   other  than  your  own,  one  with  a  large  population   and  one  with  a  small  population.  How  do  the   population  characteristics  of  your  community   compare  with  the  population  characteristics  of   these  communities?"  "How  do  the  population   characteristics  of  the  three  largest  cities  in  Canada   compare  with  each  other?"  "How  do  Canada's   general  population  characteristics  compare  with   those  of  other  countries  around  the  world?      Sample  questions:  "Why  would  people  choose  to   leave  a  rural  life  and  move  to  an  urban   settlement?  Why  would  people  choose  to  move  to   another  province  or  territory?  What  are  the   impacts  of  these  trends  on  society?"  

N  

I  

Systems  (Energy)  

No  

No  

N  

N  

Planning  

No  

No  

D  

I  

Sociogeographic,   Planning,  Systems  

No  

No  

I  

N  

Immigration  and   Settlement  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Immigration  and   Settlement  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

D2.3  

D  

I  

Immigration  and   Settlement  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

D3.2  

I  

I  

Immigration  and   Settlement,   Systems,  Planning   Sociogeographic  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

D3.3  

N  

D  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

D3.4  

D  

D  

Immigration  and   Settlement,   Sociogeographic  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

D3.5  

D  

N  

Immigration  and   Settlement  

No  

No  

  

109  

CGC1D  

D3.1  

CGC1D  

E2.2  

CGC1D  

E1.2  

CGC1D  

E2.1  

CGC1D  

E2    

Sample  questions:  "Where  do  people  live  in   Canada  and  why?"  "What  pattern  or  patterns  do   you  see  in  the  location  of  First  Nations  reserves   across  Canada?  What  are  some  factors  that   account  for  the  location  of  reserves?"  "What  are   some  physical  factors  that  may  influence  the   location  of  a  settlement?"  "How  might  access  to   various  forms  of  transportation  influence  the   development  and  density  of  com-  munities?  How   would  a  settlement  pattern  influenced  by  highway   routes  differ  from  one  influenced  by  flight   routes?"  "What's  the  difference  between  a  town,   a  city,  and  a  census  metropolitan  area  (CMA)?   Why  might  a  city  prefer  to  be  called  a  town?"   "Why  do  some  settlements  grow  into  large   metropolitan  areas  and  others  stay  as  small   towns?"   Sample  questions:  "In  what  ways  might  urban   growth  influence  the  type  of  policing  in  a  com-   munity?"  "What  types  of  health  care  services   might  be  needed  in  a  large  urban  community?   Why  might  they  be  different  from  those  needed  in   a  small  town?"  "How  might  the  increased   migration  of  First  Nations  people  from  reserves  to   urban  centres  have  an  impact  on  both   communities?"   Sample  questions:  "What  are  the  costs  and   benefits  of  air  travel?  How  do  carbon  offset   programs  mitigate  the  environmental  impact  of  air   travel?  Are  they  enough?"  "How  can  changes  in   transportation  systems  help  to  control  urban   sprawl?"  "Why  might  some  communities  consider   creating  a  bike  lane  as  an  alternative  to  widening  a   roadway?  Why  might  this  option  be  better  in   some  communities  than  others?"   Sample  questions:  "How  might  the  draining  of   marshland  for  urban  development  affect  drainage   patterns,  the  microclimate,  and/or  wildlife?"   "What  impact  might  an  increase  in  population   density  have  on  sewage  treatment  processes  and   on  nearby  bodies  of  water?"  "What  effects  have   increases  in  the  amount  of  paved  land  had  on   groundwater?  How  have  water  bodies  been   affected  by  increased  runoff  from  paved  areas,   and  how  might  communities  that  use  that  water   be  affected?"  "How  do  paved  areas  affect  air   temperature?"          

D  

N  

Immigration  and   Settlement,  Urban   Systems,  Planning  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Sociogeographic,   Ecological,   Systems,  Planning  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Systems   (Transportation)  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Systems,   Ecological,  Climate  

No  

No  

N  

N  

Systems,  Planning  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

E3.1  

CGC1D  

E1.1  

CGC1D  

E1.4  

Sample  questions:  "What  services  does  a  city's   central  business  district  or  downtown  provide?   Why  is  a  thriving  central  business  district   important  to  a  city?"  "How  do  the  commercial   land  uses  within  a  community  help  to  unite  the   community  or  divide  it?"  "What  benefits  do   recreational  spaces  and  facilities  provide  for  this   community?  Are  all  age  groups  supported  by  the   recreational  spaces  available?"  "Do  all   neighbourhoods  have  equal  access  to  parks  and   green  space?"  "Why  is  industrial  land  often   located  on  the  perimeter  of  the  city?"  "Why  might   the  location  of  a  specific  kind  of  land  use  within  a   community  change  over  time?"  "How  do   municipal  taxes  both  influence  and  reflect  the   characteristics  of  land  use  in  the  community?"   Sample  questions:  "Do  present  food  production   practices  support  the  sustainability  of  the  food   system?"  "Why  would  it  be  important  to  have   dairy  farming  close  to  urban  centres?"  "What  role   does  the  availability  of  local  food  play  in  making   communities  more  sustainable?"  "What  options   are  available  to  consumers  if  they  wish  to  make   more  sustainable  food  choices?"   Sample  questions:  "What  is  the  multiplier  effect?   How  does  the  establishment  or  loss  of  a  major   industry  affect  other  businesses  in  a  community?"   "How  have  towns  that  have  lost  their  major   industry  been  able  to  survive  (e.g.,  Stratford,  Elliot   Lake)?  Why  have  some  other  communities   become  ghost  towns?"  "What  kinds  of  public   services  and  infrastructure  does  a  community   need  to  remain  socially  stable  and  economically   viable?"  "What  role  do  taxes  have  in  sustaining  a  

D  

I  

Planning,  Systems  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Systems  (Food)  

No  

No  

I  

I  

Systems,  Planning  

No  

No  

  

110  

community?"  "What  are  the  economic  and  social   characteristics  of  a  diverse  neighbourhood,  and   how  do  they  support  sustainability?"  

CGC1D  

E1.5  

CGC1D  

E2.3  

CGC1D  

E3.2  

Sample  questions:  "What  criteria  could  be  used  to   evaluate  a  community's  progress  in  achieving   environmental  sustainability?  What  economic   criteria  would  a  plan  to  improve  environmental   sustainability  have  to  meet  in  order  to  be  practical   to  adopt  and  viable  in  the  long  term?"  "Does  your   course  of  action  support  the  cultural  needs  of  the   people  living  in  the  community?   Sample  questions:  "How  does  the  official  plan  for   your  community  address  urban  sprawl?"  "Should   there  be  maximum  size  limits  for  cities?"  "Should   there  be  restrictions  on  the  use  of  farmland  for   development  or  on  other  land  uses  near  urban   centres?"   Sample  questions:  "How  has  the  physical  site  of  a   community  influenced  land  use  within  it?"  "Are   there  any  physical  features  within  the  community   that  might  have  been  built  (e.g.,  hills,  lakes,   waterfront  land)?  If  so,  why  were  they  built?"  

N  

I  

Sustainability  

No  

No  

D  

D  

Planning  

No  

No  

D  

I  

Planning  

No  

No  

CGC1D  

E3.3  

Sample  questions:  "Which  type  of  land  use  takes   up  the  most  space  in  the  community?"  "Where  is   most  of  the  commercial  space?"  "What  reasons   support  having  that  type  of  land  use  in  that   particular  location  and  not  somewhere  else?"       

D  

I  

Planning  

No  

No  

CGC1P  

A1.1  

N  

N  

CGC1P  

A1.2  

CGC1P  

A1.4  

CGC1P  

A.15  

CGC1P  

A1.6  

CGC1P  

A2.3  

Sample  questions:  "How  might  you  use  statistics   relating  to  temperature  and  precipitation  for  a   specific  location?  Where  might  you  find  these   data?   Sample  questions:  "What  kinds  of  tools,  including   organizers,  can  you  use  to  analyse  data  and   information?  How  are  they  helpful?"  "What   graphic  organizer  could  you  use  to  compare  data   and  information  on  different  communities  in  order   to  make  a  decision  on  where  to  live?"   Sample  questions:  "What  would  be  the   advantages  and  disadvantages  of  building  high- rise  apartments  in  a  particular  place?"  "What   trends  do  you  see  in  the  use  of  alternative  energy   in  Ontario?"  "How  might  consumer  choices  relate   to  social  justice  and  environmental   sustainability?"  "What  is  the  relationship  between   a  particular  resource  and  the  economy?"  "How   will  warmer  winter  temperatures  affect   businesses  that  rely  on  cooler  temperatures  (e.g.,   skiing  resorts,  wineries  that  make  ice  wine)?"   "When  considering  an  issue,  how  does  using   geographic  perspective  enable  you  to  analyse  its   complexity?"   Sample  questions:  "What  criteria  could  be  used  to   choose  the  best  place  to  live  in  Canada?"  "Given   your  community's  current  population  trends,  what   will  its  land-use  needs  will  be  in  the  near  future?"   Sample  questions:  "Why  would  understanding  the   spatial  significance  of  the  global  distribution  of   fresh  water  help  you  analyse  a  controversy  over   foreign  access  to  Canada's  fresh  water?"  "What   kinds  of  patterns  and  trends  might  you  want  to   consider  if  you  were  discussing  a  news  story  about   climate  change?"  "What  is  the  interrelationship   between  resource  use,  the  environment,  and   current  debates  about  expanding  public  transit?   How  does  this  issue  affect  you  or  your  personal   choices?"  "How  will  an  analysis  based  on   geographic  perspective  help  you  achieve  a  more   balanced  understanding  of  a  controversial  issue,   such  as  a  proposal  to  build  a  large  industrial   facility  near  a  residential  area?"  

N  

I  

Systems   (Transportation),   Ecological   Climate  

No  

No  

No  

No  

N  

I  

Planning,   Ecological,   Sociogeographic  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Planning  

No  

No  

N  

D  

Planning  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Planning  

No  

No  

  

111  

CGC1P  

B1.4  

CGC1P  

B2.2  

CGC1P  

B3.1  

CGC1P  

B3.2  

CGC1P  

C1.1  

CGC1P  

C2.3  

CGC1P  

D1.1  

CGC1P  

D1.2  

CGC1P  

D1.3  

CGC1P  

D1.4  

CGC1P  

D2.1  

CGC1P  

D3.1  

Sample  questions:  "How  do  human  activities   contribute  to  changes  in  Canada's  climate?"   "What  are  some  of  the  environmental  costs   that  may  occur  when  humans  adapt  the  natural   landscape  to  their  needs  (e.g.,  by  building   irrigation  systems,  clearing  land,  draining   marshes)?"  "Consider  a  proposal  for  adapting  a   natural  feature  in  your  area  for  human  use  (e.g.,   filling  in  a  swamp  and  building  a  shopping  mall  on   it).  What  are  the  environmental,  economic,  social,   and  political  implications  of  the  proposal?  How   would  the  costs  and  benefits  of  this  proposal   compare  with  those  of  leaving  the  natural  feature   untouched  or  modifying  it  in  a  way  that  preserved   most  of  its  natural  characteristics  but  allowed   some  human  use?"   Sample  questions:  "What  does  a  population   settlement  map  tell  us  about  the  preferred  range   of  latitude  for  settlement  in  Canada?"  "Where  will   people  resettle  if  coastal  areas  are  flooded?"   "How  have  people  adapted  to  areas  where  natural   characteristics  are  not  conducive  to  settlement?"   Sample  questions:  "What  would  you  consider  to   be  the  three  most  important  natural  features  in   your  community?  What  makes  them  important  to   the  community?  Should  the  community  ensure   that  they  are  preserved?"   Sample  questions:  "Which  community  would  be   the  hardest  to  adjust  to  if  you  were  to  move  to  it?   Why?"  "Which  communities  are  in  the  best  food- growing  areas?"  "Which  of  the  communities  you   have  looked  at  has  the  landscape  and  climate   conditions  best  suited  to  your  favourite  outdoor   activities?"   Sample  questions:  "Where  in  Canada  would  wind   energy  be  a  good  option  for  a  community?"  "How   are  individuals,  businesses,  and  communities  in   Canada  using  solar  energy?"  "Which  alternative   energy  option(s)  would  be  best  for  your   community  or  local  area?"   Sample  questions:  "What  are  the  social,  economic,   and  environmental  costs  and  benefits  of  having   this  industry  in  the  area?"  "How  would  other   businesses  in  our  area  be  affected  if  this  industry   were  to  collapse?  How  might  this  affect  you?"   "How  would  a  new  sports  attraction  (e.g.,  a   hockey  team,  a  major  sporting  event)  affect  a   community?  What  other  businesses  might  it   attract?"  "How  might  the  development  of  the  rich   mineral  resources  of  northern  Ontario's  ring  of   fire  region  affect  First  Nations  communities  in   the  area?"   Sample  questions:  "How  will  people's  needs   change  as  they  get  older?"  "How  will  an  aging   population  affect  the  types  of  goods  and  services   available  in  their  community?"  "What  do   immigrants  need  to  establish  themselves  in  a  new   country?"  "How  are  Canadian  families  changing?"   Sample  questions:  "In  what  ways  can  cultural   diversity  enrich  the  life  of  a  community?"  "Why   might  tensions  develop  between  people  from   different  ethnic  backgrounds?  What  strategies   might  prevent  or  reduce  these  tensions?"   Sample  questions:  "Is  it  better  to  invest  in  more   nursing  homes  for  the  elderly  or  more  home-care   support?"  "What  kinds  of  support  services  are   available  for  immigrants?  Who  provides  them?"   "How  can  schools  help  newcomers?"  "What  can   employers  do  to  help  single  parents  balance  work   and  childcare  responsibilities?"   Sample  questions:  "Are  the  population  trends  in   your  community  similar  to  the  trends  in  Canada  as   a  whole?"  "What  do  you  anticipate  will  be  the   biggest  area  of  concern  in  your  community  as  a   result  of  these  trends?"  "What  kinds  of  business   opportunities  do  you  see  emerging  as  a  result  of   the  changes  taking  place  in  the  population  of  your   community?"   Sample  questions:  "What  are  the  different   categories  in  which  immigrants  can  apply  for  entry   into  Canada?  What  factors  affect  the  number  of   people  applying  in  each  category?  Which  category   do  you  think  most  future  immigrants  will  apply  for   and  why?"   Sample  questions:  "What  are  the  advantages  and   disadvantages  of  living  in  a  suburb  of  a  large  city?   Which  would  you  prefer  to  live  in,  the  suburb  or  

I  

D  

Ecological,   Planning  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Sociogeographic  

No  

No  

N  

D  

Ecological  

No  

No  

N  

N  

Ecological      

No  

No  

N  

D  

Systems  (Energy)  

No  

No  

N  

D  

Planning  

No  

No  

I  

N  

Sociogeographic,   Immigration  and   Settlement  

No  

No  

I  

N  

Immigration  and   Settlement  

No  

No  

I  

N  

Sociogeographic,   Immigration  and   Settlement  

No  

No  

N  

D  

Sociogeographic  

No  

No  

I  

N  

Immigration  and   Settlement  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Immigration  and   Settlement,   Sociogeographic  

No  

No  

  

112  

CGC1P  

D3.2  

CGC1P  

E1.2  

CGC1P  

E1.4  

CGC1P  

E2.2  

CGC1P  

E2.3  

CGC1P  

E2.4  

CGC1P   CGC1P  

E3     E3.1  

the  city?"  "Why  might  a  First  Nation  student   prefer  to  live  on  a  reserve  rather  than  in  a  nearby   city?"  "Is  there  a  pattern  to  where  people  live  in   Canada?"  "What  role  does  the  Trans-Canada   Highway  play  in  the  distribution  of  population   settlement  in  Canada?"   Sample  questions:  "What  three  languages  are   most  commonly  spoken  in  Canada?"  "How  does   the  number  of  people  under  25  compare  to  the   number  of  people  over  65?  Why  is  this  important   to  know?"  "How  do  the  population  density  and   other  population  characteristics  of  your   community  or  local  area  compare  with  those  of   other  Canadian  communities?"   Sample  questions:  "Can  all  waste  materials  be   disposed  of  in  the  same  manner?  Why  or  why   not?"  "How  does  your  community  dispose  of   unwanted  electronics?"  "What  happens  to  your   garbage  if  your  community  does  not  have  a  landfill   site?"  "What  could  communities  and  individuals   do  to  minimize  the  amount  of  material  that  has  to   be  landfilled  or  incinerated?"   Sample  questions:  "What  can  you  do  to  make  a   difference  in  your  community?"  "How  does  the   community  benefit  if  you  take  your  own  bag  when   you  shop  for  groceries?"  "How  does  eating  local   foods,  cleaning  up  a  local  river,  installing  a  green   roof  on  the  school,  or  using  alternative  energy   support  sustainability?"  "How  might  the   community  benefit  economic-  ally,  socially,  and   environmentally  from  the  preservation  or   restoration  of  a  heritage  building?"  "What   changes  can  you  make  to  your  home  that  would   help  make  the  community  more  environmentally   sustainable?"   Sample  questions:  "Are  recreational  areas  close  to   the  residential  areas?"  "Do  public  transportation   routes  provide  easy  access  to  commercial  areas?"   "Is  residential  land  located  near  industrial   spaces?"  "Are  sewage  treatment  plants  next  to   recreational  land?"  "If  you  were  to  redesign  your   community,  would  you  change  the  patterns  of   land  use  in  any  way?"   Sample  questions:  "How  might  the  closure  of  a   pulp  and  paper  mill  lead  to  the  decline  of  a   community?"  "Why  would  people  choose  to  move   to  the  suburbs?  Why  is  the  resulting  urban  sprawl   a  problem?"  "Why  is  it  beneficial  to  have  housing   near  a  downtown  commercial  area?"  "What  types   of  social  issues  may  arise  from  changes  in  land  use   in  an  urban  community?"   Sample  questions:  "If  you  were  planning  on   moving  to  a  new  community,  why  would  it  be   important  for  you  to  check  on  future  plans  for  the   community?"  "Why  might  it  be  worthwhile  to   attend  a  planning  meeting  about  a  proposed   project  in  your  community?  What  could  you  do  to   voice  your  ideas?"        Sample  questions:  "How  can  aerial  photographs  of   the  community  help  us  identify  different  land   uses?  How  could  you  use  the  photographs  to  see   changes  in  land  use  and  plan  for  future  land-use   needs?"                  Sample  issue:  The  Great  Lakes  constitute  an   important  shipping  route.  Foreign  ships  often   empty  their  ballast  water,  which  can  contain   invasive  species,  directly  into  the  lakes.  The  goby,   which  was  likely  imported  in  ballast  water,  is  an   aggressive  fish  that  has  taken  over  the  spawning   grounds  of  some  native  species,  threatening  the   balance  of  the  ecosystem.   Sample  questions:  How  has  suburban   development  on  the  Niagara  Escarpment  or  the   Oak  Ridges  Moraine  affected  local  ecosystems?   How  has  the  zebra  mussel  population  in  Lake  Erie   affected  aquatic  species  and  water  quality?  How   has  commercial  logging  affected  the  sustainability   of  forests  in  Northern  Ontario?     

D  

D  

Sociogeographic  

No  

No  

N  

D  

Systems  (Waste)  

No  

No  

N  

D  

Sustainability  

No  

No  

D  

D  

Planning  

No  

No  

D  

N  

Planning  

No  

No  

N  

D  

Planning  

No  

No  

N   D  

N   D  

Planning   Planning  

No   No  

No   No  

CGC1P   CGC1P   SNC1D   SNC1D  

E3.2   E3.3   B1     B1.1  

N   N   N   D  

N   N   N   N  

Planning,  Systems   Planning,  Systems   Ecological   Ecological  

No   No   No   No  

No   No   No   No  

  

113  

SNC1D  

B1.2  

SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D   SNC1D  

B2     B2.3   B2.4   B2.5   B3     B3.2   B3.5   C1.2  

Sample  issue:  Landfill  sites  can  have  negative   effects  on  adjacent  ecosystems,  attracting  pests,   leaching  toxic  chemicals,  and  producing   greenhouse  gases.  Municipal  recycling  and   composting  programs  divert  garbage,  reducing  the   need  for  new  land-  fill  sites.  However,  many   people,  particularly  rural  residents  and  those  in   apartment  buildings,  may  not  be  included  in  these   programs.   Sample  questions:  What  provincial  or  federal   legislation  attempts  to  protect  special  features  or   sensitive  elements  of  terrestrial  or  freshwater   ecosystems?  How  could  such  legislation  be  more   effective?  How  have  the  actions  of  local  wetland- reclamation,  municipal  tree-planting,  Aboriginal   fisheries-management,  Great  Lakes­   rehabilitation,  organic  farming,  or  other  groups   helped  to  ensure  ecological  sustainability?  What   further  action  could  such  groups  take?                                         Sample  issue:  By  reducing  the  accumulation  of  ice   on  roads,  road  salt  makes  winter  driving  safer,   decreasing  medical  and  insurance  costs  associated   with  motor  vehicle  accidents.  But   the  compounds  in  road  salt  damage  roads  and   vehicles,  pollute  water  systems,  and  harm  animals   and  vegetation.   Sample  questions:  How  has  the  presence  of   mercury  in  water  bodies  in  Northern  Ontario   affected  the  environment  and  the  lives  of   Aboriginal  people?  How  does  the  widespread  use   of  agricultural  chemicals  in  Canada  or  elsewhere   affect  the  economy,  society,  and  the   environment?  What  are  the  economic  benefits   and  environmental  costs  of  diamond  mining  for   Northern  Canadian  communities?        Sample  issue:  Pesticides  and  fertilizers  are  used  to   increase  the  productivity  of  land.  However,  run-off   flows  into  water  bodies  and  leaches  into   groundwater,  poisoning  the  water  or  altering  its   chemical  balance  and  affecting  aquatic   ecosystems.   Sample  questions:  How  does  the  draining  of   wetlands  for  new  subdivisions  affect  local   waterbirds  and  plants  that  thrive  in  marshes?  How   does  untreated  waste  released  into  rivers  or  lakes   affect  fish  and  animals  that  eat  the  fish?  How  does   the  introduction  of  Atlantic  salmon  or  other  sport   fish  affect  indigenous  lake  trout  and  brook  trout?   Sample  issue:  Municipal  composting  initiatives   divert  garbage  from  landfill  sites  and  make  com-   post  available  to  gardeners.  The  use  of  compost   reduces  the  need  for  chemical  fertilizers,  helping   to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  aquatic  ecosystems   by  reducing  fertilizer  run-off.  However,  many   people,  such  as  those  living  in  apartment   buildings,  are  not  included  in  composting   programs.   Sample  questions:  What  action  has  been  taken  to   green  the  grounds  of  your  school?  What  effect  has   such  action  had  on  the  local  ecosystem?  What   additional  action  could  be  taken?  What  local   initiatives  have  been  developed  to  reduce  the   amount  of  pollution  released  into  nearby  rivers  or   lakes?  What  additional  initiatives  could  be  taken   to  enhance  the  sustainability  of  these   ecosystems?  How  has  the  implementation  of  an   Environmental  Farm  Plan  (EFP)  changed  practices   at  a  local  farm?  What  are  the  benefits  of  the  plan   with  regard  to  the  sustainability  of  the  ecosystem?                           

D  

N  

Politics,  Ecological,   Planning  

No  

No  

N   N   N   N   N   N   N   I  

N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N  

Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological  

No   No   No   No   No   No   No   No  

No   No   No   No   No   No   No   No  

SNC1P   SNC1P  

B1   B1.1  

N   I  

N   N  

Ecological   Ecological  

No   No  

No   No  

SNC1P  

B1.2  

D  

D  

Ecological  

No  

No  

SNC1P   SNC1P   SNC1P   SNC1P   SNC1P  

B2   B2.3   B2.4   B2.5   B3  

N   N   N   N   N  

N   N   N   N   N  

Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological  

No   No   No   No   No  

No   No   No   No   No  

  

114  

SNC1P   SNC1P   SNC1P  

B3.3   B3.5   C1.1  

          Sample  issue:  Chlorine  compounds  have  strong   disinfectant  properties  and  are  used  in  bleach  and   to  purify  water.  However,  these  compounds  can   be  highly  toxic  and  must  be  used  with  care.   Sample  questions:  How  do  the  compounds  in  road   salt  reduce  ice  accumulation?  Why  are  fire   extinguishers  that  contain  compressed  carbon   dioxide  not  suitable  for  fighting  a  magnesium  fire?   Why  do  some  types  of  sports  equipment  use   titanium?  Why  should  gasoline  not  be  used  as  a   degreasing  solvent?   Sample  issue:  The  use  of  road  salt  makes  winter   driving  safer,  reducing  the  social  costs  of  motor   vehicle  accidents,  including  loss  of  human  life.  But   the  compounds  in  road  salt  damage  roads  and   vehicles,  pollute  water  systems,  and  harm  animals   and  vegetation.   Sample  questions:  What  are  the  social  benefits   and  environmental  costs  of  mining  or  refining   metals  such  as  nickel,  iron,  or  gold?  What  is  the   environmental  impact  of  using  fertilizers  rich  in   nitrogen  on  lawns  and  gardens?  What  is  the   environmental  impact  of  the  widespread  use  of   plastics?             Sample  questions:  "If  you  were  advocating  for   recreational  space  for  youth  in  your  community,   why  would  it  be  important  to  gather  statistics  on   the  number  of  people  in  the  local  community  and   their  ages?  Are  there  people  you  might  interview   about  the  need  for  such  a  space?"  "Why  might   political  cartoons  be  a  good  source  on  the  ideas  of   a  political  leader  and  the  public  response  to  those   ideas?"   Sample  questions:  "What  does  the  term  digital   footprint  mean?  Why  is  your  digital  footprint   significant?  Do  you  think  that  the  information  you   share  on  social  media  with  your  peers  would  be   interpreted  differently  by  a  potential  employer?   Do  you  think  the  employer  has  a  right  to  access  or   restrict  such  information?"  "What  are  the   objectives  of  the  plan  of  action  you  are  proposing   to  address  an  issue  in  your  school  or  local   community?  What  did  your  investigation  reveal   about  unintended  results  of  other  courses  of   action  that  were  implemented  to  address  this   issue?"  "What  criteria  can  be  used  to  assess  the   changes  that  have  resulted  from  this  decision   taken  by  a  local  council?"  "How  might  you   determine  whether  your  student  council   represents  the  perspectives  of  all  students  in  the   school?"        Sample  questions:  "What  are  some  privacy  or   safety  issues  related  to  the  use  of  social  media?   Do  they  have  an  impact  on  the  way  you  or  your   friends  use  social  media?"  "What  positions  are   being  voiced  in  your  community  with  respect  to  a   local  transit  issue?"  "What  are  some  different   views  on  the  privatization  of  aspects  of  the  health   care  system  in  Canada?"  "What  are  some   considerations  that  affect  people's  consumer   choices?  Why  might  people  who  favour  free  trade   and  those  who  favour  fair  trade  differ  in  the   criteria  they  use  when  making  these  choices?"        Sample  questions:  "If  you  were  concerned  about  a   social  issue  in  publicly  funded  schools,  would  it  be   more  appropriate  to  contact  your  MP,  your  MPP,   or  your  city  or  band  councillor?  Why?"  "Given  his   or  her  responsibilities,  what  issues  would  you  like   to  discuss  with  your  municipal  or  band   councillor?"  "Why  might  different  levels  of   government  have  different  perspectives  on  the   same  issue?  In  what  ways  might  these  diverse   perspectives  complicate  the  policy-making   process?  In  what  ways  might  they  enhance  it?"   "What  are  the  main  issues  in  current  debates  over   Senate  reform?"  

N   N   I  

N   N   N  

Ecological   Ecological   Ecological    

No   No   No  

No   No   No  

SNC1P  

C1.2  

I  

N  

Ecological  

No  

No  

SNC1P   CHV2O   CHV2O  

E2.8   A1.1   A1.2  

N   N   N  

N   N   D  

Sustainability   Politics   Planning  

Yes   No   No  

No   No   No  

CHV2O  

A1.5  

N  

D  

Planning  

No  

Yes  

CHV2O   CHV2O  

A1.7   B1.1  

N   D  

N   D  

Planning,   Sustainability   Planning,   Tranportation  

No   No  

Yes   No  

CHV2O   CHV2O  

B1.4   B2.2  

N   N  

N   N  

Planning   Politics  

No   No  

No   No  

  

115  

CHV2O  

C1.2  

Sample  questions:  "When  you  brainstormed  with   other  students,  what  are  some  ways  you  identified   for  making  a  contribution  in  the  community?   Which  of  these  appeal  to  you?  Why?"  "Are  there   food  banks  and/or  community  gardens  in  your   community?  What  are  some  ways  in  which  you   could  get  involved  with  them?"   Sample  questions:  "In  what  ways  does  using  public   transit,  biking,  or  carpooling  contribute  to  the   common  good?"  "What  are  some  significant   changes  in  your  local  community  that  have  been   brought  about  as  a  result  of  citizen  action?"   "What  impact  can  consumers'  choices  have  on  the   natural  environment?   Sample  questions:  "What  are  some  ways  in  which   various  student  perspectives  are  represented  in   our  school?  Do  you  feel  like  your  voice  is  heard?"   "What  cultural  festivals  are  celebrated  in  your   community?  Whose  beliefs  and  values  do  they   reflect?"  "What  religious  structures  are  in  your   community?  What  do  they  tell  you  about  respect   for  diversity  in  the  community?"  "Why  might   some  people's  perspectives  be  valued  more  than   those  of  others?  What  are  some  ways  to  address   this  inequity?  What  action  could  be  taken  to   ensure  that  marginalized  voices  are  heard?"   Sample  questions:  "What  are  some  ways  in  which   a  person  can  communicate  his  or  her  position  on   an  environmental  issue?"  "What  do  you  think  is   the  most  effective  way  for  you  to  get  your  ideas   heard  in  our  school?"  "What  criteria  might  you   use  to  determine  the  most  effective  way  to  voice   your  position  on  a  social  justice  issue?"   Sample  questions:  "When  you  consider  the   various  courses  of  action  proposed  to  address  this   issue,  how  would  you  rank  them  from  easiest  to   most  difficult  to  carry  out?"  "Which  option  do  you   think  would  have  the  greatest  impact?"  "Would   you  be  able  to  carry  out,  or  participate  in,  any  of   these  courses  of  action?"             Sample  issue:  Scientists  are  researching  changes  in   climate  patterns  as  possible  contributing  factors   to  an  increase  in  the  number  of  smog  days  in   Ontario  and  elsewhere  in  Canada.  As  the  air   quality  worsens,  people  may  curtail  their  outdoor   activities,  and  those  with  respiratory  problems   may  require  medical  attention,  increasing  health   care  costs.   Sample  questions:  How  have  recent  extreme   weather  events  such  as  heat  waves  in  Europe  or   drought  in  southern  Africa  affected  habitats  in   these  regions?  How  might  predicted  changes  to   global  temperature  and  precipitation  affect   agriculture  in  Ontario,  Canada,  or  different  areas   around  the  world?  How  might  the  continuing   reduction  of  the  polar  ice  cap  influence  domestic   and  international  transportation  and  shipping?   Sample  issue:  Governments  and  industry  have   created  rebates  or  tax  cuts  to  encourage   consumers  to  replace  their  old  appliances  with   efficient  ENERGY  STAR  appliances.  However,  such   initiatives  do  not  take  into  account  the  resources   used  to  create  the  new  products  or  the  problems   associated  with  the  disposal  of  old  appliances.   Sample  questions:  What  type  of  recycling  and   composting  programs  are  in  place  in  your  com-   munity?  What  proportion  of  locally  generated   garbage  do  they  divert  from  landfill  sites?  How   could  they  be  improved?  What  is  the  purpose  of   carbon  offset  credits?  Do  they  achieve  that   purpose?  Why  or  why  not?                 

N  

D  

Sustainability  

No  

No  

CHV2O  

C1.3  

D  

I  

Systems   (Transportation),   Sustainability  

No  

No  

CHV2O  

C2.1  

N  

N  

Politics  

No  

No  

CHV2O  

C2.3  

N  

I  

Politics  

No  

No  

CHV2O  

C3.2  

N  

N  

Politics,   Sustainability  

No  

No  

GLC2O   GLC2O   SNC2D  

          D1.1  

N   N   D  

N   N   N  

Sustainability   Sustainability   Ecological,   Immigration  and   Settlement  

No   No   No  

Yes   Yes   No  

SNC2D  

D1.2  

N  

D  

Politics,  Planning  

No  

No  

SNC2D   SNC2D   SNC2D  

D2.4   D2.8   D3.4  

N   N   N  

N   N   N  

Ecological   Climate   Ecological  

No   No   No  

No   No   No  

  

116  

SNC2P  

D1.2  

Sample  issue:  Motor  vehicle  emissions  are  a  major   contributor  to  greenhouse  gases.  People  can   reduce  such  emissions  by  walking,  biking,  or  using   public  transportation  instead  of  driving;   by  keeping  their  vehicle  in  good  operating   condition;  or  by  driving  a  hybrid  vehicle.   Sample  questions:  Why  do  government  and/or   industry  offer  rebates  to  consumers  buying   programmable  thermostats  and  compact   fluorescent  light  bulbs?  How  does  the  production   of  oil  from  the  Alberta  oil  sands  contribute  to   greenhouse  gas  emissions?  What  is  the  difference   in  green-  house  gas  emissions  between  a   traditional  SUV  and  a  hybrid  vehicle?  What  is   "clean  coal",  and  what  is  its  impact  on  greenhouse   gas  emissions?  How  does  large-scale  livestock   farming  increase  the  production  of  greenhouse   gases?  What  ac-  tions  have  you  and/or  your   community  taken  to  help  reduce  levels  of   greenhouse  gases?        Sample  issue:  Car  emissions  contribute  to  smog  as   well  as  global  warming.  Road  tolls  and  in-  creased   use  of  public  transit  to  cut  down  on  the  number  of   cars  on  the  road,  and  the  implementation  and   enforcement  of  idling  by-laws,  could  significantly   cut  these  emissions.   Sample  questions:  How  can  various  kinds  of   chemical  spills  in  local  ecosystems  (e.g.,  fields,   rivers,  streams)  be  cleaned  up?  In  what  ways  does   improper  sewage  treatment  or  agricultural  run-off   threaten  local  water  supplies,  and  how  can  these   dangers  be  addressed  or  averted?  What  can  be   done  to  minimize  the  effect  of  an  invasive  species   (e.g.,  purple  loosestrife)  on  a  native  species  (e.g.,   milkweed)?   Sample  issue:  Ecotourism  attempts  to  reduce  the   waste  and  environmental  damage  associated  with   mass  tourism.  Although  responsible  ecotourism   seeks  to  conserve  local  ecosystems  through   sustainable  practices,  and  can,  for  example,  help   reduce  deforestation  and  animal  poaching  rates,   any  human  intrusion  can  dam-  age  fragile   ecosystems.   Sample  questions:  What  are  the  risks  to  the   environment  of  herbicide  use  and  water   consumption  on  golf  courses?  What  are  some  of   the  risks  and  benefits  to  the  environment  of   landscaping?  In  what  ways  can  hunters  and  fishers   damage  the  environment?  In  what  ways  can  they   contribute  to  its  sustainability?  What  rules  are   needed  to  ensure  that  visitors  to  a  protected  area   do  not  harm  that  ecosystem?                                                Sample  issue:  When  the  U.S.  government   abandoned  its  Cold  War  military  bases  in  the   Canadian  North,  it  left  behind  a  variety  of   contaminants,  including  large  amounts  of   polychlorinated  biphenyls  (PCBs).  Exposure  to   these  chemicals  can  affect  the  nervous  system  and   the  immune  system  and  can  cause  cancer.   Sample  questions:  How  does  the  use  of  biosolids   as  fertilizer  on  Canadian  farms  affect  the  health  of   local  populations?  What  short-  and  long-term   health  problems  can  be  traced  to  the  chemicals  in   the  tar  ponds  in  Sydney,  Nova  Scotia?                      

I  

D  

Ecological,   Sustainability  

No  

No  

SVN3E   SVN3E  

B1     B1.1  

N   D  

N   N  

Ecological   Ecological,   Systems   (Transportation)  

No   No  

No   No  

SVN3E  

B1.2  

I  

N  

Ecological  

No  

No  

SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E  

B2.4   B3     B3.1   B3.5   B3.6   B2.2   B2.3   B2.5   C1   C1.2  

N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N  

N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N  

Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological   Ecological  

No   No   No   No   No   Yes   Yes   Yes   No   No  

No   No   No   No   No   No   No   No   No   No  

SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E  

C2     C2.2   C3   C3.1  

N   N   N   N  

N   N   N   N  

Ecological   Ecological     Ecological   Ecological    

No   No   No   No  

No   No   No   No  

  

117  

SVN3E  

D1.1  

SVN3E   SVN3E   SVN3E  

D3.3   E2.3   E2.4  

Sample  issue:  Home  energy  audit  and  retrofit   rebate  programs  have  been  established  by  many   provincial  governments  to  help  homeowners   reduce  their  energy  bills.  Although  these  programs   raise  awareness  of  the  environmental  impact  of   wasting  energy  and  provide  practical  ways  of   reducing  waste,  not  all  homeowners  take   advantage  of  them.   Sample  questions:  What  types  of  incentives  exist   to  encourage  consumers  to  purchase  energy- efficient  products  and  services?  How  effective  are   such  incentives?  What  methods  do  energy   companies  use  to  encourage  consumers  to   conserve  energy?  What  are  some  of  the  non- governmental  organizations  in  Canada  that  raise   awareness  of  the  environmental  costs  of  energy   consumption?  Are  there  any  groups  in  your  local   community  that  focus  on  energy  conservation?   How  effective  are  they?                 

N  

D  

Politics  

No  

No  

N   N   N  

N   N   N  

Politics   Ecological   Ecological  

No   Yes   Yes  

No   No   No  

  

118  

Appendix B1: EEW Invitation

  

119  

Appendix B2: EEW Participants List
EEW Participants ­ confirmed (March 29, 2015) Ministry of Education Cindy Cosentino: Ministry of Education; Education Officer ­ Science and Innovation Catherine Mahler: Ministry of Education; Environmental Education Ministry of Environment, Climate Change Carolyn O'Neill: Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MOECC); Manager, Great Lakes Regional Municipalities Tracey Carrigan: York Region; Manager, Environmental Education and Promotion Faculties of Education Paul Elliott: Trent University, School of Education and Professional Learning Doug Karrow: Brock University; Science/Environmental Education Sheila Rhodes: Univ. Ont Institute of Technology (UOIT); School Interdiscipl Studies /Employment Services Principals Helen Fisher: Lead Principal, Model School for Inner City Project (MSIC) David Hawker-Budlovsky: Central Co-ordinating Principal; (Outdoor Education schools); TDSB Paul Lacalamita: Catholic Principals' Council; Executive Director William Parish: Principal, Agnes Macphail Public School; (TDSB) Linda-Sue Thomas: Principal, Ernest Public School; (TDSB) Teachers Carly Bardikoff: Ontario EcoSchools; Program Coordinator Jen Coleman: Orangeville District Secondary School - Upper Grand Board (UGDSB) Simona Emiliani: MSIC Co-ordinator Simon Isdell-Carpenter: ACL Gifted Students and School Leadership; William Lyon Mackenzie C.I. Jane Lacalamita: Catholic Grade School (retired) Pam Miller: TDSB, EcoSchools; Instructional Leader Meg O'Mahoney: University of Toronto Schools (UTS): Smruti Soni: MSCI; Central Lead Teacher NGOs/Extracurricular Education Centres/Conservation Authorities Susan Arndt: Evergreen; Program Director Lisa Fisk: Evergreen; Project Manager Chris Hilkene: Clean Water Foundation (CWF); President Dave Ireland: Royal Ontario Museum (ROM); Biodiversity, Managing Director Nicole Hamley: Toronto Region Conservation (TRCA); Education Coordinator; Integrated Learning Programs Amy Lane: Ontario Clean Water Agency (OCWA); Marketing and Corporate Social Responsibility Specialist Catherine Paisley: Ontario Science Centre (OSC), Vice President; Science Education Stephanie Sobek-Swant: rare Charitable Research Reserve; Executive Director Gerrit Kamminga; rare Charitable Research Reserve; Senior Educator Other Experts Christine Bata Schmidt, Judi Cohen, Nancy Griffin: IWF (International Women's Forum) James MacKinnon: Teaching/Learning Services Consultant; Durham Catholic S.B.

  

120  

Appendix B3: EEW Draft Agenda     Time       8:00          8:30       8:35       9:00       9:30       9:35   10:15   11:15   11:30   12:00   12:10   12:35       1:00       2:00   Event   Registration/coffee/muffins   Participants  are  assigned  to  tables   Welcome     Introduction   View  from  the  Ministry  of  Education   Fast  coffee  top-up   Introduction  to  Round  Table  discussions   Round  Table  I  (RTI):   Defining  roles  in  Environmental  Education   RTI  reports  (10  min  /  table)   Summary  of  RTI   Participants  move  to  new  table  organization  for   RTII   Round  Table  II  (RTII):   Looking  ahead:  Environmental  Education  for  the   future   Buffet  "Working"  Lunch   Legacy  of  Paddle-to-the-Sea:  restarting  a   conversation  with  kids  regarding  the  Great  Lakes   Continue  RTII  discussion   RTII  reports  (10  min  /  table)   Leg  stretch  and  networking   Representative   Ryerson  students  /     Kim  Gilbride   Dean  Imogen  Coe   Lynda  McCarthy   Catherine  Mahler;  Cindy   Cosentino   Lynda  McCarthy   All  participants   Ryerson  facilitator  for   each  table   Michal  Bardecki   All  participants      Andrew  Laursen;  Vadim   Bostan      Ryerson  facilitator  for   each  table   Three-person  panel   sequestered  to  prepare   "Observations  of   Workshop"   Three-person  panel   All  participants   Led  by  RUW     

    2:30       2:45       3:00       3:30  

"Observations  of  Workshop"   Discussion  on  Workshop     "Next  steps"   Leg  stretch  and  proceed  to  RUW  Launch  to  start   at  4:00pm  

  

121  

References
Barratt, R. & Hacking, E.B. (2011). Place-Based Education and Practice: Observations From the Field. Children,Youth and Environments, 21 (1), 1-13. Borland, J. (2015). An Historical Geography of Ontario School-Board-Operated Outdoor Education Centres. Ph.D. Philosophy Dissertation, University of Windsor. Brundtland, G. H., & World Commission on Environment and Development. (1987). Our common future Oxford University Press. The Canadian Encyclopedia (2015). Environmental and Conservation Movements. Retrieved November 1 , 2015 from http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/environmental-andconservation-movements/ Checkoway, B., Richards-Schuster, K., Abdullah, S., Aragon, M., Facio, E., Figueroa, L., Reddy, E., Welsh, M. & White, A.. (2003). Young People as Competent Citizens. Community Development Journal, 38 (4), 298-309. Chowdhury, T. R. (2015). The First Step Towards Sustainability: The Practices and Implementation of Environmental Education by Educators in Ontario. MT Research Paper, University of Toronto Cundiff, B. (1989). Reading, Writing and the Environment. Seasons, 29 (3), 16-19. Doyle, T.& MacGregor, S. (2013). Environmental Movements Around the World : Shades of Green in Politics and Culture. Westport, CT: Praeger. Education Experts' Workshop. (2015). EEW April 2015 Summary v.3. Retrieved May 9 , 2016 from http://www.ryerson.ca/content/dam/water/education%20and%20outreach/ Education%20Experts%20Workshop/Recommendations%20from%20Education %20Experts%20Workshop.pdf Environmental Education Ontario. (2003). Greening the Way Ontario Learns: A Public Strategic Plan for the Advancement of Environmental Literacy. Retrieved November 1 , 2015 from http://www.eeon.org/greening-the-way-ontario-learns/
st th st

  

122  

Forests Ontario. (2016). Ontario Envirothon. Retrieved March 3rd, 2016 from http://www.forestsontario.ca/education/programs/ontario-envirothon/ Godfrey, B. J. (2010). Urban Sustainability: Teaching at the Interface of Environmental and Urban Studies. Ometeca, 274. Gruenewald, D. A. (2003). The Best of Both Worlds: A Critical Pedagogy of Place. Educational Researcher, 32 (4), 3-12. Henderson, A., Brown, S.D., Pancer, M., & Ellis-Hale, K. (2007). Mandated Community Service in High School and Subsequent Civic Engagement: The Case of the ``Double Cohort'' in Ontario, Canada. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 36 (7), 849-860. Hsieh, H. & Shannon, S.E. (2005). Three Approaches to Qualitative Content Analysis. Qualitative Health Research, 15 (9), 1277-1288. Igbokwe, A.B. (2012). Environmental Literacy Assessment: Exploring the Potential for the Assessment of Environmental Education/Programs in Ontario Schools. International Journal for Cross-Disciplinary Subjects in Education, 3 (1), 648-656. International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources. (1970). International Working Meeting on Environmental Education in the School Curriculum, Paris: UNESCO. Kopar, C. (2013). The Characteristics of Effective Environmental Education Programs: An exploration of the perceptions of environmental educators in Southern Ontario. M.E.S. Thesis, University of Waterloo. Louv, R. (2008). Last Child in the Woods: Saving Our Children From Nature-Deficit Disorder. New York, NY: Algonquin Books. Lowenstein, E., Martusewicz, R., & Voelker, L. (2010). Developing Teachers' Capacity for EcoJustice Education and Community-Based Learning. Teacher Education Quarterly, 37 (4).

  

123  

Mannion, G. & Adey, C. (2011). Place-Based Education Is an Intergenerational Practice. Children, Youth and Environment, 21 (1), 35-58. Neal, P. (1994). Handbook of Environmental Education. New York, NY: Routledge North American Association for Environmental Education. (2015). Urban Environmental Education. Retrieved August 10, 2015 from http://www.naaee.net/sites/default/files/eecapacity/UEE2015.pdf Ontario EcoSchools (2016). Ontario EcoSchools. Retrieved March 3rd, 2016 from http://www.ontarioecoschools.org Ontario Institute for Studies In Education (2013). Deepening Environmental Education in Pre-Service Education Resource. Retrieved August 12, 2015 from http://www.oise.utoronto.ca/ese/UserFiles/File/DEEPER%20Guide%202014.pdf Ontario Ministry of Education (2007a). Ready, Set, Green! Tips, Techniques and Resources from Ontario Educators. Retrieved February 7, 2016 from https://www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/document/policy/readySetGreen.pdf Ontario Ministry of Education (2007b). Shaping Our Schools, Shaping Our Future: Environmental Education in Ontario Schools. Retrieved August 10, 2015 from http://www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/teachers/enviroed/shapingSchools.html Ontario Ministry of Education. (2008). Standards for Environmental Education in the Curriculum. Retrieved February 8, 2016 from http://www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/teachers/enviroed/Env_Ed_Standards.pdf Ontario Ministry of Education. (2009). Acting Today, Shaping Tomorrow: A Policy Framework for Environmental Education in Ontario Schools. Retrieved August 10, 2015 from http://www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/teachers/enviroed/action.html Ontario Ministry of Education. (2011). Environmental Education: Scope and Sequence of Expectations. Retrieved August 20, 2014 from http://www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/curriculum/secondary/environment.html

  

124  

Ontario Ministry of Education. (2014). The Ontario Curriculum ­ Secondary. Retrieved July 31, 2014 from http://www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/curriculum/secondary/index.html Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. (2005). Places to Grow: Better Choices, Brighter Future. Retrieved November 3, 2014 from https://www.placestogrow.ca/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=9&It emid=14 Ontario School Information System. (2013). Education Facts, 2012-2013. Retrieved September 7, 2015 from http://www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/educationFacts.html Pardy, B. (2010). Ontario's Policy Framework for Environmental Education: Indoctrination and Integration. Pathways: The Ontario Journal of Outdoor Education, 22 (2), 22-23. Palmer, J. (1993). Development of Concern for the Environment and Formative Experiences of Educators. The Journal of Environmental Education. 24 (3), 26-30. Palmer, J. (1998). Environmental Education in the 21st Century: Theory, Practice, Progress and Promise. New York, NY: Routledge. Pedretti, E., Nazir, J., Tan, M., Bellomo, K., & Ayyavoo, G. (2012). A Baseline Study of Ontario Teachers' Views of Environmental and Outdoor Education. Pathways: The Ontario Journal of Outdoor Education, 24 (2), 4-12. Puk, T. & Behm, D. (2003). The Diluted Curriculum: The Role of Government in Developing Ecological Literacy as the First Imperative in Ontario Secondary Schools. Canadian Journal of Environmental Education, 8, 217-232. Puk, T. & Makin, D. (2006). Ecological Consciousness in Ontario Elementary Schools: The Truant Curriculum and the Consequences. Applied Environmental Education & Communication, 5 (4), 269-276. Reimers, F. (2006). Citizenship, Identity And Education: Examining The Public Purposes Of Schools In An Age Of Globalization. Prospects, 36 (3), 275-294. Sanders, M.G. (2003). Community Involvement In Schools - From Concept to Practice. Education and Urban Society, 35 (2), 161-180.

  

125  

Smith, G.A. (2007). Place-Based Education: Breaking Through the Constraining Regularities of Public School. Environmental Education Research, 13 (2), 189-207. Stapp, W.B. (1969). The Concept of Environmental Education. Environmental Education, 1 (1), 30-31. Statistics Canada, (2011), 2011 Census of Population, Retrieved November 6, 2015 from http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2011/as-sa/index-eng.cfm Steele, A. (2011). Beyond Contradiction: Exploring the Work of Secondary Science Teachers as They Embed Environmental Education in Curricula. International Journal of Environmental and Science Education, 6 (1), 1-22. Stevenson, R. B. (2007). Schooling and Environmental Education: Contradictions in Purpose and Practice. Environmental Education Research, 13 (2), 139-153. Stevenson, R.B., Brody, M., & Dillon, J. (2012). International Handbook of Research on Environmental Education. Florence, KY: Routledge. Tan, M. & Pedretti, E. (2010). Negotiating the Complexities of Environmental Education: A Study of Ontario Teachers. Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics and Technology Education, 10 (1), 61-78. Tanner, M. (1997). The Evolution of Environmental Management in Canada. The London Journal of Canadian Studies, 13, 1-11. Toronto District School Board (2011). Model Schools for Inner Cities. Retrieved March 10th, 2016 from http://www.tdsb.on.ca/Community/ModelSchoolsforInnerCities.aspx Turner, W. R., Nakamura, T., & Dinetti, M. (2004). Global Urbanization and the Separation of Humans from Nature. Bioscience, 54 (6), 585-590. UNESCO. (1975). The International Workshop on Environmental Education, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. Retrieved on November 1 , 2015 from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0002/000276/027608EB.pdf
st

  

126  

UNESCO. (1978). Final Report: Intergovernmental Conference on Environmental Education. Organized by UNESCO in Cooperation with UNEP, Tbilisi, USSR. Retrieved on November 1 , 2015 from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0003/000327/032763eo.pdf UNESCO. (1992). United Nations Conference on Environment & Development Rio de Janerio, Brazil, 3 to 14 June 1992 ­ Agenda 21. Retrieved on February 21 , 2016 from https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/Agenda21.pdf UNESCO. (2005). UNESCO and Sustainable Development, Paris, France. Retrieved on February 20 , 2016 from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001393/139369e.pdf Vancouver Working Group. (2006). The Youth Friendly City - Prepared for 2006 United Nations World Urban Forum. Retrieved July 29, 2014 from http://www.cscd.gov.bc.ca/lgd/intergov_relations/library/wuf_the_youth_friendly_c ity.pdf Woodhouse, J. L. & Knapp, C. (2000). Place-based curriculum and instruction: Outdoor and environmental education approaches. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. World Health Organization. (2015). Programmes ­ Global Health Observatory (GHO) ­ Urban Population Growth. Retrieved July 30, 2014 from http://www.who.int/gho/urban_health/situation_trends/urban_population_growth_t ext/en/
th st st

  

127  

