CEx1 6
ISBN (ppk) ISBN (PDF)

2016 Collaborative Exercise

An Architecture of Water: Creating H2O_Thresholds
George Thomas Kapelos, editor A record of student design outcomes of  the 2016 Collaborative Exercise held at  the Department of Architectural Science,  Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario,  Canada, January 2016.

978-1-926796-57-8 978-1-926769-58-5

An Architecture of Water : Creating H2O Thresholds

An Architecture of Water: Creating H2O Thresholds
George Thomas Kapelos, editor

CEx1 6

i 2016 Collaborative Exercise

An Architecture of Water | Creating H2O_Thresholds
George Thomas Kapelos, Editor

ii Department of Architectural Science Faculty of Engineering & Architectural Science Ryerson University 325 Church Street, Toronto, ON, Canada M5B 2K3 416-979-5360 www.arch.ryerson.ca

CEx1 6
George Thomas Kapelos, Editor
ISBN (ppk) ISBN (pdf) CEx16 cover image: 978-1-926769-69-1 978-1-926769-70-7

An Architecture of Water: Creating H2O thresholds
A record of student design outcomes of the 2014 Collaborative Exercise held at the Department of Architectural Science, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, January 2014.

Saman Soleimani-Deilamani Saman Soleimani-Deilamani

CEx book design & production coordinator:

For further information regarding the 2013 Collaborative Exercise and student work contained in this publication, please contact the Department of Architectural Science or the editor, George Thomas Kapelos at gkapelos@ryerson.ca. The PDF copy of this book is available for download at http://ryerson.ca/gkapelos

2017 © Ryerson University, Toronto

01

Table of Content
H2O_Thresholds Creating H2O_Thresholds Thropes / themes / drivers
07 13 23

8Delaware

8A Water Marks 8BOxbow 9A Thames Revival Conservatory 9B[H2O]rbs 10A Water Project 10BMeander

69 70 72 75 76 78 81 82 84 87 88 90 93 94 96 99 100 102 105 106 108 111 112 114 118 118

student projects
1Brooksdale
1A The Tree 1BMeandering 2ALotusPolkü 2BImmersion 3ARegeneration 3B Poetry | Power 4A Dam Beautiful 4BEddy 5AConfluence 5B Plover's Lookout 6A Dam Good Water 6BSubmersion 7A River Shelf 7B Digi di acqua



25 27 28 30 33 34 36 39 40 42 45 46 48 51 52 54 57 58 60 63 64 66

9Strathroy

10 Big Bend Conservation Area

2Thamesford

11Moraviantown

3Mitchell

11A Moravian Remediation 11B Lenape Water Pavilion 12ASyracusia.III 12BAscension 13A Élan Vital 13B Aqua Amphitheatre 14A Rain Screen 14BSubmersion 15ALIFEtration 15B Marshin' Around

12Thamesville

4Stratford

13Chatham

5

Plover's Mill

14 Pain Court

6

Fanshawe Dam

15 Lighthouse Point

7

Springbank Park

Endnotes Aknowledgements

02

03

The Department of Architectural Science Collaborative Exercise
Each year, at the start of the winter semester, undergraduate and graduate students, faculty and staff, and invited guests come together to take part in the annual Collaborative Exercise (CEx) held at the Department of Architectural Science at Ryerson University. The five-day event challenges students to address an important contemporary issue. The intention of the exercise is to engage students to collaborate, think and design, while investigating a topic related to architecture and the built environment. Through this experience, students have the opportunity to work with students from other years in the Department's program, to achieve a common design goal. The Collaborative Exercise ends with an exhibition at the Paul H. Cocker Gallery in the Ryerson University's Architecture Building. This book showcases the outcomes of the 2014 Collaborative Exercise, entitled An Architecture of Water: Creating H2O thresholds. I congratulate the students and faculty on their great work. George Thomas Kapelos, OAA FRAIC RPP OPPI MCIP Professor, Department of Architectural Sciene Instructor, Collaborative Exercise 2014

04

St. Marys
fall 2000

Steven Evans
04 photographer

05

"Water is everything."
-- Thales of Miletus (624-546 BCE)

06

07

H2O_Thresholds
The Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus hypothesized that the originating principle of nature and the nature of matter was a single material, water. Unlike other ancient philosophers, Thales explained natural phenomena without reference to mythology.1 He believed that metaphysics -- that branch of philosophy concerned with the first principles of things, including being and knowledge -- cannot deny the importance of water as the fundamental element of life. Philosopher Timothy Stock describes how water permeates (literally and figuratively) every aspect of human life, be it spiritual, cultural, economic, social, political, historical, scientific or the day-to-day. "Water is everywhere".2 As a philosopher, he asserts that the core questions of metaphysics revolve around our understanding of water and careful attentiveness to this subject. For Stock, water is at the heart of discussions of cosmology (the origins of the universe), identity (who we are), modality (the study of possibilities and necessities) and ontology (being). He describes four conditions of water that embody these ideas found at the core of metaphysics and suggests ways in which these may be represented. · Cosmology, (the origins of the universe), is the study of the world in its totality and may be represented by the world's oceans · Identity (who we are) is represented by our rivers, places where humans find fresh water for sustenance · Modality (the study of possibilities and necessities) may be represented through clouds · Ontology (being) is depicted by water, forming rain, snow or hail. These four philosophical constructs help us understand who we are and our place on the earth. Our relationship to water is central to this understanding.

What is "water"? and why is it important?
A philosophical discussion about the cosmos, our identity, the vagaries of clouds and hailstones as analogies for the metaphysics of water may certainly be interesting, but water, you will say, is real! In fact, it's real in so many ways: it's wet, it can be hot or cold; snow will slow us down in winter; a warm summer's day invites us to the cooling waters of a lake or stream; a rainfall is a welcome in a drought while a summer hailstorm can flatten a field of crops or crack a car's windshield; humidity makes us uncomfortable; a dry winter makes us itchy; a summer downpour will spoil a picnic but can create a beautiful rainbow; an icy sidewalk can be treacherous, not to mention the more harmful impacts of water as a carrier of disease or as a powerful force bringing destruction to humans, plant and animal life and the built world. Water ­ H2O ­ therefore, can be understood to be many things: the source of life, a poetic inspiration, a powerful force, a transient entity. In the tradition of working together, the 2016 Collaborative Exercise (CEx16) of the Ryerson University Department of Architectural Science challenges students to consider the meaning of water in today's world and propose design interventions that bring water's many meanings to physical form. But why should we be interested in water? It's everywhere, isn't it? Don't we have enough water to go around? Isn't it something that just is? The answer is, yes and no. Water

08

exists and there appears to be plenty of it, but water in 2016 is in crisis around the globe.

Our use of water
How much water do you use each day? In an average home, showers are typically the third largest water use after toilets and clothes washers. The average North American shower uses 65.1 litres (17.2 gallons) and lasts for 8.2 minutes at average flow rate of 7.9 litres per minute (2.1 gallons per minute).3 The average person uses about 153 litres in a day. This would mean that all 400 of the Ryerson architecture students participating in CEx16 would use approximately 61,200 litres of water each day. But, in order to survive, each of us needs to drink only two litres a day or a total of 800 litres for all 400 students. How well do we use the remaining 60,400 litres? This leads us to consider questions such as, do we conserve water? and each time we turn on the tap, do we know how valuable the water we are using may be? Do you know how much water you may consume? This is the typical use of water in a household:
Bath 5-minute shower Brushing teeth with tap running Brushing teeth with tap off One toilet flush Other water use (drinking, cooking, etc.) Washing machine Dishwasher Washing car with bucket 151.4 litres 37.9 litres 7.6 litres 0.9 litres 11.4 litres 26.5 litres 151.4 litres 37.9 litres 11.4 litres

and water availability is at crisis levels. Water scarcity is the lack of sufficient available water resources to meet the demands of water usage.5 More than 75% of river flows are allocated to agriculture, industries or domestic purposes (accounting for recycling of return flows). This definition of scarcity - relating water availability to water demand - implies that dry areas are not necessarily water-scarce. However, the world is approaching physical water scarcity. More than 60% of the world's river flows are allocated. These water basins will experience physical water scarcity in the near future. Further, there is an economic water scarcity. Water resources are abundant relative to water use, with less than 25% of water from rivers withdrawn for human purposes, but malnutrition exists in many places caused by water shortage. According to the World Water Council, these areas could benefit by development of additional blue (fresh surface groundwater) and green (precipitation that lands on the ground and is not stored beneath the surface) water,6 but human and financial capacities are limiting. In some parts of the world, there is little or no water scarcity. There are abundant water resources relative to use. Less than 25% of water from rivers is withdrawn for human purposes. The world-wide water crisis is serious:7 Here are some facts that tell us just how serious this crisis may be: · 2.8 billion people around the world are affected by water scarcity at least one month in each year; · more than 1.2 billion people lack access to clean drinking water · water scarcity already affects every continent; · around 1.2 billion people, or almost one-fifth of the world's population, live in areas of physical scarcity, and 500 million people are approaching this situation;

There is agreement among world authorities on water that we are facing a water shortage. Water is becoming scarce

09

· another 1.6 billion people, or almost one quarter of the world's population, face economic water shortage (where countries lack the necessary infrastructure to take water from rivers and aquifers). Water scarcity, therefore, is among the main problems to be faced by many societies globally in the twenty-first century. In fact, water use has been growing at more than twice the rate of population increase in the last century and, although there is no global water scarcity as such, an increasing number of regions are chronically short of water. Water scarcity is both a natural and a human-made phenomenon. There is enough freshwater on the planet for seven billion people but it is distributed unevenly and too much of it is wasted, polluted and unsustainably managed. Water scarcity comprises three components: water stress, water shortage and water crisis, described as follows: · Water stress: the difficulty in finding sources of fresh water; · Water shortage: provoked by climate change, pollution or increased demands; · Water crisis: lack of available potable and unpolluted water · The United Nations estimates that one in every six people in the world is water stressed or about 1.1 billion people. Water stress occurs when the available supply of water drops below 1.700 cubic metres / person / year or 1.7 million litres of water a year globally. Water stress is a worldwide problem. It has several manifestations: · Inadequate access to safe drinking water for about 884 million people8 · Inadequate access to sanitation for 2.5 billion people9 which often leads to water pollution; · Groundwater over-drafting (excessive use) leading to diminished agricultural yields10

10

· Overuse and pollution of water resources harming biodiversity · Regional conflicts over scarce water resources sometimes resulting in warfare

The problem is also a Canadian one.
Every morning, most Canadians don't have any difficulties showering, making coffee, brushing teeth, washing up or doing laundry. But this is not the case everywhere in Canada. Surveys indicate that there may be as many as 2 million lakes in Canada. About 7.6% of Canada's nearly 10 million square kilometers is covered by fresh water; enough water is contained by these lakes and rivers to flood the entire country to a depth of over 2 meter.11 In spite of this, water is a problem. Two-thirds of all First Nation communities in Canada have been under at least one drinking water advisory at some time in the last decade. A CBC news investigation revealed that 400 out of 618 First Nations

in the country had some kind of water problem between 2004 and 2014.12 The longest running water advisory is in the Neskantaga First Nation in Ontario, where residents have been boiling their water for 20 years. Nazko First Nation, Alexis Creek First Nation and Lake Babine, all in British Columbia, are next on the list with water problems spanning 16 years.13 According to Water Canada, contaminated drinking water is a major source of concern for small and rural communities (SRCs) including First Nations reserves. Many SRCs have water contamination problems that go largely undetected, while over 100 First Nations communities across Canada are under boil water advisories in any given year. Beyond these evident problems, many emerging issues--for example, the presence of disinfection by-products (DBPs) and micro-pollutants in the water supply--lay beyond the scope of existing small system technologies. Water is a critical national issue.

During the 2016 Collaborative Exercise, representatives from Ryerson Urban Water talked about the multiple water issues facing Canadian's today. left to right: Lynda McCarthy, Professor, Department of Chemistry and Biology; Lisa Prime, Director, Environment and Innovation,Waterfront Toronto; Nina-Marie Lister, Associate Professor, School of Urban and Regional Planning, Faculty of Community Services; Joy Charbonneau, Architect and Artist; Tom Kaszas, Environmental Innovations Branch, Ministry of Environment and Climate Change; Irene Hassass, Director, Strategic Planning and Partnerships, Aslan Technologies; Ludiwine Clouzot, President, Ecoloodi; Eric Meliton, Project Manager, Water Stewardship, Partners in Project Green; Cyndy Baskin, Associate Professor, School of Social Work, Faculty of Community Services

11

Recognizing the potential for change ­
The action of Ontario's Conservation Authorities

Ontario is home to approximately 20% of the world's freshwater.1 Ontarians commonly take their abundance of freshwater for granted but current issues relating to water are forcing a re-think of our relationship to water and a re-evaluation of its value, importance and the ways in which it is currently used. Much of the focus of this activity is taking place under the aegis of Ontario's Conservation Authorities. These were created in 1946 by an act of the Ontario legislature. They arose at a time in the mid-twentieth century when the province was facing unprecedented development. Concerned citizens and government leaders developed a greater awareness of the value of conservation of land, water and natural habitat. Recognizing this need, the province established these authorities to restore natural values to provincial watersheds and manage lands for agriculture, recreation, forest regeneration and habitat preservation. These authorities are mandated to ensure the conservation, restoration and responsible management of Ontario's water, land and natural habitats through programs that balance human, environmental and economic needs. Today there are thirty-six Conservation Authorities in Ontario whose jurisdictions extend over one or more watersheds and include the municipalities found within the watershed. Conservation Authorities have important powers relating to water: they have the ability to enforce regulations in order to ensure a complete and rational approach to activities in the watershed such as flood control and erosion.15 The work of Ontario's Conservation Authorities has the following objectives: · to ensure that Ontario's rivers, lakes and streams are properly safeguarded, managed and restored;

· to protect, manage and restore Ontario's woodlands, wetlands and natural habitat; · to develop and maintain programs that will protect life and property from natural hazards such as flooding and erosion; and · to provide opportunities for the public to enjoy, learn from and respect Ontario's natural environment16 Most recently Ontario's Conservation Authorities have been advocating for an integrated watershed management approach to ensure resilient watersheds, healthy people and a strong economy.17 Conservation Authorities have been advocating for healthy ecosystems as a key aspect of healthy and sustainable life in the province. Healthy ecosystems such as forests, wetlands, lakes, rivers and green spaces provide safe water resources, healthy food, clean air, cooler environment, and opportunities for more physical activities in parks and conservation areas which contribute to both healthier bodies and minds. Environmental organizations and the health sector recognize the co-benefits of a healthy environment and are working together to build awareness, develop policy, and lead initiatives that support each other for one end goal - healthier people and ecosystems.18 As part of the development of its ongoing mandate, Ontario's Conservation Authorities are seeking to raise the awareness of the value watersheds and the significance that the protection of water resources may have for the future of the province. Ontario's Conservation Authorities are encouraging citizens to take an active interest in their watersheds.19 George Thomas Kapelos
Professor, Department of Architectural Science Instructor, Collaborative Exercise 2016

12

13

Creating H2O_Thresholds
Continuing in the tradition of past Collaborative Exercises, which addressed a number of seminal themes, such as `civility' (2013) and `identity' (2014), CEx16 addresses the topic of `water' / H2O. within the Thames River watershed. The intervention was to be designed in such a way to invite the public to consider the relationship of humans to water as an omnipresent element that is fundamental to life, a force of embodied energy, a valuable resource, and a source of delight. The interventions were to be visualized as a series of "Water Thresholds / H2O_Thresholds", inviting citizens to connect with and interact with water in all its representations, forms and meanings. The H2O_Thresholds are envisaged to form important nodes on a continuous network of places along the river and in the watershed. The interventions are conceived to be accessible from the region's road network as well as from the water. Each element creates a connection between the land and the water, and relates the human experience to water in all its forms.

The site
CEx16 takes place at sites along the Thames River watershed in southwestern Ontario. Sixteen sites were identified and assigned to student sections with two teams working on each site. In south-western Ontario, the Thames River watershed is managed by two conservation authorities: the Upper Thames River Conservation Authority and the Lower Thames Valley Conservation Authority.1 This area that the focus of an extensive study and resulted in an exhibition and book project by George Kapelos and Steven Evans entitled Course Studies ­ Tracking Ontario's Thames: An Exploration of the River.2 During the CEx16 photographs taken along the watershed were on view in the Paul H. Cocker Gallery in the Architecture Building at Ryerson University. These photographs formed part of the site information for student teams. In their final submissions students were required to digitally insert an image of the proposed design into the photograph to indicate how their intervention may be seen in the river landscape.

Project Tropes / Themes / Drivers
Our perceptions and views of water change as the result of different contextual encounters. All organic life on earth requires water to survive and when faced with water shortage, an organism will view water as a precious resource. When we are exposed to the elements of nature, such as rain, hail, blizzards, fogs or flooding, we perceive water with unease, discomfort or as a potential hazard or threat. Water also conjures more pleasurable associations, as a medium of enjoyment and recreation, not only in its liquid state but also as snow or ice. In many cultures water is viewed symbolically as a source of healing, a representation of life, or a locus of identity and meaning. In all cases, water can either be the source of disease or the guarantee of health. In

The Project

An Architecture of Water: Creating H2O_Thresholds

CEx16 takes its cues from the growing interest in the importance of water. CEx16 invited students to design an architectural element or "intervention" on a given site

14

all of these manifestations and understandings, the importance and value of water is made abundantly clear. Therefore, as a means for participants in CEx16 to explore the multiplicity of water's meanings, each team was asked to consider encapsulating two of following four tropes ("figurative meanings") in the design of their proposed intervention. The themes were designated by four distinct colours. The tropes bring to mind a number of qualities of water that teams might consider and each team was encouraged to spend time exploring possible symbolism and architectural representations for each of these meanings for the design of their team's "H2O_Threshold." The following are but a few of the possible ways in which these themes could be developed.
Tropes / Themes / Drivers water ­ the essence of life Colour GREEN Examples The human body, water on Mars, transpiration, a lush landscape, the hydrologic cycle, etc. Music such as Claude Debussy's La Mer, the reflection of moonlight on water, the pleasure of a babbling brook, a plunging waterfall, etc. The sublime, Niagara Falls, Hydroelectric power, flooding, tsunami, hail, freeze-thaw etc. Snow, humidity, drought, steam, the commodification of water, ice, fog etc.

Recognizing how water may have multiple meanings or capacities, each team was asked to consider one trope / driver / theme as primary and the other trope / driver / theme was to be given secondary importance. At the outset of CEx16, each team was assigned a primary trope to help drive the conceptual realization of the project. In order to provide a greater understanding of the complex role of water in our lives, and to provide a variety of experiences along the watershed, each team was subsequently asked to acknowledge a second trope to be developed alongside the primary theme. The assignment of tropes / themes / drivers was consistent along the river's course, so that teams would not only respond to the theme under development but also acknowledge the potential of the design being developed to interconnect with the designs of teams located immediately adjacent, upstream and downstream along the river. For example:
Primary design driver Secondary design / trope / theme driver / trope / theme Section 1, Team A, location 1 Section 2, Team A, location 2 Section 3, Team A, location 3 Section 4, Team A, location 4 etc. Water ­ the essence of life The poetic quality of water The power of water The poetic quality of water The power of water Water as an evanescent or fleeting substance

The poetic quality of water ­ an idea that stimulates the imagination

BLUE

the power of water ­ whose power can be harmful or be beneficial water as an evanescent or fleeting substance

BROWN

Water as an evanescent Water ­ the essence or fleeting substance of life etc. etc.

WHITE

During the first day of CEx16, students were invited to explore these themes collectively as "design drivers."

15

Program Requirements:

Design objectives and parameters:

Each team was invited to design a H2O_Threshold that would invite the public to consider the relationship of humans to water. The relationship may represent the following aspects of the human-water relationship: it is an omnipresent element that is fundamental to life, a force of embodied energy, a valuable resource, a threatened commodity and / or a source of delight. Teams therefore designed an intervention that engaged humans to consider and reconsider these aspects of water and the importance of water to life on this planet. Elements were to be designed for a one of the sites identified within the watershed of the Thames River in southwestern Ontario and described in the book Course Studies ­ Tracking Ontario's Thames: An Exploration of the River.3 The sites had been photographed and these photographs, along with topographic maps, served to provide information on the site and surrounding context. At the project's conclusion and as part of their final submission, teams were required to digitally insert an image of their proposed design into a copy of the photograph and include it in their poster. As a "H2O_Threshold", the element must allow users to engage with water and seek to provide an interface with water that addresses the following:

16

Education

Create a space in which an encounter with water may engage a group of people and educate them about the issues relating to water use in the world today. Consider how water may influence the activity in this space. Create a space where users may engage with water recreationally. Consider the seasonal climate changes and how these will affect and influence the recreational use of water in the design. Water is integral to culture. Create a space that highlights the cultural importance of water, be it for relaxation, contemplation, spiritual sustenance or other cultural activities, and consider how the cultural use of water may influence the design of the intervention. Water has inherent properties and operates in specific ways. It is one of the four elements in Classical western thought ­ air, earth, fire and water. Consider the way both the elemental and symbolic function of water as well as water's sensible qualities may be reflected in the design of the intervention.

Recreation

Culture

Function

Project Scope
No size or area was given for the proposed intervention. As sites were selected along the Thames River watershed, the element could engage with the water and the river in a way that it is in / on / over / beside the Thames. It could also engage the river from one of its banks or on both sides and therefore could be seen to have multiple parts or components. Nonetheless, it was to constitute a unified whole. The following were program considerations: · The underlying premise of CEx16 was to create H2O_ Thresholds that would be markers along a river that act as newly-conceived architectural elements highlighting the importance of water to human existence.

· The H2O_Thresholds were to illustrate the abstract representation of the assigned theme in its form and tectonics. · The tectonics of the H2O_Thresholds were to be explored and clearly developed. The form and materiality of the intervention may seek to relate to the subject. The tectonic, therefore, was to consider both construction and how the choice of materials, assemblage and construction raises the architecture of the intervention to a higher meaning or art form, allowing the material and object to have a metaphysical presence. · The intervention was to have both a weather-protected and open / outdoor component. · The intervention would function throughout all four seasons. Its use, function and operation may change with time (daily, seasonally, as the river's course changes, as water flows increase or decrease, as water levels rise or fall, as water quality degrades or improves etc.). · The intervention should be capable to accommodate a multiplicity of purposes and activities that my change over time. · The intervention might also serve a functional purpose for water purification and / or water management.

Program Elements
The intervention might accommodate a cross-section of users, from individuals to small groups to large gatherings, of all ages and demographics. It may therefore have within it a variety of zones from the intimate to the public, and the design should be considered at three scales: the intervention, its immediate context (e.g. an area within 20 meters of its focus), and its larger context (e.g. extended vistas, views up- and down-stream, and to the adjacent shore / bank).

17

Each team was to endeavour to include the following program elements/ interventions:
The element / the intervention:

· Information display (digital or analog) to accommodate electronic / interactive elements which connect it with other H2O_Thresholds along the watershed. · Didactic element with a brief explanation of project's intent and the team's approach to the water theme / trope / driver · Overhead weather protection for a small gathering of users · Seating for individuals or small groups · Capacity for users to access the water on foot, ramp or otherwise · Capacity for river users to access the element · In all cases design components should ensure that accessibility, safety and security are provided on the site.
The immediate context:

· Accommodate up to 50 people for a variety of activities · Consideration for elements that connect to the shore and / or float out into the water · The design should provide for access to individuals of all ages and accessibility needs · Consideration for engaging with existing landscape / built elements
The larger context:

· Consideration of users and inhabitants along the waterway · Acknowledge, as appropriate, Aboriginal peoples and traditional First Nations territories · Acknowledge physical context including river bank, opposite shore as appropriate, and immediate and longer views

18

· Acknowledge existing infrastructure, public transit, parks and public buildings · Consideration for public events that take place in the area
Project Deliverables, Submission Requirements and Deadlines

CEx16 concluded on Thursday January 14, 2016. Students submitted digitally prepared drawings and constructed models of their proposed H2O_Threshold. These were displayed in the Paul H. Cocker Gallery located in the Architecture Building at Ryerson University. A celebration concluded the week on Friday evening. George Thomas Kapelos

CEx16 was launched on Monday morning, January 11, 2016 at the start of the winter term in the Architectural Science program at Ryerson University. Students from all four years of the undergraduate program participated and were evaluated on a pass-fail basis. Graduate students from the Masters programs in Architectural Science facilitated team designs and faculty members from the Department and invited guests served as design critics during the four-day Collaborative Exercise. During the week, a number of events took place that supported the students as they developed designs. These events were organized to engage students sequentially in the problem development and were labelled to signify stages in the development of design. In the first afternoon, students were assigned initial themes and produced ideas for "design drivers" ­ ideas that might shape the design direction of proposed designs. A "Water Table" was hosted by Ryerson Urban Water on Tuesday, January 12, 2016, that featured experts addressing issues of water from environmental, design, cultural and scientific perspectives. Midway during CEx16, student teams met to exchange ideas and discuss the interrelationship of proposed design interventions along the watershed. Edward Burtynsky's film "Water" was screened on Tuesday evening and a deejay spun his favourite water music on Wednesday afternoon as students completed their designs.

Professor, Department of Architectural Science Instructor, Collaborative Exercise 2016

19

20

21

22

23

The 2016 Collaborative Exercise asked students to explore four tropes / themes / drivers as ways in which an H2O_Threshold may be understood. Each student explored one theme individually and presented them before commencing to further investigate with their group.

Life Water ­ the essence of life

Poetry The poetic quality of water ­ an idea that stimulates the imagination

Power The power of water ­ whose power can be harmful or be beneficial

Evanescence Water as an evanescent or fleeting substance

How would you address the relationship of humans to water architecturally through one of the themes?
23

24

3

25

4

1 5 6 8
9

2

7

12 13

11

10

15

14

student projects

26

Brooksdale
spring 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

1

Brooksdale
43°03'53.2"N 80°59'54.0"W

27

*

28

The Tree
1A
Dima Ahmad, Fahmida Ahmed, Afnan Al-Rashid, Erik Aquino, Fernando Arce, Nicola Augustin, Khaliq Azizi, Jiachen Bai, Shengyu Cai, Youhyun Chang, Wang Chiu, Alexender Christie, Bingjie Shi, Doan-Thy Vo The Tree is situated at the Brooksdale site along the Thames River watershed. This architectural intervention represents how the concept of life, through the lens of evanescence, can be explored. The Tree includes a terraced bio swale, which extracts pollutants from the water as it flows down the path of the river. The river's path is accompanied by a footbridge which leads to the site of the intervention. While the various terrace levels represent the stages in the journey through life, the tree, as final marker of the journey, represents the ultimate aspect of water's meaning as giver of life. The Tree's structure is generated as an extension of the footbridge, which slopes upward to form its canopy. The canopy itself incorporates three funnel systems that act both structurally and as a means of water collection with cisterns located at each base. Furthermore, the canopy carries an extensive green roof system that exemplifies the reappearance of vegetation from the ground plane onto the roof plane. The incorporation of a hydroponic system utilizes collected rainwater for plant irrigation both on the ground and on the roof structure. This enhances the concept of water's path through life as it encourages the continuation of the cyclical journey and demonstrates the necessity of collecting water needed at the beginning of a life cycle. The final step on this journey is the evaporative process of transpiration. Here plant leaves are shown as promoters of growth. As such, the tree promotes the idea of water as a necessary component to the continuation and generation of life.

29

30

Meandering
1B
Brandon Bortoluzzi, Hong Chen, Ka Pui Agnes Cheng, Ye Rin Choi, Jaehyung Chun, Andrew Dixon, Francesca Vicencio Doctolero, Yoonseo Ha, Adam Hollings, Juan Paolo Jabile, Krystyne Kontos, Jeanne Lai, Piritheeve Ledchumanan, Nivin Nabeel, Mampuru Anthony Stollmeye "Walk along the river what adventure will you find, walk along the river and lose track of all time." In this scheme, we present the river, its water and their combined experience poetically. Water is so basic and ever-present that we often take it for granted. Yet water is powerful enough that even with human intervention the river and its waters are never completely under our control. The poetry and journey of the river are experienced by creating a rhythmic experience. A repetitive pattern of travel and activity, similar to the iambic pentameter used so often in poetry, epitomizes the visitor's journey, as experience of the site builds towards a crescendo at the pavilion. Nodes of activity are located along the path, whose programs differentiate one stanza of this exploration from another. At each point along the journey the power of nature and water is emphasized differently but always through seasonal changes that are beyond human control. The boardwalk and program areas, set above the river for much of the year, provide specific vantage points and experiences for contemplating the human-to-water relationship. As spring thaws occur, flooding leads to higher water levels bringing viewers closer to the water and changing their interaction. The project has divided itself into six key nodes. First, at the road, where the journey begins, an entrance feature marks the start of the trail. Next, an ecology area provides an educational space for experiential learning about the life of the ecosystem and the power of the water on this system. Further along, a dock brings users over the water with a view below for a peaceful yoga and recreation area. A dock, along the path, features a lower level that will flood in the wet season creating a reflection pool to inspire readers, writers and artists. The educational aspect is then furthered with a historical node to teach about water's importance in the area through time. Finally, all of this concludes at the pavilion, a space for gathering that has an opening for a fire pit for events during cool summer evenings, but that floods with water in the spring showing water's power and control over our human activity.

31

High Spring Waterline Waterline Firepit/Re ection Pool

High Spring Waterline Waterline

32

Thamesford
fall 2000

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

2

Thamesford
43°03'53.2"N 80°59'54.0"W

33

*

34

LotusPolkü
2A
Imane Boury, Michael Fik, Michelle Friesen, Jean-Paul Guay, Michael Hankus, Eva Huang, Jeong-Yeon Hyun, Yuliya Ivanova, Kieran Jackson, Rachel Luu, Nazanin Mirsharifi, Amanda Nalli, Samantha Turchyn, Agnes Yuen The Lotuspolkü is an interactive installation symbolizing the power of water on human existence, as represented by a poetic balance. The site is located along the Thames River in Thamesford. The proposed design responds to the river's still waters by integrating itself as a playful interaction between humans and nature. The intervention is designed to humble users, reminding them of nature's power. Some of the floating docks tilt to a maximum angle of 5° and startle the user believing that they are about to fall into the marsh, as a reminder of water's power over human life. Furthermore, the tilting movement suggests the idea that even though humans can be disruptive, over time, nature will prevail. The design informs the visitors of the impacts of human life on the growing carbon footprint and threats to surrounding ecology. The effect of the subtle splashing engages humans to acknowledge the importance of water conservation, effectively arguing that while Canadians are exposed to an abundant amount of fresh water compared with other countries, we are not consuming as wisely as we should. The floating pads are composed of a timber structure of wood from chestnut trees that are found within the region. The framework permits multiple spaces for the placement of recycled plastic barrels and rubber tires which give the pads buoyancy. Safety and aesthetics are addressed by the installation of continuous LED lights around the circumference of the pads as a means to engage nighttime users. As the level of the river fluctuates, the pole system allows each platform to rise and fall with the water levels. The simple qualities of the design such as its form and fluidity allow for future expansion and reconfiguration of the pads.

35

36

Immersion
2B
Arshad Ahmad Ahmady, Alexandra Anne Barbin, Daniel Alexander Carey, Cornelia Suen Kong, Ho Yee Carol Kwan, Sookyum Lee, Hao Ling, Serafino Meliambro, Matthew Sauder, Bagas Jeremy Sinaga, Nikola Sokolov, Tommy Surya, Nicholas Winn, Lucy Yang Thamesford is a lively, small community in Zorra Township situated west of London. Residents enjoy aquatic activities, including canoeing, kayaking, skating and recreational fishing, all of which take place on the Thames. The primary design driver was evanescence and the secondary driver was life. We drew inspiration from the surrounding community's interaction with water and wanted to create a pavilion that embraced the multi-faceted aquatic activities enjoyed by people in the community. We designed a partially-submerged amphitheater for users to observe the contrasting river and swamp life from the same vantage point. We defined evanescence as the continual phase-shifting of water as it cyclically changes between liquid and solid. This process is typically horizontal in nature as the water level of the river rises and falls. We decided to acknowledge this by having our pavilion slope into the water. As the water level changes, the relationship between our pavilion and the body of water changes as steps are seasonally hidden or revealed. Our design focuses users' attention on both the river and the swamp, creating awareness and education of the impacts of water and the life it supports. The pavilion promotes human activity as well as becoming a place for boats to dock in the summer. It can also function as a warming pavilion in the winter for skaters. Ultimately, our pavilion is a communal gathering area which represents the relationship between water, biodiversity, and the community which it serves.

37

38

Mitchel
spring 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

3

Mitchell
43°28'10.2"N 81°11'53.9"W

39

*

40

Regeneration
3A
Maribel-Jean Agustin, Richard Paolo Asuncion, Victoria Beck, Jade Bridglal, Nick Caccavella, Luis Carlos Carvalheiro, Ailsa Craigen, Francesca Cuda, Jason glionna, Nicolas Jimenez, Jasmin Minji Kim, Frank Tzu-yu Lin, Michelle Martinez, Teresa Mytkowski, Steffi yip Woon Sun Regeneration is an intervention aimed to promote education about water purification in Mitchell. Purification systems utilized in the design can be adapted to household and farm use in order to reduce the amount of run-off impacting the river and the area's ecology. By integrating a pine xylem and sand aggregate filter into the design, regeneration cleans the river water at a large scale, while enabling visitors to interact with and understand the process. The platform allows for visitors to gather and view demonstrations in a centralized area.

41

42

Poetry | Power
3B
Margoux Claire Castro, Nadia Corsetti, Jonathan Day, Julian Angelo Dumo, Ana Ene, Rikai He, Dana Rae Hibberd, Mathew Hyr, Katherine Anne Krolak, Tejal Mahesh Lad, Catherine Marie Lee, Justin James Luoma-Reddy, Kousha Omidi Sahneh, Marcus Alexander Parisi, Tirisha Amelia Phago Water not only is an essential resource to sustain life but an element of great power and beauty. The project offers an opportunity to re-establish the relationship between contemporary society and water, forming a new identity and appreciation for the metaphysics of water. Poetry | power is a revitalization of the Mitchell dam, a significant node along the Thames River watershed. The design offers a range of recreational, multipurpose and educational functions forming a series of unique experiences for visitors to engage with the site. The project is a celebration of the relationship between the Thames River and the surrounding community, a source of life and delight and an invaluable resource for southwestern Ontario. The building is an extension of the landscape, allowing visitors the opportunity to engage with the physical context of the site. The design takes a minimalistic approach that provides visitors the opportunity to witness the experiential and elemental qualities of water year-round. In response to the invasive nature of the site's dam, the project establishes a journey into the heart of this human intervention, allowing individuals to become aware of the structure's identity as a barrier to the flow of water. Utilizing a complete sensory range of sight, sound, feel and smell, the path provides a phenomenological exploration of water ­ a reflection on the element's relationship to humans in respect to time and place.

43

44

Stratford
spring 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

4

Stratford
43°22'21.5"N 80°59'01.3"W

45

*

46

Dam Beautiful
4A
Andrea Bickely, Eunjin Choi, Sara Duffin, Diana Klissarova, Tess Macpherson, Gabriel Ramirez, Sylvia Rodas, Sebastian Serrano, Jessica Taylor, Cristina Terentii, Mohammadamir Teyouri, Zachary Topp, Stephanie Wu The R. Thomas Orr Dam, located in Stratford, is the focus of our architectural intervention. This intervention is driven by the exploration of water and its association with power and life. The power of water within nature manifests itself in various forms. Its fluidity and ability to transform between solid and liquid represent the ever-changing relationship of humans to water. The R. Thomas Orr Dam was constructed to control the river's flow, which was prone to damaging the surrounding area in flood time. Dam beautiful is an exploration of the power of water and its ability to draw life to a location that is otherwise unexplored and unappreciated. Dam beautiful does this by allowing users to experience water in three different ways: auditory, visually and physically. The auditory experience is enhanced through the use of pressurized fountains at both ends of the walkway; the sound of the falling fountain is contrasted with the powerful sound of the falling water on the dam. The visual experience is created as visitors are brought to the heart of the dam which was previously inaccessible. In winter months when the water recedes, human activity continues to thrive there in the form of a skating rink, providing recreation in an otherwise under-appreciated season. This architectural intervention involves the local community while promoting two fundamental aspects of water: power and life.

47

48

Eddy
4B
Katrina Blanshard, Kathleen Collins, Ivan Efremov, Marina Elmova, Ramoncito Espino, Jacqueline Galang, Samanta Grant, Valerie Poon, Adam Rosenberg, Gianpaul Rossi, Julia Singh, Jung Tian, Justin Wong, Matthew Wong-Chun-Sen, Cathy Zhang The site, located on the Avon River near the R. Thomas Orr Dam, consists a body of water extending from the Thames River which separates a residential neighbourhood from the downtown core of Stratford. The dam is an important structure as it prevents river flooding and serves as a pedestrian bridge for the public to view the spiraling Eddy in the river. The project's inspiration comes from the exploration of the primary trope `evanescence' and the secondary trope `poetry'. Two spiral elements intersect the river and serve as a H2O threshold. The larger of the two is designed as a boardwalk extension located off an existing walkway which runs along the river. As users follow the winding paths to the project's center, they come upon seating surrounding a whirlpool. Symbolically representing evanescence, river water gently circles and disappears into a central focus, only to emerge on the opposite side of the river, where it is filtered and celebrated in a fountain spray. The grey-water from the fountain is passed further along to a nearby community pool, owned and operated by the city, in an effort to promote a more sustainable approach to the murky water found in the Avon River. The trope of poetry is illustrated through a yin-yang effect in two ways. Firstly, polluted water enters into an infiltration cycle from the center of one concrete spiral element and exits as clean water from the second concrete spiral element. Secondly, the asymmetrical elevations in the heights of the spiral structures create an opposing balance which creates a tangible unity The program spaces at the center of the spirals provide seating for leisure and fishing, especially when the city hosts its annual trout fishing competition.

49

public vs. private diagram

circulation diagram

50

Plover's Mill
winter 2000

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

5

Plover's Mill
43°08'58.8"N 81°11'29.5"W

51

*

52

Confluence
5A
Joana Benin, Ted Kent Dominique Bulaclac, Johnathan Chan, Lauren Chan, Danika Brianna Chesney, Mackenzie Elizabeth Chiarotto, Danielle Shannon Fuller, Valerie Gershman, Irda hajdari, Sara Khaled Mohamed Hassanein, Sara Khaled Mohamed, Romina Kaveh, Sora Kim, Henry Mai, Meng Ye Nestled along the Thames River in Plover's Mills, confluence is a modest gathering place that serves to educate and relax. Two cylindrical hubs tower over low water levels from July to September, or seemingly float over high water levels from December to April, displaying the dynamic visual relationship between architecture and the ephemeral nature of water. Simultaneously, the changing density of the intersecting wood cladding creates incredible views, light, and shadows for the interior space, while the interior is exposed to the sky and the river below. This design establishes a third place on the riverbank, a point for social congregation that will draw people into the area. The connection to water is further explored with natural purification pools that step down the gentle slope. The pools exemplify the subtle skill with which the land purifies pollutants from farm runoff, bridge runoff and the river itself, with a pump system drawing water into the first and largest pool. The third and last pool overflows, and purified water returns back into the river, completing the cycle. Boardwalks surround two of the three pools, providing a circulation system around the hubs and the pools that reflect the cyclical nature of the water cycle. Ultimately, the arrangement of confluence is grounded in health, of both the social and natural landscapes, with water as the medium and means.

53

54

Plover's Lookout
5B
Meredith Davis, Tetyana Gradyuk, Kimberly Grovu, Vincenzo Gulia, Katherine Swainson, Amanda Brennan, Mitchell Cairns-Spicer, Laura Herrera, Magdalena Krawczyk, Randa Law, Shahida Hoque, Aris Peci, Alexis Johansen
"The water understands Civilization well; It wets my foot, but prettily, It chills my life, but wittily. Ill-used, it will destroy, In perfect time and measure With a face of golden pleasure Elegantly destroy." -- Ralph Waldo Emerson

The design presents three stages of interaction with the Thames River creating moments within the pavilion at high ground, mid ground and at the riverbank. It represents a threshold from land to water with different degrees of enclosure and moments, as visitors navigate through the site. The lowest station at the riverbank allows closer interaction to the water and an accessible ramp for canoeists and other boaters coming off the river. The mid-ground level features a seating area and assembly space. The highest point is composed of an enclosed information centre and a cantilevered deck providing a lookout to the landscape and river for a moment of reflection. This higher deck allows access to the pavilion and river during the flooding seasons when water levels rise. The steps and platforms at different heights portray the sculpting of land by water and accommodate the rise and decline of the water level in the river throughout the year. The way in which our design is integrated into the site and its change in topography also refers to the power of nature and erosion as a result of water flow. The roof is shaped as an angular, sloping form to mimic the strength of water in its solid state, while the reflective materiality of it depicts the calm hues and constant movement of the river.

55

56

Fanshawe Dam
spring 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

6

Fanshawe Dam
43°02'30.9"N 81°11'00.4"W

57

*

58

Dam Good Water
6A
Grace Emma Chalabi, Liam Gerald Joseph Hall, Mina Hardan, Rui Meng Huang, Daniel Jacobs, Inhye Jeong, Naveed Khan, Han Sol Kim, Hyo Yeon Lee, Adrian Wai-Lam Man, Mark Melnichuk, Amanda Marie Mota, Christopher Pin, Daniel Boleslaw Sobieraj This intervention engages users to connect with and interact with water through a full sensory and educational experience. The project, Dam Good Water, encourages the public to consider the relationship that humans have to water and the multiplicity of water's meanings, specifically its significance as the essence of life and as a source of power that can be harmful or beneficial. The proposal forms a node along the Thames River and is located on the Fanshawe Dam just north of London. The dam creates two distinct conditions: the reservoir that is located just upstream is calm and serene while the basin downstream is dynamic and turbulent. This intervention uses the dam as an axis that creates two contrasting experiences. A cantilevered viewing platform projects out of the dynamic side of the dam and harnesses the flow of the water to create a waterfall that streams from the side of the platform, showcasing the power of water. Water's significance as the essence of life is revealed in a submerged platform and a living wall with glass and perforated metal panels that allow the public to see how plants filter water, the changing water levels and aquatic life. The two viewing platforms interact with one another as the water that is filtered through the living wall is then used for the waterfall. As the water levels change in the reservoir, the amount of water collected and released through the waterfall also reflects this change. The changing intensity of the waterfall as a result of changing water levels is a visual demonstration of the power of water harnessed by the dam. Visitors can enter from the nearby trail system and descend into a tunnel that is connected to both platforms, allowing them to pass through the intervention and exit at the trail system across the dam.

59

60

Submersion
6B
Jonathan Kim, Ji Young Lee, Reena Sierra Kaur Lepik, Casey Li, Justin LuomaReddy, Yuqing Ma, Stefan Andre Miller, Rawan Muaddi, Minyoung Park, Daria Poloubabkina, Arghavan Safvati, Bethany Stock, Gregor Tratnik, Cathy Truong Submersion embodies the concept of evanescence through the gradual disappearance and reappearance of form as dictated by forces of nature. Fanshawe Dam, located on site, represents the idea that water can be controlled, which is contradicted by the presence of this project. As a poetic gesture, control over the installation has been released, allowing a portion of the installation to flood when the water level rises, and empty when it lowers. Thus, people are on equal terms with the environment, and give respect to all living things, just as aboriginal cultures believe. On approach, the pavilion has a minimal presence. It presents itself as a simple dock, from which visitors can enjoy a view or launch boats for recreational use. Two separate thresholds lead underground and visitors have a different experience depending on which path is chosen. The entrance nearest to the water leads to a space located underneath the dock. This space is a sunken room which fills with water during wet seasons, when the water level rises. This process can take up to three days. During dry seasons, the space can be occupied. With glazing on the exterior wall, visitors can see the water levels. The glazed portion of also which lets in diffused light depending on the height of the water level. The other space is totally underground and is not visible upon approach, except for its entrance. This space can be used for relaxation as well as for educational purposes. It contains built-in seating and informational displays. A glazed wall that separates this space allows visitors to experience the flood room when it cannot be occupied.

lowc tide

high tide

61

62

Springbank Park
spring 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

7

Springbank Park
42°57'32.9"N 81°18'36.4"W

63

*

64

River Shelf
7A
Parandis Abdi, Omar Ahmed, Jason Brijraj, Angela Chau, Yuezhu Deng, Julia De Los Reyes, Joshua D-Souza, Zu Ting Feng, Mily Mutch, Lorraine Okungbowa, Dan Rubenzahl, Noeline Tharshan, Bianca Verwaayen, Kristen Wiebe River shelf is located at Springbank Park, situated along a stretch of the Thames River, in London. Conceptually derived by the primary and secondary design drivers, life and evanescence, respectively, river shelf strives to further cultivate the relationship of humans to water, and its important connection to human life. Engaging the design driver, life, river shelf comes to life as an individual engages with the design elements. A dynamic, perforated, lit bridge crossing the Thames leads to a glass enclosure, situated between two remaining concrete piers, reminiscent of the hydro dam that once was situated on site. Weight sensitive sensor panels trigger a water element, as pumped water from the river is allowed to flow over the concrete piers. Life is interpreted as human interaction. Upon standing on the perforated metal landing, visitors can engage with the river through dropped panels that create small pools of water located around bench seating. Across the seasons, human engagement with the installation will change. During colder months, warmed water emitted from the installation will create steam, a different experience than that of the summer. As the installation functions once humans are present, the water spilling from the piers falls below a perforated metal decking -- allowing visitors to witness water patterns and ripples created by the installation. These ripples dissipate into the river and cease to exist ­ showcasing the evanescent property of water. River shelf acts as a beacon of light in the evening, an educational destination and a reprieve from the urbanity of London, allowing the individual to engage with the river and, more importantly, furthering the relationship of humans to water.

65

66

Digi di acqua
7B
Nastaran Baktiyari, Florence Chu, Farah Elmajdoub, Philip Fors, Kathinka Gundermann, Stephen Hewitt, Shimin Huang, Jeff Jang, Benjamin Joyce, Arash Kamran, Asal Khalilisamani, Dana Latimer, Sareh Mousa, Rabia Randhawa Springbank Park, nestled within the City of London, is home to the ruins of what was once a large dam, which collected drinking water from a natural spring. What remains on the site is the abandoned pump house, which is used as a public washroom for hikers and bikers on the river trail. Because of this traffic, we propose to create an art installation here, which engages people with the ruins across the river and with the river water itself. Poetically, the whimsical pathway accentuates the beauty of the site. This pathway connects the existing Maurice Chapman Walkway to the opposite side of the river. The organic form and wave-like configuration of the pathway creates a unique experience as users are drawn to a series of nodes along path. The nodes are places of rest where small canopies provide shade and shelter. Each node has an information board, which educates visitors about the history of the site and how the river was once a source of drinking water. Power is manifested in the pathway design as water is manipulated along the railings bordering the path in a variety of forms to engage users with the river. Power is represented by the bridge that forces the river water to change its natural path and flow elsewhere for visitor interactions. In the summer, water is turned into mist to cool visitors. In spring and fall, water is kept in its natural state as a flowing stream and in winter icicles are formed along the railings. These icicles create a magical experience and grow into a whimsical wall of ice. The large canopy near the ruins is the ending point for the visitor's experience where a memorial fire between the large concrete masses creates warmth and promotes contemplation.

67

68

Delaware
spring 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

8

Delaware
42°54'29.6"N 81°25'27.8"W

69

*

70

Water Marks
8A
Taylor Marshall, Rhea Mazgaonkar, Abiraahmy Nareshkumar, Daniel Ibrahim, Shamim Khosravi-vamakani, Jaehwan Lee, Ka Lai Liu, Jiani Luo, David Luong, Jennifer Pham, Alina Pisetskaya, Nineveh Rashidzadeh, Robert Sarra Situated near the community of Delaware, Water Marks embodies the spirit of power and poetry by intervening into the Thames River in both horizontally and vertically. A collection of copper piers is scattered between the riverbank and a small island. Each copper pier is perforated at various levels along its length. As the water flows through the piers, the kinetic energy forces air through the perforations, creating a multitude of sounds. At the base of each pier, a small generator further utilizes the river's energy to power a light located there, permitting the user to experience the project at various times of the day. The piers subtly educate users both about the history of the site and the power of the river. Reveals are cut into each of the piers creating datum lines across the sculptural forms, which indicate the water levels of past and potential future floods. Though the project is an intervention, it manages to relate to its surrounding landscape, blending in as it disperses across the plane. The project incorporates the island and defines it as a destination and gathering space. A concentration of short piers on the island provide seating for users. As one moves away from the island, the spacing between the piers increases, creating a gradual dispersion onto the landscape. The widths and heights of the piers were derived from the dimensions of the trees on site, to allow the project to further blend in. The project gives itself completely to the river by allowing the water to naturally react with copper, creating a coating of green oxidation at the base of each pier. Over time, the green patina will almost completely cover the piers, further indicating the power of water, and its potential for destruction.

71

72

Oxbow
8B
Marie Arcayos, Joanna Oon, Alexander Paul, Andrea Plesa, Sahil Saroy, Eric Siegfriedt, Diana Sobaszek, Shivathmikha Suresh Kumar, Daomin xie, Brant York, Anthony Youssef, Tsz Wing Yung Oxbow showcases water's ever-changing state by means of a tangible and enjoyable experience. The form mimics the natural curves of the river bank and follows the flow of the river. The intervention enhances the relationship of the land to the water by reaching out to the island and providing access to the river in the middle of its course. Visitors enter through a covered pathway that leads to the centre of the intervention. The pathway serves as a threshold for visitors prior to their engagement with the river. Visitors witness the evanescent quality of water by experiencing it in its different states. Mist is mechanically produced along the path. The experience varies in different weather conditions. In the summertime, the mist can provide relief from the heat, while during cooler seasons, the system exhibits a unique effect, where water can be experienced in another state, fog. In the centre, a water feature showcases water as a source of delight both in solid and liquid states. The shallow pond allows visitors to experience water recreationally as a place to cool off and relax in the summer and as an ice rink in the winter. A filtration system consisting of rocks and plant life purifies the water for the pond/ice rink which shows the connection of life to water while also serving a functional purpose. Water can be seen in three different states as it is being cleansed, which is a display of the evanescence of water. The filtration as an open display of an innovative means to cleanse water also serves as an educational feature. Complemented by interactive elements, the design aims to raise awareness of the global water crisis. Oxbow's enjoyable water features increase visitors' appreciation of water as a fundamental element of life.

73

74

Strathroy

spring 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

9

Strathroy
42°53'16.5"N 81°26'02.5"W

75

*

76

Thames Revival Conservatory
9A
Sean Abar, John Benner, Derek Beattie, Ariel Cooke, Stephen Chun, Arnel Espanol, Eric Farnand, Dylon Feyen, Bariel Frank, Connor Gagnon, Fatima Hassan, Andrea Ivancic, Jiayi Zhang With the increase of cultivation and agricultural engineering to get the most bountiful crop yields, the farmlands surrounding our site are severely impacted. Soils are drained of all nutrients and becoming filled with pesticides and other pollutants. Over time the banks of the river erode more rapidly and local fauna become impacted to the point of endangerment. In an attempt to counter these damages caused by the Thames River, we propose a remediation through the construction of an artificial marshland and a conservation facility to revitalize the endangered life of the Thames in this location. These marshlands will serve as a spawning pool and breeding ground for the spiny soft-shell turtle, a native species that is threatened and protected under Ontario's endangered species legislation. Despite this classification, the turtles are being illegally poached. Therefore, this sanctuary will allow a safe haven for the turtles where they can be observed and studied. Alongside the spiny soft-shell turtle, the conservation facility will house areas for the hooded red warbler and the monarch butterfly. By planting ample amounts of milkweed along the bank of the river, this will create a sanctuary for the monarchs while strengthening the river edge to prevent rapid erosion.

77

78

[H2O]rbs
9B
Giancarlo Franzoi, Amber Goveas, Elena Hamanova, Arpy Katrjian, Luke Kimmerer, Katrina Klemmer, Anna Kosichenko, Eric Lachance, Andrew Lee, Jasper Leung, Nicole Li, Jonathan Lo, Clarice Medina, Michael Plummer The design, [H 2O]rbs, revisits the Thames River as a roadway: a canoe-travelled passage that connects many regions in southwestern Ontario. On this site in Strathroy, we observed that the Thames meanders through its most "naturalistic" stretch. Water flows along its course poetically. Water has graced the riverside with both a gentle and harsh touch, leaving its mark sculpted into the face of the earth. [H2O]rbs chooses to let water write its own story, as it always has, but provides a perspective from which the story can be understood: from the air, where the Thames can be seen from distance as it rounds the bend, a whisper can be heard; from the earth, where an edge encourages water to take shape, an ever-changing sculpture emerges; from the water, where its power, presence and evanescence can be felt, we understand the river to be blood of the earth. [H2O]rbs means to demonstrate that water is a challenge for humankind. Water comes between what is easy and what must be the end goal. Thus, each of the [H2O]rbs is strategically oriented in order to make arrival difficult. One must transverse a snow and ice covered landscape or fight the current in a canoe in order to reach this destination.

79

80

Big Bend Conservation Area
summer 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

10

Big Bend Conservation Area
42°38'20.6"N 81°42'08.5"W

81

*

82

Water Project
Marta lehzdyn, Daniel Lord, Fontane Ma, Judy Manouk, Didar Mansurova, Rachel Mcgee, Justin Mitchell, Alexander Moroz, Pearl Mu, Tristan Rouse, Yuri Shin, Claire Tam, Abhishek Wagle Water is a powerful source of life. It has the ability to transform, to heal and to destroy. It can be the symbol of two extremes ­ whether it be the devastation of a natural disaster or the calm nature of a river bank. The big bend of the Thames River serves as an example of both its healing and destructive qualities. Water naturally runs through the river course, providing essential nutrients for plants, animals and inhabitants in the watershed. However, the turbulent water and seasonal flooding have also caused the edges of the river to erode over time. This erosion process has washed away rocks and foliage, leaving the river edges bare and wistful looking. Our design proposal aims to educate the public on water's powers, while also providing viewers of the Thames River with an aesthetic experience. Located at the bend of the river, our design will serve as a platform for year-round activities. A void of filtered water is placed at the centre of the curvilinear form. The calm water within the void contrasts the rough current that flows in the river, rising and dropping throughout the year. When the water level is at its lowest, countless stepping stone-like platforms provide a circulation path. While on the platform, users can engage in recreational activities such as swimming, lounging or fishing. As the water cools and begins to freeze, the reflecting pool takes on a new form. Hydro generated electric power heats the water and transforms the pool into a hot-spring ­ contrasting it with the frozenover river. Floods are common with the melting of ice, so as the season changes, water levels rise, which causes many of the stepping-stones to be submerged in the water's powerful embrace. Debris is carried throughout the river, stripping the area of its natural beauty. A filtration system implemented within the structure aims to improve the river water for future generations. By creating a flexible platform that features year-long activities, our proposal not only improves the site but also successfully educates the users on the power and essence of water.

10A

83

84

Meander
Margoux Claire Castro, Nadia Corsetti, Jonathan Day, Julian Angelo Dumo, Ana Ene, Rikai He, Dana Rae Hibberd, Mathew Hyr, Katherine Anne Krolak, Tejal Mahesh Lad, Catherine Marie Lee, Justin James Luoma-Reddy, Kousha Omidi Sahneh, Marcus Alexander Parisi, Tirisha Amelia Phago Our meandering path interacts with high and low water conditions to illustrate the impact of water on life and landscape. The design is composed of two parallel paths on the water's edge and on the shoreline. The outermost water path disappears during high water conditions and the innermost forest path becomes dominant. Alternately, during low water conditions the water recedes and program areas on the outer edge become more accessible to the public. In the annual water cycle, the fire pits on the shoreline are surrounded by water during high water periods. This brings fire pits and fire as an element which sustains human life to the edge of the shore. During low water conditions paths to water-related activities reveal themselves, leading to fishing, canoeing and educational opportunities. The boardwalk and parallel roof structure facilitate seamless movement between the two high and low water conditions. Through the expression of slight changes in topography and tectonic qualities, the boardwalk design permits users to experience the fleeting qualities of water by elevating and submerging them in different seasons. Meander is a monument to the eleventhousand-year long presence of indigenous people at big bend, and references numerous floods along the Thames River which affected their livelihood. While the Thames watershed has sustained life for centuries, its evanescent qualities have impacted the relationship between man and water. Meander brings these qualities to the forefront at the pronounced southern tip of the peninsula. Existing park paths connect the meandering path to camp sites and park grounds to the northwest.

10B

85

86

Moraviantown
spring 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

11

Moraviantown
42°35'27.6"N 81°53'06.5"W

87

*

88

Moravian Remediation
11A
Nicholas Callies, Alyssa Carere, Matthew Chung, Mariam El-Zein, Bryka Esuan, Matthew Ferguson, Daniel-Julian Filice, Luisa Gonzalez, Jessica Gu, Alan Guildimann, Adid Hisaghi, Stephen Jones, Pin Lai, Jeffrey Szeto Conditions at the Moraviantown site directed our actions. For both social and political reasons, we believed a remediation was needed. The Delaware First Nation, the owners of the land, have been wronged, persecuted and abused historically, as with other first nations across our nation. Our Prime Minister himself has acknowledged the need for a greater effort in this context. Aboriginal Canadians continue to be sidelined and something must be done to address this. The theme of water afforded us the opportunity to make a symbolic statement, to present a built offering to the Delaware First Nation. Physical remediation is made through the construction of an island pavilion which becomes a learning centre and meeting space for indigenous culture and spirituality. It will serve to highlight the rich culture that has been forgotten and on which our proposed project will be built. Paired with this physical manifestation of remediation is our symbolic gesture, a water purification system which cleans the river to provide a clean, tranquil pool, and a small source of potable water for visitors and the community. The gabion walls which cross the river house filters and flow-control mechanisms and provide separation between the turbulent dirty river, the marshes which will clean it and the pristine pool beyond. We believe that the significance of water in First Nations' spirituality, paired with the amenity it provides to the site, will prove a thoughtful and compassionate gesture. During the summer, the water will be clean and calm enough for anyone to comfortably swim, float or dip their feet. Meanwhile in winter the frozen river will provide a smooth surface for pick-up hockey or casual skating.

89

90

Lenape Water Pavilion
11B
Jessica Hoang Chen, Timothy Tsz Ho Cheng, Arman Ghafouri- Azar, Eyad Hachimi, Andrew Martyn Harvey, Shirley Li, Baotong Liang, Ivana Luk, Daniel Luo Gawel, Kierstyn Marlow, Terry-Ann Mendoza, Tishana Phagoo, Nicole Marie Regier, Bence Jozef Sutus, Sebastian Thomas Van Niekerk
Poetry As in many cultures, the circle is highly valued among the Canada's First Nations for its role in both the facilitation of fair social discourse and pedagogy (the circle talk) and the provision of a physical space for social gathering, prayer and performance (the pow-wow). At a pow-wow, participants dance in a circle, with seating and audience areas encompassed by a surrounding larger circle. Circles also provide us with an understanding of natural cycles such as birth, life and death, the cycle of the seasons and the four elements of matter: air, earth, fire, and water. The observatory pavilion located on a shallow island in the Thames River near Moraviantown echoes the narrative of the symbolic significance of the circle. In the hottest season when the Thames River is dry, the circle sits literally anchored to the island. The interior courtyard provides a central performance space and contains dry earth where communal fires may be laid. Air is manifested through the openness of the space, allowing natural ventilation to pass through the structure and also enhancing the viewing experience of the surrounding natural splendour. Finally, water is manifested in its most powerful form when the river's water level rises and lifts the pavilion, enabling the user to experience the river through the varying size of volume in the interior space. Poetry is embodied in the journey leading towards the Lenape water pavilion. An elevated boardwalk connects the adjacent hiking trail to the island, taking the visitors on a journey through the Carolinian forest and along the Thames. The natural landscape is reflected in the mirror-coated glazing panels of the pavilion, allowing it to blend in seamlessly with its context. Restoration of the river bank is provided in a series of rain gardens, natural berms and a fortified greenbelt of trees, which together filter contaminated water run-off from adjacent agricultural properties. Power Water holds power over humans, animals and plant life, and becomes physically powerful when acted upon by natural forces such as gravity. Our structure is a celebration of this power by containing a free-floating platform which rises with the Thames River as it floods and engulfs the shallow island on which it sits. The column grid and roof structure are anchored permanently to the island and, as the river rises, the floor rises as well, creating a variety of spatial conditions. The current of the river is utilized for the renewable energy it offers. Water turbines are constantly driven by the river and the kinetic energy is transformed to power the structure's water purification system. The purification system offers clean drinking water to locals and visiting

91

92

Thamesville
fall 2000

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

12

Thamesville
42°32'26.7"N 81°59'11.0"W

93

*

94

Syracusia.III
12A
Zeenah Mohammed Ali, Andrew Aziz, Andrew Barat, Matthew Breton-Honeyman, Tess Hoover, Marco Lee, Ciara Martins, Kiente Sanipe, Louise Shin, Paul Szywacz, Jamie Tong, Stephanie Tung, Ernest Wong, iaying Xiong, Noah Zweig This project addresses two themes: power (primarily) and life (secondarily). The site is situated near a train bridge, which crosses the Thames River and passes through the small community of Thomasville. The design features three Archimedes' screws, a readily accessible, street-level pedestrian walkway cantilevered to the bridge edge, and a viewing platform along the river bank which doubles as a resting stop, providing seating and shading for kayakers and canoers. Each of the Archimedes' screws appears as a faucet tap, creating three separate waterfalls that can be observed from both the river bank and walkway. The water travelling through space ­ from the river to the falls ­ alludes to water's physical force, the flow of which is able to power each screw. The cyclical process of life is reflected here through the water's constant flow, regardless of its physical state, be it as a flowing liquid in the warmer seasons or as a frozen cascade of ice in the winter. Flowing properties of water are present throughout the year. Resembling ordinary faucet taps, each screw expresses itself as a symbol of excess water usage in North America, faucets being an effortless way of obtaining water and, therefore, easily taken for granted. The faucets allow observers to reflect upon the symbolic nature of the installation. Water is an important aspect of our daily lives. The design invites the public to think about the importance of this precious resource.

95

96

Ascension
12B
Antonio Adamo, Nour Akkad, Sama Ardestani, Navindra Budhwa, Aurela Emiri, Noah Gotlib, Julianne Guevara, Matthew Lau, Benjamin Luong, Myoung Shin, Tyler Skidmore, Glearda Sokoli, Alvin Tanoko, Stuart Vaz Over the last century, the people of Thomasville have made a concerted effort in the restoration and upkeep of the Thames River watershed in their community. This has included the planting of over 200,000 trees and seasonal river clean-ups. During the year, the Thames is a popular canoe trail and is the location for the annual Thames Water Festival that draws in over one thousand participants. The 2016 Collaborative Exercise invites students to consider the relationship of humans to water as a resource through the themes of life, power, poetry and evanescence. Using evanescence and poetry as our primary and secondary themes, ascension strives to follow these themes by reconfiguring the river banks through the insertion of vertical louvers. The height, space and arrangement of the louvers vary to create key moments where pedestrians can rest, fish or simply enjoy the view. The boardwalk design mimics the freeflowing river and creates resting spots for canoers. The boardwalk also incorporates a vegetation filtration system to support water purification of the river and assist the community in their upkeep of the river. The poetic intent of the structure is seen in its design where the decking divides to expose the water filtration plants. During winter, the river becomes a place for cross country skiing and the louver density changes to create a wind barrier to protect skiers. The overhanging structures that are added to the louvers act as resting points. The overall design is intended to draw people who happen upon the structure, whether by hiking or canoeing, to consider the importance of the river.

97

98

Chatham

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

summer 2001

13

Chatham
42°24'21.8"N 82°10'59.8"W

99

*

100

Élan Vital
Catalina Ardila Bernal, Mateusz Pawel Bledowski, Emrik Elijah Burrows, Tara Castator, Sabrina Lidia Guglietti, Jack Tanmey Hache, Jimmy Chung Kwan Hung, Jia Xin Huang, Christian Joseph Iannantuono, Wonseob Jung, Stephanie Duong Lima Lima, Matthew Martire, Victoria Anne Staseff, Stephanie Steriotis, Robyn Thomson Our site is located within the narrow condition of Chatham's McGregor Creek. We aimed to transform the seemingly lifeless surroundings into a lively social space providing a positive educational experience. We are transforming the existing dam and small pedestrian path to become a destination by creating an outdoor garden and by connecting the existing parks to the north and south of the site. We are bringing aquatic life to the site through the use of bio-filtration. Using plants and organisms to purify the water, we anticipate our design will rejuvenate the river and the surrounding urban area. As plants grow they have the ability to absorb nitrogen and phosphorus, currently found in excessive amounts in the water due to agricultural fertilizer use. Plants have the ability to remove water pollutants by up to 80%. They dispose eutrophication, which creates a richness of nutrients in a body of water that counters the lack of oxygen, allowing for the renewed growth of plant life and restoration of animal habitat. By replacing the dam with a six-level weir, we are showing the layers of water's power. The connections along the creek flow up and down to create a unique experience in this place.

13A

101

102

Aqua Amphitheatre
Marin Agostini, Nona Arezehgar, Kyle Benassi, Jae Young Chahng, Simon Chen,Celine Huynh, Hugo Lim, Hadley Milos, Simran Munde, Shiva Shushtari, Samuel Toby Aqua amphitheater, located on the McGregor Creek in Chatham, aims to provide a threshold that provokes the public to think about the poetic and evanescent nature of water. Aqua amphitheater allows users to engage with water and provides an interface that addresses the educational, recreational, cultural and functional qualities of water. Through the construction of an outdoor amphitheater and the expansion of the pedestrian bridge and surrounding pedestrian channels, the threshold revitalizes the connection between the northern and southern sectors of Chatham, which is currently penetrated by McGregor creek and the Thames River. The southern sector, a commercial zone, is occupied by the amphitheater, a public entertainment space, and the northern sector, across the creek, a recreational zone, is occupied by an outdoor bleacher space, a public seating space that gradually descends into the water. The highest elevation of aqua amphitheater engages humans with water in its regular, static state and the lowest elevation engages humans with water in its unpredictable and dynamic state. Aqua amphitheater serves as a new anchor in the heart of Chatham. It is an architectural intervention that considers water as an omnipresent element that is fundamental to life, a force of embodied energy, a valuable resource and a source of delight.

13B

103

104

Paint Court
fall 2000

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

14

Pain Court
42°22'23.0"N 82°16'53.0"W

105

*

106

Rain Screen
Ysabel Arboleda, Rutuja Atre, Andrea Hui Wah Au, Mariah Cestra, Emilie Amber Paige Doucette, Alex Fown, Timothy Tin Yan Lai, Yeuk Ying Ng, Adam William John Oliphant, Kousha Omidi Sahneh, Marycarmen Ortuno Gonzalez, Ishan Patel, Kristen Smith, Syeda Maryum Waseem, Claudia Wrzecionek The interplay of water's powerful and poetic qualities reveals a myriad of understated ways in which moisture shapes our lives and the landscapes in which we live. Natural phenomena such as erosion, glaciers, icebergs and freezing rain exemplify water's quiet potential to elicit dramatic change and destruction. Water is the defining element that can sustain or stifle life. In this location, five kilometers west of Chatham, the Thames River slowly meanders through the agricultural community of Pain Court. Located on a grassy river bank between several farms, the site of Rain Screen possesses few outwardly powerful characteristics. Consequently, this community-oriented space utilizes the subtle, poetic force of water to offer two varied, seasonal effects. In summer, water flows down a metal mesh surface, irrigating and supporting a series of climbing vines of grapes, peas and beans. In winter, as water freezes as it flows over the wire mesh, it creates a clear ice screen against wind and blowing snow. These two different manifestations of water highlight water's importance to provide both food and shelter throughout the year. In addition to encircling a winding path that hovers over a graduated wetland system, the continually moist metal screen encloses two primary programmatic spaces. This wetland system provides a protective boundary between pesticide-contaminated farmlands and the adjacent river, while safeguarding the park against anticipated seasonal flooding. The park is programmed to operate as an informal community centre within its low-density, agricultural context. Anchored by two "water-hearths," the two programmatic nodes provide spaces for local markets, family picnics and classroom field trips. The pathway features seating, observation decks and educational signage intended to raise awareness of the effects of pesticides on water quality and public health.

14A

107

108

Submersion
Michelle Ashurov, Rachel Wing Kay Au, Chin Sing Cheng, Spencer Riley Cregan, Michael Evola, Karen Fang, Madison Laura Jantzi, Sena Kaska, Jin Won Kim, Shahrzad Mansouri, Matthew Muto, Blake Ryan Nicholson, Sarah Rachel Persad, Jue Wang, Yong Kang Zhu Submersion promotes the sacred relationship between humans and water, recognizing the importance of water as a necessity of life, while simultaneously acknowledging water's fleeting nature. Our design provides interactive spaces for the public through the creation of voids within the Thames River. Monolithic ramps begin beyond the shoreline, dug into the earth, and lead to a contemplative exhibition space. The concrete shell that separates the path from the water will weather from the high and low levels of the river, revealing its seasonal cycles. A small museum pays homage to historical events that took place along the site, specifically the Battle of the Thames in the War of 1812. The museum structure is partially submerged three meters below the average water level, providing the experience of descending into the river. Enclosed between the two ramps, a void contains a shallow pool of purified river water, allowing winter skating for visitors. Because of the pollution of the river's water, we located a water filtration system within the lower level of the structure, which pumps freshly purified water to the shallow pool. Our design intent is not only to rid the river of contaminants but also to display a stark contrast between the two bodies of water and to raise awareness of the river's current condition. The interplay of light and heavy and hard and soft materials emulates the relationship of humans to water.

14B

109

110

Lighthouse Point
spring 2001

Steven Evans, Photographer
original image: 16"x20" gelatin silver print

15

Lighthouse Point
43°03'53.2"N 80°59'54.0"W

111

*

112

LIFEtration
Soroush Arabi, Sara Baghbani Shenirani, Elizabeth Chong, Vlash Gjeka, Lucas Guong, Dana Gurevich, Gregorio Jimenez, Rachel Law, Tess Lecky, Marissa Liv, Daniela Lopez, Flora Mouchel, Konner Mitchener, Margaux Perrin, Alborz Razaritousi, Freedom Stone This project amalgamates two tropes, life and evanescence. The design concept of LIFEtration revolves around the cleansing, purification and filtration of water, evident through both literal means and educational gestures to promote the importance of filtration on this particular site. Located at the mouth of the river, the site is subject river runoff which has created an environment unsuitable for plant and animal life. LIFEtration proposes to remedy this situation through an intervention in the form of floating agriculture islands that work to rejuvenate plant life and provide shelter for fish. Artificial filtration systems are incorporated in the ramp system, providing an educational experience for users to see the system at work. This design gesture points towards the future of the site, emphasizing the complete rejuvenation of the landscape. There is space for recreation including communal seating and a gathering space for seasonal activities. The pathway opens towards the lake and becomes completely immersed in the water. This threshold emphasizes the importance of the site as a threshold where river and lake meet.

15A

113

114

Marshin' Around
Latoya Barrow, Adrian Chiu, Daniel Drab, Andres Guzman-Romero, Terence Jiakang Huang, Mashoor Ishraque, Sarah Lipsit, Oluwatobi Omisore, Nahal Rahnamaei, Artyom Savin, Keegan Toscano, Liam Van Steekelenburg, Garbo Jhu The path on lighthouse point, located at the mouth of the Thames River, creates for the viewer a moment of reflection through a juxtaposition of the current state of the river with the potential that it could reach. This proposal introduces recreational and educational activities on a site that is currently lacking in both. Boating and fishing equipment rentals are located here to encourage recreational fishing. Drawing more users to the site affords an opportunity to raise awareness on the condition of the wetlands and the river. The introduction of filtered and managed water on the site creates a sharp contrast to the polluted water that surrounds it and allows users to see and experience the state that the river was before and the state that it could reach. The over-scaled circular pathway represents the importance of regenerating a natural environment within a space that has experienced negative effects of pollution from agriculture and other causes. The region surrounding Lighthouse Point has been deforested and transformed into farmland for agriculture, leading to a severe loss of natural habitat. With human intervention on the land, the addition of man-made wetlands and iron oxide filtration systems provides a glimpse of the future of lighthouse point. A porous surface containing iron oxide magnetically attracts and captures the phosphates in the water. Phosphates result in lower oxygen levels, and thus by removing them the inner ring will now have normal oxygen levels ­ meaning the water is clean and filtered. This spot of filtered water is symbolic of the power that human intervention can have on the Thames River and Lake St. Clair.

15B

115

116

117

118

Endnotes
H2O_Thresholds: 1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thales, accessed 5 January 2016 2 Timothy Stock "The Waters of Metaphysics" in Water John Knechtel, Editor, Alphabet City / MIT, Cambridge, 2009. 3 http://www.home-water-works.org/indoor-use/showers, accessed 6 January 2016 4http://www.alternet.org/story/141751/how_much_water_do_you_use_ here's_some_quick_numbers, accessed 6 January 2016 5 The following material is taken from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Water_scarcity, accessed 6 January 2016. 6 http://waterfootprint.org/en/water-footprint/glossary/#BW, accessed 8 January 2016 7 http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/scarcity.shtml, accessed 6 January 2016 8 http://www.unicef.org/media/files/Joint_Monitoring_Report__17_July_2008.pdf, accessed 6 January 2016 9 http://www.unicef.org/media/media_44093.html, accessed 6 January 2016 10 http://academic.evergreen.edu/g/grossmaz/WORMKA/, accessed 6 January 2016 11 Lake - The Canadian Encyclopedia / www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/ en/article/lake/ 12http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/bad-water-third-worldconditions-on-first-nations-in-canada-1.3269500, accessed 8 January 2016 13http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/bad-water-third-worldconditions-on-first-nations-in-canada-1.3269500, accessed 6 January 2016 14 http://www.wwf.ca/conservation/freshwater/, accessed 6 January 2016. 15http://www.conservation-ontario.on.ca/about-us/conservationauthorities, accessed 6 January 2016. 16http://trca.on.ca/about/conservation-ontario-other-conservationauthorities.dot, accessed 6 January 2016 17 See http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page11105.aspx, accessed 6 January 2016. 18 See http://www.conservation-ontario.on.ca/what-we-do/healthyecosystems-and-people, accessed 6 January 2016. 19 See http://watershedcheckup.ca/images/FACT_SHEET_CA_WRCs.pdf Creating H2O_Thresholds: 1 See http://www.conservation-ontario.on.ca/about-us/conservationauthorities/ca-contact-list, accessed 9 January 2016. 2 George Kapelos and Steven Evans Course Studies ­ Tracking Ontario's Thames: An Exploration of the River Museum London (Ontario) 2002. 3 George Kapelos and Steven Evans Course Studies ­ Tracking Ontario's Thames: An Exploration of the River Museum London (Ontario) 2002.

Aknowledgements
Event Photos
Lisa Boulatova  pages: 2, 3, 6, 9, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, (20-21), 22,  24, (116) Yvonne Bambrick  pages: 12, 15, 16, (20-21), (116), 118, 120 Angela Murphy  pages: 10, (116)

Special Thanks
The Department of Architectural Science thanks Ryerson Urban Water in the Faculty of Science, Imogen Coe, Dean, and Angela Murphy, Manager. This project could not have been undertaken without the masterful photography of the Thames River taken in 2000-2001 by Steven Evans (pictured left with George Kapelos)

119

Master Students

Graduate students from the Department of Architectural Science assisted with the development of 2016 Collaborative Exercise prior to the event, and participated as Section Facilitators during the five-day event. Faculty members from the Department of Architectural Science participated as Design Champions, providing advice and support to student teams. A number of guests were invited to participate as Design Champions and observers. Support for this project was received from Ryerson Urban Water in the Faculty of Science at Ryerson University The following graduate students took leadership roles in the development of 2016 Collaborative Exercise before and during the event: Project lead / research: Antone Frisina Research / project coordinator: Samuel Vandersluis Research / graphics: Saman Soleimani-Deilamani

CEx16 would like to thank the following graduate students and faculties for their support of the collaborate exercise 2016 and providing guidance and critics to students. Without their time and effort 2016 Collaborative Exercise would not have been possible. Section 1 Shiloh Lazar & Vera Straka Section 2 Danielle Van Ooteghem & Cheryl Atkinson Section 3 David Kotewicz & Leila Farah Section 4 Chelsea Campbell & Ivan Martinovic Section 5  Pritish Pathak & Marco Polo Section 6 Andrew Chiu & Edmond Binjaku Section 7 Hovag Kara-Yacoubian & Arthur Wrigglesworth Section 8 Ashely Adams & Scott Sorli Section 9  Zohra Akbari & Robert Coelho Section 10  Sarah Ghorashi & Frank Hamilton Section 11  Jessica Walker & Jurij Leshchyshyn Section 12  Babak Teimoori & Barush Zone Section 13 Steve Deboyrie & Vincent Hui Section 14  Marwa Tawfiq & Van Thi Diep Section 15 Nathaniel Mendiola & Cheryle Bradbee

119

120 Department of Architectural Science
Faculty of Engineering & Architectural Science Ryerson University 325 Church Street, Toronto, ON, Canada

CEx1 6
George Thomas Kapelos, Editor

An Architecture of Water: Creating H2O thresholds
A record of student design outcomes of the 2016 Collaborative Exercise held at the Department of Architectural Science, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, January 2016.

© 2017

