Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the screening of dioxins in fish samples
Elaine Yu-Lan Chen
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Environmental Sciences Commons Recommended Citation
Yu-Lan Chen, Elaine, "Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the screening of dioxins in fish samples" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 169.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

ENZYME-LINKED IMMUNOSORBENT ASSAY (ELISA) FOR THE SCREENING OF DIOXINS IN FISH SAMPLES

by Elaine Yu-Lan Chen B.Sc.(Hons), University of Toronto, 2004

A thesis presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the Program of Environmental Applied Science and Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008 © (Elaine Yu-Lan Chen) 2008

~ROPERTVOF

RYERSON:!\N'VERSITY UBRAfW
~."

:\

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

11

ABSTRACT

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the screening of dioxins in fish samples

Elaine Yu-Lan Chen Master of Applied Science Environmental Applied Science and Management Ryerson University

2008
Dioxins are environmental contaminants that are toxic to humans. The conventional analytical method for dioxins, gas chromatography - high resolution mass spectrometry, is extremely time-consuming and expensive. Research is needed to find alternative methods that will increase sample throughput while decreasing time and costs associated with dioxin detection. Dioxins readily accumulate in fish tissue and fish are a common food source for humans. Thus, the goal of this research was to develop a screening technique for dioxins in fish samples using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Three approaches, each with a different fish sample purification method but all using ELISA detection, were undertaken. This research concluded that the approach of Florisil® cleanup followed by ELISA detection (Florisil®-ELISA) was suitable as a screening technique. The other two approaches, one using gel permeation chromatography (GPC-ELISA) and the other using acid silica and carbon columns (acid silica/carbon-ELISA) for fish sample cleanup, were not suitable.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I am grateful for the support, encouragement, direction and intellectual input of my academic supervisors, Dr. James Li and Dr. Ching Lo. I would like to thank Dr. Ray Clement, Dr. Eric Reiner, and Barry Ali for their helpful advice, guidance and resources throughout the course of this research. I acknowledge the support of Frank Tomassini and Dr. PK Misra of this research. This research was also supported by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council. The analytical assistance by all staff from the Ontario Ministry of the Environment's Bioassay Laboratory and Biota and Sediments Unit is gratefully acknowledged. Special thanks to Fengrong Sun, Wei Zhang, Charles Wang, Ngoc An Vu, and Kechun Wu for their analytical assistance. Lastly, I would like to thank my committee members, Dr. Grace Luk and Dr. Lynda McCarthy, and the chair of the committee, Dr. Vadim Bostan, for their contributions. I would like to acknowledge the Ontario Ministry of the Environment's Environmental Monitoring and Reporting Branch and Laboratory Services Branch for financially supporting this research from 2006-2007. This research was further supported in 2007-2008 by the Ontario Ministry of the Environment's Best in Science Program. During my study, I was supported through a Ryerson Graduate Scholarship and a Research Assistantship by Dr. James Li.

IV

This thesis is dedicated to my parents, Kuo-Hsing Chen and Louisa Chen.

v

