Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2011

Development of a sustainable and inclusive solid waste management system in Colombia
Jessica Edmonds
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Environmental Sciences Commons Recommended Citation
Edmonds, Jessica, "Development of a sustainable and inclusive solid waste management system in Colombia" (2011). Theses and dissertations. Paper 833.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

        DEVELOPMENT OF A SUSTAINABLE AND INCLUSIVE SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT   SYSTEM IN COLOMBIA        By  Jessica Edmonds  (BASc honours in Ecology, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana de Bogotá, Colombia, 2007)        A Thesis  presented to Ryerson University  in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of    Master of Applied Science   in the program of  Environmental Applied Science and Management          Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2011  ©Jessica Edmonds 2011      

      AUTHORS DECLARATION    I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.     I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the  purpose of scholarly research.      _____________________________  Jessica Edmonds        I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other  means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of  scholarly research.      _____________________________  Jessica Edmonds             

ii

      DEVELOPMENT OF A SUSTAINABLE AND INCLUSIVE SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN  COLOMBIA 
© Jessica Edmonds, 2011 

Master of Applied Science   In the program of  Environmental Applied Science and Management      Abstract of Thesis    Managing solid waste is a pressing environmental issue worldwide. This is especially observed  in developing countries, where the main concern is to provide the service of waste collection,  usually lacking a formal recycling program. Instead, recycling is often conducted by an informal  sector composed of recyclersbytrade. What has been found is that the current informal  recycling sector -- if approached differently -- can offer a financially viable and an  environmentally and culturally sound solution. A case study approach was chosen and  questionnaires were conducted with recyclersbytrade and dealers in Cali, Colombia. An  interview was conducted with the President of the Recyclers' Association of Bogotá, Colombia.  A normative system is proposed as an alternative contextbased solution in developing  countries that focuses on the inclusion of organized recyclersbytrade into the formal solid  waste management in order to increase recycling rates, extend the lifespan of landfills and  improve the living and working conditions of this informal recycling sector.

iii

    Acknowledgements    I would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr. Doug Banting for his guidance and support.    I would like to thank the CiViSOL Foundation for their inspiration and support. I would also like  to acknowledge the President of the Recyclers' Association of Bogotá, and all the recyclersby trade and dealers in Cali, who cooperated and participated in the interviews.       Special thanks to Jonny, mama, Sharoni and Saki for always being there for me.                                       

iv

    Table of Contents    Chapter 1. Introduction  1 Chapter 2. International municipal solid waste variations and the green agenda's   4                    direction  2.1 Comparison of municipal solid waste generation and composition between and   4       within countries   2.2 Review of solid waste management systems 11 2.2.1 Waste collection systems  12 2.2.2 Transfer stations  14 2.2.3 Waste disposal systems  15 2.2.3.1 Landfilling  15 2.2.3.2 Incineration  17 2.2.3.3 Composting  17 2.2.3.4 Anaerobic treatment 18 2.2.3.5 Recycling system  18 2.3 Green agenda in solid waste management systems  24    Chapter 3. Review of informal recycling considering the social, economic,   26                     environmental, political, technical and organizational aspects   3.1 Social aspects of informal recycling  26 3.2 Economic factors of informal recycling  28 3.3 Environmental and health aspects of informal recycling 31 3.4 Political aspects of informal recycling  32 3.5 Technical aspects of informal recycling  34 3.6 Organizational aspects of informal recycling  35 3.6.1 Cooperative system   36 Chapter 4. Sustainable and inclusive solid waste management systems   38 4.1 Approaches to informal recycling   38 4.2 Legal and economic aspects influencing the integration of the informal recycling   43       sector  4.3 Worldwide initiatives working towards intersector integration in SWMS  44 4.4 Models proposed in published literature  47 Chapter 5. Problem, objectives and methodology  53 5.1 Problem  53 5.2 Objectives  55 5.3 Methodology  55 Chapter 6. Case study  59 6.1 Colombia's waste generation and composition and its current SWMS, with special  59       focus on Bogotá    6.2 The recycling system in Colombia and its social component     68  6.3 Policy development regarding recyclersbytrade in Colombia led by CiViSOL     75  Chapter 7. Results and discussion    78  v

7.1 Results  7.2 Discussion  Chapter 8. Conclusions: A Normative system for the inclusion of recyclersbytrade's                        organizations in a sustainable solid waste management in Colombia  Appendices   Bibliography                                                   

   78   87  95 109 113

vi

    List of Tables  Table 1. View of solid waste generation worldwide   Table 2. Waste composition in London, Canada, Bogotá, Colombia and Kumasi, Ghana.   Table 3. Worldwide perspective of MSW composition  Table 4. Integration success of informal recycling system into formal waste management                 associated with the interaction of the political context, technology employed,                  social setting and organizational aspects   Table 5. Data sources regarding the case study Table 6. Annual expected growth of the disposed waste  Table 7. The litigation history in Colombia regarding the informal recycling sector  Table 8. Results from the questionnaires conducted to recyclersbytrade in Cali  Table 9. Lowest and highest values of sale of PRM reported by recyclersbytrade in Cali  Table 10. The prices of purchase and sale of PRM according to dealers  Table 11. Comparison of value of sale of recyclable materials                                      vii 4 6 7 49

57 66 77 79 80 83 84

    List of Figures  Figure 1. Material resource balance Figure 2. Estimated number of waste pickers (millions)  Figure 3. Cycle of capital in the integration of the informal recycling sector in an                    inclusive society  Figure 4. Integrated sustainable waste management Figure 5. Final disposal methods in the departments of Colombia   Figure 6. Distribution pattern by income level in Bogotá, Colombia Figure 7. Doña Juana sanitary landfill and the distribution of waste by zones  Figure 8. Waste characterization at Doña Juana landfill in Bogotá, Colombia  Figure 9. Household % PRM by income level  Figure 10. Percentages of PRM by income level Figure 11. Quantity of PRM by locality  Figure 12. Distribution of regional recyclers' organizations part of the ANR  Figure 13. Street waste pickers collecting PRM Figure 14. Value of sale per kilogram of plastic by category  Figure 15. Value of sale per kilogram of aluminium by category  Figure 16. Value of sale of recyclable materials at the Alqueria transfer station during                        the month of February, 2011.  Figure 17. The current recycling system in Colombia  Figure 18. The current recycling system in Bogotá  Figure 19. The Different Dimensions and Aspects that Constitute the Normative                      System   Figure 20. The proposed normative system for the inclusion of recyclersbytrade's                             organizations in a sustainable solid waste management in Colombia                      19 23 41 50 60 63 64 65 66 67 68 70 74 81 82 83 96 97 98 100

viii

    List of Appendices  Appendix A. Photographs of waste pickers and their different modes of                          transportation   Appendix B. Questionnaire for recyclersbytrade and dealers Cali (March 2011)   Appendix C. Interview to the president of ARB. Monday, March 22, 2011 Appendix D. Photographs of the recycling operation at the Alqueria transfer                          station                                              109 110 111 111

ix

    Abbreviations     ANR  ARB  ASE  CBO  CIIA  DSD  GFE  GIS  IPCC  ISWM  National Association of Recyclers (Asociación Nacional de Recicladores)  Recyclers' Association of Bogotá (Asociación de Recicladores de Bogotá)  Areas of Exclusive Service (Areas de Servicio Exclusivo) Community Based Organizations  Engineering Centre for Research of Los Anders University (Centro de Investigación de  Ingenieria de los Andes)  Duales System Deutschland  Garbage for Eggs   Geographic Information System   Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change  Integrated Sustainable Waste Management 

MAVDT  Ministry of the Environment, Housing and Territorial Development (Ministerio de  Ambiente, Vivienda, Desarrollo y Territorio)  MSW  Municipal Solid Waste   NGO  NLGP  PGIRS  PRM  RRS  RSW  Nongovernmental organizations   Nonlinear Lexicographic Goal Programming   Integral Solid Waste Management Plan (Plan de Gestión Integral de Residuos Sólidos)  Potentially Recyclable Materials   Selective Micro Routes (Ruta de Recolección Selectiva)  Residential Solid Waste  

SISWMS  Sustainable and Inclusive Solid Waste Management System   SUI  SWMS  UAESP    Unique Information System of Public Services of Colombia (Sistema Único de  Información de Servicios Públicos)  Solid Waste Management Systems   Special Administrative Unit of Public Services (Unidad Administrativa Especial de  Servicios Públicos de Bogotá) 

x

Chapter 1. Introduction   Currently, waste is an increasing issue and creative management decisions are needed to  address this environmental problem, particularly in the developing world where conditions may  not be addressed in the same way as in wealthier countries.   Worldwide, Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) has increased and with it, higher pressure has  been placed on Solid Waste Management Systems (SWMS). This is due to the overall growing  population best categorized as a "consumptionoriented society", with less conscientious  consumption patterns and with higher living standards. In addition, there has been an increase  in packaging and lower material biodegradability, especially among plastics (Messineo and  Panno, 2008; Amponsah et al. 2009). Construction and demolition processes, along with the  generation of waste from households and private and public service establishments, have also  increased due to population growth and urban expansion (Roper, 2006). In 2001, the global  production of MSW was estimated to be 1.5 billion tons and since then, it has grown  considerably (Themelis and Ulloa, 2007).    Currently, the conventional and broadly used waste management practices around the  world have been documented to cause numerous environmental problems. According to Cen et  al. (2007), costly MSW incineration plants are considered a problem due to the production of  noxious emissions. On the other hand, landfilling contaminates the soil and ground water, while  emitting greenhouse gases and degrading the landscape (Sharholy et al. 2008). Thus, it is of  great importance to maximize reuse and repair practices, as well as overall recycling and  composting activities which may subsequently reduce the amount of waste for collection and  disposal, increase the lifetime of landfills, reduce transportation costs and offset the use of  primary raw materials, if thoughtfully implemented. There may be other concerns that would  also benefit society and specific communities as MSW is more carefully managed.   In the developed world, SWMS have been adopted for MSW, with a broader intention of  reducing resource consumption and increasing current recycling rates. On the other hand, the  developing world is characterized by presenting low standards regarding its SWMS: improper  disposal methods, insufficient waste collection coverage and overall inefficient practices  1

(Lardinois and van de Klundert 1995; Armijo et al. 2002; Cheeseman et al. 2006; Themelis and  Ulloa, 2007; Amponsah et al. 2009). The main concern in these countries is to provide the basic  service of garbage removal, not recognizing the gains provided by a formal recycling program.  Instead, if recycling exists it is often performed by an informal sector composed of recyclersby trade or waste pickers (Cheeseman et al. 2006). To date, in developing countries, SWMS is a  precarious practice compared to the developed world. However, copying procedures and  models for SWMS from these developed countries has not provided successful results.    In the face of rising poverty levels in the developing world and the knowledge of the  current environmental impacts associated with waste management, environmental and social  goals in this field have been receiving more attention. International interest has been raised by  the work of Cheeseman et al. (2006), Jaffe and Nas (2004), Gutberlet (2008) in Brazil, Beukering  (1994) and Dikshit et al (2006) in India and Armijo et al. (2002) in Mexico.  These countries have  responded due to the increasing volume of MSW, as well as international awareness of  sustainability as a goal, and the plight of their urban poor. What has been found is that the  current informal recycling sector -- if approached differently -- can offer an environmentally  and culturally sound solution. SWMS must be able to deal with a growing awareness of  environmental issues and the scarce budget allocated to waste management in developing  countries.   It has been observed that integration of the informal recycling sector into a formal  SWMS can increase the efficiency and working conditions of those involved (Cheeseman et al.  2006). Successful initiatives have been achieved when a combination of stakeholders from the  public and private sectors come together cooperatively with nongovernmental organizations  (NGO) and community based organizations (CBO). These partnerships are seen to be important  in institutionalizing and legalizing the informal sector's activities, as well as generating stable  and longterm solutions (Lardinois and van de Klundert, 1995). However, the longterm  sustainability of the integration of the informal sector into the formal SWMS remains to be  demonstrated, suggesting the need to model their SWMS, including their context, capacity and  support structure (Anschutz et al. 2006).    2

The purpose of this research is to evaluate opportunities for increasing recycling rates in  developing countries by providing a contextbased solution which works towards the inclusion  of the informal recycling sector into a formal SWMS. For the purpose of this thesis research, a  case study approach has been chosen, to take into consideration the unique circumstances  present in a specific context. The case study takes place in Colombia, where data were made  available by the cooperativeness of local authorities and others representing the major  stakeholders in SWM.  The details of the specific data and the nature of the case study are  presented later.                                        3

Chapter 2. International Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Variations and the Green Agenda's  Direction     The following chapter describes the existing differences between waste generation and  composition amid developing and developed countries. A review of the various components of  solid waste management system is also presented, followed by the goals of the green agenda  regarding solid waste management.     2.1 Comparison of Municipal Solid Waste Generation and Composition between and  within Countries     As  a  result  of  economic  development,  population  growth  and  higher  consumption  levels,  MSW  continues  to  be  generated  at  an  alarming  rate;  however,  there  are  significant  differences  among  various  countries.   According  to  Cointreau  (2006),  with  higher  income  levels  there  is  a  higher production of waste (Table 1).     Table 1. Solid Waste Generation Worldwide (Cointreau, 2006) 
  Mixed Urban Waste of  Large City (kg/capita/day) Residential Waste Only   (kg/capita/day)  Low Income   Country  0.5 ­ 0.75  0.25 ­ 0.45  Middle Income   Country  0.55 ­ 1.1  0.35 ­ 0.65  High Income   Country  0.75 ­ 2.2  0.55 ­ 1.0 

  Many studies have been carried out relating income levels of a population with its MSW  generation to enable development of mathematical models. These have proven to be of some  use for predicting Residential Solid Waste (RSW) production. A study carried out in Mexicali by  Armijo et al. (2008), analyzed the differences among three distinct socioeconomic strata and  the waste production rates and composition. It was observed that the average RSW generation  and composition differs among the different socioeconomic strata, showing that the medium  socioeconomic level presented the highest waste generation rate. Also, in regards to family  4

typology, it was observed that the nuclear family (composed by parents and unmarried  children) presented the highest waste production.   Orccosupa (2002) carried out a similar study in the municipality in Peñalolen, Chile. In  this study, the relationship between the RSW generation per capita and socioeconomic factors  was analyzed. The "polluter pays" principle was considered throughout his work, as municipal  waste management service  unlike electricity or water services  is the only one that charges  a standard rate, without considering the actual demands placed on the service. The relationship  was found to be strong between the per capita generation of RSW and the per capita gross  income, which translates into an expected increase of RSW generation per capita, to result  from the expected economic growth in subsequent years. It was also noted that waste  management focused on a preventive principle which required the conjunct work of three  stakeholders: producers aiming to include cleaner production, responsible consumers and the  government as a regulator and implementer of incentives and sanctions (Orccosupa, 2002).   The composition of waste, especially the presence of packaging, is also affected by  income level and the degree of industrialization. This phenomenon has shown changes  throughout the years. Such is the case of the USA, whose waste in 1960 was 12.3% (% by wet  mass) metals and only 0.4% plastics, compared to 1996 with 9.4% plastics and only 7.7% metals  (Conitreau, 2006). In 2007, according to the reported waste composition data at landfills and  waste to energy facilities --after recycling and composting activities have taken place-- plastics  accounted for 31.4% and metals 2.9% (Barlaz and Staley, 2009).  According to Dahlen and Lagerkvist (2008), the main components analyzed in waste  composition studies are diverse: biodegradable waste (consisting of yard waste and animal  refuse); paper and cardboard; plastics; glass; metals (ferrous and nonferrous); wood; textiles  and leather; hazardous waste (including medical waste and special waste); other organics  (miscellaneous combustibles); other inorganics (miscellaneous noncombustibles, ceramics and  minerals) and residue.  Table  2  shows  the  composition  of  waste  from  three  cities  in  Canada,  Colombia  and  Ghana.  Although  it  is  not  possible  to  extrapolate  these  values  to  all  the  developed  and  5

developing  countries,  with  different  population  densities  and  conditions,  this  reflects  the  relationship  between  the  type  of  waste  generated  by  a  country  and  the  mean  living  standards  of its inhabitants. It is noted that organic waste represents the main component for Bogotá and  Kumasi,  double  the  amount  from  London.  Another  component  that  shows  differentiation  is  paper,  highlighting  the  value  in  London  three  times  higher  than  Bogotá  and  ten  times  higher  than  Kumasi.  The  values  of  metals  and  glass  in  London  are  three  and  six  times  respectively  higher compared to Bogotá and Kumasi.     Table 2. Waste Composition in London, Canada, Bogotá, Colombia and Kumasi, Ghana.   Waste component  London, ON  Bogotá, Colombia***  Kumasi, Ghana**  Canada**  GDP (millions of USD)*  $1 336 067  $230 844  $15 619  Biodegradable/Organic %  30.00  61.58  64.00  Paper %  32.00 9.68  3.00 Plastics %  10.00 19.71  4.00 Metals %  3.00 1.13 1.00 Glass %  6.00 1.72   Wood %    1.03  3.00  Textile %    4.45  3.00  Others %  19.00  0.50 (leather + clays + bricks)    Inert %    0.38 (minerals)  22.00  (*World Bank, 2009; **Amponsah et al. 2009; ***SCS Engineers, 2007)    Similar results comparing low, middle and highincome countries and their waste  composition have been reported by Cointreau (2006), which provide similar quantities and the  same tendencies as presented above, but provide some further details (Table 3).   There are evident differences between the socioeconomic conditions of developed and  developing countries. For instance, as a result of a lower biodegradable content in waste from  higher income countries, the moisture level is lower and the calorific value is higher. This  differential accounts in part for the viability of incineration as a final disposal method in high  income countries.    6

Table 3. Worldwide Perspective of MSW Composition (Cointreau, 2006)  Waste component  Biodegradable %  Paper and cardboard %  Plastic %  Metal %  Glass %  Rubber, Miscellaneous %  Fines % (ash, broken glass, sand)  Moisture %  Density in Trucks kg/m3  Lower Heating Kcal/kg    Low Income   Country  40 to 85  1 to 10  1 to 11  1 to 5  1 to 10 1 to 3 15 to 50 40 to 80 250 to 500  800 to 1100  Middle Income   Country  20 to 65  15 to 40  2 to 13  1 to 5  1 to 10 1 to 5 15 to 40 40 to 60 170 to 330  1000 to 1500  High Income   Country  7 to 55  15 to 50  2 to 20  3 to 13  4 to 10  2 to 12  5 to 20  20 to 35  120 to 200  1500 to 2700 

In  the  developed  world,  SWMS  were  previously  concerned  with  environmental  health  protection  including  human  safety  considerations  and  the  reduction  of  environmental  impact.  Currently,  they  have  been  centred  on  the  optimization  of  SWMS  practices  with  a  broader  intention  of  reducing  resource  consumption.  In  addition,  political  pressure  triggered  by  public  opposition to landfilling, has pushed the MSW agenda towards higher recycling rates (Armijo et  al. 2002; Anschutz et al. 2006).   In these countries, the sophisticated and costly recycling practices are part of the formal  SWMS, achieving up to 50% recycling rates. Such is the case of the USA with an overall recycling  rate  of  32.5%,  which  is  related  to  curbside  recycling  programs  serving  51%  of  the  population  (Bohm  et  al.  2010).  Similarly,  Canadian  cities  like  London  and  Toronto  have  achieved  40%  and  44% recycling rates as a result of a series of initiatives. These initiatives include the introduction  of  the  blue  bin  recycling  system,  curbside  recycling,  selfmanagement  of  yard  waste  programs,  and electronics recycling depots, among others (Amponsah et al. 2009; City of Toronto, 2010).   The  European  Union  perceives  SWMS  as  fundamental  issues  relating  to  sustainable  development.  Consequently,  the  European  Commission  published  New  Waste  Directive  legislation  in  2008.  This  legislation  seeks  to  encourage  reuse  and  recycling  practices,  as  well  as  environmental  health  through  energy  recovery  and  the  reduction  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  7

while  focusing  on  waste  prevention.   Such  are  the  cases  of  Austria  and  the  Netherlands,  where  they  have  implemented  the  treatment  of  biodegradables  by  providing  decomposable  bins  to  insure  source  separation.  Other  European  Union  member  states  have  put  into  practice  economic  measures,  such  as  the  "PayAsYouThrow"  charges,  as  well  as  incentives  for  the  diversion  of  the  biodegradable  fraction  of  MSW.  The  Landfill Allowance  Trading  System  applied  in  the  United  Kingdom  increased  the  waste  diversion  through  transferable  allowances  by  selecting  inexpensive  and  convenient  sites  to  do  so.  In  addition,  an  extended  producer  responsibility  system,  such  as  the  Duales  System  Deutschland  (DSD)  (for  packaging  waste  in  Germany)  has  increased  the  reuse  and  recycling  rates.  Part  of  this  system  consists  of  labelling  the packaging materials for collection purposes. The labelling system allows the identification of  the  specific  recycling  process  each  packaging  material  will  subsequently  go  through  (Chang  et  al. 2011).    In  contrast,  the  developing  world  is  characterized  by  rapid  population  growth,  rural  migration  to  cities  and  an  overall  lowskilled  population,  which  results  in  the  creation  of  unplanned  settlements  that  lack  proper  infrastructure  and  which  are  frequently  located  in  disasterprone  regions.  This  situation  often  sets  low  standards  regarding  its  SWMS:  improper  disposal  methods  such  as  open  dumps,  insufficient  waste  collection  coverage  and  inadequate  operation  (Cheeseman  et  al.  2006;  Amponsah  et  al.  2009).  These  low  standards  in  turn  hinder  developing countries' capacities to handle properly the increasing volume of MSW (Armijo et al.  2002).  This  is  usually  a  result  of  a  lack  of  finance,  poor  environmental  controls  and  deficiencies  in  the  regulatory  framework,  as  well  as  scarce  sanitation  measures  (Lardinois  and  van  de  Klundert, 1995).  In addition, illegal dumping of waste in waterbodies or open lands, as well as burning of  waste can occur in areas that lack waste collection service, which could subsequently impose  environmental and human health risks (Medina, 2000). The main concern in these countries is  to provide the basic service of garbage collection, while lacking the formal recycling practice  promoted by the different jurisdictions and supported by a population of knowledgeable  residents, as seen in developed countries.  Instead, it is performed by an informal sector  8

composed by recyclersbytrade or waste pickers and itinerant waste buyers. Some developing  countries have achieved high recycling rates, which oscillate between 20% and 50%, with a high  percentage being contributed by the informal recycling sector. An exceptional case was  observed in Cairo which had an 80% recycling rate (Cheeseman et al. 2006).   The socioeconomic characteristics of a population have been found to play an important  role in determining the nature of SWMS. The observed relationship between waste  constituents and high and low income levels, has suggested a link among waste composition,  generation and broader socioeconomic conditions (Armijo et al. 2008). Thus, it has been  implied that for planning SWMS strategies for a specific region, it is necessary to possess a deep  understanding of the population's characteristics. Such characteristics include: income and  consumption levels, the quantity and composition of waste generated, operating costs,  education and values, as well as the sociocultural aspects and the policies related to MSW  (Burnley, 2006; Dahlen et al. 2007).   Grodzinska et al. (2006) have suggested that public consent and the degree of  involvement directly affect the effectiveness of waste management goals, especially when  focusing on recycling efforts. This is due to the importance of understanding the principles of  source separation of recyclable materials --free of impurities -- and their proper placement.   According to Cointreau (2006), estimations regarding the price ranges of waste  management in low middle and highincome countries, are a function of the average GNP.  Although the per capita workforce costs and waste generation in developing countries are low,  the price of waste management services --including collection, transportation and sanitary  landfill as final disposal method-- are not proportionally low. The analysis of the costs as a  percentage of personal income shows that waste management services in developing countries  are costly even with prevailing inefficient operations (Cointreau, 2006).   A study carried out in six municipalities in Sweden that exhibited similar socioeconomic  characteristics  but  different  waste  collection  systems,  analyzed  the  waste  generation  and  composition  per  person  (Dahlen  et  al.  2007).  Three  municipalities  had  dropoff  systems  of  sorted  recyclables;  two  municipalities  had  extensive  curbside  collection  of  sorted  recyclables  9

including  biodegradables,  and  one  municipality  had  curbside  collection  of  dry  recyclables.  The  results  indicated  that  more  recyclables  were  collected  with  curbside  collection  systems  compared to dropoffs. It was also observed that there was an increase of dry recyclables, when  biodegradable  material  was  collected  separately  in  the  curbside  collection  system.  Although  weightbased billing decreased the amount of delivered household waste, it was suspected that  improper paths, such as illegal dumping or burning of waste were developed.  A  very  different  scenario  took  place  in  Pakistan  (Anshutz  and  van  de  Klundert,  2001).  There,  the  city's  waste  managers  could  not  understand  how,  after  implementing  penalizing  measures,  residents  would  still  not  place  the  waste  put  out  for  collection  properly.  It  was  only  with  the  intervention  of  an  NGO  that  they  found  that  men  rejected  the  task  of  waste  handling,  as  they  viewed  it  as  a  dirty  job  relegated by  social  norms  to  women.  Simultaneously,  the  seclusion  imposed  on  women  did  not  allow  them  to  exit  their  homes  nor  to  be  in  contact  with  men, so taking household waste out for collection was not an option.  The NGO's contextbased  solution  consisted  of  the  collaboration  of  children  that  could  be  from  the  households  or  elsewhere, in which case they would be remunerated.  Similar  sociocultural  aspects  have  been  observed  to  influence  waste  management  in  developing  countries  like  Thailand.  In  this  country,  waste  handling  at  the  household  level  is  regularly a task undertaken by servants and house cleaners, who lack education and awareness  regarding  source  separation.  This  situation  is  worsened  by  the  existence  of  a  marked  socio economic  differentiation,  in  which  no  recycling  behaviours  or  incentives  exist  (Mongkolnchaiarunya, 2005).   The  above  characteristics  of  waste,  the  socioeconomic  conditions  and  the  sociocultural  characteristics  of  a  population  --  illustrated  in  the  Swedish,  Pakistani  and  Thai  examples  --  are  reminders  of  the  importance  of  the  contextbased  approach.  In  order  to  develop  and  implement  an  appropriate  SWMS,  it  would  seem  wise  to  take  into  account  the  environment,  the waste characteristics and the population's sociocultural and socioeconomic opportunities.    It  would  seem  that  attempts  to  import  and  implement  the  SWMS  of  developing  countries,  usually  involve  sophisticated  and  costly  technologies.  Negative  results  have  been  10

observed  when  applying  these  foreign  systems  that  seem  to  not  match  the  context  and  needs  of  developing  countries.  These  negative  results  could  be  associated  in  the  first  place  with  the  different  characteristics  of  waste  composition.  There  are  higher  organic  matter  and  moisture  levels  in  the  waste  stream  of  developing  countries  compared  to  developed  countries  which  consequently affects the efficiency of technologies. Such is the case of incineration plants or in vessel composting, which requires electrical power and expensive equipment for its operations.  Similarly,  a  high  degree  of  public  involvement  is  required  for  a  large  scale  recycling  system  to  function,  which  is  generally  a  challenging  task  to  achieve  even  in  developing  countries  (Jaffe  and Nas, 2004).  According to Muraleedharan et al. (1996) SWMS should be perceived as a result of rapid  urban  growth,  instead  of  a  solely  technical  problem  concerning  collection  and  disposal.  A  broader  perspective  that  includes  the  sociocultural  and  economic  aspects  of  a  given  population could elucidate the various limitations and problems present in waste management.   It  is  important  to  understand  that  due  to  the  different  circumstances  as  described  in  the  research  literature,  developing  countries  entail  distinctive  situations  regarding  their  SWMS,  than  those  applied  in  developed  countries.   A  model  that  is  sensitive  to  local  social  conditions  would  therefore  be  seen  to  facilitate  introduction  of  sustainable  and  inclusive  SWMS  in  developing countries.    2.2 Review of Solid Waste Management Systems    Solid waste can be categorized according to its source, such as industrial, hazardous,  agricultural, medical or municipal. Municipal solid waste encompasses all the discarded  materials which result from the household, industrial, institutional and commercial activities of  a community (Pitchel, 2005). It is therefore important that waste management takes under  consideration the diverse nature of MSW which results from the various sources.       11

Solid waste management is defined by Eliassen et al. (1977) to include procedures,  values and community decisionmaking infrastructure:                   The field associated with the management of MSW regarding its  generation, storage, collection, transfer, processing and final  disposal, in a way that is in accord with the best principles of  public health, economics, engineering, conservation, aesthetics,  and other environmental considerations. In addition, it includes  all administrative, financial, legal, planning, and engineering  functions involved in solid waste (Eliassen et al. 1977).  

If SWMS are to be tailored to the needs and characteristics of a given community, then  aspects such as financial resources, population size, physical infrastructure, as well as the  volume and composition of solid waste would need to be taken into account (Pitchel, 2005). In  addition, the design of the suitable waste treatment and collection plans and strategies, must  be accompanied by awareness campaigns directed to the community, when implementing a  SWMS (Calvo et al. 2009).   Sustainability goals are the current focus for many environmental concerns, including  the designing, planning and operating of SWMS. These goals include socially sound solutions,  maximization of recycling efforts, environmental conservation and the optimization of  renewable energy supplies, while being costeffective (Chang et al. 2011). The main  components of Municipal Solid Waste Management Systems have been described in a number  of contexts, from collection systems to waste disposal systems.    2.2.1 Waste Collection Systems    The literature suggests that one of the first steps in SWMS for mixed or sourceseparated waste  is collection. The latest advancements in waste collection include the collection of organics  (including yard waste) and other recyclable materials, as well as hazardous waste. Options for  12

consideration would seem to include the frequency of collection, the prospects and  impediments for source separation, the technology of the vehicles (from lowtech to garbage  trucks) and waste storage containers and their capacity. Particular attention is paid to the  frequency of collection, as it has been reported that the costs increase with higher collection  frequency (Pitchel, 2005).     In developed countries, the majority of MSW is collected (although "transfer depots"  are also used in some SWMS). The waste placed for collection must be properly sealed and its  loading is often done with fully mechanized systems. This is due to substantial labour costs and  a stringent policy framework that assures the minimization of occupational health risks (Armijo  et al. 2002). On the other hand, according to (Cheeseman et al. 2006) developing countries  present lower rates of MSW collection. In lowincome nations, collection varies from 30% to  60%, while in middleincome nations it ranges from 50% to 80%.  The loading of waste is  performed in a less mechanized way and the waste not collected poses public health risks  (Lardinois and van de Klundert, 1995; Amponsah et al. 2009).   There are mainly four types of waste collection described in the literature. These  include: curbside or alley collection; setback collection; backyard collection; and dropoff at  specified collection point.    In the first type, collection days must be scheduled and residents place garbage  containers at the roadside or in rear alleyways on the scheduled day. The collection crew  proceeds to empty the waste containers into the garbage truck. The residents are responsible  for returning the waste containers.   The second and third types share some similarities. According to Pitchel (2005) the  second type, collection days are not scheduled and a special collection crew is responsible for  carrying the waste containers from backyard to curb and back to their storage place, while the  emptying of containers is done by the collection crew. Residents are not involved in this  method, which increases the time of operation. In the third type, the collection crew goes onto  the property where containers can be transported directly to the garbage truck or emptied first  into a cart and then returned back to their storage place. As with the second type, residents are  13

not involved in this method. Setback collection and backyard collection are the most expensive  methods due to the timeconsuming procedure. In the last type, which is the least expensive  method, residents are responsible for transporting their waste to specific points that can be  transfer stations or disposal sites (Pitchel, 2005).   The designs of optimized routing models that can reduce the overall costs of collection  have been proposed in recent years in order to achieve optimal results; the routing system  must be tailored to the local conditions. Thus, the models need to consider the population  density, waste containers, waste generation and composition, economics, road network type  and length, collection vehicles, travel time, cultural aspects and geographic dimensions of each  of these. Other models focus on the reduction of greenhouse gases and fuel consumption.  Special attention has been paid to Geographic Information System (GIS) route modelling  software, which provides the opportunity to establish the minimum costdistance collection  routes for the transportation of MSW to its final disposal. ArcGIS Network Analyst is a GIS  application which offers routing, service area delineation and facility proximity analysis (Calvo  et al. 2009).  One example of the benefits of using GIS routing technology is provided by a study  carried out in Churriana de la Vega (cited by Calvo et al. 2009) to improve the waste collection  system in Spain. The proposed new collection route reduced the distance covered by trucks by  40.6% compared to the previous routes, optimizing the collection time, vehicle maintenance  and personnel costs.     2.2.2 Transfer Stations    Some municipalities mainly in the developed world transport the collected MSW to transfer  stations prior to taking it to the final disposal site. These can offer a variety of benefits such as  the chance to recover recyclables; lower garbage collectiontruck maintenance costs, as well as  the possibility of partially processing the waste. Transfer stations in the United States can vary  in size from small and medium--with the capacity to receive 100 to 500tons/day -- to large  14

transfers with the capacity to handle very large volumes and provide areas for storage (Pitchel,  2005).      2.2.3 Waste Disposal Systems    The following will describe some of the most common waste disposal methods. The description  will include the main characteristics of each final disposal method, as well as the negative  environmental effects associated with it.       2.2.3.1 Landfilling     Worldwide, a typical landfill contains many materials that could well be recycled or converted  into compost but instead they are buried in a landfill. This highlights the linear approach or  "cradleto grave" waste management model. In this model, resources are extracted and  transformed into products designed for a specific lifespan. Subsequently, the remainder are  disposed of in a "grave" that could be a landfill or an incinerator (McDonough and Brungart,  2002).  There is no planned sustainability for the materials.  Traditionally landfill dumps receive MSW, which is deposited into a site lacking a liner  and leachate collection system. Once its capacity has been reached, the dump's closure is  completed by capping it with a layer of soil. On the other hand, sanitary landfills are those with  a leachate collection and treatment systems, as well as an impermeable liner and cap. The  sanitary landfill is covered with an impermeable layer when its closure occurs. This technology  offers some protection against pollutant migration to adjacent soil, surface and groundwater.  The bioreactor landfill which applies newer technology recirculates the leachate throughout the  waste, in order to promote the decomposition of MSW (Themelis and Ulloa, 2007).  According to Cointreau (2006), landfilling presents various environmental impacts. It  contaminates the soil and ground water, degrades the landscape and releases all sorts of  noxious gases, while contributing to global warming. Such byproduct gases include carbon  15

monoxide, methane, benzene, carbon tetrachloride, ethylbenzene, dichloro methane and  toluene. In fact, it accounts for 618% of the total methane emissions worldwide. According to  Yip and Chua (2008), approximately 200 m3 of greenhouse gases are released into the  atmosphere, for each ton of MSW disposed of in a landfill. Also, methane is roughly 23 times  more potent as a greenhouse gas compared to carbon dioxide (Themelis and Ulloa, 2007). In  addition, adverse health effects might threaten surrounding communities, as a result of these  emissions (Sharholy et al. 2008; Yip and Chua, 2008).   In a study assessing 40 generic municipal waste management scenarios it was shown  that the best landfill scenario included source separation of recyclables and the diversion of the  organic fraction, which was sent to anaerobic digestion with electricity production (Christensen  et al. 2009).     Landfilling with Gas Harvesting    Biogas or landfill gas is a byproduct of landfilling. It is mainly composed of methane (around  54%) and carbon dioxide (around 46%), coupled with minimum quantities of hydrogen  sulphide, ammonia, water vapour and other trace components (Themelis and Ulloa, 2007). In  recent years, biogas harvesting has gained momentum. Due to the high level of methane the  collected biogas can be utilized as a sustainable energy source. As a result of this, biogas  harvesting can potentially offer environmental and financial advantages. It also offers social  benefits, as it can supply energy to surrounding communities (Yip and Chua, 2008).   The range of choices for landfill gas harvesting, ranges from simple combustion to  conversion to natural gas, direct use and electricity generation.  Usually the technology  involved in this process consists of a network of gas wells and blowers, flaring equipment,  landfill gas pretreatment facility and landfill gas reciprocating combustion engines (Yip and  Chua, 2008).      16

2.2.3.2 Incineration    Incineration is explained as:                  The use of MSW incineration plants is limited due to their high cost. However, a more  serious issue is associated with the generation of noxious emissions, such as dioxins which are  troublesome and persistent environmental pollutants (Cen et al. 2007). Incineration plants can  also contribute to the release of heavy metals, such as cadmium, mercury, arsenic and lead.  These metals can be discharged as fly ash or bottom ash as well as volatilized compounds,  which can travel long distances and pose high a risk to human health (Cointreau, 2002). In  addition, incineration promotes the generation of waste due to the constant level of MSW  required for its operation. This could potentially lead to a decline in recycling rates, and  disregard for waste reduction strategies (Cen et al. 2007).     2.2.3.3 Composting    A way to divert the organic portion of MSW from landfilling is through composting. This process  involves the enhancement of natural aerobic decomposition of organic matter by  microorganisms. The process of composting can be explained as:       17 The controlled burning of waste, which could be solid, liquid  or gaseous. The controlled conditions might include an  oxygenenriched combustion chamber under elevated  temperatures, the use of auxiliary fuel, and vigorous  agitation of incoming waste. The main goal of incineration is  to reduce the volume of waste, in order to extend the  lifespan of a landfill (Pitchel, 2005).  

                 

The conversion of the organic waste fraction of MSW into more  complex and stable material, which is performed through  controlled aerobic and biological processes. The final humuslike  product has aesthetically and hygienically safer qualities, as well  as a major reduction of its original odour. The final organic  product is usually utilized for agriculture and landscaping, as well  as in landfill operations as a daily cover material and for  remediation of contaminated sites (Pitchel, 2005). 

2.2.3.4 Anaerobic Treatment    The anaerobic treatment for waste management involves a series of procedures under  anaerobic conditions, using microorganisms to break down the biodegradable material. As a  result of this anaerobic process, carbon dioxide and methane are released as biogas. Due to the  fact that this process does not require the use of oxygen, electricity consumption is reduced.  In  addition, another major advantage of this method is the use of the biogas subproduct for  energy generation. Overall, this system involves four phases: hydrolysis, acidogenesis,  acetogenesis and methanogenesis; at the same time, specific mesophilic bacteria are linked to  each one of these steps. The temperature of the reactor is maintained at 35°C, due to the  mesofilic characteristics of the bacteria used (Spachos and Stamatis, 2011).    2.2.3.5 Recycling System    The broad area of interest of this research is recycling, defined by Beaukering (1994) as "the  means of reprocessing waste to recover an original raw material in order to avoid disposing of  potentially valuable materials, as well as offsetting energy usage and the consumption of virgin  materials".  18

In general, recycling encompasses different categories of solid waste recovery, such as  reuse and repair, closedloop and openloop recycling and energy recovery (Figure 1). The first  step in a recycling system usually observed in developed countries is source separation, which  implies the separation of  recyclables from the  waste stream. This first  step is usually performed  at the household level, as  well as commercial and  institutional  establishments (Pitchel  2005).     Pieter van Beukering 
  Beukering (1994)

Figure 1. Material Resource Balance

(1994) performed an economic analysis of the formal and informal entrepreneurs recovering  MSW in Bangalore, India. He found that reuse and repair is a method that reclaims material in  its finaluse form to be used in the same way, with only minor changes and with the use of  simple technology. Closedloop recycling recovers materials and reuses them in the same  manufacturing activity. Waste is reprocessed at the industrial level and does not enter the  waste market.  Openloop recycling --the most common type-- requires sophisticated  technology, which will process materials after they have entered the recycling market.   Energy recovery is considered the last choice when waste can neither be reused nor  recycled in a cost effective way. This process can entail the direct combustion of waste in order  to harvest energy, or the conversion of waste into intermediate fuel products (Beukering,  1994).   According to Anschutz and van de Klundert (2001) source separation, reuse and  recycling are of great importance in waste management; especially source separation, as it  increases the value of the collected recyclables. Similarly, the value of recyclable materials  increases with each step of the recycling chain. First, the retrieval of items from mixed waste  19

converts the retrieved items into a resource. Second, the sorting process increases the value of  recovered materials due to higher categorization. Such is the case of plastics separated by  subcategories such as highdensity polyethylene, polyethylene terephthalate and polyvinyl  chloride. Third, the accumulation of large volumes increases the profit margin. The last step  consists of preprocessing activities, such as washing, compacting, cutting, granulating and  baling (Cheeseman et al. 2006).      Factors Influencing Recycling     A study carried out in Israel assessing the financial viability of formal recycling --performed by  private or public sectors-- reported that when performed efficiently, municipal recycling was  less costly than conventional waste disposal methods. The results suggested that recycling  represented a financial advantage in over 50% of the municipalities in Israel, as it would reduce  approximately 11% of the costs of conventional disposal, while obtaining environmental  benefits (Lavee et al. 2009).   Recycling depends on the value added to discarded or secondary materials, compared  to their value as primary raw materials. The physical characteristics of primary or secondary  raw materials will determine the economic opportunities. The value is determined by the  quantity (mass), location (dispersion of mass) and quality (homogeneity and contamination) of  primary and secondary raw material. Subsequently, residuals must be produced in high  volumes in order to warrant a costeffective recovery process (Beukering, 1994). In addition,  the purchase and sale of recyclable materials depend on the supply and demand of the material  in question, both internationally and locally. This uncertainty creates a problem when it comes  to selecting the types of material to recycle (Armijo et al. 2002).      Lavee et al. (2009) have suggested that a possible way to deal with this uncertainty is by  governmental intervention. Such intervention could promote recycling through Pigouvian taxes.  These taxes can be applied to municipalities, consumers and producers, while providing  subsidies to reduce recycling costs. Another intervention policy that might help dealing with  20

price uncertainty is price stabilization for recycling. However, they have found that the  implementation of this requires a longterm contract between recycling plants and  municipalities in order to secure a fixed price for their waste. This policy addresses the price  uncertainty issue, instead of a subsidy program that could boost recycling, but not eradicate  uncertainty.   Technological development also influences recycling of materials. This becomes evident  with the improvement of the technology employed in the production of primary and secondary  materials. If secondary materials can be easily replaced by primary materials, then the value of  secondary materials will increase. However, if the technology is undependable, then the value  of the secondary materials will diminish. The improvement of technologies used for primary  material extraction also affects the value of such materials. Such is the case of innovations in  logging methods, which decrease the price of wood pulp and can potentially affect paper  recycling (Beukering, 1994).   Plastic recycling has the advantage of reduced space requirements after being  converted to pellets and processed to granules, which is about equal to the space required for  virgin operations (Beukering, 1994). However, it is a difficult process as each type of plastic goes  through a different process and the contamination associated with its recycling poses major  concerns (Pitchel, 2005).   Cullet or broken glass recovering is one of the most ancient types of recycling, and its  quality loss is significantly less compared to that of other materials (Pitchel, 2005). However,  some decontamination before processing is needed. In general, virgin glass production costs  are high due to the equipment required and higher cleaning efforts. This makes cullet  reprocessing attractive, as does the energy savings it can offer, mainly due to the cullet's lower  melting point (Beukering, 1994). In order to create new glass products, the first step consists of  separating the glass into clear, green and amber, followed by the crushing of containers into  little pieces and finally, it goes into the furnace mixed with limestone, silica and soda ash  (Pitchel, 2005).   21

Paper recycling is very common in industrialized countries. In developing countries,  however, its collection is not as organized. Recovered paper can be categorized as: bulk paper  such as corrugated paper and newspaper, and high grade paper such as manila folders. The  bulk collections are mainly used to produce construction paper and paperboard among others,  while highgrade material is mainly used as a pulp substitute. The main disadvantage of paper  recycling is the fact that its quality downgrades in the process. This is due to the fibres  shortening and the loss of bonding capacity and flexibility. On the other hand, each ton of  recycled paper prolongs the landfill's lifespan, while saving 7000 gallons of water, along with  4100 kWh of energy (Pitchel, 2005).   Recycling of nonferrous metals such as lead, copper, aluminum and zinc is very popular  in both developed and developing countries. Their recycling presents various advantages  compared to mining. Since less energy is required, it does not impose a loss of quality,  generates lower emissions and presents stable prices. These characteristics of nonferrous  metal recycling create exceptionally profitable conditions (Beukering, 1994). Such is the case of  steel recycling which presents various advantages like significant water and energy savings due  to avoided mining or impurity treatment, as well as lower greenhouse gases emissions and the  preservation of its quality properties. This means that it does not lose its qualities as a result of  undergoing several recycling processes (Pitchel, 2005). However, there is a limited availability of  nonferrous metals in the recycling market (Beukering, 1994; Pitchel, 2005).     The Social Component of Recycling     Recycling of materials is part of the formal waste management system in some jurisdictions,  while it remains an informal practice in others. This situation highlights a contrast between  costly and sophisticated MSWMS throughout various cities in North America and European  countries, with recycling at the household level and curbside collection, compared to more  rudimentary systems where recycling is performed informally, and often lacks source  separation at the household level.   22

In the majority of developing countries, recycling is carried out by informal recyclers or  recyclersbytrade (Figure 2) (Medina, 2008).  In fact, it represents a significant income source  in Asia and Latin America, where 1 to 2% of the population relies upon waste picking for their  subsistence (Cheesman et al. 2007). For the purposes of this paper, the terms "informal  recyclers" and "recyclersbytrade" will  be used synonymously.   This informal recycling sector has  been defined by Cheesman et al. (2006)  as "the unregistered, unregulated, casual  activity performed by individuals or  organized informal recyclers, which are  small scale with minimal capital input and  labourintensive methods". According to  Armijo et al. (2002) this informal recycling  sector has a flexible and adaptive nature  Medina (2008) Figure 2. Estimated Number of Waste Pickers  (millions)

that responds to limited local conditions and scarce financial resources, which increase  in the face of economic crisis. As stated by Gutberlet (2008) this vulnerable sector is  characterized by a lack of influence in local decisionmaking.  In addition, recyclersbytrade are unlicensed, thus escaping tax payments and lacking  social welfare (Cheeseman et al. 2006). According to Jaffe and Nas (2004), informal recycling  systems are very dynamic, presenting cultural, political and organizational aspects that are  likely to exist as long as waste and poverty coexist. However, they argue that there has not  been sufficient research done on this topic, thus the uptodate descriptions of the informal  recycling sector fall short and cannot describe their diversity.           23

2.3 Green Agenda in Solid Waste Management Systems    Currently, the role that urban sustainable development is playing in policymaking is believed to  be gaining momentum with recognition of climate change issues, especially in developed  countries. According to Roper (2006), the reduction of MSW generation, followed by an  increase of reusing, recycling and composting are crucial to alleviating the difficulties faced by  waste management. Furthermore, Muraleedharan et al. (1996) suggested early in the  sustainability debate within SWMS that planning required intra and intergenerational aspects  to be taken under consideration. These aspects include the conservation of resources, public  health concerns, environmental contamination of waste disposal methods, as well as the  livelihood of all the stakeholders involved in SWMS, including informal recyclers.  Following the sustainability trend, SWMS has begun to include strategies to reduce the  quantity of the raw materials utilized, as well as to reuse and recover recyclable materials.  These strategies are implemented through regulations that create incentives for industries.  However, according to Brungart and McDonough (2002), even these measures cannot solve the  intrinsic problem of waste generation under the current industrial model. By themselves, such  measures do not address the longterm effects of environmental pollution and the toxicity of  manufactured goods and their subsequent disposal. They argue that it is necessary to take a  further step, in which materials can be recycled. Even better, they should be "upcycled"  conserving the high quality and usefulness of the original material, and using only nontoxic  compounds.   A further step introduced by Brungart and McDonough (2002) is a new way of looking at  industrial design that embraces the challenge of replacing ecoefficiency with ecoeffectiveness.  Although ecoefficiency aims for a more sustainable approach doing more with less material,  energy consumption, and time it does not provide a successful strategy in the long run. This is  due to the lack of a comprehensive analysis of the longterm cumulative impacts that  industrialization coupled with waste production and contamination impose on the environment  and human health. It primarily focuses on reducing the negative impact of the old and  24

destructive system which is evidenced in its policies of reducing the amounts of toxic waste  released into environment every year, meeting stipulations of complex laws to prevent  ecosystems and people from being poisoned too quickly, and calculating prosperity by less  activity. In addition, ecoeffectiveness embraces a more complex mix of considerations and  aspirations. It promotes doing things right from its origins, instead of making the wrong ones  less harmful.       Following the concept of ecoeffectiveness, a zero waste strategy is not only a target to  attempt but also a useful strategy that some producers have already implemented. Under this  framework, a producer is responsible for the life cycle of the products manufactured.  This falls  under the Extended Producer Responsibility policy, which deals with the process of goods until  the consumer is done using them (Roper, 2006).                                      25

Chapter 3. Review of Informal Recycling Considering the Social, Economic, Environmental,  Political, Technical and Organizational Aspects     The following chapter describes the nature and characteristics of the informal recycling sector  in developing countries. This description includes the social, economic, environmental, political,  technical and organizational aspects that are associated with waste management in these  countries.     3.1 Social Aspects of Informal Recycling    The recycling performed by informal recyclers began with the rapid industrialization of  European and North American cities primarily in the 19th century, along with the introduction  of the first waste collection systems (Anschutz et al. 2006, Cheesman et al.  2009). With  modernization of waste management in these industrialized countries, access to recyclables  found in the waste stream became restricted to the formal sector, ignoring the role the  informal recycling sector had been providing. This denied informal recyclers so much of their  livelihoods that they subsequently discontinued their activities (Anschutz et al. 2006).   Although in the majority of European and North American cities this informal recycling  practice has been replaced with formal and more costly and sophisticated recycling  technologies, the informal recycling practice is still prevalent in most developing countries  (Lardinois and van de Klundert, 1995; Araba et al. 2009).   Different types of informal recycling have been described in the literature depending on  where and how recyclables are recovered. The most common types of informal recyclers or  recyclersbytrade in developing countries encompass the group of itinerant waste buyers,  street waste pickers and dump and landfill waste pickers. Itinerant waste buyers specialize in  one or two kinds of recyclable materials, which they purchase directly from households. Street  waste pickers recover recyclables from waste found on streets and communal bins or bags prior  to collection, while dump and landfill waste pickers, live on or near the open dumps and landfill  26

sites where they recover recyclables (Medina, 2000). The recyclable materials collected by this  informal recycling sector are usually sold to dealers. The transportation mode of the collected  recyclables in developing countries depends on recyclersbytrade's income, and includes sacks,  wheelbarrows, handpush carts, tricycle carts, rickshaws, horsepulled carts and motorized tricycles (Araba et al. 2009).   A common method used by the World Bank to determine the poverty line is the  purchasing power parity (PPP), and those who present incomes below the established PPP are  considered poor (Dikshit et al. 2006). According to Cheeseman et al. (2006), it has been  observed that the recycling network in developing countries has a hierarchy in which individual  recyclersbytrade (itinerant waste buyers, street and dumpwaste pickers) belong to the base  of the pyramid, which limits their earnings. This is mainly due to a lack of storage space and  limited processing capacity of individual recyclersbytrade. The next level is composed of  family units, which provide social and economic support to their members. Next are recyclers bytrade organised into small enterprises or cooperatives. These organizations have the ability  to increase the value of the materials collected and legitimizes their activities. The network  hierarchy is followed by dealers or middlemen, who purchase directly from informal recyclers  or recyclersbytrade, then wholesalers who purchase from dealers and sell directly to recycling  industries.   Through questionnaire surveys in Delhi, India, Dikshit et al. (2006) studied the entire  chain of the informal recycling sector, which included waste producers, informal recyclers  (composed of street waste pickers and itinerant waste buyers), dealers and wholesalers. They  argued that the urban poor participate in environmental conservation and economic  development and that little attention has yet been paid to the study of their activities. These  researchers found that informal recyclers, particularly street waste pickers in Delhi were  incapable of ascending to higher levels within the recycling trade due to social segregation and  a lack of network connections. Thus, a chronic state of poverty within the informal recycling  community prevailed.  27

Informal recyclers have been characterized as being marginalized socially and politically  in the jurisdictions where they operate. Their work is usually thought to be dirty and lowstatus.  They frequently belong to the most disenfranchised minority groups and their work is  associated with illegal activities (Lardinois and van de Klundert, 1995).  In most cases, they are migrants or belong to ethnic or religious minorities. This is the  case of the Dalit, who under the traditional Indian caste system, have been relegated to waste  picking and latrine cleaning. Similar cases occur in Muslim countries where nonMuslim or  ethnic minorities are confined to waste management activities. Such are the cases of the  Palestinian community of waste pickers in Lebanon and the Zabaleen community of Coptic  Christians in Egypt (Anschutz et al. 2006).   Overall, there is very limited research and fieldwork done regarding the informal  recycling practice. This is associated with the difficulties presented at times by the unsafe  conditions surrounding these marginalized communities, as well as the fact that only recently  has this topic gained momentum in the academic world (Jaffe and Nas, 2004). Due to the  difficulty of measuring the informal recycler's performance, quantitative data on waste  management in these countries are limited and often unreliable. This is especially true of  information regarding recycling rates (Araba et al. 2009).     3.2 Economic Factors of Informal Recycling    The informal recycling sector is characterized by having a flexible and adaptive nature that  responds to local economic conditions (Jaffe and Nas, 2004). From a macroeconomic  standpoint, the informal recycling system would seem to be well adapted to developing  countries' conditions, which include scarce capital and a large lowskilled workforce. The  informal sector offers a stable and consistent supply of secondary materials to local industries,  replacing more costly imported raw materials (Cheeseman et al. 2006).   According to Medina (2000) recyclersbytrade act in response to the market's needs;  they are not driven by environmental concerns. The logic of their response is linked to the  28

market's demand for a particular material and a sufficient price being paid for its collection to  attract recyclers.   Recycling activities of any kind including formal recycling performed in developed  countries contribute to local economies worldwide. However, recycling in developing countries  as discussed previously is mainly performed by the informal sector. Due to this scenario, the  following economic benefits are attributed to the informal recyclers' labour in the developing  world.   According to Medina (2000), informal recycling enhances the commercial sector by  boosting industrial competitiveness, as the recovered valuable materials can be locally utilized  without loss of hard currency. In addition, less energy is consumed using recovered materials,  resulting in lower operational costs for industries. This was observed in Mexico, where  importing wood pulp was seven times more expensive than using recovered waste paper. As a  result, Mexican paper mills improved their relationship with street waste pickers in order to  lower their costs and be competitive with North American paper makers (Medina, 2000).   Recycling represents an essential source of informal employment for a large portion of  the urban poor, which would otherwise not have had paid work. They obtain revenues  exclusively from the direct sale of the collected recyclable materials (Lardinois and van de  Klundert, 1995). In fact, the labourintensive characteristics of informal recycling consist of an  exhaustive set of collection circuits around the city and extensive material selection activities,  which require a large workforce. This labourintensive characteristics and large workforce  requirements might have not existed if production was limited to the extraction and the  industrial processing of virgin materials (Beukering, 1994).  In the case of itinerant waste  buyers, they also contribute to an increase in the incomes of waste producers --like household  residents or business owners, by purchasing their recyclable materials (Dikshit et al. 2006).     The savings to municipalities consist of a reduction in the volume of waste that would 

otherwise be collected, transported, and disposed of in landfills (Jaffe and Nas, 2004). Reported  data suggest that in Jakarta, Indonesia, in 1988, recyclersbytrade's activities saved the city  29

about US$300,000 per month, while recovering 25% of the daily waste production (Lardinois  and van de Klundert, 1995).    In Surabay, Indonesia, recyclersbytrade collected 12% of the city's waste, while  recovering 31% of the recyclables (Armijo et al. 2002). In Delhi, India, the resulting profit  generated from waste marketing activities performed by street waste pickers, itinerant waste  buyers, dealers, wholesalers and recycling industries, was estimated to be US $74 million per  year. Over 40% of the total value was destined to waste producers, 50% was internalised as the  private incomes of waste traders and the remaining sum resulted in budget savings for waste  disposal (Dikshit et al. 2006).   The profits of the different players involved in the informal recycling chain highlight  marked differences, in which earnings vary according to the player's position in this chain  (Araba et al. 2009). While the earnings of middlemen can reach USD$4 248 per year, large  itinerant buyers earn USD$3 058 per year and street waste pickers earn just USD$510 per year  in Port Harcourt, Nigeria (Chinwah, 2006).    In Delhi, India out of 1kg of recyclable material sold to recycling industries, 52% of the  earnings went to waste producers, followed by wholesalers with earnings of 25%, itinerant  waste buyers with 12% and lastly dealers or middlemen with 11% (Dikshit et al. 2006).  A study  carried out in various cities in Mexico showed that waste pickers enjoyed an income five times  higher than the minimum wage. This study surveyed approximately 3,000 recyclersbytrade,  who collectively processed 353 000 tons of waste per year. A similar situation occurs in Sao  Paulo, Brazil, where the members of recyclersbytrade's cooperative collected and sold 100  tons a month and earned US$300 a month  fully twice the minimum wage. Lastly, in Buenos  Aires, Argentina, over 40,000 waste pickers produced revenues of US$178 million a year  (Medina, 2000, 2008). The above case studies showcase how informal recyclers' activities can  result in substantial savings in fuel and labour, as they reduce the volume of waste collected  and transported to final disposal. Subsequently, they also contribute to prolonging the life span  of sanitary landfills and promoting environmental conservation (Medina, 2008).  30

According to Medina (2000), in some lowincome neighbourhoods where there is a lack  of waste collection services and difficult topographic conditions, informal recyclers provide the  service by charging a fee to residents. Such is the case of Santa Cruz, Bolivia where informal  recyclers serve 37% of the city, showing the willingness of residents to pay for this service. In  addition, municipal waste collection using garbage trucks presents a disadvantage over informal  recyclers, as their transportation methods are better suited to the hilly conditions and the  narrow and unpaved streets. However, illegal dumping is a negative effect associated with this  waste collection system where the distance to the final disposal sites is located too far away for  transport modes of limited capacity to transfer the collected waste.     3.3 Environmental and Health Aspects of Informal Recycling    Due to the manual handling of waste, as well as the lack of health and safety standards  regarding protective gear and clothing, informal recyclers face occupational workplace risks.  The direct contact with waste can potentially represent occupational risks. Such risks include  encountering broken glass, hazardous substances, faecal matter, leachate, toxic chemicals,  pesticides, needles and infectious and allergenic materials (Cointreau, 2006; Anschutz et al.  2006; Cheesman et al. 2006). The decomposition of waste also represents health risks,  associated with inhaling dust, bioaerosols and fumes caused by open burning of waste.  Handling waste also presents health and safety risks, which are linked to the constant lifting,  odour, working in traffic, and accidents. In fact, children waste pickers, which account for a  significant portion of recyclersbytrade, are the most vulnerable. This is due to a higher  ingestion of toxins per unit of body weight. Subsequently, disturbances throughout their  growth period can negatively affect the functionality of their reproductive, immune, endocrine  and nervous systems, as well as their organ development (Cointreau, 2006).     Although there is scarce data availability regarding the health issues associated with  informal recycling, data suggest that as a result of their direct contact with waste, pickers are  prone to certain health problems. Such problems include, eye infections and skin and  31

respiratory complications (Cheeseman et al. 2006). According to Cointreau (2006), studies  carried out worldwide have reported that solid waste workers experienced a higher risk of  acquiring different diseases "they have 10 times more risk for acute diarrhea (Romania); 6  times more risk for infectious disease (Denmark); 3 times more risk for parasites (India); 2.6  times more risk for allergic pulmonary disease (Denmark); 2.5 times more risk for chronic  bronchitis (Switzerland) and 2 times more risk for coronary disease (USA) and 1.2 times more  risk for hepatitis (Italy)". Environmental benefits include reduction of greenhouse gases, the conservation of  virgin resources and a reduction of environmental exploitation activities and the prevention of  ecological damage. This is the case of paper recycling which reduces logging activities that  promote flooding and soil erosion.  Likewise, metal recycling reduces mining activities, which  are associated with the release of toxic substances that can potentially increase air and water  contamination (Dikshit et al. 2006).   By recovering 378 000 tons of paper per year, waste pickers in Jakarta have saved six  million trees from being cut (Lardinois and van de Klundert, 1995). Although it is complicated to  measure these environmental benefits in monetary figures, they are likely to be significant  (Dikshit et al. 2006).    3.4 Political Aspects of Informal Recycling     As stated previously, although the services performed by informal recyclers reduce the overall  costs of SWMS, in various places a negative perception and a hostile relationship between the  informal and formal sectors continues to prevail. This negative perception is mainly associated  with street litter when garbage containers are not put back in place, or if their contents are  spilled. There are also issues where traffic is interfered with by street waste picker's carts, as  well as concerns related to sanitation. Furthermore, there is often embarrassment associated  with having informal recyclers in the cities, as they symbolize failed attempts at modernisation.  32

In some cases, municipal authorities ban the informal sector's activities which results in them  being considered criminals (Medina, 2000; Jaffe and Nas, 2004; Gutberlet, 2008).   Extreme cases of hostility and violence towards the informal recycling sector have been  reported in Colombia, where they were expelled from certain neighbourhoods and killed by  paramilitary groups who performed "social cleansing" (Medina, 2000). In other cases, municipal  employees working at open dumps, the waste collection crew and the police force have  received bribes for allowing informal recyclers to access the dumps, or to recover recyclables  directly from the garbage trucks or the streets. The presence of these scenarios also reinforces  contention that there is exploitation of informal recyclers (Dikshit et al.2006).   The Zabaleen community of itinerant waste buyers in Cairo has had an exceptionally  high recycling rate of 80%, and has been active for over 70 years. However, faced with social  and political marginalization together with a lack of political power and a dependency on local  political decisions, this group has suffered from this vulnerability (Cheeseman et al. 2006). In  2003, Egyptian authorities privatized waste collection and in 2009 they ordered the culling of all  pigs. These animals were vital to the elimination of organic waste, and this action in turn  threatened the livelihood of Cairo's informal recyclers and jeopardized their efficient system  (Slackman, 2009).   Experiences similar  to  the  one  describing  Cairo's recyclersbytrade  have  been  observed  throughout the developing world. Such is the case of the study conducted in Brazil by Gutberlet  (2008) on a recycling cooperative called CooperPires. In this study, recyclersbytrade, the local  government,  and  the  business  community  were  interviewed  and  video  documented.  The  study  illustrated the social and economic challenges faced by the CooperPires cooperative created in  2004, and how quickly they lost all governmental support due to changes in municipal politics.   These scenarios highlight the vulnerability recyclersbytrade experience, due to their  dependency on local authorities, as well as their marginalized social and political status. These  circumstances are a result of the frequent social perception that informal recyclers represent  an undesirable set of actors in waste management systems (Jaffe and Nas, 2004). However, it  has been noted that previous attempts to abolish informal recycling in developing countries,  33

followed by encouraging them to engage in different activities, have not been successful  (Medina, 2000).   Evidence that the effects of public policies regarding recyclersbytrade have been  influenced by public perception has been summarized by Medina (2000) who identified four  scenarios. These include repression, neglect, collusion and stimulation. As described above, one  scenario is the situation in which informal recyclers are considered illegal and a very negative  perception towards them prevails. This setting is characterized by repressive policies  accompanied by a hostile relationship between the informal and formal waste management  sectors.   Another scenario is one in which local authorities do not recognize recyclersbytrade  activities, as they are ignored and are not provided with appropriate support. The collusion  scenario is typified by a political clientelism relationship, where local authorities exploit  informal recyclers. This exploitation takes place in the form of monetary bribes.   The "stimulation" scenario legalizes informal recyclers' activity and recognizes the  environmental, economic and social benefits they are accountable for. This recognition is  accompanied by the provision of support, programs and training. It also foments higher  organizational structures of recyclersbytrade and grants their organizations or cooperatives  contracts related to waste management.  Subsequently, Jaffe and Nas (2004) developed a  hypothetical model using the four public policy scenarios identified by Medina, to improve  recyclersbytrade's working conditions. This is described in more detail in section 4.2.      3.5 Technical Aspects of Informal Recycling    It has been observed that transfer stations can substantially increase recyclersbytrade's  working efficiency as they provide space to sort, accumulate large volumes, and even pre process the collected materials prior to selling (Baillie and Feinblatt, 2010). According to Armijo  et al. (2002), it appears that if transfer stations are equipped with scales, boxes for storage,  grinders for waste processing and showers; recyclersbytrade can potentially improve the  34

value of sale of recyclable materials, due to higher volumes, added value of preprocessing  activities and savings in transportation costs.       It has been suggested that the majority of the informal recycling sector is mainly 

dedicated to collection and separation activities of potentially recyclable materials prior to their  sale. Preprocessing activities can potentially present various benefits. Advantages have been  observed in Cairo, where a family of informal recyclers had purchased extruders -- small  processing machines -- in order to sell the collected plastic in the form of pellets (Baillie and  Feinblatt, 2010). A similar case has been reported in Buenos Aires, Argentina where the  Cooperativa Nueva Mente of recyclersbytrade has been using a hotpress technology, in order  to convert natural fibres and plastic waste materials into composite materials (Waste for Life,  2011).  Another case in Argentina is the cooperative Reciclando Sueños, which made the  transition from collecting, sorting and selling recyclables materials to manufacturing. Currently,  they process plastic by chopping, cleaning, drying and injecting it into a mould that they can  subsequently assemble and sell as a painting sponge product (Baillie and Feinblatt, 2010).      3.6 Organizational Aspects of Informal Recycling    Recyclersbytrade belong to the bottom of the recycling chain and occupy a marginalized social  and political status, as described previously. It has been observed that when they are organized  into cooperatives -- instead of working individually -- they gain public recognition, while  improving their living conditions and income and increase their recycling rates (Baillie and  Feinblatt, 2010).     Such organized systems can confer legal status on the activities of the informal sector,  provide its members with more stability, as well as increase their selfesteem and influence  their decisionmaking. It can also prevent health risks by avoiding working directly on dumpsites  (Gutberlet, 2008).   According to Medina (2000), it appears that informal recyclers' organizations can be  successfully run as small businesses, cooperatives or publicprivate partnerships. The small 35

business organizational type usually occurs when there is no municipal waste collection system  at all in a given neighbourhood, thus opening the door to entrepreneurs. Partnerships are  characterized by municipallysupplied equipment and infrastructure. The waste pickers  themselves provide only their labour. This partnership operates a recycling plant, fed by  recyclables separated at source (Medina, 2000, 2008). Cooperatives are the most common  organizational type throughout Latin America. Such is the case of Brazil, which has over 500  street waste picker cooperatives boasting 60,000 members. It has been suggested that this  organizational type requires longterm governmental support to improve health and hygiene,  promote selfconfidence, provide technical training and help commercialize recycled materials  (Gutberlet, 2008).     3.6.1 Cooperative Systems     Currently, researchers' interest in economic democracy like cooperatives and associations        -- also called selfmanagement companies -- has risen as a result of the negative effects of  globalization and neoliberal policies (Hernandez, 2006). A solidarity economy is an alternative  way of production, capital distribution and organization system. It seems to be an attractive  option particularly to informal recyclers in developing countries, as it appears to allow them to  defeat social exclusion, while selfgenerating employment and income (Amato, 2008).   According to the International Cooperative Alliance (ICA) (2010), a cooperative is  defined as "an autonomous association of persons united voluntarily to meet their common  economic, social, and cultural needs and aspirations through a jointly owned and  democratically controlled enterprise".  For the case of the recyclersbytrade, the Production Cooperativism Model might be an  interesting alternative. This model consists of a cooperative system that produces specific  goods while being managed in an autonomous way by its workers (Amato, 2008). The workers'  autonomy or full control is achieved by democratic decisionmaking, collective ownership and  common objectives (Hernandez, 2006; Martinez, 2008). The existence of a common cultural  36

and historic background is an important element in a cooperative system, as it facilitates the  communication and the creation of cooperative ties (Cabaleiro and Fernandez, 2007).     The cooperativism system has seven governing principles established by ICA in 1937 and 

last reviewed in 1995. These are: the membership is voluntary and open to all individuals who  are willing to commit to the responsibilities of being a member; each member has an equal  voting right, thus presenting a democratic system; members have economic participation in the  cooperative, where part of the capital belongs to the cooperative and members obtain some  degree of compensation; the cooperative has an autonomous nature and is fully controlled by  its members; the cooperative is in charge of providing its members with training, education and  information; there is a sense of cooperation amongst cooperatives in order to support the  cooperativism movement; and it is in the cooperative's interest to improve their community by  focusing on sustainable development (Rufino, 2002).     In most cooperatives, the internal government presents similar characteristics. 

According to Martinez (2008), the governing system is characterized by a hierarchical structure  where power is exercised by delegation; the members must voice their concerns to their  representatives, who will subsequently communicate the information to the higher  management level. The leadership is centred in the directive members and the professional  management; which are responsible of achieving the social objectives along with the market  competitiveness.    Although collective decisionmaking can lead at times to a conflictive environment, if  focused strategically, it can contribute to the development of the organization; which  showcases the dynamic nature of this system (Hernanadez, 2006). The greatest challenge of  selfmanagement companies is to assure their efficiency and competitiveness in the market,  while safeguarding their solidarity principles (Rufino, 2002).           37  

Chapter 4. Sustainable and Inclusive Solid Waste Management Systems     The following chapter describes the focus and main goals of the sustainable and inclusive solid  waste management system. This description includes the different approaches regarding the  informal recycling sector; the legal and economic aspects influencing the integration of the  informal recycling sector; the worldwide initiatives working towards intersector integration in  SWMS; and the models proposed in the published literature regarding the integration of the  informal recycling sector into the formal SWMS.     4.1 Approaches to Informal Recycling     According to Gutberlet (2008) there is a growing necessity for implementing Sustainable and  Inclusive Solid Waste Management Systems (SISWMS) policies, which support the incorporation  of marginalized communities of recyclersbytrade into the formal SWMS. The necessity of  inclusive policies is based on their capacity to reduce poverty and enhance environmental  health.  SWMS present certain financial and institutional barriers that limit the development of  integrated and sustainable systems. This situation is exacerbated when there is a narrow sighted view of waste management; as a strictly technological problem excluding the needs of  the local social system (Lardinois and van de Klundert, 1995).   This narrowsighted view misses out on the opportunities that could result from  including the existing local social system. Such is the case of an alliance between the two  sectors formal (private and public) and informal (informal recyclers)  that could potentially  create a winwin scenario. This winwin scenario is likely to improve working conditions,  increase recycling rates, address social issues and be financially convenient for municipalities.  According to Anschutz and van de Klundert (2001), the sustainable aspect would depend on the  capacity of the waste management system to avoid depleting the resources it depends on for  its existence.   38

It has been suggested by Anschutz et al. (2006) that the traditional approaches aiming  to aid recyclersbytrade have failed to succeed due to ignoring their professional role in the  waste management systems. These approaches have perceived informal recyclers as a social  issue instead of as economic actors, which are part of the SWMS. Such approaches include: the  developmentbased approach, the welfarebased approach and the rightsbased approach  (Anschutz et al. 2006).   The developmentbased approach identifies recyclersbytrade as a social identity and  views them as an unfortunate community faced with a precarious livelihood. Although this  approach focuses on reinforcing their capabilities and providing them with new opportunities  --by fomenting education and access to credits-- it ignores their professional role in waste  management. The welfare approach as its name suggests, focuses on recyclersbytrade's lack  of welfare and it works towards improving their living conditions, yet it neither acknowledges  their economic role in SWMS nor addresses their political issues. The rightbased approach  centres on institutional, political and social issues. It works towards increasing their political  intervention by strengthening their legal status and setting them up in organizations. Although  this approach recognizes informal recyclers as social and political stakeholders, it still ignores  their economic role in SWMS (Anschutz et al. 2006)  According to Gutberlet (2008), countries that are more progressive have now begun to  invest in social programs that support organized selective waste collection, recycling and  commercialization. One of the first steps towards this change is the recognition of the informal  sector's current contribution to recycling in developing countries.  To achieve this change of  perception, it is crucial for decision makers to acknowledge waste pickers as an asset to be  engaged as potential partners in SWMS (Medina, 2008). To this end, Armijo et al. (2002)  suggest that recyclersbytrade must be moved higher up in the recycling hierarchy and become  small recycling contractors.   Armijo et al. (2002) have suggested that engaging citizens and various stakeholders can  contribute to the increase of recycling rates. This includes schools, universities, businesses,  hospitals, industries and religious communities, among other important community groups. The  39

following methods have been identified as helpful tools for increasing the overall recycling  rates: implementing campaigns at a national and local level, developing workshops targeting  various stakeholders, as well as reaching the public through TV and radio programs. These  methods can potentially promote recycling at the source within the entire population. In  addition, it can contribute to a more complete collection of recyclable materials performed by  recyclersbytrade.   In searching for alternative solutions, Scheinberg et al. (2006) have suggested exploring  the economic activities carried out by the informal sector within the waste management  system. They have also suggested four types of recyclersbytrade's involvement. To involve  recyclersbytrade in new service roles both in collection and recycling requires an increase in  their participation. To improve sorting activities and increase recycling capacity and working  conditions requires the construction of transfer stations. To enhance the market leverage  requires the creation of recyclersbytrade's cooperative organizations. To assure good  management requires the promotion of good communication among all stakeholders involved  in the waste management system and the planning process.    Nitivattananon and Sembiring (2010) have suggested the use of the conceptual  approach when working towards the inclusion of informal recyclers into the formal SWMS. This  conceptual approach consists of five types of capital that influence their integration. These five  types of capital include public infrastructure, financial, human, physical and social capital. Public  infrastructure includes roads, hospitals, schools, etc. Financial capital comprises the available  monetary assets. Human capital covers the education, skills and abilities of individuals. Physical  capital comprises land, property and machines. Social capital represents rules, norms, value and  networks.   It has also been argued by Nitivattananon and Sembiring (2010) that the informal sector  must improve its ability to add value to their collected material prior to their integration into  the formal SWMS. An increase in their earnings is positively correlated to their living conditions  and social acceptance.  Figure 3 shows the existence of a capital cycle that affects the  integration of the informal recycling sector into the formal SWMS. By raising the financial  40

capital through social and human capitals, the physical and infrastructure capitals can also  increase. Thus, it seems that by strengthening the partnership between the informal and formal  sectors, it is possible to improve living conditions of informal recyclers involved in SWMS.                                Nitivattananon and Sembiring (2010) 
 

Figure 3. Cycle of Capital in the Integration of the Informal  Recycling Sector in an Inclusive Society 
 

Anschutz et al. (2006) have suggested a systems approach that views informal recyclers  as economic players and valuable stakeholders within the waste management system. In order  to stimulate recyclersbytrade in their economic role, they center their efforts on the following  measures:   1. Creation of new opportunities for collection and recycling, with the participation  of informal recyclers in system design and implementation 2. Creation of transfer stations for sorting purposes, to guarantee better working  conditions, while reducing health risks and accidents, an idea which is similar to  Scheinberg et al. (2006) 

41

3. Improvement of their negotiation power by reinforcing the relationship between  the recycling market and informal recyclers, by creating cooperatives to secure  better selling prices, as well as purchase of equipment  4. Facilitation of communication among the informal recycling sector, the formal  waste management sector and the decision makers to allow consideration of  informal recyclers' concerns in the planning process.    Although the systems approach provides an integral solution that considers informal  recyclers as important economic actors and stakeholders within the waste management  system, Anschutz et al. (2006) also identified challenges to be overcome in order to deliver  successful results. They pointed out the need to understand the economics of the waste sector  in question, as the collection of materials is only sufficient to support a specific number of  cooperatives. They also reported the importance of only working with the population of  recyclersbytrade that are enthusiastic to be part of the process of improving their working  conditions. Another challenge they identified is the longterm commitment of the various  stakeholders involved and the provision of training.  The Advisers on Urban Environment and Development (WASTE) (Anschutz and van de  Klundert, 2001) is a nonprofit organization based in based in Gouda, the Netherlands. Through  their research in developing countries, they have developed the Integrated Sustainable Waste  Management (ISWM) methodology and conceptual framework.  This framework takes into  account the elements of the waste system, sustainability characteristics and the stakeholders  involved. The components to ISWM they identified are: political and legal concerns; technical  and performance elements concerning the equipment and facilities of waste systems as well as  their implementation and maintenance; social and political institutional structures including  roles and responsibilities; cost recovery and reduction, privatization and how recycling  infrastructure links to the marketplace; the way that culture influences waste generation and  management; and  environmental context related to health risks, pollution control and impacts  on water, land and air caused by the waste system.  42

ISWM also promotes the incorporation of waste management into other municipal  programs, such as the use of compost in urban agriculture or public parks to reduce the use of  chemical fertilizers.     4.2 Legal and Economic Aspects Influencing the Integration of the Informal Recycling  Sector    A regulatory framework that excludes the participation of the informal recycling sector in  SWMS can potentially affect worker integration. This usually occurs due to their lack of  institutional and financial background as described previously.   Gutberlet (2008) has suggested considering the development of the following policies  when trying to achieve an intersector (formal and informal sectors involved in waste  management) integration. These public policies consider: the inclusion of organized recycling  groups; the establishment of fair wages and social benefits; eradication of exploitation and  bribing; proper health and safety conditions for recyclersbytrade; and environmental  protection and source separation.  Dikshit et al. (2006) have suggested that the interference of the government by  publishing the market prices of recyclables through mass media can potentially increase the  transparency in transactions. However, they have also implied that governmental regulation  and control of prices, business licensing and interest rates may have counterproductive effects  on the recycling system. This is due to the difficulties of enforcing such rules on an informal  sector, as well as the potential to lower the incentives of private traders and decrease the  earnings of informal recyclers.  According to Baillie and Feinblatt (2010), positive policies aiming to acknowledge and  legitimize informal recyclers and encourage their integration have been observed in Buenos  Aires, Argentina. There, Decree No. 622 created a registry of the existing cooperatives, as well  as small and mediumsize enterprises that would contribute to achieve the newly stipulated  mandatory recycling targets. In addition, the Urban Recoverer's Program was established and  43

vaccinations, identification cards and uniforms were provided. This program enabled the  coordination of endeavours in order to accomplish the decree's vital objectives.      It has been implied by Cheeseman et al. (2006) that the provision of incentives to both  formal and informal stakeholders contributes to achieving an integration of both sectors.  Publicprivate partnerships (PPP) are an alternative way to involve small and medium  enterprises with SWMS.     4.3 Worldwide Initiatives Working Towards InterSector Integration in SWMS    NGOs have played a vital role organizing recyclersbytrade into cooperatives. The fact that  NGOs are acquainted with the local conditions, has allowed them to develop interesting  initiatives, obtain grants and have access to loans, while providing business, legal and technical  support to the cooperative. According to Medina (2000), in Madras, India waste pickers were  not organized into a cooperative; however, an NGO created a waste collection program that  legalized their livelihood. The program consisted of the integration of waste pickers or "street  beautifiers" into the waste collection system of slums, and enabled them to leverage loans to  pay for tricycle carts. In addition, residents paid US $0.30/month for the collection service,  which was used to pay their salaries and repay the loans. This system evolved to include middle  and highincome neighbourhoods that include 900 collection units run by street beautifiers.  Another example of recycling enhancement at a local level is the initiative carried out by  Yuyun Ismawati. This work contributed to the development of a workerowned solid waste  cooperative in Indonesia, while generating employment and increasing economic stability  (GAIA, 2010).   In the case of Brazil, waste picking has been recognized as a valid occupation.  There,  organized informal recyclers have been enjoying the status of legitimate stakeholders that can  influence decisionmaking at various governmental levels. Such are the cases of Rio de Janeiro  with 14 cooperatives, as well as Porto Alegre where informal recyclers have been integrated  into the municipal recycling program of SWMS, serving almost 80% of the city (Medina, 2000;  44

Medina, 2008).  It is therefore not surprising that in 2004, informal recyclers in Brazil recycled  approximately 95% of all aluminum cans, 47% of steel cans, 46% of glass containers, 33% of  paper and 16.5% of plastics. In São Carlos, it was observed that informal recyclers had reduced  the weight of the city's waste by fully 39% (Gutberlet, 2008). Lastly, another program was  founded by the World Bank's integrated Solid Waste and Carbon Finance Project. The aim of  this program was to create an inclusive SWMS that would integrate waste pickers into the  formal sector in Brazil (Medina, 2000, 2008).   A successful case of inclusive waste management has been implemented in Belo  Horizonte, Brazil. There, the municipal authorities chose to integrate an association of informal  recyclers into their sustainable waste management model. Under this framework, informal  recyclers became the preferred agents in charge of recyclables collection. Informal recyclers  were also provided with training, education and technical support. As a result, the city's  cleanliness improved along with the living and working conditions of informal recyclers (Jaffe  and Nas, 2004). According to Medina (2000), Rio de Janeiro is the home to one of the most  successful informal recyclers' cooperatives. The cooperative is called Coopamare and its  members were reported to have recovered 100 tons of recyclables a month while earning US  $300/month per member, which was twice the minimum wage in Brazil at that time.  Juarez, Mexico is also a case of prosperity for informal recyclers. In this city the creation  of the cooperative Socosema was able displace the middleman who exploited them and  instead, obtain a direct contract with the municipality to recover recyclable materials at the  open dump (Medina, 2000).  Another successful cooperative case is the Renacer Lanzone cooperative of informal  recyclers in Argentina. The members of this cooperative were trained by professors at the  National Institute of Industrial Technology in Argentina, regarding the different categories into  which to sort plastics.  The result of this training provided to the members of the cooperative,  an increase in earnings of 300% (Baillie and Feinblatt, 2010).   Research conducted in Yala, Thailand analyzed the capacity of citizens' participation in  solving municipal waste management issues (Mongkolnchaiarunya, 2005). For this purpose,  45

alternative solidwaste solutions were tested and for each, estimates of the sustainability of  communitybased initiatives were developed. The alternative solidwaste program consisted of  a recycling project called "Garbage for Eggs" (GFE) led by a communitybased organization. The  study showed that projects like GFE are effective for cleaning the streets of very poor areas in a  short period. It was also observed that with social empowerment the bargaining power  increased, while the dependency on local government decreased. Lastly, it was suggested that  projects such as the GFE should be perceived as learning processes that could lead to changes  regarding the policymaking, cultural perception and environmental awareness of the  population towards waste.  Manila, Philippines, is another interesting case where the recycling rate increased from  just 6% in 1997 to 25% in 2006, with over 65% performed by itinerant waste buyers (Araba et  al. 2009). The vital contribution of the informal sector is attributed to an NGO program  initiative called the "Linis Ganda". The NGO's main objectives included the strengthening of the  relationship between middlemen and itinerant buyers and their organization into cooperatives.  This improved their negotiating power, while enhancing their social standing and facilitating  their access to credit. Itinerant waste buyers were provided with uniforms and ID cards, push  carts, a fixed route and were renamed "ecoaides" (Araba et al. 2009). According to Anschutz  and van de Klundert (2001), the implementation of the program was done in three stages. The  first stage consisted of women collecting recyclable materials from 21 locations, including high income areas where itinerant waste buyers had not been previously allowed. For this purpose,  they used flyers to announce the program to potential participants. The second stage involved  the participation of 10 middlemen who would purchase the collected recyclables. The third  stage identified the industries which were dedicated to process and recycle materials and  created links between middlemen and these industries.   The recycling rates have significantly increased and the members recovered 4 000 tons  of recyclable materials per month.  Each of the 17 cities in Metro Manila developed an informal  recyclers' cooperative, which could obtain lowinterest loans from the Land Bank and the  Department of Trade and Industry of Philippines (Medina, 2000).   46

Waste for Life (2011) is an innovative notforprofit organization that is composed by a  team of cooperative participants working alongside designers, engineers, scientists, architects,  artists and educators composes this organization. This diverse network of actors focuses on  povertyreduction solutions linked to environmental issues. Their efforts have concentrated on  adding value to nonrecycled plastic waste materials, with scientific and technological  knowledge, while improving the livelihood of the urban poor. For this purpose, a hotpress  technology has been developed to convert natural fibres and plastic waste materials into  composite materials which can be subsequently used as building materials as well as in  domestic products. Currently, their project in Argentina has the first prototype hotpress that  has been incorporated into the regular recycling activities at the Cooperativa Nueva Mente in  Buenos Aires. It can be inferred therefore that informal recyclers contribute to society by reducing the  waste disposed which saves the municipalities' expenditure, as well as providing a vital  environmental service. Considering the successful scenarios described above, it is reasonable to  think that it should be possible to expand these experiences throughout the developing world.  In particular, it should be possible to spread out the alternatives involving grassroots  development which offer environmental benefits, financial feasibility, as well as socially  responsible solutions. As observed in the different scenarios, it is crucial to support informal  recyclers' organizations with better infrastructure and social services, in order to reduce  poverty and increase their recycling rates.      4.4 Models Proposed in the Published Literature    According to Muraleehdharan et al. (1996), various models have been designed to deal with  certain matters in waste management. These models can be used to analyze the location of  disposal sites and processing or transfer facilities and determine the appropriate disposal  options. Such models include the Resource Recovery Planning Model; the Harwell Waste  Management Model; and the MINESWASTE or Model for Description and Optimization of  47

Integrated Material Flows and Energy Systems. The MINESWASTE model is the most  comprehensive one including waste composition, as well as the impact of source sorting and  emissions. However, these details are applicable in systems with controlled boundaries where  recycling occurs at the source or as an endof pipe practice. Thus, it is not applicable for  developing countries, where emissions are not a main concern and recycling usually takes place  between the source and the waste collection phases. In general, all three models are limited to  the formal waste management system focusing in operational efficiency and resource needs,  excluding informal recycling's role.  According to Jaffe and Nas (2004) it is necessary to contextualize the informal recycling  sector, as well as capture its dynamic nature in order to develop a model to improve the system  as a whole. They have proposed a hypothetical model that analyzes the interactions of the  political context, the technology employed in a given SWMS, the social setting and the  organizational advancements of recyclersbytrade. These variables were obtained from an  historical and comparative perspective based on available case studies in the literature. Their  model considers four distinct scenarios, ranging from A to D (Table 4). The purpose of this  model was to see how the interaction of such variables can affect the success level of  integrating the informal recycling system into the formal SWMS. According to this model, the  recyclers' organizational degree ranges from low to high; while the sociopolitical context  ranges from a repressive to a stimulating scenario. The technical aspect examines the  appropriateness of the modern waste technologies used in waste collection, transportation and  final disposal.   Jaffe and Nas (2004) have also suggested including the government and NGO when  working towards the integration process. It was noted that when recyclersbytrade presented  a high level of organization, they had a higher chance of being integrated into the formal waste  management sector, in particular, when there was political will and stimulation supporting this  process. On the other hand, it was also noted that there was no direct link between social  segregation and the success of the system.   48

                                                      49

  Although the hypothetical model has a novel approach contextualizing the informal  recycling sector and providing a predictive success rate; the model itself falls short when  applied to other scenarios that might present variables slightly different from the ones  described in the four scenarios. It also falls short in explaining the scoring criterion used to  calculate the effect of each variable and how this interaction determines the success rate.   According to Anschutz and van de Klundert (2001), the stakeholders to be considered  when attempting to develop ISWM include: recyclersbytrade, itinerant waste buyers, dealers,  wholesalers, recycling enterprises and enduser industries. It is also required to have data  regarding the waste generation and composition, the different neighbourhoods and their  relevant socioeconomic characteristics; as well as all sociocultural aspects of citizens and their  willingness to cooperate and pay for waste service.  Road and traffic conditions, elements of  waste systems such as collection, transportation and disposal and the city's waste management  activities are also required (Figure 4).                           
Anschutz and van de Klundert (2001) Figure 4. Integrated Sustainable Waste Management

50

In addition, Anschutz and van de Klundert (2001), suggest that it is useful to identify the  strengths, limitations, opportunities and threats of the various actors. A way of doing this is  through conceptual mapping of the waste system, identifying what the activities that the  informal and formal sectors are undertaking. For this performance evaluation they suggest the  utilization of a SWOT assessment, which explores the opportunities, threats, strengths and  weaknesses of the involved stakeholders.    In order to address the informal recycling role in waste management Muraleehdharan et  al. (1996) designed a comprehensive model that would contribute to the planning process of  waste managers. This comprehensive model was designed over a decade ago. However, it is  still relevant to the current social, environmental and technical aspects that are required to be  assessed in developing countries when an integration of the informal recycling sector into the  formal SWMS is being considered. In order to achieve an inclusive SWMS that would integrate  the informal recycling sector into the formal waste management sector, they developed the  Critical Operational Research (COR) framework. This framework was designed as a policy  analysis tool that would allow an open discussion between the various actors involved in waste  management in Madras, India. Based on the framework, they proposed a Nonlinear  Lexicographic Goal Programming (NLGP) model, which consisted of six objectives with their  respective goals. The first four objectives pertained to the municipal entity and dealt with  issues such as waste collection, environmental quality, budget spending, and vehicle usage. The  next objective focused on the informal recycling sector and addressed the social factor. Another  objective was related to private entities involved in waste management and incorporated the  economic viability of processing facilities. They used actual measures pertaining the city's  current SWMS and combined these six objectives (collection, employment of waste pickers,  budget utilization, disposal, processing facilities, vehicle utilization) to create six scenarios, in  order to analyze the effects of controllable targets on the performance of an inclusive system.  The NLGP was resolved with a sequential nonlinear goal programming method, which divided  the problem into subproblems. Subsequently, these subproblems were resolved using the  General Algebraic Modelling System.   51

The results showed that the amount of waste collected by the municipality's collection  system, did not affect the employment level of informal recyclers. However, when the waste  collection exceeded 80% of the waste produced, it reduced dramatically the employment level  of recyclersbytrade.  It was also observed that if informal recyclers picked 100% of the  recyclable materials without being part of the formal sector, it would save the municipality over  Rs$200 million, compared to Rs$40 million if they were part of the formal waste management  sector. This result contradicts the belief that the informal recycling sector reduces the efficiency  and increases the operating costs for municipalities. In addition, the results also showed that  the integration would reduce the number of informal recyclers employed to about 500600 out  of the 30 000 present in Madras, India (Muraleehdharan et al. 1996).                                       52

Chapter 5. Problem, Objectives and Methodology      5.1 Problem 

The privatization of waste management services has become a tendency in developing  countries. However, this privatization has not taken into consideration the social aspects  associated with waste management, specifically with the informal recycling sector. The  privatization has been oblivious to social inclusion solutions, which aim towards poverty  eradication for recyclersbytrade (CiViSOL, 2011).   Nitivattananon and Sembiring (2010) carried out a study in Bandung, Indonesia. In their  paper they discussed the perception and attitudes of decisionmakers and key stakeholders  towards the participation of recyclersbytrade in waste management. They stressed the  difficulties and challenges of convincing politicians and authorities that the informal sector's  role in waste management is not a liability, but to the contrary an asset.   In addition, due to the dependency of informal recyclers on local politics, the livelihood  of these marginalized communities is constantly challenged. Changes in municipal politics can  put at stake the logistic and governmental support of infrastructure, financial aid and capacity  building given to informal recycling organizations (Gutberlet, 2008).    Colombia is a suitable case study, due to being a developing country that experiences  environmental and social problems, as well as financial constraints regarding its waste  management. Similar to the rest of the developing world, Colombia's recycling system is  characterized by its informal and fragmented nature. This informal recycling sector in Colombia  as in other developing countries is noted for the poverty and marginalized conditions of its  recyclersbytrade. In addition, the data provided by the District Secretariat of Planning of  Bogotá, the Special Administrative Unit of Public Services of Bogotá (UAESP), rra (public law +  social innovation) attorneys and consultants and the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali,  together with CiViSOL foundation's support, made Colombia a good candidate for a case study.   According to the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali (2009), Colombia produces 25 079  tons of waste daily and only 13% is recycled of the total waste generated, out of which  53

recyclersbytrade contribute 54%. As stated by CiViSOL (2011), part of the reason there is no  source separation culture in Colombia is that cities do not have proper infrastructure, such as  transfer stations dedicated to the separation of recyclables. Also, it is important to note that  even though the current operators of waste management in Bogotá are responsible for  performing the route of recyclable's collection -- according to their legal contracts -- they do  not operate this route.   Rising public and NGO concern, especially by the CiViSOL Foundation has suggested the  need to involve various stakeholders to set out scientific and managementbased alternatives  to the current SWMS problems.    CiViSOL is a non forprofit organization that operates in Paris, New York and Barcelona  as well as in the cities of Cali and Bogotá in Colombia. It focuses on policymaking to increase  democratic participation and development prospects for poor and marginalized communities.  This organization has contributed to the litigation process by Colombia's recyclersbytrade. Its  goal is to formally integrate them into the marketplace in order to assure their rights to survival  and development. Also, it has contributed to this research by providing legal documents of the  litigation process and by introducing key stakeholders from the informal recycling sector which  have participated in the interviews performed in 2011 in Cali and Bogotá.   Considering the current state of Colombia's waste generation, the improper disposal  methods and deficiency of waste collection in some municipalities, the lack of a formal  recycling system and the lack of a recycling culture nationwide, coupled with the poverty  condition of recyclersbytrade, it would appear that a contextbased solution is needed.  Through this research, it is argued that an integral solution to Colombia's SWMS lies within an  inclusive infrastructure that will incorporate the existing informal recycling system within the  formal sector, benefiting the SWMS as a whole. Culture needs to be respected and  accommodate to changes. There seems to be a need to develop a model --based on the  world's examples, yet customized to the Colombian context-- that considers the  implementation of sustainable and inclusive SWMS goals.      54

5.2 Objectives    Overall, the objective of this project has been to develop a strategy and plan for SWMS  (reducing landfilling, enhancing recycling and improving the working conditions of organized  recyclersbytrade) in developing countries by:  1. modelling the experiences of other developing countries' SWMS that have  increased the recycling efficiency and improved the livelihood and working  conditions of recyclersbytrade, and research into sustainable and inclusive  SWMS  2. testing the model by applying it to knowledge gained in a case study of  Colombia where the cities of Cali, Bogotá and Medellin have experienced  problems in managing waste  3. contributing to the incipient research on the informal recycling sector and  attempting to add valuable new knowledge on this topic since existing literature  seems to fall short in describing the diversity of conditions for SISWMS   Specific stages in completing these objectives aim at developing an understanding of the  environmental, social, cultural and financial issues. It is hypothesized that such a plan and  strategy will enable objectives related to each of these issues to be achieved. In particular,  social goals for informal recyclers are hypothesized to be able to be attained at the same time  as environmental (recycling/landfilling) and financial goals.     5.3 Methodology         Literature  review    Questionnaires  and interview      Governmental data    Nongovernmental data   

  Normative System

  Set of measures and  recommendations   

55

The methodology comprises three major steps. The first step consisted of synthesizing  components identified in the literature demonstrating successful initiatives to make waste  management sustainable and inclusive. This enabled the compilation of a list of criteria from  which a preferred alternative for any developingworld application could be developed, based  on the priorities expressed in their local values and attitudes. A description of the current solid  waste management system in Colombia (its SWMS and informal recycling sector) was  assembled in part from primary observations, which included questionnaires and an interview  from key stakeholders, such as: recyclersbytrade, dealers and the president of Bogotá's  Recyclers Association. The description of Colombia's SWMS has also included official published  (and unpublished) documents. The data were intended to match the criteria identified in the  literature from other parts of the developing world.   Data needed to achieve understanding were:  1. Identify the socioeconomic characteristics (inferred from socioeconomicstrata) of  informal recyclers and dealers to subsequently analyze their distribution pattern in  the cities  2. Identify working conditions, organizational status, the current market prices of  recyclable materials, treatment performed, transportation modes and their political  awareness   3. Identify working conditions and operations' characteristics at the Alqueria Transfer  Station, recycling capacity and staff size, selling prices of the recyclable materials,  role division within the ARB organization, informal recycling routes and the  perception and expectations regarding an inclusive SWMS in Bogotá  For this purpose, questionnaires for recyclersbytrade and dealers in Cali were  conducted, as well as an interview with the president of the Recyclers' Association of Bogotá  (Asociacion de Recicladores de Bogotá (ARB)). During the questionnaire process carried out in  this study, the difficulties associated with dangerous conditions were experienced. This was a  limiting factor when conducting the questionnaires to recyclersbytrade in the Calvario  56

neighbourhood, as according to the commander in chief of the police, it was recommended  that the researcher should go with a team of four armed police officers.   The second step consisted of developing a normative system that supports the  sustainable and inclusive solid waste management in developing countries, recognizing the  various stakeholders, as well as the environmental, financial and social goals. The options for  managing recurrent issues were itemized; e.g. different waste collection arrangements by  characteristics of the waste (quantity, composition, socioeconomics and cultural aspects),  options for mandated roles for the stakeholders, from collection and sorting to recycling and  after use, as well as associations with vehicle options for transporting sorted household waste.  The last step consisted in developing a set of measures and recommendations to assure the  success of the normative system for a sustainable and inclusive solid waste management in  Colombia.   Confidentiality was sustained throughout the research process. The only organization  and respondent names that have been disclosed in this paper pertain to the Recyclers'  Association of Bogotá and its president. The purpose of carrying out direct interviews was to  assess which aspects need to be improved to achieve higher recycling rates, as well as formalize  the informal recycling routes. It can also help to assess the applicability of reproducing this  mediumsize transfer station experience in other areas throughout the cities in Colombia. It  also provided the opportunity to corroborate and enhance the data available from secondary  sources. Table 5 illustrates the various data source used to build up the case study.      Table 5. Data Sources Regarding the Case Study 
Source  Recyclersby trade in Cali  Data  Socioeconomic information;  working days; potentially  recyclable materials (PRM)  collected; place of collection;   transportation type;  treatment; prices of sale;  organizational level; and  knowledge of the policy  advancements regarding the  Method  104 questionnaires   Data concerns  It was not possible to perform these  same questionnaires to recyclers in  Bogotá, due to direct order from the  ARB to discontinue the socioeconomic  characterization study conducted in a  joint venture between the UAESP and  the Pontificia Universidad Javeriana of  Bogotá. Due to time and financial  constraints, the population was 

57

Dealers in Cali 

President of  Recyclers'  Association of  Bogotá (ARB) 

Director,  Graduate  Program at  Pontificia  Universidad  Javeriana of  Bogotá  rra 

informal recycling sector  Socioeconomic information;    PRM purchased; treatment;  prices of purchase and sale;  organizational level;   knowledge of the policy  advancements regarding the  informal recycling sector  Operational structure at the  Alqueria, the working  conditions  of recyclers  at the  ARB, and the ARB's proposal  regarding the monetary  recognition for their service  Anecdotal information of the  results on the socio demographic characterization  of recyclersbytrade in Bogotá  

Four questionnaires 

sampled, rather than being complete  Due to time and money constraints,  and safety concerns the population  was selectively sampled, rather than  being complete 

 An interview   Document containing  sale prices of recyclables   Four PDF documents  regarding the Alqueria  Transfer Station   Meeting to discuss the  thesis topic and  direction 

Access to information regarding the  informal routes of collection was  denied. Details regarding the  socioeconomic analysis were also  denied.   Opportunities of obtaining the results  of the sociodemographic  characterization of recyclers in Bogotá  were denied after an employee from  the UAESP, responsible for authorizing  this study was dismissed from the  position     

CiViSOL 

Mayor's Office  of Santiago de  Cali 

Special  Administrative  Unit of Public  Services  (UAESP) of  Bogotá 

Summarized information  regarding the litigation  process of recyclersbytrade  in Colombia   Detailed information  regarding the litigation  process of recyclersbytrade  in Colombia     Introduction to key  stakeholders belonging to the  informal recycling sector in  Colombia  Sociodemographic and  socioeconomic  characterization of the  informal recycling sector in  Cali and the organizational and  working conditions of  recyclersbytrade in Cali  MSW composition and  quantities according to the  various income levels and  localities and Doña Juana  Landfill waste characterization 

Unpublished article  regarding policy  advancements   Extraordinary Report  Number 6  passed to the  Constitutional Court of  Colombia referencing  the Sentence T291 of  2009 

 

3 documents regarding  the informal Recycling  community of Cali 

 

 Published document  regarding the  characterization and  quantification of MSW in  Bogotá    2 excel documents 

District  Secretariat of  Planning of  Bogotá 

Provided appropriate records  of Bogotá's income levels  stratification 

GIS shapefiles  

The sample size households of the  final report was small due to the  limited sampling size sample  determined by a 90% confidence level,  17 households were analyzed per  income level. Results were valid only  as indications, and not as exact  statements of the waste composition   

58

Chapter 6. Case Study     The following chapter provides a detailed description of Colombia's waste generation and  composition and its current SWMS, with special focus on Bogotá. This is followed by a detailed  explanation of the current recycling system in Colombia and the social aspects associated with  it, as well as the policy development regarding recyclersbytrade in Colombia.    6.1 Colombia's Waste Generation and Composition and its Current SWMS, with  Special Focus on Bogotá      Currently, Colombia produces 25 079 tons per day of solid waste. Bogotá is responsible for  23.48%, followed by Cali responsible for 8.0% and Medellin with slightly less. The per capita  waste generation is 0.6 kg/per capita/day. However, it varies substantially among cities; while  big cities like Bogotá produce 0.95 kg/per capita/day of waste and small cities produce  0.31kg/per capita/day (Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali, 2009). If these values are compared  to the estimates of waste generation according to the country's income level reported by  Cointreau (2008), the average daily waste generation of Colombia is equal to a low or middle income country. Small cities in Colombia have a daily waste generation of lowincome countries  and big cities like Bogotá are equal to middle or highincome countries.   According to the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali (2009), 96% of the urban areas  provide waste collection and transportation services, whereas rural areas only have 1.6%  coverage by area. There are 1 112 municipalities in Colombia, out of which 97.8% have  available data regarding final disposal practices. Based on the Unique Information System of  Public Services of Colombia (Sistema Unico de Informacion de Servicios Publicos (SUI)) (2009),  80.21% of the total waste produced is disposed of in sanitary landfills, 10.03% is disposed of in  transition containment units, 7.56% is disposed in open dumps and 2.20% is disposed in other  ways, such as uncontrolled dumping of waste directly into water bodies, burial sites or waste  59

burnoff sites. Figure 5 illustrates the percentage of municipalities within each department in  Colombia that use sanitary landfills or integral plants as their final disposal methods.    Figure 5. Final Disposal Methods in the Departments of Colombia (SUI, 2009)                                      
Final disposal of Solid Waste in Sanitary Landfill and Treatment Plants

   

Over 90% of the municipalities use sanitary landfills or integral plants as final disposal modes  60%  90% of the municipalities use sanitary landfills or integral plants as final disposal modes >60% of municipalities use sanitary landfills or integral plants as final disposal modes 

         

60

The Ministry of the Environment, Housing and Territorial Development (Ministerio de  Ambiente, Vivienda, Desarrollo y Territorio (MAVDT)) passed Resolution 1390 in 2005, which  prohibited municipalities from having open dumps and other inadequate final waste disposal  methods. Subsequently, sanitary landfills were pointed out as the only system that could be  recognized in the waste management household billings. In addition, Resolution 351 and 352 of  2005 determined the new billing system, which is oriented towards the desegregation of costs  by activity and the acknowledgment of the costs of final waste disposal (General Secretariat of  the Mayor's Office of Bogotá, 2005).  The implementation of the resolutions created in 2005 in municipalities lacking sanitary  landfill, has been a slow transition. Such is the case of the city of Cali that closed Navarro Open  Dump -- which had operated since 1973 -- in 2008 (Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali, 2009).  In addition, the municipality has made broken promises to Navarro's Dump waste pickers,  regarding alternatives to their livelihood since the closure of the Dump in 2008. Until today, the  municipality has ignored the Court's petition to implement social inclusiveness into the design  of waste management as set out by the adhoc committee chosen by the Court (rra, 2010).  On the other hand, the MAVDT stipulated the guidelines for an Integral Solid Waste  Management Plan (Plan de Gestion Integral de Residuos Solidos (PGIRS)), which is managed by  one of the 33 autonomous regional corporations (General Secretariat of the Mayor's Office of  Bogotá, 2002).  Although 639 municipalities have already implemented the PGRIS, 42% have  not proceeded with its implementation (SUI, 2006). In fact, the PGIRS does not take into  consideration its institutional, financial or even technical viability.    The current municipal solid waste management systems in Colombia have not  recognized recycling as an important and integral feature. This is reflected in the lack of the  valorisation of the potentially recyclable materials. As a result of this, there is a lack of formal  recycling, as well as a poor recycling culture and an almost nonexistent participation in source  separation at the household level (Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali, 2009).    According UAESP (2009), the perception of Bogotá's citizens in regards to source  separation shows that: the majority (31%) does not think it is important; 25% indicate that they  61

do not have the time or space to accumulate recyclable materials; 19% who complain the  garbage collection truck mixes the waste; and 15% that believe they generate too little waste to  have the need to recycle. The remaining population expresses that they have insufficient  incentives for recycling or have only one garbage can at home.  In addition, it has been noted  that waste management decisionmakers believe -- based on their studies -- that composting  does not have a market and therefore, it is not a viable option (senior employee from UAESP of  Bogotá. Interview via email. 22 September 2010).    Bogotá    The climate in Bogotá is cold and dry, with an average temperature of 14 °C and mist as a  predominant phenomenon. The annual precipitation distribution is bimodal with maximum  peaks in April and October and minimum peaks in January and July, with an average annual  precipitation of 799 mm (DANE, 2005).  Bogotá city is located 2 640 meters above sea level with  an estimated 7 304 384 inhabitants and an annual population growth rate of 2.1% (IDEAM,  2000). For the purpose of billing and subsidizing public services such as waste management, the  District Planning Secretariat of Bogotá has stratified the city in different income levels or strata  ranging from one to six. According to this classification, income level 1 receives a subsidy of  50% in its waste management billing, while income level 2 receives a subsidy of 40% and  income level 3 receives a subsidy of 15% (Figure 6) (Dane, 2009).   Six Areas of Exclusive Service (Areas de Servicio Exclusivo (ASE)) for curbside waste  collection within Bogotá have been established. Each area includes different localities that  contain various neighbourhoods. ASE 1 includes Usaquén and Suba localities. ASE 2 includes  Fontibón and Engativá. ASE 3 includes Chapinero, Barrios Unidos, Teusaquillo, Mártires, Santa  Fe and Candelaria localities. ASE 4 includes Puente Aranda, Tunjuelito and Ciudad Bolívar  localities. ASE 5 includes Antonio Nariño, Rafael Uribe, Usme and San Cristóbal localities. ASE 6  includes Kennedy and Bosa localities (UAESP and CIIA, 2005).     62

                                              Although Bogotá has implemented a lowscale recycling project at the Alqueria Transfer  Station, the prevailing recycling system in Bogotá, as in the rest of Colombia, is characterized by  its unsystematic and fragmented nature, as well as the poverty and marginalized conditions of  recyclersbytrade CiViSOL (2011). The Alqueria Transfer station has been operating since 2006.  It receives PRM from curbside Selective Micro Routes (Ruta de Recolección Selectiva (RRS)),  63
District Planning Secretariat of Bogotá (2010)    Income   Levels 

Figure 6. Distribution Pattern by Income Level in Bogotá, Colombia  

which operate once a week. A total of 73 RRS collect PRM of approximately 30% (663 078) of  the total amount of users of waste management service in Bogotá, which are distributed in 16  localities covering 221 neighbourhoods (UAESP, 2009).   In regards to the final disposal of waste, Bogotá has a sanitary landfill called Doña Juana,  which has been operating since 1988.  It has an area of 456 hectares of which 40% is utilized as  a landfill, where the waste is distributed among eight zones (Figure 7).      Figure 7. Doña Juana Sanitary Landfill and the Distribution of Waste by Zones 

  SCS Engineers (2007) It receives 6 000 tons of waste daily, a total of 2.2 million tons of waste annually.  Currently, it has approximately 26 000 000 tons of disposed waste, and its closure is projected  for 2016 due to potential expansion of the landfill, with a total of 47 000 000 tons of disposed  waste; otherwise, it would have been closed before. The composition of waste at the landfill is  disaggregated the following way:  clay (0.06%), bricks (0.11%), leather (0.33%), minerals  (0.38%), cardboard (0.76%), wood (1.03%), metals (1.13%), glass (1.72%), textiles (4.45%) paper  (8.92%), plastics and rubber (19.71%) and biodegradable (61.58%) (Figure 8) (SCS Engineers,  2007). If compared to the worldwide MSW composition values presented by Cointreau (2006),  Bogotá presents a similar composition to the ones observed in low and middle income  countries.   64

Figure 8. Waste Characterization at Doña Juana Sanitary Landfill in Bogotá, Colombia 
Waste Composition at Doña Juana Landfill from 2001 to 2009 
100.00 80.00 60.00 % 40.00 20.00 0.00 2001 2002 2003 2004 Year 2005 2006 2008 2009

Leather

Ceramic

Brick

Wood

Metals

Organic Matter

Paper  Cardboard

Plastic  Rubber

Others

Textile  

Glass

UAESP and CIIA (2005)   According to SCS Engineers (2007) the final coverage includes a layer of clay, a biosolid  mix, dark earth and grass as the top layer. The landfill's bottom waterproofing includes the  following layers: clay, texturized geomembrane, geotextile, ground limestone and gravel. Due  to the continuous functioning schedule at Doña Juana Sanitary Landfill, a temporarily plastic  sheet is used to cover waste which has not been disposed of in the discharge area or if it is in  the process of final closure.  The plastic used is a woven canvas covered in a polyethylene film  that increases its impermeable properties.  There is no recycling inside the landfill and the  entire complex is enclosed. However, Doña Juana has a leachate treatment plant that has been  operating since 2002 and includes physical, chemical and biological processes.  According to SCS Engineers (2007), the growth of disposed waste is expected to be  2.08% per year under the current conditions. They suggest that if implementing recycling  policies in the following years --that do not take into consideration the informal recycling  sector-- the estimated annual growth is expected to behave as shown in table 6:            65

Table 6. Annual Expected Growth of the Disposed Waste (SCS Engineers, 2007) 
Year  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016  Linear Projection of Disposed Tons  1 994 906  2 035 625  2 076 343  2 117 061  2 157 780  2 198 498  2 239 216  2 279 935  2 320 653  2 361 371  2 402 090  Proportion of Material Recycled    1%  2%  3%  4%  5% 6%  7%  8%  9%  10%  Total Tons  1 994 906  2 015 269  2 034 816  2 053 550  2 071 469  2 088 573 2 104 863  2 120 339  2 135 001  2 148 848  2 161 881 

  During the study on the quantification and characterization of PRM contained within the  MSW generated in Bogotá, the percentage of PRM was expected to increase with income level.  However, the percentage of PRM by income level at the landfill showed a different behaviour.  Income level 1 exhibited a value higher than income levels 2, 3 and 4. Income level 2 exhibited  the lowest value with 16.7% and income level 6 showed the highest value with 22.9% (UAESP  and CIIA, 2005).  According to UAESP and CIIA (2005), the percentage of PRM analyzed in the sampled  households did not show a clear relation with income level (Figure 9). Although, high values  belonged to the highest income levels (income level 5 with 30.7% and income level 6 with  Figure 9. Household % PRM by Income Level
Household % PRM within each Income Level
40

36.3%), in the other income levels  there was no defined tendency.  Income level 1 with 27.1% was quite  similar to income level 4 with only  23.5%. The UAESP and CIIA (2005) 

% PRM

30 20 10 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Income  Level % PRM

have suggested that this could be  due to the high variation observed in  the quantities of waste collected per 

UAESP and CIIA (2005) 

week among the different households. It was also suggested that it was due the fact that  66

informal recyclers are not inclined to collect PRM in areas belonging to income level 1. Instead,  they tend to collect recyclables in areas of higher income levels. Another possibility is the  existence of an internal reuse chain among income levels, especially observed for textiles,  which are passed from higher to lower income levels. However, due to the extent of this  research, it was not possible to corroborate these hypotheses.   According to UAESP and CIIA (2005), the percentage of PRM found in the sampled  households, showed higher values than the ones reported at the landfill --with 24% in  households against 18% at landfill. This might also be indication the effects of informal  recyclers' activities. However, again due to the extent of this research, it was not possible to  corroborate this hypothesis.  According to UAESP and CIIA (2005), the composition of PRM at the household level  reported is as follows: paper and cardboard 39%, plastics 37%, glass 13%, textiles 6% and  metals 5%. These values differ from the ones reported at the landfill, where plastics were 45%,  paper and cardboard 23%, textiles 15% and metals 6%. They observed that paper and  cardboard showed a tendency to increase with income level. Glass followed the same pattern  and metals and plastics also increased with income level, but their values were very close. On  the other hand, textiles decreased with income level. However, income level 1 presented the  highest value with 4.6%, while income levels 4, 5 and 6 were 1.9% (Figure 10).   Figure 10. Percentages of PRM by Income Level 
Percentages of Different Materials of PRM Generated within each Income Level 
20 15

 %

10 5 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Income Level
Paper and cardboard Glass Metals  Plastics Textiles

UAESP and CIIA (2005) 

67

Preliminary investigations suggest that the per capita RSW generation exhibited a  function of income level, where the highest income level presented the highest waste  generation, which coincides with the pattern identified for other areas. In addition, the relation  between family income and quantity of PRM showed that the quantity of PRM rises with  increasing family income (UAESP and CIIA, 2005).   According UAESP and CIIA (2005), ASE 1 which includes Usaquen and Suba localities  presented the highest generation of PRM. On the other hand, ASE 4 which includes Puente  Aranda, Tunjuelito and Ciudad Bolivar localities presented the lowest contribution of PRM. Each  locality is composed by various neighbourhoods belonging to different income levels (Figure  11).   Figure 11. Quantity of PRM by Locality
Quantity of PRM Generation in each  Locality (tons/day)
Total PRM (Tons/day)
100 80 60 40 20 0

Localities

UAESP and CIIA (2005)    6.2 The Recycling System in Colombia and its Social Component     According to the Mayors' Office of Santiago de Cali, the current recycling rate in Colombia is as  low as 13% out of the 25 079 tons of waste produced daily. Informal recyclers collect 7% of the  total percentage recycled. Colombia is typical of developing countries in that it presents an  informal recycling sector composed by dealers, wholesalers and recyclersbytrade with  itinerant waste buyers, street waste pickers and dump waste pickers. This informal sector is  68

Ba Su rr ba io s U ni do Te s us aq ui llo M ár An tir to es ni o  N Pu ar iñ en o te  A ra nd a Ca nd el ar Ra ia fa el  U Ci rib ud e ad  B ol íva r

Us aq ué n Ch ap in er o Sa nt a  Sa Fe n  Cr ist ób al

Us m e Tu nj ue lit o

Ke nn ed y Fo nt ib ón En ga tiv á

Bo sa

dedicated to the recovery of potentially recyclable materials for their subsequent  commercialization.  The informal recycling sector has existed for over 60 years in Colombia.  At present it is  estimated to involve 20 000 families, of which 30% belong to an organization and the remaining  70% work independently. According to the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali (2009) there are  estimated 128 organizations of recyclersbytrade associated with the ANR. However, the ANR  approximation of the recyclersbytrade community in Colombia is substantially higher. They  have estimated that there are 50 000 families with a total of 300 000 individuals involved (ANR,  2010).  According to ANR (2008), it is difficult to establish the precise origins of the recyclersby trade in Colombia as it has not been documented. However, during the decade of the 1950s  Colombia was mainly rural (70%) and going through a violent political episode caused by the  confrontations between the liberal and conservative parties. This conflict resulted in the death  of thousands of peasants, leaving widows and orphans. Not having other options, this  population migrated to the cities creating a homeless and urban poor community. During this  same period, Colombia's industry was very precarious and the lack of materials such as paper,  metal and containers was prevalent. Under these circumstances, the urban poor found  livelihood opportunities in waste collection (ANR, 2008).   According to Restrepo (2009), the violent political situation in Colombia along with the  migration of peasants to the cities, continue to influence the composition of the informal  recycling sector. This is the case of many displaced families that as a result of the last decade of  violence have moved to cities like Medellín, resorting to waste picking for subsistence. On the  other hand, according to Agudelo et al. (2007), the majority of recyclersbytrade (46.4%) in  Medellín have worked in this trade for over 10 years, followed by 3 to 5 years (24.7%), which is  followed by 6 to 10 years (17.5%) and less than 1 year and up to 2 years (11.4%).  It was during the 1980s that the informal recycling community began to gain social  acknowledgement. This response took place as a result of the closure of two open dumps in the  cities of Medellin and Bogotá.  The closure of these open dumps threatened the livelihoods of  69

600 to 800 families, which were dedicated to the recovery of recyclable materials.   Subsequently, two cooperatives were created, becoming the first attempts of cooperativism in  Colombia. Eventually, the ANR was founded in 1990 during the first National Meeting of  Recyclers announced by the ARB (ANR, 2008).    During the 1990s, Bogotá's mayor recognized the ANR as a notforprofit legal  organization, which drove the ANR to establish regional representation. Such regional  representation includes ARCON on the Atlantic Coast, FEDESURCO on the southwest, ARCESCO  on Huila and Caqueta and ARR in the coffeegrowing region. Since then, ANR has created links  with various organizations and has continued to advance and reach thousands of recyclers  across Colombia (Figure 12). Although, the ANR has made significant progress contributing to  the consolidation of recyclers' organizations at the national, regional and local levels, the social  and economic reality of recyclers is far from  ideal (ANR, 2008).   The Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali  (2009) has suggested that the lack of  cohesiveness and higher organizational systems  in Colombia are affecting these actors in two  ways. On one hand, their capacity and efficiency  in terms of the recycling rates achieved are  being lowered. On the other hand, they are  creating an uneven economic recycling chain  where dealers and recycling industries gain the  highest profits, while recyclersbytrade  continue to be in the bottom of the chain with  the lowest earnings.    Gomez et al. (2008) carried out a study  in Medellín assessing the aspects that affect the productivity of informal recyclers in that city,  through the interview of 209 recyclersbytrade. They found that the majority (37%) of  70 Figure 12. Distribution of Regional  Recyclers' Organizations Belonging to the  ANR (ARB, 2011) 

recyclersbytrade perceived that under their current precarious working conditions, it was not  possible to improve their earnings. On the other hand, 20% perceived that improving the selling  prices of the collected recyclables could improve their income and living conditions.   The continuous development of big cities in Colombia such as Bogotá, Cali and Medellín  presents many challenges. Among these, the current recycling system raises some concern,  especially the social aspect associated with it. This social concern is due to the fact that in  Colombia 10% of the urban poorest belong to the recyclersbytrade community (Gomez et al.  2008). According to Agudelo et al. (2007), over 80% of recyclersbytrade in Medellín have said  that they work in this trade due to unemployment, while 11.3% due to tradition and 8.2%  because they like it. Thus, recycling is not limited to only being a technical and environmental  issue but also a social one. This is of special concern when cities' recycling goals increase and  with it more professional, technical and formal attitudes towards recycling activities might be  required, representing more challenges for the informal recycling sector in Colombia.   The capacity to transport recyclable materials, which also affects their productivity,  varies according to the transportation availability for each recyclerbytrade. Depending on  their earnings, the main modes of transportation in Colombia include a sack, handpulled cart,  tricyclepulled cart, horsepulled cart and a motorizedpulled cart (Appendix A). The largest  group of these (33.33%) transport between 41kg/day and 70kg/day, while a small percentage  (13.4%) transports 71kg/day to 250kg/day (Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali, 2009). These  differences in the recycling capacity --due to their precarious conditions and limited capital--  have resulted in an overall inefficient and inconsistent recycling system.   Gomez et al. (2008) performed a study regarding the aspects that influence the  productivity of recyclersbytrade in Medellín. They suggested that the most common mode of  transportation in Medellín is the handpulled cart, which empty weights 50kg. Although this  mode of transportation presents impacts, 63% of the recyclersbytrade interviewed perceived  it as a positive element that increases their productivity. These negative impacts are associated  with the vibrations and the physical exhaustion it causes, as well as the mechanical and  ergonomic risks.   71

Agudelo et al. (2007) had performed a study on the working and health conditions of  recyclersbytrade also in Medellín, through the interview of 97 recyclersbytrade. They  suggested that the handpulled cart requires great physical effort, especially from the arms, the  torso and the legs. Due to having only two wheels, it prevents the use of potential energy.  Another negative aspect is related to the wheels, which are made out of circular metallic plates  covered with recycled rubber from car wheels. This design causes the wheels to lose their  round shape, which subsequently causes a resistance in the motion and increases the vibration.  Lifting and pulling the handpulled cart with the collected PRM that can weigh between 80 to  120kg, also represents an occupational risk.   The informal recycling sector presents overall similar aspects throughout Colombia, such  as the composition of the recycling chain, transportation modes, poverty and marginalized  conditions; as well as health risks associated with their working conditions and a higher  percentage of unorganized recyclersbytrade that work independently.   It is important to note that the number of informal recyclers in Bogotá differs according  to the source. According to the General Secretariat of the Mayor's Office of Bogotá D.C. (2010),  the community of recyclersbytrade in Bogotá is estimated to be 8 479 individuals. However,  an additional 10 027 individuals who are not considered recyclersbytrade, depend on this  activity for their subsistence. On the other hand, according to the president of the ARB, the  community of recyclersbytrade in Bogotá is estimated to be 18 000 individuals (President of  ARB. Personal Interview. 22 March 2011).    The findings in the socioeconomic study assessing Cali's informal recycling sector have  suggested that this sector presents a low capacity to recover, accumulate and transform  potentially recyclable materials. As a result, informal recyclers do not have the possibility to  generate addedvalue from the collected materials and gain higher incomes. According to  Gomez et al. (2008), the informal recyclers' community in Medellín lives in poverty conditions.  This is due to the fact that the majority of this population (over 80%) base their income  exclusively on waste picking. According to the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali (2009) "77.6%  of the households of recyclersbytrade in Cali gain less than the minimum wage a month  72

(COP$353 600 or USD $202.24 at the current exchange rate)". Similarly as stated by Agudelo et  al. (2007) "in Medellín, 87% of informal recyclers have low salaries (less than 8  per day that is  equal to approximately USD $11.3 per day), which is insufficient to cover their basic  necessities". According to Gomez et al. (2008) "almost 60% of the informal recyclers'  community belong to socioeconomic strata 0, 1 and 2".  According to the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali (2009), private recycling companies  have been introduced in recent years in the recycling market of Cali. These companies have  developed infrastructure and the capacity to access waste from the most productive areas,  which has displaced recyclersbytrade. Subsequently, these new circumstances have  deteriorated recyclersbytrade's working conditions observed in longer working hours and less  income. This is reflected in the statistics that show that 80% of informal recyclers have  expressed their incapability in assuming all household expenses and their low access to credit,  which is only 14.4%.    The average age of recyclersbytrade for both sexes in Cali according to the Mayor's  Office of Santiago de Cali (2009), is 38.6 years old. Men constitute 65.5% and women 34.5%.  According to Agudelo et al. (2007), the gender distribution in Medellín is 66% male and 33%  female. According to the General Secretariat of the Mayor's Office of Bogotá D.C. (2010), the  gender distribution in Bogotá is 51.2% men and 48.8% women. The age range with the highest  concentration of males is 18 to 40 years old (22.7%), followed by the range of 5 to 17 (20.9%),  which is considered child labour. Similarly, women's highest concentration by age range is 18 to  40 (22.4%).   In regards to education levels, according to the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali  (2009), 67% of recyclersbytrade find themselves with only the primary level of education,  whether completed or not. The main reasons for not continuing with their education include  financial constraints and lack of interest in education.  According to the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali (2009), recyclersbytrade work an  average of 6 days per week. However, their working hours have increased from eight to nine  hours per day, yet their earnings have not increased. On the other hand, according to Gomez et  73

al. (2008), recyclersbytrade spend an average of 8.23 hours per day. This time is distributed in  the following way: 1.32 hours are spent travelling to the specific location where they rent and  store their transportation mode (e.g. handpulled cart), and then travelling to the place where  they begin their route and finally travelling back to the storage place at the end of the day. They  spend 6 hours recovering PRM, while spending an average of 37 minutes selecting the material  and transporting it to the selling sites (dealers).  As stated by Gomez et al. (2008) the majority of recyclersbytrade (76%) obtain PRM  from the direct opening of garbage bags and cans  put out for collection (Figure 13), 18% obtain PRM  directly from waste generators, while only 4% find  them properly separated. They also found that the  most productive schedule for collecting PRM was  from 6:00 am to 8:00 am (34%), followed by 4:00 am  to 6:00 am (17%), then 8:00 am to 10:00 am (13%).  In regards to the treatment given to PRM, 66%  organize it, while 20% clean it and 10% leave it as is.  Lastly, the productivity and income according to  recyclersbytrade's perception is mainly dependent  on the quantity of the materials they collect (48%),  followed by the capacity of the transportation mode  (18%). The weather and the individual's capacity  were both rated similarly (12%), followed by the  competition for the material (9%).   According to Gomez et al. (2008), it was found that a high percentage of recyclersby trade (38%) perceived that the personalized delivery of PRM was considered the best way to  increase their productivity, followed by collective agreements with waste producers (26%) and  source separation (13%). The income of recyclersbytrade was found to be directly  proportional to the quantity of recovered PRM.    74 Figure 13. Street Waste Pickers  Collecting PRM (Courtesy of ARB, 2011)

In regard to the value of the collected recyclable materials, copper has the highest  commercial value per kilogram (average price of sale in Colombian pesos COP$5 200 which is  equal to CAD$1 at the current exchange rate); however its recovery is low. Paper on the other  hand has an average selling price of COP$360 per kilogram, and it registered the highest  recovery rates by recyclersbytrade. Glass presents the lowest selling value (Gomez et al.  2008). According to the General Secretariat of the Mayor's Office of Bogotá D.C. (2010), the  most sold recyclable materials by recyclersbytrade are cardboard and paper. The highest  added value is found in plastics, cardboard and paper. In Bogotá, the highest concentration of  dealers is found in the localities of Kennedy, Los Mártires, Bosa, Suba, Engativá and Puente  Aranda. On the other hand, the highest concentration of dealers in Cali is found in El Calvario,  Sucre, Fepicol, Mauela Beltran and Porvenir (Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali, 2009).    6.3 Policy Development Regarding Recyclersbytrade in Colombia Led by CiViSOL     The legal status of recyclersbytrade in Colombia has vacillated over the past decade,  presenting fluctuations regarding the legal status of their trade. These fluctuations have been  mainly determined by the different municipalities that, by attempting to improve the waste  management service only considering the environmental, technical and financial aspects of it,  have excluded the participation of recyclersbytrade.  According to the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali (2009), it has been noted that  municipalities around Colombia perceive that a drastic change of roles regarding the various  stakeholders involved in SWMS will occur in the mediumterm. This change is associated with  the control of waste by privatized big companies; which would gradually exclude recyclersby trade from their occupation.   Throughout this past decade, the informal recycling sector has received the support of  voluntary lawyers, such as the CiViSOL Foundation. It is important to note that the legal and  constitutional advancements made in Colombia have set a precedent. It is thanks to this  precedent that the inclusive waste management alternatives are now possible.  However, it is  75

also thanks to the results of scientific case studies --showcasing the environmental, financial  and social benefits of inclusive waste management models-- that have made the development  of such inclusive policies possible.   Overall, CiViSOL has been working towards improving the living and working conditions  of recyclersbytrade through legal empowerment since 2003. So far, the foundation has  contributed to the implementation of recyclersbytrade's rights to their livelihood and their  empowerment as "entrepreneurs of waste" (CiViSOL, 2011). According to CiViSOL (2011) "This is  not a process of philanthropic nature or public social assistance. This is a reform to public policy  and the configuration of spaces to allow systemic and autonomous inclusion in the public  service of waste management".   According to rra (Public Law + Social Innovation) attorneys & consultants (2010), a New  York and Bogotábased law firm, the summary of the litigation history in Colombia regarding  the informal recycling sector is as shown in Table 7. The following table illustrates the dates  that certain laws which threatened the livelihood of recyclersbytrade in Colombia were  implemented. The table also shows the Supreme Court of Colombia's response which resulted  from the voluntary legal intervention of CiViSOL foundation and other independent lawyers.     Although informal recyclers have now been legitimized, in practice their real integration  to the SWMS has not yet been achieved. According to rra (2010), due to corruption surrounding  the bidding for the recycling contract at Doña Juana Landfill in Bogotá, the participation of  informal recyclers has not been determined. Broken promises have been made by the  municipality to Navarro's Dump Waste Pickers in Cali, regarding alternatives to their livelihood  since the closure of the Dump in 2008 and until today the municipality of Cali has not  implemented the inclusive waste management adhoc committee designed.             76

Table 7. The Litigation History in Colombia Regarding the Informal Recycling Sector (rra, 2010) 
Year  Situation and effects  2002   Informal recyclers were excluded from  2003  competing for one of the six waste  collection and transportation contracts in  Bogotá. This exclusion was based on the  fact they are not equityowned  corporations. Instead, they are non profit and solidaritybased organizations,  such as cooperatives.  2002  Article 28 of Decree 1713  Municipalities throughout Colombia  were granted the property rights to  waste once it was put out for collection.  This decree prevented recyclersbytrade  from claiming an entitlement to collect  recyclables.  2003   The conditions for competing in waste  management contracts issued by the  municipality of Bogotá were designed in  such a limiting way that it again excluded  recyclersbytrade's organizations from  competing.  2008   Law 1259 of 2008   2009  Forbade not only the opening of garbage  bags or cans put out for collection, but  also the transportation of waste in non motorized vehicles. Subsequently, this  law threatened the trade that informal  recyclers in Colombia engage in, as they  belong to the urban poor and do not  possess sites to extract waste or  motorized vehicles to transport  recyclables.              Also, Navarro dump waste pickers (1200  individuals) in Cali were evicted when  the dump was closed in 2008. This  eviction was done without providing an  alternative to their livelihood.  2009  Recyclersbytrade's livelihood remained  illegal according to Law 1259.    Response  Court Ruling T7242003  As a result of voluntary legal intervention, the Constitutional Court  stated that the public biddings for waste management contracts  could not exclude recyclersbytrade's cooperatives from  competing.   

Article 28 was derogated by Article 10 of Decree 1505   As a result of the voluntary legal intervention the Court expressed  that after garbage bags and cans were discarded for collection, they  were considered abandoned property.  This allowed recyclersby trade's organizations to collect recyclables, as well as to compete in  municipal waste collection and transportation contracts.   As a result of the voluntary legal intervention of, the Court  requested effective actions for the inclusion of recyclersbytrade  organizations in future bidding contracts of waste management 

Court Ruling T2912009  As a result of the legal intervention of CiViSOL, the Court stipulated  that recyclersbytrade's organizations must be included in future  public bid processes associated with the cleanliness public service.  In addition, under the right to equality stated in Article 13 of the  Colombian Constitution of 1991, the Court pressured the  municipalities to incorporate marginalized and discriminated groups  in the administrative procurement processes.  It also stipulated that  public biddings for cleanliness contracts in Colombia must: (a)  ensure participation of recyclersbytrade's organizations (b) enable  organized recyclersbytrade to access to bidding processes and (c)  guarantee that largescale corporate bidders must operate  contracts with recyclersbytrade as organizations and not as  individual employees. For this purpose, a scoring criterion was set to  measure largescale corporate bidders' efforts to operate waste  management contracts with recyclersbytrade's organizations.  The Court recognized the rights to a livelihood, food, education and  dignified housing and health of Navarro's dump waste pickers. Thus,  it ordered the municipality of Cali to guarantee their fulfilment. To  assure this, the Court requested an adhoc committee to design and  implement an inclusive waste management policy for the city of Cali  within the next six months.   Ruling C793 of 2009   The court consent to exceptionally not apply its relevant conditions  by the competent authorities. This was due to human rights  implications.  

  77

Chapter 7. Results and Discussion     7.1 Results    Questionnaires were conducted to 104 out of the 3200 recyclersbytrade and to 4 out of 359  dealers in Cali. Although the sampled population of recyclersbytrade is small and statistical  rigour cannot be demonstrated, it does provide an idea of what the current issues for recyclers bytrade in Cali are. Similarly, although the sampled population of dealers is really small and not  statistically representative, it does give an idea of the prices paid for the collected PRM. It is  also useful as a comparison with the prices of sale according to recyclersbytrade. The  questionnaires were done in a period of two weeks during the month of March 2011 and they  were conducted in areas where there is a high concentration of dealer shops, such as el  Calvario and Siloe neighbourhoods. Questionnaires were also conducted in the street during  the waste collection days, as well as at two meetings of recyclers' organizations.  The  questionnaires are found in Appendix B. Table 8 illustrates some of the results obtained from  the questionnaires conducted to recyclersbytrade in Cali.   The interview conducted with the president of ARB is found in Appendix C. The  interview provided clearer insight into the organizational structure and division of roles within a  well established organization of recyclers in Colombia, as well as to have a better understanding  of the operations and recycling capacity of the lowscale recycling system in the Alqueria  Transfer Station. The interview also allowed an assessment of the applicability of reproducing  this mediumsize transfer station experience in other areas throughout the cities in Colombia,  as well it provided useful data for comparing the prices of sale between Cali and Bogotá. In  addition, it provided the opportunity to assess the ARB's perception and expectations regarding  an inclusive SWMS in Bogotá.        78

Table 8. Results from the Questionnaires Conducted to Recyclersbytrade in Cali, Colombia  Gender ratio   Socioeconomic strata  Period of time engaged  in recycling   Working days per  week  73% men  89% stratum 1  30% from 6 to 10 years and  17.31% from 11 to 15 years  41%  work 3 days per week  and 27% work 6 days per  week  Sources of obtaining  97% obtain PRM from  PRM  garbage bags and cans  Transportation modes  74% use a handpulled cart  (owned or rented)  Buyers of the PRM   98% sale directly to dealers Treatment performed  96% only classify collected  to PRM  PRM  Degree of classification  55% do not classify and sale  of plastics  mixed plastic  27% women  10% stratum 2   35.6% over 16 years   16% work 7 days per week   

3% other sources (e.g. paper industry)  14% use tricyclepulled cart, 10% use  sack and 2% other  2% other  4% carry out other preprocessing  activities to collected PRM   38% classify plastic in plastic bags and  containers and 7% classify plastic  according to its production (extrusion  or injectionblow moulding)  77% also  collect glass   25% present additional income source  33% work Independent   30%  poses some knowledge of the  legal advancements 

Types of PRM collected 95% collect plastics, paper,  cardboard and metals   Income Sources  75% is dedicated solely to  informal recycling   Organizational level  67% belong to recyclers'  organization   Knowledge of  70% do not poses knowledge  Sentence T291  regarding the legal  advancements      

According to the findings of this study, the gender ratio, socioeconomic stratum, period 

of time engaged as recyclers, working days per week, income sources, organizational level,   source of obtaining PRM, transportation modes used, buyers of the PRM collected, types of  PRM collected, and the treatment performed to PRM prior to their sale, show a similar  tendency to the data reported by the Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali (2009), the General  Secretariat of the Mayor's Office of Bogotá, Agudelo et al. (2007), and Gomez et al. (2008). 

79

The alternative income sources reported by the respondents were the collection of  debris, purchase and sale of metal scrap and construction for men, and house cleaning for  women. According to the results drawn from the questionnaires conducted to recyclersby trade, it is observed that the majority (70%) is not informed regarding the policy advancements  concerning the informal recycling sector, while 24% had somewhat of a vague idea about the  policy advancements and only 6% knew what the sentence T291 entailed. This has not been  assessed before and no available data exist to compare these results with.   In summary, the values of sale of PRM can be observed in Table 9. As illustrated in this  table, there are major differences between the lowest and highest prices of sale of PRM, which  show inconsistencies in the prices, as well as a lack of a standardized valorization.             Table 9. Lowest and Highest Values of Sale of PRM Reported by Recyclersbytrade in Cali  PRM  Mixed plastics   Plastic bags  Plastic containers  Extrusion blownmoulding  Injection blownmoulding  Newspaper  Paper  Cardboard  Rubber  Liquor glass bottle  Glass bottle  Metal scrap  Mixed aluminum  Aluminum pots  Aluminum cans  Aluminum profile  Bronze  Copper    It was also noted that the majority (over 95%) of the respondents collect cardboard,  paper, plastics and metals. However, metals especially bronze and copper are collected in lower  80 Lowest Price (COP)  $100.00/kg  $50.00/kg  $100.00/kg  $500.00/kg  $400.00/kg  $20.00/kg  $150.00/kg $150.00/kg $100.00/kg $50.00/kg $10.00/unit  $100.00/kg  $800.00/kg  $1 000.00/kg  $1 200.00/kg  $1 500.00/kg  $800.00/kg  $6 000.00/kg  Highest Price (COP)  $500.00/kg   $700.00/kg  $800.00/kg  $950.00/kg  $800.00/kg  $200.00/kg  $600.00/kg  $650.00/kg  $800.00/kg  $200.00/kg  $60.00/unit  $600.00/kg  $8 000.00/kg  $2 400.00/kg  $2 000.00/kg  $3 500.00/kg  $11 000.00/kg  $17 000.00/kg 

amounts. Due to its low commercial value and its heavy weight, glass is collected by a slightly  lower percentage of respondents (77%). Rubber is only collected by 22% of the respondents  and organic waste is only collected by 3%.   In regard to the classification of materials, plastics showed the highest degree of  classification within its own material type. According to the results drawn from the  questionnaires, 55% of the respondents do not classify plastics and they sell them mixed; while  38% classify plastics into two categories, such as plastic bags and containers. The remaining 7%  sort plastics according to the production process it undergoes (injection and extrusionblown  moulding). Figure 14 illustrates the selling prices of plastics according to the different  categories. It is observed that the highest value of sale (per kilogram) of plastic is obtained with  the category of extrusionblown moulding, followed by injectionblown moulding, plastic  containers and mixed plastic. The lowest value of sale corresponds to plastic bags.    Figure 14. Value of Sale per Kilogram of Plastic by Category
100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0%
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 0 9. 9 9. 9 9. 9 9. 9 9. 9 9. 9 9. 9 9.9 9.9 0.0 49 59 29 39 69 19 99 79 89 10  $  $  $   $   $   $   $   $   $   n $ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 a .0 .0 .0 .0 .0 .0 .0 .0 .0 00 s th 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 $7 $8 les $2 $3 $4 $5 $6 $1 $9

Percentages

Values Mixed  Plastics Plastic  Bags Plastic  Containers

Extrusion Blown moulding  Plastics   Extrusion   Blow   Molding   Plastics

Injection  Blown moulding  Plastics   Injection   Blow   Molding   Plastics

  According to the results from the questionnaires, the majority (82%) of the respondents  do not sort aluminum and they sell it mixed. The remainder (18%) classify aluminum in three  types: aluminum pots, cans and profile. The value of sale per kilogram by category of aluminum  is shown in Figure 15.  As illustrated by the figure, almost 90% of recyclersbytrade sell the  kilogram of mixed aluminum for a value ranging from COP$1 000.00 to $2 999.99. It also shows  that the kilogram of aluminum pots and aluminum cans is sold (almost 60% and 80%  81

respectively) for a values ranging from COP$1 000.00 to $1 999.99. The majority of respondents  (over 90%) sell aluminum profile for a value ranging from COP$2 000.00 to $3 999.99, which  displays the highest value of sale.     Figure 15. Value of Sale per Kilogram of Aluminum by Category    
Percentages 100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0%

                 

9 9 9 9 0 9.9 9.9 9.9 9.9 .00 0.0 00 ,99 ,99 ,99 ,99 ,00 0 3 4 1 2 , 1  $  $  $  $  $ $5 0  0  0  0  an er  0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0  th Ov s 0 0 0 0 s 0 0 0 0 , , , , Le $1 $2 $3 $4

Values 
Mixed Aluminium Aluminium  Pots Aluminium  Cans Aluminium  Profile

According to the results drawn from questionnaires conducted to dealers, all the  respondents sell their purchased PRM to wholesalers. The majority (75%) only selects the  purchased PRM, while the remaining (25%) also performs baling. In regard to their  organizational status, the majority belong to an organization. All the respondents said they  purchase from individual recyclersbytrade plastics, paper, cardboard and metals. Table 10  illustrates the average prices of purchase and sale according to the dealers who participated in  the questionnaires. Based on the results drawn from the questionnaires, cardboard displayed  the lowest (10%) profit margin. Copper, aluminum pots and plastic bags exhibited a profit  margin around 20%. Bronze, metal scrap, aluminum sheets and paper displayed a profit margin  around 30%. Aluminum profile and mixed aluminum showed a profit margin around 40%.  Mixed plastic, glass bottles and newspaper, exhibited over 60%, 70% and 90% profit margins,  respectively. Plastic containers and rubber exhibited the highest profit margins with 100% and  120%, respectively.   82

Table 10. The Prices of Purchase and Sale of PRM According to Dealers    Purchase price COP Mixed plastic  $200.00/kg  Plastic bags  $150.00/kg  Plastic containers  $250.00/kg  Newspaper  $50.00/kg   Paper  $426.70/kg  Cardboard  $200.00/kg  Rubber  $250.00/kg  Glass  $50.00/unit  Copper  $10 000.00/kg  Bronze  $5 333.33/kg  Mixed aluminum    $1 900.00/kg Aluminum profile  $2 200.00/kg Aluminum pots  $2 000.00/kg Aluminum sheets  $1 500.00/kg  Metal scrap  $300.00/kg    Figure 16, illustrates the prices of sale of the recyclable material portion of PRM at the  Alqueria Transfer Station during the month of February of 2011. These recyclable materials  include: paper, cardboard, newspaper, pliable paper, glass, flexible plastic, PET, rigid plastic  containers (tatuco), other plastic materials (pasta), metal scrap and aluminum.    Figure 16. Value of Sale of Recyclable Materials at the Alqueria Transfer Station During the   Month of February, 2011. (Courtesy of ARB, 2011)  Sale Price COP  $333.33/kg   $200.00/kg  $500.00/kg  $95.00/kg   $562.50/kg  $220.00/kg  $550.00/kg  $85.00/unit   $11 833.33/kg  $7 166.66/kg  $2 650.00/kg  $3 000.00/kg  $2 400.00/kg  $2 000.00/kg  $392.50/kg 

83

It is possible to compare the different values of sale of recyclable materials by the three  stakeholders (Table 11). These are the 104 interviewed recyclersbytrade in Cali, the four  interviewed dealers in Cali and the reported sale inventory for the month of February of 2011  of the Alqueria Transfer Station.     Table 11. Comparison of Value of Sale of Recyclable Materials  Material  Alqueria Transfer  Recyclersbytrade  Dealers in Cali  Station value of sale in  in Cali value of sale   value of purchase   Bogotá  (COP)  (COP)  (COP)  Paper  $400.00/kg  $432.53/kg  $426.70/kg  Cardboard  $150.00/kg  $208.69/kg  $200.00/kg  Newspaper  $100.00/kg  $77.44/kg  $50.00/kg  Glass  $50.00/unit  $47.24/unit  $50.00/unit  Flexible plastic (plastic bags)  $100.00/kg  $261.56/kg   $150.00/kg  PET  $300.00/kg      Rigid plastic containers  $300.00/kg  $401.28/kg  $250.00/kg  Other plastics  $100.00/kg  $312.86/kg  $200.00/kg  Metal scrap  $70.00/kg  $526.11/kg  $300.00/kg  Aluminum  $800.00/kg  $1 957.14/kg  $1 900.00/kg      As illustrated in Table 11, the value of sale of paper is slightly higher in Cali compared to  Bogotá. This is confirmed both by the average sale value reported by recyclersbytrade and the  average purchase value reported by dealers. A similar situation is observed with the cardboard.  Although the values of sale of flexible plastic, rigid plastic containers, other plastics, metal scrap  and aluminum are higher in Cali compared to Bogotá, the values of purchase reported by the  dealers are lower than the ones reported by recyclersbytrade. In the case of newspaper, the  values of sale are higher in Bogotá than in Cali. However, the value of sale of glass in Bogotá  matches the purchase value of dealers in Cali, which are both lower than the average value of  sale reported by recyclersbytrade.   It is also interesting to note that the categorization of plastic varies according to the  recyclers' knowledge. At the Alqueria Transfer Station in Bogotá plastics are classified in four  types that include flexible plastic, PET, rigid plastic containers (tatuco), and other plastics  84

(pasta). On the other hand, in Cali plastics are classified four different types, which include  plastic bags, plastic containers, extrusion moulding plastics and injection moulding plastics.  Another difference is glass, which at the Alqueria does not have a categorization as the one  observed in Cali with two kinds, namely glass bottles and glass liquor bottles.   An additional difference between the Alqueria and Cali is observed with metals. This is  especially evident for the case of metal scrap and aluminum which have values of sale smaller  in Bogotá compared to Cali. In addition, Cali presents a higher classification of aluminum, as  well as the presence of other metals like bronze and copper. Better data may offer an  explanation for these differences.  According the president of the ARB (2011), the current recycling rate in Bogotá is             1 200tons/day. The Alqueria is a mediumsize transfer station with 100 workers, out of which  70 are permanent and the remaining operate only during the weekends. It has a loading area  where it receives the collected PRM (Appendix D1). The PRM is set on long metal tables in a  ventilated area, where it gets sorted out by uniformed recyclersbytrade. This includes a one piece uniform, back support belt, cap, dust respirator mask, boots and gloves. Next to the metal  tables there are big cans for each type of recyclable material (Appendix D2). The sorted  material is flattened, baled and weighted (Appendix D3). Due to occupational risk concerns,  recyclersbytrade at the transfer station do not lift anything heavier than 60kg; in which case  they use a lifting jack. Then the sorted recyclable materials are set in designated areas  according to the recyclable material type (Appendix D4).   It receives an average of 15tons/day of PRM, out of which only 65% are recyclable  materials and 35% are rejected materials, which are also baled. However, in order for the  Alqueria to be selfsustainable and cover all its operational and administrative costs, it requires  20tons/day of PRM --an amount only received during the month of December. These  administrative costs include payroll of the administrator, the coordinator, the administrative  assistant and the recordkeeper, which reach almost COP$5 000 000.  In regard to the current  state of the cooperative system in Bogotá, she expressed that "there are only three cooperative  companies of associated work, which pay their members' health plan and social benefit".   85

The informal recycling routes carried out by recyclersbytrade are a core component of  informal recycling. For the purpose of this research, it was considered as an important aspect  that requires to be acknowledged when thinking of integrating this sector into the formal  SWMS.  The ARB together with a group of professionals has mapped the informal recycling  collection routes performed by all the recyclersbytrade in Bogotá. However, these data were  not made available.  When inquiring about their present political agenda, the president of the ARB expressed  that presently, they are concentrating their efforts into obtaining the monetary recognition for  their service, in order to change the livelihood of recyclersbytrade. For this purpose, the ARB  has come up with a plan. According to the president of the ARB (2011) and the team of  professionals that has been collaborating with the ARB, the city is currently paying to waste  collection companies in Bogotá COP$145 000 per ton of waste collected, which leaves a profit  margin of 46%.  According the president of the ARB (2011), the ARB's proposal consists of locating  collection trucks in strategic zones in order to receive, weigh, and record the collected PRM of  approximately 35 recyclersbytrade. Then, the collection trucks would transport the PRM to  the dealers' sites. Based on the hours of work of recyclersbytrade and the transportation  costs, they have estimated it will cost COP$385 000 per ton to operate this system.   According to the presidents of the ARB (2011) the value of sale per kilogram of collected  PRM -- without discriminating the type of material collected -- by recyclersbytrade is  estimated to be COP$200. Subsequently, the deduction of this brings down the final cost of  their proposed system to COP$185 000. In addition, the presidents of the ARB explained that  there are savings of COP$90 000 in the transportation due to the surplus stretches in the  collection circuits, which brings down the final cost of their proposed system to COP$95 000.   According to the president of the ARB (2011), the city recognizes the collection service  of PRM COP$70/Kg. The ARB is proposing to divide this amount the following way: COP$56/kg  should be allocated to recyclersbytrade and the remaining COP$14/kg should be allocated to  the transportation trucks who take the PRM to the dealers' sites.   86

7.2 Discussion  The hypothetical model proposed by Jaffe and Nas (2004) which analyzes the interactions in a  political context, the technology employed in a given SWMS, the social setting and the  organizational advancements of recyclersbytrade, could give a glimpse into the success rate of  achieving a Sustainable and Inclusive SWMS in Colombia. However, other aspects that are not  included in this model such as the financial data, education, environmental and health issues  are discussed subsequently.    In Jaffe and Nas (2004) model, the organizational level of recyclersbytrade is the  starting point that influences and determines the success level of their integration into the  formal SWMS. According to their model (in Table 4 on page 49) Colombia has a combination of  scenarios C and D, medium to low organizational level. These scenarios predict a low to very  low success factor regarding the integration of the informal recycling sector into the formal  SWMS. The organizational status of recyclersbytrade in Colombia is still very incipient and not  cohesive, as only 30% of the recyclersbytrade belong to an organization. This positions  Colombia in a low stage in recyclersbytrade's organizational structure. Also, as described in  the literature, successful experiences integrating the informal recycling sector into the formal  SWMS, demonstrate that high organizational structure is essential for increasing recycling rates  and improving the recyclersbytrade's living conditions. Certainly there is room for  improvement in this regard, especially when legally -- according to Sentence T291 of 2009 --  the partnerships between large waste management corporations and recyclersbytrade can  only be done through their organizations and not as individuals.   Organizing recyclersbytrade in cooperative systems in Colombia could potentially  contribute to public recognition. Renaming the informal recycling sector positively could  promote a change of their perception as an asset to SWMS, becoming the preferred agents in  charge of the collection of recyclables. In addition, the provision of ID cards, uniforms and  standardized transportation modes would create a recognizable image. It can also award them 

87

with legal status and more stability, increase their selfesteem and influence their decision making.  Having under consideration that the informal recycling sector has existed for over 60  years and currently it only exhibits a very low organizational status, might suggest that the  ANR's efforts are not being sufficient in reaching out to the majority of recyclersbytrade  operating in Colombia. The ANR's efforts are also not enough in consolidating a cohesive  organization system throughout Colombia, as well as informing recyclersbytrade in regard to  the legal advancements. Similar to the work carried so far by CiViSOL regarding the legal  advancements, other NGOs could focus more in capacity building. It could be argued that the  intervention of NGOs could contribute substantially to increasing the percentage of organized  recyclersbytrade, as well as creating a more unified organizational system. As described in  previously, NGOs have played a crucial role organizing recyclersbytrade into cooperatives in  other developing countries. This is due to being familiar with the local conditions, having the  capacity to develop interesting initiatives, providing business, legal and technical support, as  well as obtaining funding.   Another important factor in consolidating the informal recycling sector in Colombia is its  socioeconomic characterization, such as the one performed by the Mayor's Office of Cali. This  socioeconomic characterization could include a registry of all cooperatives of recyclersbytrade  in order to legitimize them and to improve the management of a professional and integrated  SWMS.  It could be argued that the informal recycling sector in Colombia has evolved from a  repressive political context to a stimulating one. This recent stimulating political scenario is  based on the Sentence T291 of 2009. However, in practice this transition which involves  various adjustments seems to be taking some time. Thus, a real integration is still to be proven.  According to Jaffe and Nas (2004) model, this stimulating political context now present in  Colombia increases the possibilities of having a higher success in the integration of recyclersby trade into the formal SWMS.   88

In regard to the social segregation of recyclersbytrade in Colombia, this seems to be  related specifically to their social status, as the majority of this community belongs to  socioeconomic stratum 1. Their low socioeconomic stratum is associated with their low  earnings, which are based exclusively on waste picking. This is confirmed by Gomez et al. (2008)  in Medellin, where over 80% base their income exclusively on waste picking; as well as the fact  that 80% of them in Cali have expressed their incapability in assuming all household expenses  (Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali, 2009).  This scenario suggests that there is a direct relation  between the income of recyclersbytrade and the quantity of recovered PRM, thus their low  collection capacity is also confirmed. It seems that recyclersbytrade are the "working poor"  who are unable to survive on this income, nor control their destiny to escape this cycle of  poverty. Therefore, increasing their productivity is another aspect that has to be taken under  consideration in order to increase overall recycling rate and as a result of this, improve their  income and living conditions.   According to the Jaffe and Nas (2004) model, this social segregation is restricted to  social status dictated by their low socioeconomic stratum in Colombia, and increases the  possibilities of having a higher success in the integration of recyclersbytrade into the formal  SWMS in Colombia.  Currently, the country presents a curbside collection system of mixed waste. It also  presents issues regarding its waste collection coverage, especially in the rural areas. Currently,  almost 20% (5 0159 tons/day) of the total waste is disposed in a method different from the  sanitary landfill, which was pointed out as the only method recognized. These different  methods include transition containment units, open dumps and uncontrolled dumping of waste  directly into water bodies, burial sites or waste burnoff sites. One of the main faults of  Colombia's SWMS is the lack of an integral recycling system and the current low recycling rate  of 13%. This is substantially lower compared to what appears in the literature for developing  countries, where according to Cheeseman et al. (2006), the overall recycling rates are between  20% and 50%. Thus, the current reported technologies applied in Colombia's SWMS show that  there is room for improvement.   89

This improvement is related in part to implementing a sourceseparated curbside  collection system, which should focus on a sustainable and socially sound alternative. It is  believed that implementing a sourceseparated curbside collection system such as the ones  observed in the developed world, with expensive collecting trucks, high maintenance fees and  gasoline requirements could represent costs that are not financially viable. Thus, it seems  logical to rethink alternative systems for the collection of recyclables that could be financially  viable, environmentally friendly and socially responsible. In addition, it could be argued that  one of the most important aspects of recycling begins with source separation, which is  currently almost nonexistent in Colombia. In the Colombian society where source separation is  such an incipient practice, education would play an important role in creating awareness of its  importance, as well as fundamental instructions on how to recycle. This educational campaign  needs to target the various stakeholders from citizens and institutions to industrial and  commercial settings. Further benefits of source separation would include the reduction of  occupational health risks of recyclersbytrade who would not need to recover PRM from mixed  waste, increasing their collection efficiency.   Education regarding the ecological merits of recycling, and the prospect of collecting  PRM where it has not been collected so far, is a vital component in the introduction of recycling  in the current waste management system. However, other measures are also required. The  current profit margin of 46% gained by the waste management companies operating in Bogotá,  could affect the imperative to change as it is not as strong as it would be if there were a 100%  profit margin or more. Thus, incentives such as taxes, fines and rewards could potentially  increase the recognition and the needed structural changes in the modus operandi of people.   From an economic perspective, source separation could potentially increase if financial  incentives exist. This financial incentive would promote source separation of waste producers.  Considering that one of the highest recycling rates reported worldwide belonged to the  Zabaleen community of itinerant waste buyers in Egypt, could suggest that this system might  offer a viable alternative for the Colombian case. On the other hand, SWMS in Colombia is  90

required to increase the collection coverage both in cities and especially in rural areas, as well  as assure that all the waste produced is disposed in sanitary landfills.    The current inefficient recycling practice is also related to the low productivity of 

recyclersbytrade. This low productivity is associated with their transportation mode as it  reduces not only the capacity of carrying high volumes of PRM, it also reduces the capacity to  travel longer distances. This is observed with the reported data on Cali's recyclersbytrade  where the majority (33.33%) transport between 41kg/day and 70kg/day, while a small  percentage (13.4%) transport 71kg/day and 250kg/day. Also, there are issues associated with  the handpulled cart, which is the most common transportation mode. The deficiencies in  Colombia's SWMS, as well as the inappropriate alternative of applying a recycling collection  system typical of the ones seen in the developed world due to financial constraints and the  social conditions associated to recyclersbytrade, increase Colombia's success rate according to  the hypothetical model proposed by Jaffe and Nas (2004).    Overall, according to the model designed by Jaffe and Nas (2004), Colombia is required 

to increase the organizational level of recyclersbytrade in order to increase its success factor  in creating sustainable and inclusive SWMS. On the other hand, the other aspects analyzed by  them such as the political context, the social segregation and the current technologies used in  the SWMS point out a high success rate. Therefore, it would be argued that the greatest efforts  need to focus on capacity building of recyclersbytrade organizations such as cooperatives,  reaching greater numbers of informal recyclers throughout Colombia, and consolidating a more  unified system.   It is suggested that by involving recyclersbytrade in new service roles both in collection  and recycling, as well as improving sorting activities by building transfer stations in strategic  locations and assuring good communication among the partnerships between waste  management corporations and recyclersbytrade cooperatives, could potentially promote  higher recycling rates.   The results of this study show that in Colombia, recyclersbytrade's economic activities  within SWMS are mainly dedicated to collection and separation activities of PRM prior to their  91

commercialization. Also, in the Colombian case this collection is not efficient as it is time  consuming to recover PRM from mixed waste by opening garbage bags and cans put for  collection. In addition, the recyclersbytrade's standards of categorization of PRM are very  simple. In most of the cases, the commercialization is done directly with dealers which act as  the middlemen in the recycling chain. A simple and inconsistent categorization style is  especially observed in plastics and metals such as aluminum. Therefore, it is suggested that  organized recyclersbytrade are trained to sort metals and plastics in standardized categories,  such as PET (Polyethylene Terephthalate), HDPE (High Density Polyethylene) PS (Polystyrene),  PVC (Polyvinyl Chloride), LDPE (Low Density Polyethylene) and PP (Polypropylene) for plastics.    Currently, the net income of recyclersbytrade could be inferred, according to the  president of the ARB (2011) estimation of the value of sale per kilogram of collected PRM which  does not differentiate between the types of materials collected and the estimation of the  capacity to transport PRM by recyclersbytrade according to the Mayor's Office of Santiago de  Cali (2009). According to these two estimations, 33.33% of recyclersbytrade earn between  COP$ 8 200 to COP$14 000; while 13.4% earn between COP$14 200 and COP$40 000  (considering the deduction of 50kg that the handpulled cart weighs).   Independent recyclersbytrade, as well as the ARB members working at the Alqueria  Transfer Station in Colombia, do not engage in preprocessing activities. It is also especially  difficult for independent recyclersbytrade that lack the infrastructure to have the capacity to  accumulate large volumes that could potentially add value and increase their income. This  scenario suggests the importance of establishing transfer stations like the Alqueria throughout  the different cities in Colombia. A step further could be to include the performance of pre processing activities carried out in these transfer stations, such as granulating of plastics that  could be sold directly to recycling industries for example. These preprocessing activities can  potentially add value to the commercialization of the collected recyclables, which would  improve their income. This last aspect would actually follow the idea of involving recyclersby trade in new service roles, which could potentially raise financial, human and social capital.  92

Organized recyclersbytrade would need to undergo professional training in order to use  machinery for preprocessing activities such as hotpress technology and extruders.  The differences noted in selling prices of recycled materials between Cali and Bogotá  suggests a lack of consistency. The most evident differentiation in the sale values between  Alqueria and Cali is observed for metals like metal scrap and aluminum. Therefore, more  consistency in the market prices should be considered in Colombia to assure transparency in  transactions through limited government intervention. It is suggested that governmental  participate by publishing the market prices of recyclables through mass media.  There are various environmental advantages of increasing recycling rates in Colombia  and collecting the PRM by improved alternative environmentallyfriendly modes of  transportation, such as a tricyclepulled cart. These advantages range from energy  conservation, source conservation and prolongation of sanitary landfills in reducing greenhouse  gas emissions. From a sustainability perspective, the environmental needs would not be met if  the value to society is not sufficient for recyclersbytrade to continue performing this service  by being able to survive on their revenues. Thus, the demand of a monetary recognition for  their service seems to be logical in order to improve their efficiency and their income. In the  case of Colombia, as proposed by the ARB a recognition of COP$56/Kg would be suggested. In  regard to their suggested amount, although it seems reasonable, further studies could be  performed to assess this particular aspect. This is especially true if the value of their service  becomes so lucrative or expensive that they become replaced by entrepreneurs and  automation (as in developed countries).  Another aspect regarding the cost of the integration would be the financial savings to  the different municipalities in Colombia, as has been observed in the literature. However, as  observed in the literature, the integration could potentially reduce the number of recyclersby trade participating formally in SWMS. This is an important factor which would have to be  assessed in the case of Colombia.   Due to the nature of the informal recycling system in Colombia, which is unregistered  and unregulated, as well as the scarce research done on the topic, there is a lack of data. This  93

also applies to insufficient data that could enable the estimation of the current market for  recyclables. Thus it is not possible to assess how income could be portioned across the families  who do the work (by dividing the estimated market into the number of recyclersbytrade), as  well as for how many recyclersbytrade this integration could benefit.   It is lastly argued that under the premises of environmental science and management:  sustainability entails viable systems which rely on social commitment and responsible  economics. It is also acknowledged that the recyclersbytrade community in Colombia has  shown an adaptive nature that has responded to the local economic conditions, providing an  important service throughout the country. Thus, an alternative SWMS that considers, on one  hand, the legal development with inclusive policies and social aspects, and on the other hand,  the municipalities needs regarding the technical, financial and environmental aspects of waste  management.                                   94

Chapter 8. Conclusions: A Normative System for the Inclusion of Recyclersbytrade's  Organizations in a Sustainable Solid Waste Management in Colombia   There is limited research done on recyclersbytrade in the developing world due to the difficult  conditions of carrying out research in these communities. Although recent attention has been  paid by the Mayor's Office of Cali and independent researchers in Medellin, the scarcity of data  still prevails in Colombia. This is especially evident in Bogotá, where the recyclersbytrade  community is the biggest and no socioeconomic or demographic characterization exist.   It is believed that recycling in developing countries, such as Colombia, is not limited to  only being a technical and environmental problem but also a social one. Due to this, it requires  a solution that considers the financial, technical, environmental and social aspects of recycling  in Colombia. The SWMS in Colombia has various limitations as demonstrated above and the  current recycling system that is mainly carried out by the informal recycling sector is one of  them.   On the other hand, the development of new technologies and the implementation of  more rigorous policies aiming to achieve higher recycling goals might also represent a challenge  to the recyclingbytrade community, especially those who are not organized. These changes  can potentially challenge their traditional working structure, as the city's requirements will  determine more professional and formal attitudes towards recycling activities. It is therefore,  necessary to focus first on strengthening the informal recycling sector's organizational structure  in Colombia. This way, the cities' waste management requirements could be fulfilled and the  success rate of the integration could increase, along with recyclersbytrade's income and living  conditions. This process also needs to consider policy development, monetary incentives, and  educational campaigns aiming at the reduction of waste generation and the participation of  residents in source separation. Another important aspect that is required to be considered is  increasing recyclersbytrade productivity. As discussed previously, there is an urgent need to  develop infrastructure, such as transfer stations and to improve their transportation mode, as  well as provide training regarding the standardization of PRM's categorization.   95

 

Figure 17 is a conceptual diagram of the current recycling system in Colombia composed 

of waste generators, recyclersbytrade, small to largesize dealers, and the recycling industry.  Figure 17 also illustrates how the current recycling system is neither cohesive nor an integral  feature of the current SWMS. Instead, the recycling system has an informal and fragmented  nature that results in a low recycling rate. In addition, it shows how the diversity of  transportation modes used by recyclersbytrade determines the different productivity levels  regarding the recovery of PRM. Last, it is possible to observe how this recycling system is likely  unsustainable and missing out opportunities for meeting social and other goals.   Figure 17. The Current Recycling System in Colombia                                                     

96

Figure 18 is a conceptual diagram of the current recycling system in Bogotá. It illustrates  the addition of the Alqueria Transfer Station, where the recycling rate has increased along with  the working and living conditions of the organized recyclersbytrade involved. However, this  pilot project is an isolated experience that has only been able to reach a limited amount of  organized recyclersbytrade, as well as a low portion of the city (30%). Figure 18 illustrates also  shows how the diversity of transportation modes continues to determine different productivity  levels regarding the recovery of PRM and how recyclersbytrade are only involved with  collecting and sorting activities.  Thus, the reality of the informal recycling sector in the rest of  Bogotá as in the rest of Colombia is characterized by a recycling system that is neither cohesive  nor an integral feature of the current SWMS.    Figure 18. The Current Recycling System in Bogotá 

  97

The Proposed Normative System for the Inclusion of Recyclersbytrade's   Organizations in a Sustainable Solid Waste Management in Colombia    The focus of the model is the integration of the perspectives of the different stakeholders  involved in SWMS, which is currently lacking. The inclusiveness applies to all if sustainability is  to be achieved. If any player or aspect associated with the SWMS are sacrificed, then the puzzle  is incomplete and its structure and functionality are lost. The different elements that constitute  the normative system are aiming to address the pressing environmental problem related to  Colombia's SWMS by considering the social, economic, political and technical aspects, as well as  the various stakeholders associated with it. Figure 19 is a conceptual diagram showcasing the  different dimensions and aspects that constitute the normative system. The conceptual  diagram has a puzzlelike style which symbolizes the puzzlelike data that were used to buildup  the case study.  Figure 19. The Different Dimensions and Aspects that Constitute the Normative System     Environmental Problem Regarding the Management of Solid Waste in Colombia 

Reduction of  waste  generation 

Increase Increase   source source    separation separation   

Change the  perception of  recyclers by trade 

Training  dimension 

Institutional and  legal dimension 

Social aspects 

Technical and  performance 

Economic  aspects 

Roles  and    Roles  and responsibilities    responsibilities

  98

Figure 20 is a conceptual diagram illustrating the proposed normative system for the  inclusion of recyclersbytrade's organizations in a sustainable solid waste management in  Colombia. The normative system proposes changes in the current SWMS of Colombia that  could potentially: achieve higher recycling rates, increase the lifespan of its landfills, reduce  greenhouse gas emissions, and be financially viable and socially sound. The normative system  promotes a more cohesive recycling system supported by a higher organizational level of  recyclersbytrade's cooperatives. As illustrated in Figure 20, the proposed normative system  focuses on the integration of organized recyclersbytrade into the SWMS through contracts  with waste management corporation. Each joint contract between a given municipality and the  waste management corporation with one or more recyclersbytrade's cooperatives would be  in charge of a specific area of the city, such as one of the six ASE in Bogotá. This integration  would support itself with the real enforcement of the Court Ruling T291 of 2009.  As shown in Figure 20, waste management corporations would be in charge of the  curbside collection of the nonrecyclable portion of waste; while organized recyclersbytrade  would be in charge of the curbside collection of the PRM portion of waste. In addition, the  informal recycling routes are required to be mapped and formalized and where needed  improved.  Figure 20 also shows how the technical and performance aspects, as well as the division  of roles need to be addressed. It illustrates that the transportation mode used by the waste  management corporations continues to be garbage trucks; while organized recyclersbytrade's  transportation mode would undergo a standardization process. This standardization process  would focus not only in achieving higher productivity levels regarding the recovery of PRM, but  also addressing the environmental issues associated with the common motorized  transportation modes. Thus, it is proposed that organized recyclersbytrade use nonmotorized  vehicles which are environmentally friendly due to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.  In addition, the design of this nonmotorized vehicle would address the current issues related  to the weight of the vehicle, the size and material of the wheels, and the transportation  capacity which have been reported in the literature.   99

Figure 20. The Proposed Normative System for the Inclusion of Recyclersbytrade's  Organizations in a Sustainable Solid Waste Management in Colombia                                                Figure 20 also illustrates how the legal, economic and social aspects are defining the  system and determining its functionality. Also, the normative system is influenced by the  addition of new practices such as source separation and reduction of waste generation, which  100
ASE 4  ASE 5 ASE 6 ASE 1  ASE 2 ASE 3

are currently lacking. Attention is also given to changing the negative perception associated  with informal recyclers. The normative system promotes the perception of recyclers as an  organizational asset to the SWMS in Colombia. Thus, educational and public awareness  campaigns to promote all these new practices are a fundamental feature of the normative  system. Another important aspect of the normative system is the training and capacity building  of organized recyclersbytrade. This also includes the establishment of transfer stations in  strategic areas throughout the city. These transfer stations can potentially reduce the distance  of transportation of PRM, as well as increase the sorting and accumulation capacity.   The normative system also points out the importance of further research and  development to find new markets for all PRM which is currently lacking. In addition, through  further training it is possible to involve organized recyclersbytrade in additional recycling  activities beyond collecting and sorting, such as preprocessing activities.     Below  there is a detailed description of the different dimensions that constitute the  normative system along with a set of measures and recommendations in order to assure the  success of the normative system for a sustainable and inclusive solid waste management in  Colombia.    Reduction of Waste Generation --Aiming Towards Zero Waste   One of the aspects addressed in the normative model refers to waste reduction. In order to  reduce waste generation in Colombia, application of the preventive principle is recommended.  This requires the conjunct work of: producers aiming to include cleaner production, responsible  consumers, and the government as a regulator implementing incentives and sanctions. Also,  manufacturers are required to assume the responsibility for the life cycle of the products  produced; this falls under the Extended Producer Responsibility Policy that deals with the  process of goods until the consumer is done using them. In addition, applying the Duales  System Deutschland (DSD) practice consisting of labelling packaging materials in order to  identify the recycling process it should undergo can potentially increase the efficiency of the  recycling system (Chang et al. 2011). Further research is recommended in order to develop  101

products that use nontoxic compounds and that once recycled, conserve their high quality and  usefulness called "upcycling" (Brungart and McDonough, 2002).      Increasing Sourceseparation  Increasing sourceseparation is an important feature addressed in the normative model for two  main reasons. On one hand, the current lack of sourceseparation results in a low productivity  due to the considerable amount of time that recyclersbytrade spend on recovering PRM from  mixed waste results. On the other hand, due to the recovering conditions, recyclersbytrade  are faced with a wide range of health and occupational risks. Thus, according to the results  drawn from the questionnaires and the interview (2011), as well as the data reported by the  Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali (2009), the normative system suggests the implementation of  source separation at the household level in order to increase the productivity of recyclersby trade and with it increase the recycling rate, as well as reduce the occupational and health risks.  It is also recommended that educational campaigns be developed promoting recycling and  showcasing the financial incentives at a national and local level, reaching the public through  mass media to instil the information (Orccosupa, 2002; Chang et al. 2011). For this purpose, it is  suggested that workshops be developed targeting various stakeholders (school, universities,  residents, decisionmakers, NGO and recyclersbytrade associations) focused on providing  guidelines on how to recycle (Armijo et al. 2002).     Perception of Recyclersbytrade  Changing the public's current perception of recyclersbytrade is also addressed in the  normative system. It is suggested by the normative system to change the negative perception  of recyclersbytrade to a positive one. As reported by Medina (2000), it is recommended to  start this perception change by renaming this informal recycling sector a positive name, such as  "street beautifiers" or "ecoaides". The idea is that by renaming this sector, it is possible to  showcase through mass media the financially viable, environmentally advantageous and  socially sound service that they provide. In addition, as reported by Anschutz et al. (2006), it is  102

suggested to take under consideration the systems approach, in order to provide a more  comprehensive outlook when dealing with the integration of organized recyclersbytrade into  the formal SWMS in Colombia. This is of special importance due to Court Ruling T291, which  stipulates that recyclersbytrade must be recognized as economic actors that participate in the  recycling portion of the waste management system as "entrepreneurs of waste" (CiViSOL,  2011).    Institutional and Legal Aspects  The institutional and legal aspects are the foundation of the normative system as it sets the  parameters of a real integration of the informal recycling system into the formal SWMS in  Colombia. As reported by CiViSOL (2011) and rra (2010), Court Ruling T2912009, stipulated  that recyclersbytrade's activities which fall under the public cleanliness category and waste  management, must be included in future public biddings regarding waste management  contracts. It is also stipulated that the contracts with the waste management corporations must  take place with recyclersbytrade's organizations and not as individual employees. In addition,  Court Ruling T291 included a scoring criterion that measures the efforts of inclusion made by  the waste management corporations.   The normative model focuses on increasing recyclersbytrade at an organizational level  and strengthening of the existing ones, in order to assure a higher success rate of the  integration of the informal recycling sector into the formal SWMS (Nitivattananon and  Sembiring, 2010).   According to the results drawn from the questionnaires and interview, it is  recommended that municipalities conduct further socioeconomic and sociodemographic  characterization of the informal recycling sector in Bogotá and other cities in Colombia in order  to understand the economics of the recycling system (Scheinberg et al. (2006). These results  should be made available to the general public. In addition, it is recommended that Colombia  implements a national registry of recyclersbytrade's organizations (Baillie and Feinblatt,  2010). This registry would only include those recyclersbytrade that are enthusiastic to be part  103

of the process of integration to the formal SWMS. This is mainly due to the fact that the  collection of materials is only sufficient to a specific number of cooperatives (Anschutz et al.  2006). The registry should be updated periodically. Another aspect that the normative system attempts to address is the terms of the  contracts between the waste management corporations and recyclersbytrade's organizations.  It is suggested that the partnerships are required to share the utilities generated, but the  percentage of utilities shared requires further studies assessing this aspect. In addition, it is  recommended that the system include recyclersbytrade's cooperatives in the first stages of  the design and implementation of the sustainable and inclusive SWMS in the different cities  throughout Colombia. This measure can contribute to assuring good communication and long term commitment between recyclersbytrade's cooperatives and waste management  corporations (Questionnaires and interview, 2011).  The normative system also suggests assuring longterm commitment of the various  stakeholders involved in SWMS, including the guidance of NGO, in order to guarantee long term success (Lardinois and van de Klundert, 1995). In addition, it is recommended that the  government is made responsible for publishing through mass media, the values of sale per  kilogram and per unit of PRM to guarantee transparency in the transactions (Dikshit et al.  2006).  The current situation of the recycling market in Colombia exhibits a biased recovery of  PRM by recyclersbytrade due to demands for particular materials and rejects of others. Thus,  the normative system recommends that further research and development efforts must focus  on increasing the range of recovery of PRM, in order to expand the collection of PRM and avoid  an inconsistent and deficient recycling system (Questionnaires and interview, 2011).    Roles and Responsibilities  The normative system also deals with the division of roles and responsibilities of each  stakeholder.  According to the normative system, it is recommended that recyclersbytrade's  cooperatives are in charge of collecting the PRM in a sourceseparated curbside system. It is  104

also suggested for the purpose of easier differentiation to placed PRM in white or transparent  plastic bags the days scheduled for collection of recyclables.   The normative system also recommends following the Egyptian experience with the  Zabaleen community of itinerant waste buyers, which have achieved one of the highest  recycling rates reported worldwide (Cheeseman et al. 2006). Basically, it is suggested to apply  the financial incentive of paying waste generators for their PRM in order to achieve higher  sourceseparation and recycling rates.   According to the normative system, organized recyclersbytrade are responsible for  transporting the purchased PRM to the various transfer stations located strategically located  throughout the cities.  They will also be responsible of operating the transfer stations where  high degree of sorting, accumulation and baling takes place (Questionnaires and interview,  2011).  Further training down the road could potentially include the addition of preprocessing  activities (Baillie and Feinblatt, 2010; Waste for Life, 2011). According to the normative system, private waste companies are in charge of collecting  the nonrecyclable fraction of waste. These fractions of waste should be placed in separate  black plastic bags -- for differentiation purposes --the days scheduled for collection  (Questionnaires and interview, 2011).     Based on the studies performed by Lardinois and van de Klundert (1995), the normative  system recommends that NGOs are in charge of training the cooperative's members,  developing initiatives and providing business, legal and technical support to the recyclersby trade's cooperative, as well as supervision at the transfer stations. This is due to the fact NGOs  are acquainted with the local conditions. Based on the questionnaires and interview conducted  (2011) part of training should focus on the standardization of the classification of PRM.     Economic Component   Based on the information gathered in the questionnaires and interview conducted (2011), it is  recommended that the association between the private waste management corporation and  recyclersbytrade's cooperatives takes place during the first steps of the integration process,  105

including the bidding of contracts for waste management.  It is also suggested by the normative  system that due to the waste management contracts shared by the two parties, it is required to  share the revenues generated; however, the percentage of revenues shared requires further  studies assessing this aspect. On the other hand, the normative system suggests that recyclers bytrade's organizations should be paid for the following: (1) the collection and transportation  of recyclables COP$56/kg recognized by the city and for (2) the sale of recyclable materials  (Questionnaires and interview, 2011).  Last, according to Anschutz et al. (2006), it is expected that the integration of the  informal recycling sector into the formal SWMS could potentially reduce the number of  recyclersbytrade employed. Therefore, it is recommended that alternatives solutions are  assessed throughout the integration processes, especially with children and the elderly  involved.    Technical and Performance Aspects  Based on the study conducted by Muraleehdharan et al. (1996), the normative systems also  recommends that in order to analyze the effects of controllable targets on the performance of  the integration of the informal sector into the formal SWMS, further managementinquiry  procedures be developed, such as the Nonlinear Lexicographic Goal Programming (NLGP)  model.   The normative system also suggests the use of GIS software for mapping the improved  "informal recycling routes" which can determine the recommended amount of recyclersby trade that could participate in each route. GIS software is also recommended for determining  the strategic location of transfer stations throughout the cities (Calvo et al.2009). The design of  the improved "informal recycling routes" will consider the results of the characterization of  RSW carried out by the UAESP and CIIA (2005). This could potentially improve the recycling  productivity and by increasing the number of recyclersbytrade operating in areas with higher  PRM like ASE 1 and fewer number of recyclersbytrade in ASE 4 (UAESP and CIIA 2005).  106

Based on the questionnaires and interview conducted (2011), as well as the data  reported by Gomez et al. (2008), the normative system recommends that organized recyclers bytrade use a standardized and improved transportation mode (e.g. tricyclepull carts). The  idea is to maximize the performance of the transportation vehicle, and equipped it with a scale  for purchase purposes.   Based on the study carried out by Araba et al. (2009), the normative system  recommends the use of ID cards assigned to each member of the cooperative that would match  the transportation mode of the corresponding member.  Based on the interview conducted  (2011), each cooperative should provide uniforms to its members. The uniforms should include  pants, shirt, boots, hats, gloves, highvisibility vest in traffic, breathing masks and back support  belt. These measures will help to reduce health and occupational risks (Cointreau, 2006).   Based on the study carried out by Gomez et al. (2008), the normative system suggests  that mediumsize transfer stations should be placed strategically throughout the city to  guarantee a prudential distance from the transportation of PRM. To increase the performance  at the transfer stations, it is recommended that they are equipped with scales, boxes for  storage, compacting machines, grinders for waste processing and showers (Scheinberg et al.  (2006); Armijo et al. (2002); (Baillie and Feinblatt, 2010).Based on the interview conducted  (2011), the normative system also recommends that transfer stations should be managed by  recyclersbytrade under the supervision of designated NGOs.  Based on Anschutz et al. (2006), it is recommended that all transfer station meet air  standards requirements to assure occupational and health safety. If needed, dust suppression  and ventilation systems should be installed. Based on the questionnaires and interview  conducted (2011), it is suggested that waste collection trucks transport the sorted and baled  PRM to the recycling industries.    Training Aspects  Based on the questionnaires and interview conducted (2011), the normative system  recommends that recyclersbytrade receive training regarding the collection and purchase of  107

recyclables, the operation of transfer stations, as well as the standardization of the  classification of PRM. It is also suggested that recyclersbytrade with higher education levels  are trained in basic computer knowledge, business management and accounting. Based on the  study carried out by Cointreau (2006), it is also suggested to include training on occupational  safety measures at transfer stations.     Social Aspects  Based on the interview conducted (2011), the normative systems recommends that the  cooperative must represent the benefits of all its members providing legal support,  representation and social benefits. It is also recommended that cooperatives have a  representative board that is elected by its members and is aligned with the seven governing  principles established by ICA (Rufino, 2002).  In addition, the normative system suggests the implementation of a set of educational  campaigns targeting the informal recycling sector. These campaigns include:  an educational  campaign focusing on hygienic measures to prevent occupational risk caused by handling waste  and a vaccination campaign for tetanus, rabies and hepatitis A and B (Cointreau, 2006; Baillie  and Feinblatt (2010).   By implementing these recommendations in Colombia, it is anticipated that the SWMS  would be inclusive and sustainable.                        108

Appendices    Appendix A. Photographs of waste pickers and their different modes of transportation 
                                                                       

A1. Street waste pickers with sack  

A2. Street waste pickers with handpulled cart  

A3. Street waste pickers with tricyclepulled cart (ARB, 2011) 

109

                                   

A4. Street waste pickers with horsepulled cart 

A5. Street waste pickers with Motorizedpulled cart (ARB, 2011)

  Appendix B. Questionnaire for recyclersbytrade and dealers Cali (March 2011)   1. Name  2. In which social strata do you live?  3. How long have you been dedicated to the recycling trade?  4. Where do you collect the PRM?  5. How do you transport the collected PRM?  6. What type of PRM do you collect? Do you specialize in one type?  7. Where do you take the collected PRM?  8. Do you perform any preprocessing treatment to the PRM you collect before selling  them?  110

9. What is the selling price of the PRM? If a dealer: And what is the purchase price of the  PRM?  10. Do you have alternative income besides the recycling trade?  11. Is there flexibility to change the role in the recycling chain? Why?  12. Do you belong to any recyclersbytrade's organization?  13. There was a case in the Court regarding recyclersbytrade. Do you know what did it  deal with? Which rights were gained?    Appendix C. Interview with the President of ARB. Monday, March 22, 2011  1. Tell me about the history of the ARB   2. When did the Transfer Station la Alqueria (Centro de Acopio la Alqueria) began  operations and how is the working environment structured, as well as the procedures?   3.  How is the working dynamic of recyclersbytrade at the ARB?  4. What types of benefits are available to recyclersbytrade that belong to a cooperative  or association?  5. What is the ARB's proposal regarding the monetary recognition for the transportation of  PRM and how does the ARB view an inclusive solid waste management system in  Bogotá?    Appendix D. Photographs of the recycling operation at the Alqueria Transfer Station       D1. Uniformed recyclersbytrade at the sorting out PRM (ARB, 2011) 

   

111

                                         

D2. Weighting and baling recyclable material (ARB, 2011) 

D3. Unloading zone (ARB, 2011)

D4. Designated areas from left to right: flexible plastic, metal scrap and PET (ARB, 2011)

 

                    112

Bibliography    Agudelo, A.A., Gómez, J.A.,  Ronda, E. and  Sarmiento, J.I. (2007). Working conditions and health  among urban recycling workers in Medellin, Colombia. Archivos de Prevencion de Riesgos  Laborales, 10 (4): 181187.     Amponsah, S., Asase, M., Mensah, M., Stanford, J. and Yanful, E.K. (2009). Comparison of  municipal solid waste management systems in Canada and Ghana: A case study of the cities of  London, Ontario, and Kumasi, Ghana. Waste Management 29, 2779­2786.    Anschutz, J. and Van de Klundert, A. (2001). Integrated Sustainable Waste Management ­ the  concept. Tools for Decisionmakers. Experiences from the Urban Expertise Programme (1995 2001). WASTE, the Netherlands.     Anschutz, J., Scheinberg, A. and Van de Klundert. (2006). Waste Pickers: poor victims or waste  management professionals? Collaborative Working Group (CWG) on Solid Waste Management  in low and Middleincome Countries. Solid waste, health and the Millennium Development  Goals CWG ­WASH Workshop 2006, 15 February in Kolkata, India. Paper No. 56, 116.     Araba, A.O., Cheeseman, C.R. Chinwah, K., and Wilson, D.C. (2009). Building recycling rates  through the informal sector. Waste Management 29, 629­635.    ArmijoVega, C., OjedaBenitez, S. and RamirezBarreto, M.E. (2002).  Formal and informal  recovery of recyclables in Mexicali, Mexico: handling alternatives. Resources, Conservation and  Recycling 34, 273­288.    Armijo de Vega, C.A., Benitez, S.O. and Montenegro, M.Y. (2008). Household solid waste  characterization by family socioeconomic profile as units of analysis. Resources, Conservation  and Recycling 52, 992999.     ANR (National Recyclers Association of Colombia). 20 February 2008. Nuestra Entidad. 6  November 2010. <http://www.anr.org.co/>    ARB (Recyclers' Association of Bogotá). 16 December 2010. Asociacion de Recicladores de  Bogotá --Recicladores Sin Fronteras. 9 June 2011.  <http://www.asociacionderecicladoresdebogota.org/recicladoresbogota/inicio1>    Baillie, C. and Feinblatt, E. (2010). Recycling technologies and cooperativism: Waste for Life. A  Journal of Radical Theory, Culture and Action, 4, 205224.     113

Beukering, P.V. (1994).  An economic analysis of different types of formal and informal  entrepreneurs, recovering urban solid waste in Bangalore (India). Resources, Conservation and  Recycling 12, 229252.    Bohm, R.A., Folz, D.H., Kinnaman, T.C. and Podolsky M.J. (2010). The costs of municipal waste  and recycling programs. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 54, 864871.   Burnley, S.J. (2007). A review of municipal solid waste composition in United Kingdom. Waste  Management 27, 12741285.     Cabaleiro, M.J. and Fernandez, B. (2007). Sustetabilidad y Cooperativismo: Una propuesta  metodologica basada en un proyecto real. Revesco 92, 72106.     Calvo, F.J., Grindlay, A., Hurtado, A., Molero, E., Rodríguez, M.L. and Zamorano, M. (2009). A  planning scenario for the application of geograpgical information systems in municipal solid  waste collection: A case of Churriana de la Vega (Granada, Spain). Resources, Conservation and  Recycling, 54, 123133.     Cen, K., Dai H., Li, X., Lu, S., Ni, M., Peng, Z. and Yan J. (2007). Degradation of PCDD/Fs by  mechanochemical treatment of fly ash from medical waste incineration. Journal of Hazardous  Materials 147, 652­657.     Chang, N.B., Graça, M., Martinho, G. and Pires, A. (2011). Solid waste management in European  countries: A review of systems analysis techniques. Journal of Environmental Management 92,  10331050.     Cheeseman, C., Velis, C. and Wilson, D.C. (2006). Role of informal sector recycling in waste  management in developing countries. Habitat International 30, 797­808.    Cheeseman, C.R., Imam, A., Mohammed, B. and Wilson, D.C. (2007). Solid waste management  in Abuja, Nigeria. Waste Management 28, 468472.      City of Toronto. November 5, 2010. Facts about Toronto's trash. 1 August 2010.  <http://www.toronto.ca/index.htm>.     CiViSOL.  (2011).  REF.  Sentencia  T2912009  /  Reporte  Extraordinario  Número  6  (Sentence  T 29109 / Extraordinary Report Number 6). Santiago de Cali, March 8, 2011, 72 pgs.     Chinwah, K. (2006). Role of itinerant buyers in waste management in Port Harcourt Nigeria.   Environmental Engineering MSc thesis. Imperial College, London.      114

Cointreau, S. (2006). Occupational and Environmental Health Issues of Solid Waste  Management: Special Emphasis on Middle and LowerIncome Countries. Urban Papers 148.  The International Bank of Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank Group.  Washington D.C. <http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTUSWM/Resources/up2.pdf>    Christensen, T.H., Moller, J., Simion, F. and Tonini, D. (2009). Global warming factors modelled  for 40 generic municipal waste management scenarios. Waste Management Resources, 27,  871883.     Dahlen, L., Lagerkvist, A., Meijer, J.E. and Vukicevic, S. (2007). Comparison of the different  collection systems for sorted household waste in Sweden. Waste Management 27, 12981305.      Dikshit, A.K., Hayami, Y. and Mishra, S.N. (2006). Waste pickers in Delhi: Poverty and  environmental in an urban informal sector. Journal of Development Studies, 42, 4169.     Eliassen, R., Tchobanoglous, G. and Theisen, H. (1977). Solid wastes: engineering principles and  management issues. McGrawHill Inc. 621 pgs. United States.     Forcadell, F.J. (2005). Democracy, cooperation and business success: The case of Mondragon  corporacion Cooperativa. Journal of Business and Ethics, 56, 255274.     General Secretariat of the Mayor's Office of Bogotá. (2002). _ Decreto 1713 de 2002 Nivel  Nacional . Published August 7, 2002.  <http://www.alcaldiabogota.gov.co/sisjur/normas/Norma1.jsp?i=5542>    General Secretariat of the Mayor's Office of Bogotá. (2005). Circular 4 de 2005 Comisión de  Regulación de Agua Potable y Saneamiento Básico. Published October 7, 2005.  <http://www.alcaldiabogota.gov.co/sisjur/normas/Norma1.jsp?i=17752>    General Secretariat of the Mayor's Office of Bogotá D.C. (2010). Proyecto de Acuerdo 212 de  2010 Concejo de Bogotá D.C.  <http://www.alcaldiabogota.gov.co/sisjur/normas/Norma1.jsp?i=40204>    Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives (GAIA). 20 April 2009. GAIA member Yuyun Ismawati  wins 2009 Goldman Environmental Prize. 22 July 2010. <http://www.noburn.org/>    Gomez, W.M., Velez, P.A. and Yepez, D.L. (2008). Factores que afectan la productividad del  reciclador informal: Caso Medellín. Gestion y Ambiente 11, 85 96.    

115

Gutberlet, J. (2008). Empowering collective recycling initiatives: Video documentation and  action research with a recycling coop in Brazil. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 52, 659­ 670.     ICA International Cooperative Alliance. 16 June 2010. What is a Cooperative? 1 June 2011.  <http://www.ica.coop/coop/index.html>.    Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2006. Guidelines for National Greenhouse  Gas Inventories. 15 October 2010.  <http://www.ipcc nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/pdf/5_Volume5/V5_2_Ch2_Waste_Data.pdf>    Jaffe, R. and Nas, P.J.M. (2004). Informal waste management: Shifting the focus from problem  to potential. Environment, Development and Sustainability 6, 337353. Kluwer Academic  Publishers. The Netherlands.     Klundert, A. and Lardinois, I. (1995). Community and private (formal and informal) sector  involvement in municipal solid waste management in developing countries. Background paper  for the UMP workshop in Ittingen, April 1995. WASTE, the Netherlands.     Hernandez, O., Rawlins, B. and Schwartz, R. (1999). Voluntary recycling in Quito: Factors  associated with participation in a pilot programme. Environmental Urbanization 2, 145159.    Hernandez, S. (2006). Striving for control: Democracy and oligarchy at a Mexican cooperative.  Economic and Industrial Democracy, 27, 105135.     Hoffman, L. and Muller, M. (2001). Community Partnerships in Integrated Sustainable Waste  Management. Tools for Decisionmakers. Experiences from the Urban Expertise Programme  (19952001). WASTE, the Netherlands.     Lavee, D., Regev, U. and Zemel, A. (2009).The effect of recycling price uncertainty on municipal  waste management choices. Journal of Environmental Management 90, 3599­3606.    Martínez, J. (2008). Puntos fuertes y débiles de las cooperativas desde un concepto amplio de  gobierno empresarial. Revesco, 95, 6593.     Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali, Aguirre, D.A., Carabali, B., Castano, J.A. and Urrea, F. (2009).  Final Report of the Analysis of the Population of Informal Recyclers' Households obtained  through the Household Interview and their Working Conditions obtained through the PGIRS  Interview. Document of restricted circulation for the exclusive use of the Mayor's Office of  Santiago de Cali.   116

Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali and Delgado, Z. (2009). Recycling in Cali: organizational and  working conditions of recyclers in Santiago de Cali. Social Area, Integral Solid Waste  Management Plan. Cali, Colombia.     Mayor Office of Santiago de Cali ­Administrative Department of Municipal Planning. (2009).  Evaluation and adjustment of the Integral Solid Waste Management Plan 20042019.  Grafitextos, Cali, Colombia.    Medina, M. (2000). Scavenger cooperatives in Asia and Latin America. Resources, Conservation  and Recycling 31, 51­69.    Medina, M. (2008). The informal recycling sector in developing countries: Organizing waste  pickers to enhance their impact. GridLines, 44, 14.     Medina, M. (2008). Communitybased recycling initiatives. Grassroots development. Journal of  the InterAmerican Foundation 29, 2631.     MedinaBermudez. (1999). Manejo de Residuos Sólidos [Management of Solid Waste]. Journal  of Engineering Faculty of Universidad Militar Nueva Granada, Colombia. 11, 135144.    Messineo, A., Panno, D. (2008). Municipal waste management in Sicily: Practices and  challenges. Waste Management 28, 1201­1208.    Mongkolnchaiarunya, J. (2005). Promoting a communitybased solid waste management  initiative in local government: Yala municipality, Thailand. Habitat International 29, 2740.     Muraleedharan, V.R., Srinivasan, G. and Sudhir, V. (1996). Integrated solid waste management  in urban India: A critical operational research framework.  SocioEconomic Planning Sciences 30,  163181.     Nitivattananon, V. and Sembiring, E. (2010). Sustainable solid waste management toward an  inclusive society: Integration of the informal sector. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 54,  802809.    Orccosupa, J. (2002). Relation between the per capita production of residential solid waste and  socioeconomic factors. University of Chile. Masters Thesis in Environmental Planning and  Management. < http://www.cybertesis.cl/tesis/uchile/2002/orccosupa_j/html/index frames.html>    Pitchel, J. (2005). Waste management practices: Municipal, hazardous and industrial. United  States. CRC Press. 659 p.   117

Restrepo, Jaime Andrés. (2009). Environmental management guidelines in the recovery of solid  waste in Medellín, the case of the transfer station No 1. University of Antioquia, Departament  of Environmental and Public Health Engineering. Masters Thesis in Environmental  Management.  Medellín, Colombia.  <http://tesis.udea.edu.co/dspace/bitstream/10495/1305/1/LineamientosGestionAmbientalRec uperacionResiduosSolidosCasoCentroAcopio1.pdf>    rra (public law + social innovation) think tank (2010). The Colombian Waste Pickers' Body of  Law: A Case of Sustained Public Interest Litigation to Prevent Impoverishment through Law and  Policy, working document, unpublished, New York.    Roper, W.E. (2006). Strategies for building material reuse and recycle. International Journal of  Environmental Technology and Management 6, 313345.     Rufino, S. (2002). The management in democratic and solidarity bases: Dilemmas and  challenges. Production Operations Management Conference --POMS. San Francisco, USA. April  58, 2002. < http://portal.vanzolini ead.org.br/siteBuilder/upload/br/site_160/arquivos/secao_925/24_POMS%202002%20Sandra %20final.pdf>    Sharholy, M., Ahmad, K., Mahmood, G., Trivedi, R.C. (2008). Municipal solid waste management  in Indian cities ­A review. Waste Management 28, 459­467.    SCS Engineers. (2007). Evaluation Report of Doña Juana Sanitary Landfill in Bogotá, Colombia.  As part of the Landfill Methane Outreach Program (LMOP) managed by the United States  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  <http://www.globalmethane.org/Data/DonaJuanaSpanish.pdf>    SUI (Sistema Unico de Informacion de Servicios Publicos, Republica de Colombia). (2009).  Servicio de Limpieza. Reporte Técnicooperacional. Sitios de Disposición Final (NUSD)  (Formulario Disposicion Final de la Resolucion SSPD 6671 de 2003 y Formularios 21 y 25 de la  Resolucion SSPD 15085 de 2009). Sitio actualizado Julio 13, 2011.  <http://reportes.sui.gov.co/fabricaReportes/frameSet.jsp?idreporte=ase_com_137=>    SUI (Sistema Unico de Informacion de Servicios Publicos, Republica de Colombia). (2006). Plan  de Gestión Integral de Residuos Sólidos ­ PGIRS. Sitio actualizado Julio 13, 2011.  <http://reportes.sui.gov.co/fabricaReportes/frameSet.jsp?idreporte=ase_adm_056>    Slackman, M. (2009). Cleaning Cairo, but taking a livelihood. New York Times, 25 May 2009, A7  p. < http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/25/world/middleeast/25oink.html>     118

Spachos, T. and Stamatis, A. (2011). Thermal analysis and optimization of an anaerobic  treatment system of whey. Renewable Energy, 36, 20972105.     UAESP and CIIA. (2005). Estudio de Caracterizacion y Cuantificacion de los materials  potencialmente Reciclables presentes en los Residuos Solidos Municipales Generados en  Bogotá D.C. (Final Report: quantification and characterization of the Potentially Recyclable  Materials contained within the MSW generated in Bogotá D.C), unpublished.    UAESP (2009). Ruta de Recolección Selectiva. November 6, 2009.  <http://www.uaesp.gov.co/uaesp_jo/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=401:ru taderecoleccionselectivarrs&catid=101:programadistritaldereciclaje&Itemid=133>    United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC): Clean Development  Mechanism (CDM)_.2009. Project 2554: Doña Juana landfill gastoenergy project. Version 4  September, 2009.  <http://cdm.unfccc.int/UserManagement/FileStorage/D4PASZOHU5EWBC61K3VI7NQLJMGRFY>    Themelis, N., & Ulloa, P. A. (2007). Methane generation in landfills. Renewable Energy 32, 1243 1257.    Yip, C. H. and Chua, K. H. (2008). An overview on the feasibility of harvesting landfill gas from  MSW to recover energy. ICCBT  28 ,303 310.    Waste For Life. 22 March 2011. Who we are. 2 June 2011 <http://wasteforlife.org/>    World Bank. 15 December 2010. Gross domestic product. 2009. 17 November 2010.  <http://www.worldbank.org/>                               119

