Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Evaluating alternative styles of audio description in an animated comedy
John Riccio
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Technology and Innovation Commons Recommended Citation
Riccio, John, "Evaluating alternative styles of audio description in an animated comedy" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 553.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

HV

EVALUATING ALTERNATIVE STYLES OF AUDIO DESCRIPTION
IN AN ANIMATED COMEDY

by

John Riccio

B.Com. Ryerson University, 2007

A thesis

presented to Ryerson University

In partial fulfillment of the

requirements for the degree of Masters of Management Science
in the program of

Management of Technology and Innovation

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008

© John Riccio 2008

PROPERTY OF

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for
the purpose of scholarly research.

John Riccio

Date

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by

other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

John Riccio

Date

Evaluating Alternative Styles of Audio Description in an Animated Comedy

Master of Management Science, 2008

John Riccio

Management of Technology and Innovation

Ryerson University

Abstract
Audio description is the practice of adding extra auditory cues into visual media to

explain visual information to blind and low vision viewers. This thesis investigates the impact of conventional and alternative styles of audio description on the blind and low
viewers' comprehension, entertainment experience, trustworthiness of the audio
description narrative, and style preference.

Eighteen blind and low vision participants took part in the study. The participants were divided into two groups, and asked to watch three episodes of the television show Odd Job Jack in a single audio description style. Each participant was asked to complete a pre and post study questionnaire, and a post episode questionnaire at the

completion of each episode.
Results indicated that the alternative style of audio description provided better

understanding, entertainment value and is more trustworthy. Yet, there is no distinct

preference among the blind or low vision viewers for either audio description style.
iii

Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my family, Mom, Dad and Anne Marie, for always supporting me and providing me with encouragement to complete this paper. Without their help and support I would be unable to succeed. Dr. Deborah Fels, my thesis advisor, for recognizing potential in me during my undergraduate studies, and for being so supportive, and willing to take time out of her
incredibly busy schedule to meet with me every week and guide me through this

process. Without her support and aid I would not have been able to finish this thesis.

I would like thank Dr. Wendy Cukier, Associate Dean of the Ted Rogers School of Management, for all her help, and taking the time to meet with me on
multiple occasions to provide input and insights into my thesis. I want to thank Ryerson University and NSERC for funding my project.

To my thesis committee, Dr. Jennifer Brayton and Dr. Ozgur Turetken, for
agreeing to review my thesis on such short notice.

I would like to thank all the participants of my study, as well as the volunteers,
including Katie, Tim, George, Quoc, and Jorge. In addition, it is important to thank BlindCanadians.ca and John Rae for helping me obtain my subjects

To the CLT staff, especially Carmen, J.P. and Norma, for their constant support, and
patience with my millions of daily questions.

IV

Finally I would like to thank all of my friends in the MBA and MMSC programs especially Peter and Stephen, who were there with me through the late nights, and resubmissions.

v

Table of Contents
Abstract
Acknowledgements

iii
iv

List of Tables
List of Figures

.ix
x

1.

Introduction

1

2.

Literature Review

.5

2.1 Third person audio description
2.1.1 Standards in audio description 2.1.2 Seven step framework for production of audio description ..

T/7T&
.5 10

2.2 Need for audio description 2.3 Issues in current audio description practices 2.3.1Creating the unified world 2.3.2 The leader of unity
2.3.3 Interpretation and subjectivity of audio description

13 14 14 16
18
j

2.3.4 Audience reception 2.4 Critics of the third person approach
2.4.1 An alternative style-first -person approach

19 22
23

2.4.2 DVD extras
2.5 In-house approach

,

25
26

2.6 Perceptions of quality 2.7 Flow
2.7.1 A challenging activity that requires skill

28 29
31

2.7.2 Merging of action & awareness.... 2.7.3 Clear goals and feedback 2.7.4 Concentration on task at hand 2.7.5 Loss of self-consciousness

32 33 33 2 34

2.7.6 Paradox of control..
2.7.7 Transformation of time 2.7.8 Self-selection
vi

35
...,36 38

3.

Universal design

39

4.

The audio film industry
4.1 Audio book industry

B

43
45

5.

Methodology
5.1 Research questions 5.1.1 Understanding the show 5.1.2 Entertainment experience 5.1.3 Trustworthiness
5.3 Research design

47
47 48 48 49
49

5.3.1 Online study

51

5.3.2 Study group
5.3.3 Data collection 5.3.4. Participant characteristics
5.4 Data analysis

52
52 55
56

6.

Results

59

6.1 Effects on understanding: H1

59

6.1.1 Repeated measures analysis of understanding: HI & H5
6.2 Effects on trust: H2

60
64

6.2.1 Post-study findings: H2

64

6.2.2 Repeated-measures findings for ttyst H5
6.3 Effects on entertainment experience: H3& H5 6.3.1 Rost-study responses to enjoyment: H3 6.3.2 Enjoyment findings from post-episode: H3

65
66 66 69

6.3.3 Repeated Measures Analysis of Entertainment: H5 6.4 Audience's audio description preference: H3

.72 77

VII

7.

Discussion

79

7.1 Research question 1: Preferences for style among the blind arid low vision audience (H4) ...79
7.2 Research question 2: Impact on understanding (H1, H5)....
7.3 Research question 3 Impact on trustworthiness (H2) r

82
83

7.4 Research question 4: Impact on entertainment experience (H3, H5)
7.5 Summary of discussion 'Z?,

85
88

8

.Limitations

v

90

9.

Future directions

.

...96

10.

Conclusions and recommendations

98

Appendix A : Ethics Review Appendix B: Pre-Study Questionnaire Appendix C: Post-Episode Questionnaire Appendix D: Post-Study Questionnaire
Appendix E: Comprehension Questions Episode 3 Appendix F: Comprehension Questions Episodei

102 104 .107 110
114 116

Appendix G: Comprehension Questions Episode 2
Appendix H - Consent Information

118
120

Consent to Participate in Study from Subject..

120

Information Form Appendix I Screen Prints Login :

120 123 123

Quiz...
References

1

124
125

VIII

List of Tables
Table 1: Means and standard deviation for the Comprehension tests Table 2: Significant entertainment results from repeated measures testing Table 3: Trending analysis for entertainment experience
Table 4: Means and standard deviations of altered sense of time

60 73 . 73
76

IX

List of Figures
Figure 1: ITC Seven Step Framework.
Figure 2 : Alternative audio description process Figure 3: Optimal challenge graph (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990)
Figure 4: Mean and sd bars for comprehension scores

i

12
25 32
60

\

i

Figure 5: Percentage of correct answers for both styles
Figure 6: Means ratings and sd for information that leads to understanding

62
63

Figure 7: Perceived change in trust Figure 8: Trust compared to standard television
Figure 9: Mean and sd trustworthiness over viewings

65 > .65
66

Figure 10: Means and sd for perceived enjoyment
Figure 11: Means and sd for enjoyment compared to standards on television
Figure 12: Mean and sd of enjoyment ratings of Odd Job Jack

,..67
67
68

Figure 13: Distribution of likeability responses for the conventional groups
Figure 14: Distribution of likeability responses for the alternative group

...69
69

Figure 15: Mean scores and sd for enjoyment across viewings
Figure 16: Mean ratings and sd for altered sense of time across viewings

70
71

Figure 17: Mean ratings for experience of distractions across viewings
Figure 18: Means and sd scores for information leads to enjoyment

72
74

Figure 19: Mean ratings and sd for distractibility by viewing

.75

Figure 20: Mean and sd of ratings for altered sense of time across episodes
Figure 21: Mean and sd of ratings for altered sense of time across viewings

76
77

Figure 22: Frequency of ratings for three different audio description styles

...78

1. Introduction
Audio description is the process of writing, and performing additional narration, which
is then inserted during the breaks in dialogue of a television program or movie, to

describe important visual information for access to those programs and movies for
people who are blind or fow vision (Wall, 2002). As such, it is an integral part of

watching TV for those who are blind or low vision. Audio description, as an official practice, began in 1981 in Washington DC, at the Arena Stage (Independent Television Commission, 2000). It was the developed by Margaret and Cody Pfanstiehl, who later
went on to form the Audio Description Service (Independent Television Commission,

2000). The popularity of Audio Description grew, and by the end of the 1980Js it was
being practiced across North America and the world, including the UK and Japan. (Independent Television Commission, 2000) Audio description was mandated by the CRTC in 20Q4. In this mandate, broadcasters are required to produce two hours of audio described programming per week and it increases to four hours per week in 2009. This indicates that the need for audio
description is being recognized. This increase should help to boost the audio description industry as well as increase its profile with the general public.

One of the issues in audio description is the current style in which it is created. In the
conventional approach, a third party provider uses a neutral third person narration

method as the mea^s to deliver description. Some researchers have found that this

approaches not suitable for all the various types of genres and content. In addition,
viewers often complain that this style of description is disruptive and not enjoyable.
1

Fels et. al, (2006b) suggest an alternative technique where description is created by
the creative members of the production team who use a character driven first person

technique. They found that blind and low vision viewers reacted more positively to this style compared with the conventional style but found it less trustworthy. I intend to build
upon the findings of Fels, et al. (2006a).

In this thesis, I will investigate the impact an alternative style of audio description produced for an animated comedy series has on an audience's enjoyment, flow and understanding of that show as experienced over time. These factors will be compared with an audience's reaction to the same content produced with conventional description.
My research questions are as follows:

1. Which style of audio description is preferred by blind and low vision viewers?
2. What is the impact of different styles on the understanding of the show's plot,
setting and characters?

3. Is there a difference in trustworthiness between the first person and third person
approach?

4. What is the impact of audio description style on entertainment experienced by blind
and low vision viewers?

I plan to extend the current research by addressing some of the limitations outlined

by Fels et. al.(2006a) that included small participant numbers (only seven blind or low
vision participants), exposure to short duration (one to two minutes) of content. The
study carried out for this thesis proposes to use 18-20 blind or low vision participants

who will watch three full-length (22 minutes) audio described episodes of Odd Job Jack
in one of the audio description styles. In previous studies, participants were exposed to
2

short duration clips (e.g., less than two-minutes) containing the conventional or
alternative description. In these studies, researchers reported that one potential reason

for a positive response to the alternative description style was a novelty effect and

further longitudinal studies were required to overcome this effect. In my study, it is my intention to expose participants to multiple, full length episodes of Odd Job Jack in order
to reduce this novelty effect and examine audience's reactions and compare them with
those found in the earlier studies.

My intention is to examine the impact that the new method of audio description has on understanding, trustworthiness of the audio description narrative, the entertainment
experience, and the blind and low vision viewer's preferences. The main purpose of

audio description is to increase the blind or low vision viewers' understanding. If the new
style negatively affects their understanding it will not be a suitable replacement. In
)

addition, the audience has to be able to trust the information they are receiving or they
won't perceive any value in listening to the audio description. What has often been left out of previous research is the entertainment aspect, yet film and television is intended to be entertaining. If the audio description diminishes the entertainment value of the
show, it is not as useful to the audience.

The focus of this thesis is on audience reactions and evaluation of the different styles

of audio description. The business, legislative and implementation components of audio
description are not a focus although there may be some implications from the results
regarding these elements. In addition, this thesis does not address different genres of content or live venues for audio description. It is focused on pre-produced television content for blind and low vision audiences. Finally, I did not include sighted participants

because they are not the main users of audio description. Before possible uses for sight

participants are determined, it must be proven that the new style of audio description is equivalent to or exceeds the current standards for the^blind and low vision viewers. At the completion of this study, my research will contribute to the current practice and
knowledge base of audio description by providing film and television producers with

evidence regarding two different styles of audio description. This should enable them to
make informed decisions regarding the creative approach and inclusion of audio
description in their productions.

2. Literature Review

2.1 Third person audio description
Currently, most productions outsource audio description for television or films to an independent provider. This provider writes, records, and adds the audio description narrative to the already finished production (Snyder, 2005). In conventional thinking, the main function of audio description is to objectively provide the most important visual

information, in a limited amount of time, in a neutral tone similar to that of a newscaster.
This approach i§ built upon the principle that the purpose of audio describers is to act as
a camera lens, relaying to the audience only what is visible, without interpretation or

subjectivity. In fact, it is recommended that the describer avoid or control their use of their own reactions to the film. Thus, all information presented to the audience is

objective, allowing the blind or low vision viewers to interpret these actions on their own
accord (Pfanstiehl & Pfanstiehl, 1985). In fact, organizations such as the Independent Television Commission (ITC) and Audio Description International (ADI) have produced
comprehensive guidelines on how to properly produce audio description to achieve this camera lens effect.

2.1.1 Standards in audio description
In general, most organizations producing audio description do so with the intention of standardizing the processes and procedures to ensure that all describers provide good quality descriptions. In order to achieve this, each audio description company produces
their own guidelines which are not usually shared in the public domain. These guides

cover all pertinent audio description topics, including what to describe, how to describe,

and the production process/preparation for description. As a result, two common and
available guides (created by the ITC and ADI) were reviewed and combined to
determine the generally accepted procedures. It is important to note that these guides were created and written by sighted individuals based mostly on current industry practices with little academic research to support their principles.

2.1.1.1What to describe

Many academics argue that the audio describer's goal is to act as a "camera lens"
(Pfanstiehl & Pfanstiehl, 1985, p. 91); however, this goal is unachievable. As the old
adage states "a picture is worth a thousand words", unfortunately this holds true for

audio description. As a result, it is important that audio describers prioritize which

information is most essential to understanding the filnffor television show (Independent
Television Commission, 2000).

In order to properly prioritize what information to describe, the describer must

understand what information the blind and low vision viewers need to comprehend from
the current scene, future scenes, and the film as a whole. To understand the current scene the viewer often needs to understand who is in the

scene (including exits and entrances), who is speaking, the location/set, the facial expressions, movements and mannerisms of the characters (Audio Description
International, 2003).

Although each of these factors provides important information, it would be difficult to describe this for each scene. In addition, the describer must still provide all information

that the blind or low vision viewer needs to understand the movie as a whole (Audio
Description International, 2003). It is common for film makers to use their visual images

to foreshadow future events, the audio describer must relay these visual images in a
subtle manner, as that is how a sighted viewer would receive this information

(Independent Television Commission, 2000). Consider a scene from a murder mystery,
as the detective surveys the crime scene. He may glance at several objects, which are

of no consequence to the current scene, but are later used as critical evidence to
determine the killer. Without this information, the blind and low vision viewer may be confused as to how the detective was able to solve the mystery. ITC also points out that the describer should highlight sound effects, directly before or after it occurs, as this will help allow blind and low vision viewers achieve an equal
experience. It is also important that the describer never state the obvious; for example, it would be ridiculous for the describer to announce that the telephone is ringing as this sound is common knowledge to the audience. It should also be noted that the describer

should avoid describing sound effects that are explained during the scene, again, this would be describing the obvious (Independent Television Commission, 2000). As mentioned before, the describer must never interpret the visual cues for the audience, nor provide an opinion or commentary about the film or television show

instead the describer should attempt to simply verbalize the visuals (Independent
Television Commission, 2000).

2.1.1.2 How to Describe Action

In addition to providing strict guidelines on what should and should not be described,
The ITC and ADI guidelines provided detailed information on how to properly describe
the visuals to the audience.

There are certain rules that conventional audio describers must never break; firstly,
all audio description is performed using third person narration. This third person narrator

should be perceived by the audience as interested, warm, confident and authoritative; someone who is all knowing about the story (Audio Description International, 2003).

The describer should always attempt to describe the action as it unfolds, so that the
blind and low vision audience experiences it at the same time as the sighted audience (Audio Description International, 2003); however, it is important that they do not

contravene the golden rule of audio description. The golden rule states that audio
describers should never describe over existing dialogue (Audio Description International, 2003; Independent Television Commission, 2000). In order to avoid speaking over dialogue, it is acceptable to signpost or pre-empt the action in order to properly describe the scene (Independent Television Commission, 2000).

It is important that the describer keeps the mood, tone and pace of the scene that he
or she is attempting to describe, as this allows their description to blend into the action

of the film or television show. Using a monotone or uninterested voice to describe the information takes away from the scene and draws the audience out of the film reality (Audio Description International, 2003). In addition, it is vital that the describer
understands the audience of the film and uses appropriate vocabulary.

8

There are certain grammatical/structural issues that describers must be aware of during the writing of the audio description narrative, in order to produce quality audio description. The describer should always attempt to use complete sentences, as this is much easier for the audience to process and comprehend (Audio Description

International, 2003). In addition, the describer should attempt to use proper names or
pronouns whenever possible. The usages of terms such as, "he" or "she" can often
create ambiguity as to which character is performing the actions (Independent Television Commission, 2000). The resulting ambiguity leaves the blind and low vision viewer confused; therefore unable to properly comprehend the scene. As mentioned before, all of the action is being described in real time; thus, the

describer should also use the present tense. ITC suggests using a "mixture of present and present participate gives the text a better narrative feeling" (Independent Television
Commission, 2000, p. 12). The final major stylistic guideline requires describers to add

variety into their vocabulary. This is specifically important when using adjectives and

verbs. The proper choice of verb or adjective can considerably enhance a scene as it
accurately describes and distinguishes the mood, tone or action from other events in the

film. In addition, the use of the same word over and over again becomes repetitive and
boring for the audience (Audio Description International, 2003). It is also important to

note that variety l^eeps the viewer focused on the film, engaged in the movie, and allows
the describer to disappear (Audio Description International, 2003).

2.1.2 Seven step framework for production of audio description ITC developed a seven step framework for new describers to follow, in order to
produce quality audio description. ITC suggests, as audio describers become more

experienced, they should manipulate these seven steps to build their own framework for successfully describing video (see Figure 1). The seven steps are as follows
(Independent Television Commission, 2000):
1, Choosing a suitable program for description

According to the ITC, not all television programs or movies are suitable to be audio described, for instance, news programs generally have a continuous script with little
space or need for audio description. This same principle often holds true for many game shows (Independent Television Commission, 2000). The ITC also states that shows or

films that require continuous audio description are also unsuitable. An example of this is action films; where there is very little dialogue for extended periods of time (Independent
Television Commission, 2000). In this situation continuous description can become tiresome for the audience, as the cognitive processing load would be large.
2, Viewing the program ^

Once the audio describer has determined that the film or show is appropriate for
audio description, the describer must watch the film using a time coded version. It is

generally expected that the audio describer will watch the film in its entirety more than
once (Independent Television Commission, 2000). Watching the film more than once allows the describer to grasp the entire story, notice important details, cues and
significant events; hence, allowing the describer to better prioritize what is to be

10

described. ITC advises that the describer may want to watch the film without the visual
images to help determine the issues that blind and low vision audiences will lace when

watching the film (Independent Television Commission, 2000). At this time, the describer should make notes concerning which events need to be described as well as

performing any additional research that could be useful in the script (Independent
Television Commission, 2000).
3. Preparing a draft script

Independent Television Commission (2000) suggests that to prepare a draft script the
audio describer should have a PC based work station, with the ability to perform word
processing, time code-indexing, video editing, and audio recording. In addition, this

workstation should have the ability to associate the elements of the written script with the program's time-code (Independent Television Commission, 2000).
4. Reviewing the script

Once a draft script has been written it must be reviewed and edited by an editor or senior describer to ensure the quality of the work. After the script has been reviewed,
the describer should rehearse the entire script, in conjunction with the show, over

several times to b£ well prepared before recording (Independent Television
Commission, 2000).

5. Adjust the program sound levels

Now that the final audio description script is completed, the audio describer needs to reduce the original sound track levels during spaces where the audio description will be

added. This process enables the audio description to be heard more clearly by the
11

audience. ITC suggests this change in background volume should be subtle as to not
jar the audience (Independent Television Commission, 2000).
6. Record the audio description

With the script ready and the sound levels adjusted, the describer is now ready to

record his or her tracks. It is important that the describer focus on their sound level,
intonation, and delivery of material, as mentioned earlier, it is necessary that they stay in tune with the scene. Staying in alignment with the scene enables the audio describer to produce non-intrusive commentary that allows the viewer to enjoy the film or
program.

7.

Review the recording

The last step in this process is to review the audio description to ensure that there

are no "mistakes, omissions, or imperfect delivery" (Independent Television
Commission, 2000, p. 11)

View

Determine if
program is

View ^
Time coded

Content

Prepare

Draft Script

suitable

Version of
Show

Draft Script

Reviewed by Editor

Audio Levels of show are adjusted

Record
Narration

Review

finished
production

Adjust and
fix any errors or omissions

Figure 1 :ITC Seven Step Framework

12

22 Need for audio description
Although my research is heavily influenced by the work of Fels et al. (2006a), it is

important to consider previous work from the field of audio description to gain a full understanding of current issues. Approximately 2.5% of the Canadian population is considered to be blind or of low vision, which is just over 800 thousand people (CNIB,
2008). In addition, it has been found that people who are blind or low vision watch as
much television as those who are sighted (Kirchner & Schmeidler, 2001). However,

without the use of audio description many blind and low vision viewers believe that they
are not receiving as much information as those who are sighted (Standards For Audio
Description, 2007; Kirchner & Schmeidler, 2001).

Kirchner and Schmeidler (2001) have produced some interesting insights into the social impact of audio description. They found that a significantly higher proportion of blind or low vision viewers who watched television with audio description were more willing to discuss the show with sighted friends and family members, when compared to

those who watched the show v#th only the original soundtrack. Their study involved 111
blind participants watching three hours of science related television. The participants were shown two different shows one with audio description and one without audio description, and were asked to complete questionnaires about the program and the audio description. One of the issues with this study was that it focused on the use of audio description for documentary, which is a genre that typically uses third person
narration style. Other genres such as drama or mystery were untested thus limiting the
generalization of their results (Schmeidler & Kirchner, 2001).

13

Pettitt, Sharpe & Cooper (1996) found that, in general, people who are blind or of low vision, that have experience with audio description, have reported that it is informative and it increases their enjoyment of the show or film. They investigated whether audio
description was useful for enhancing the entertainment value of television. They took a random sample from 120 blind or low vision people, and interviewed them about their

viewing habits. From this group, 100 of the initial participants were given the opportunity

to watch four-five hours of audio described television per week, for a period of four
months. The genre of these programs spanned from light entertainment such as

sitcoms to more serious television such as documentaries, and educational films. Finally, interviews were conducted to gather information about viewing patterns and the
impact of audio description. Close to 90% of the participants in this study stated that audio description was helpful in increasing their understanding and enjoyment of the television show (Pettitt, Sharpe, & Cooper, 1996). Although this is a positive sign that blind or low vision audiences did find the audio description helpful, there was no
comparison against a control condition to examine whether there was a better

understanding of the show as a result of the audio description narration. Instead, they focused only on participant's perceptions (Pettitt, Sharpe, & Cooper, 1996).

23 Issues in current audio description practices
2.3.lCreating the unified world

What is often forgotten in the creation of audio description, and is generally under
emphasized in most audio description research is that television shows, and films are
art forms intended to entertain (Fels D., Udo, Diamond, & Diamond, 2006a). Ball states

14

that the "the most important characteristic of a work of art is unity", without unity "it does
not qualify as art" (1984, p. 3). In order to create theatrical entertainment, such as films and television, one must manipulate each component of the production (lighting, sound and acting); through this manipulation the creator is able to achieve a multitude of

effects (Ball, 1984; Brockett & Ball, 2004).
In successful productions this manipulation leads to harmony among each of the

different elements, leading to the creation of a unified piece of art. This unity is sought
after by every artist (including filmmakers) in every piece of art that they produce. Ball

believes that greater harmony amongst the integrated components results in a better
film or television show, and that all filmmakers are always seeking new techniques to

achieve this perfect unity (1984).
Through the integration of each individual component the film creates its own world

(Ball, 1984). The unity among the components helps to legitimize this world for the

audience, this leads to the audience believing in the film's world. Ultimately the
audience member should no longer be aware that he or she is watching a film, but

instead, become immersed in the film's world, as if it were reality (Ball, 1984). Ball argues that every time an element is out of alignment with the rest of the film or

television show, the production loses authenticity; he refers to this as "breaking the
system" (1984, p. 33). The filmmaker is always striving to build this system of harmony
that creates a strong and legitimate world. When the system is broken the audience

realizes that they are simply watching a film, and are no longer part of the film's world. This prompts Ball to suggest that this is the greatest error that can be made by a filmmaker.
15

In this light, the current conventions of audio description, with the goal to act as a

camera lens and simply translate the visual to verbal, is flawed. The goals of audio description need to be adjusted so that they conform to and are consistent with that of
filmmakers. Therefore, all audio describers should strive to present a unified piece of
work to the audience regardless of their method of consuming it.

2.3,2 The leader of unity

The literature has made it fairly obvious why film and television shovys require unity in
order to create a world that the audience believes. However, it is also important to

determine how this is generally done in the film industry. The responsibility to create this

unity lies solely with the director, as he or she is the captain of the ship (Benedetti,
1985). The director of the film or television show is the primary visionary of production;

thus they are charged with the responsibility of communicating this vision with the entire
production team, and ultimately turning this vision into a concrete product (Baldwin,

2003). In actuality, the finished product is not a pure vision of the director, but rather a

collaborative effort of the entire production team. The director is able to augment, refine

and fully develop his or her vision through discussions with key members of the
production team (Baldwin, 2003).

The director must then oversee the work of the entire production team to ensure

alignment amongst all the elements of the film. Through this process the director is

attempting to create a "coherent aesthetic style" (Baldwin, 2003, p. 33) or what Ball
referred to as a "system" (1984, p.33). Baldwin points out that a coherent aesthetic style can only be achieved when all the elements that form the production, including actors'

16

performances, the set design, music, lighting etc, come together to support and uphold

a unified vision.
The procedures and working relationships built between members of the production

team are in stark contrast with the conventional practice of audio description. The audio description is assembled separately from the remaining whole without those who have the strongest ability (the directors or script writers) to blend it with the production. It is
extremely rare for the audio describer and production team to ever have contact

(Independent Television Commission, 2000). If there is no interaction or even contact between the describer and the production crew, is it truly possible to present a unified piece of work? Oddly enough the ITC recognizes that there must be unity in their own
processes, stating that if an actor is used to perform the audio description they must

consult with the writer of the audio description script in order to ensure that the writer's
full interpretation is produced (Independent Television Commission, 2000). Yet, the conventional practice would indicate that there is little value in communicating with the

production team to understand their vision, and intentions of the film.

Consider what it would be like to watch a film that had been produced solely using
the audio description model, where there is no communication between the members of
the production team. In this situation, each person produces their work with their own

unique vision. The writer would produce the script in his or her genre of choice, for this
(r

example it will be slapstick comedy. The writer than sends the script to the rest of the
production team. The director reads the script and decides that he wants to emphasize

the love story in the film, hence he is going to direct it as if it were a romantic comedy. While the costume designer feels that the film would work better if it was set in the
17

1970's. The musical director reads the script and sees a sad drama of an awkward young man searching for love, so he produces his music accordingly. When this movie

is pieced together it would be possible to get a modern slapstick drama-comedy based
both in the 1970's and present day. Clearly, this rriovie would lack continuity, there

would be absolutely no coherent aesthetic style, and each element would contradict the others, so the film would be constantly breaking its system. This would result in a dreadful movie that would be unbearable to watch. This is an extreme case; however, it indicates how a lack of communication can negatively affect the production, and ultimately ruin what could have been a very good film.

2.3.3 Interpretation and subjectivity of audio description
Building a unified world aids a filmmaker in his or her attempt to illicit particular responses from the audience. Thus enabling him or her to achieve what some argue to

be the primary challenge of film and television. The unification and integration of the
j-

individual component plays a prominent role in directing the audience towards a particular response (Brockett & Ball, 2004). As mentioned previously, it is becoming

evident that the current audio descriptions conventions contravene this goal. In addition, the current guidelines over emphasize providing an unemotional and objective view of
the movie as the audio describer attempts to avoid unintentionally swaying the audience's opinion of the storyline or meaning. However, audio description is an

inherently interpretative process, leading it to being subjective. By the nature of audio description it is impossible for the audio describer to describe everything, therefore he
or she must make a subjective decision on what to describe, how to describe it, and

when to describe it. In addition, the describer is asked to interpret the mood, tone and
18

timing of the scene so that the audio description will flow within it; but this is another
subjective decision. This leads some to argue that audio describers should be less

focused on objectivity and more focused on providing an entertaining experience (Fels
D. , Udo, Diamond, & Diamond, 2006a)

2.3-4 Audience reception

In fact, Brockett and Ball (2004) would argue that it is not possible for script writers,
directors, actors or audio describers to dictate to the audience a particular reaction, as

each individual has different preferences and beliefs ; thus, making this obsession with
objectivity somewhat irrelevant. Audience reception theorists, such as Hall or Morley,
would agree with Brockett and Ball that audiences are not easily influenced and that our

individual differences account for different interpretations of the same events (Hall,
2006).

Fiske (1987) states that television viewers are social subjects, who base their perceptions on their own social history, including socio-economic background, ethnicity,
gender, orientation etc. He would also suggest that social subjects have more power to

construct their own meaning than the creators of the production (in this case both the film and the audio description). He states that the preferred meaning (as intended by the

creators) should no longer be seen as exerting considerable or complete influence over

the viewers. This viewpoint is in contrast to the passive, gullible, and easily influenced
viewer that is assumed by the description standards and guidelines, where any subjectivity would overtly bias the blind and low vision audience. Fiske (1987) even

suggests that when there is a significant difference between perceptions and filters of

19

the encoders and the decoders, it is the decoder's social history (as explained earlier),

has the strongest impact on their understanding or interpretation of the text. This active
audience research indicates that conventional style of audio description's obsession
with objectivity is somewhat irrelevant.

Hall (2006) argues all texts (including films and television shows) have a preferred reading, which could also be referred to as a true meaning. This preferred reading is the

property of the text and creator, who encodes this reading through the process of
creation. In the case of films and television this preferred reading would be the vision of the production team. The production team would encode the meaning into the text (Hall,

2006). As the audience consumes the text, they decode the meaning behind it. Hall
states that there are three possible ways to decode the meaning, as dominant,
negotiated or oppositional.

When the reader decodes the text with the dominant position, he or she is taking the
meaning as the creator intended. A negotiated decoding occurs when the reader
accepts part of the intended meaning, but rejects, adapts or does not understand the

entire message. Oppositional decoding occurs when the reader fully understands the
intended meaning, but rejects it and uses an alternative framework to decode the

meaning (Hall, 2006). In actuality, it is extremely rare for the audience to decode the
text completely from the dominant position, or the oppositional stance (Fiske, 1987). In

most situations one will either accept or reject most of the preferred meaning, while

modifying the rest of the preferred meaning to meet their needs or the specific social
history (Fiske, 1987).

20

YZ
6ujsSBd A|6ujMOU>|un 9jb Aai|} ls\m op Anuapjjjns oj aiqeun 9jb

uo!id8OJ9d p sljujou |Buosj9d jjsliuo Auow969i| 9qj way,, uo!jduos9p

0} AjjijqB 9i|} sbi| J9quos9p ojpnB 9i|} j91|}91|m suojiS9nb (9002) 6|
!P AflSBA
A|9i9|diuoo 9abm 90U9jpnB pujiq 9i|} puB J9quos9p Oj ! pUB U0!jd90J9d UMO Jj9l|} LJUJOJ O\

'S90U9U9dX9 JU9J9JJ.jp

jno sjujod os|B (9003)
PUB

|BU|6UO 9l|} qjoq S9p009p J9M9IA UO!S|A MO| JO pU||q 9L|J A||BUj J "96BSS9W IBjlJUj fSM9J0
qj jq uo!JBj9JdJ9jU! J9q jo s|q qj|M p(9j 9qj S9poou9-9J U9ijj ol|m J9quos9p

Aq p9poo9p 'M9J0 uoipnpojd eq) Aq p9poou9 sj \kb\ Bi\\ 9J9q/w uoi.jBnijs b oj.

spB9| uo!jduos9p O|pnB A^iBd pjjiDp uojjjppB 9qi 6u!poo9p puB 6ujpoou9 p ujBgo 94}
0}U| >fUI| M9U B S90np0JJU! U0!jdU0S9p O|pnB JBqj JB9|0 Sj }| U0!jdU0S9p O|pnB SJ09JJB pUB

S9JB|9J 1! MOl| 9JBI1|BA9 0} 6U|pOO9p pUB 6U!pOOU9 |O |9pOULJ SJ|BH S9||ddB (9002) Bj
(£ l|dBj6BJBd > U0IJ09S '9002 '6|Bh) {Js6ujUB9LJU M9U LijjM sn 9sudjns o; AjjnqB s\\ u\ £S9jnjdm puB st9jnpunfs!p
'SUJI1J pUB SJS|MJ SJ! in S9|| AJOJS B JO JS9J9JU!,, Bi\\ SB 'p(9J OjU96A|Od BSq O\ UOIJOjJ
J

SJ9PJSU00 ||BH "9LUBS 9L|J A|J0BX9 \KB\ S\l\\ J9JdJ9JUj ||jM S|Bnp!A!pUI OMJ OU pUB 'S6UJUB9UJ
JUBUJUJOp JO p9JJ9|9Jd 9|d!}|nUI 9ABL| AbLJU \XB\ Bl\\ '90U9l| :91BUd0jddB |99| A9qi

\Bi\\ 6U|UB9LU 91JI 9Z||BnpB O\ \\ 9UJnSU00 Ol|M 9S0L|J SM0||B }XB\ 0jU96A|0d B 'A|9SJ9AU0Q

96BSS9LJU S\H\ 6UjpnjJSUOO 9q AbLU JBL|J S9SB|q 'SB ||9M SB 'A9AUO0 O\ 6U!jdlU9UB S|
MOL|S B\Jfi yei\\ UOIJBLUJOJU! 9l|} AJ.JJU9P! OJ ASB9 Sj 1! SB 'MOIJS >||BJ |B0|l!|Od B JO SM9U 91J} 9q

pinoM aiBj6ojd 0JU960U0UJ b p 9|dwBX9 poo6 v (9002 'll^H) 1! awnsuoo ol|m bsouh o\ J9JSUBJ} pUB pUBJSJ9pun 0} ASB9 Sj JBqj 6UJUB9LU B SUjBJUOO }X9} O|U96OUOUJ V "0!.U96A|0d

JO 0|U960U0UJ 1BI\\\B 9q UBO 6UJUB9UJ p9JJ9J.9Jd BU(\ \e[\\ S^S966nS OS|B (9002)

along their subjective interpretation of the text as opposed to the preferred reading. As a

result, she believes that by nature audio description is "subjective, culturally defined and
constructed, and unstable" (Haig, 2005, Section 4, Paragraph 7).

2.4 Critics of the third person approach
As the research of audio description currently stands, there is an abundance of
evidence to support its importance to those who are blind or low vision. Unfortunately,

much of this literature is solely focused on thetraditional third person narration style of
audio description. The current guidelines for creating useful and enjoyable audio

descriptions center on the concepts of being objective, clear, concise, and definitive in
word choice (Standards For Audio Description, 2007). However, with the exception of Fels et. al. (2006a), many of these researchers seem to ignore the value of entertainment in television shows and films. It could be suggested that as entertainment, films and television shows are not objective, and that visual cues can
provide the viewer with subjective information. As such, there has been limited research

investigating stylistic variations or alternatives for audio description that can address the entertainment and information needs of blind and low vision viewers. Fels et. al. (2006a) have been among the more vocal academics and researchers to

criticize the current standards of audio description. However, they are not alone in

critical opinion of the current procedures and processes of audio description. Other
researchers and industry professionals, such as Haig, have also taken a critical look at

these current practices in order to make adjustments and improvements to the quality of
audio description.

22

In 1997, Haig, a visually impaired film and television director, directed the first film to
have the audio description completely integrated with the production. Her intention was
to create a seamless and unified film, similar to that discussed earlier (Disability Arts in

London, 2002). Haig has also focused much attention on indentifying the issues

currently facing audio description. She argues that based on pictorial semiotic theory
there are significant distinctions between visual and verbal (Haig, 2005). Thus, she is
able to show that cultural analysis and awareness is mandatory for all audio describers, although this skill may be in short supply amongst the current industry professionals (Haig, 2005). Haig also uses Halls' encoding/decoding model of communication, as discussed earlier. Finally, Haig used the theory of power and knowledge to reveal how audio description practices are affected by power relationships in society. She exposes that the current model is dominated by the medical model of disability, "where the

objective, knowing, professional experts provides for a docile viewer-patient" (Haig, 2005, Section 6, Paragraph 2). She identifies flaws in the current practices of audio description. This provides more support for the need to validate the results of Fels et. al.

(2006a), in order to determine whether this model provides an adequate solution to
many of these issues.

2A.I An alternative style-first -person approach
Upon further examination of the current practices of audio description, it becomes
evident that these practices should be challenged. It would seem most appropriate to look for alternative models of audio description production. Fels, et. al. (2006b)

developed the first-person approach to audio description. This approach is character

driven, where the description follows the st^le and perspective of one of the characters
23

from the show or film. In their paper, they describe the process using the main character as the describer; however, other characters can also adopt this role. The character

narrates using the past tense, and it includes subjective and emotional information (Fels
D., Udo, Diamond, & Diamond., 2006b). Although, this style of audio description results
in a more integrated storyline and unified piece of work through the control over what and how described information is provided, it does increase the workload on the
production and creative team.

As opposed to the current practice, this in-house approach does not outsource the production of audio description. Generally, this approach follows a similar path (as

shown in figure 2), as that of a third party produced work, but the tasks are carried out
by the creative team it. However, the creative team including the director decides on the

approach to be used for the description. Writing of the audio description script can then

be undertaken by the scriptwriter who has been trained in unique requirements of
blind/low vision audiences and audio description techniques (Fels D., Udo, Diamond, &
Diamond., 2006b). The director and the recording actor whose responsibility is to act

the dialogue must then create the video description track. The raw track can then be sent to the television show or film's sound editor who can edit and adjust the audio description to fit with the flow with the original sound track including appropriate timing, and volume levels. Quality control can also be provided at this time. Finally, the sound

editor can mix both sound tracks together with the video tracks for the master tape. The
audio description then becomes part of the master tape having the same quality as the

original audio track. This process has the potential to produce a more integrated experience for the audience, as scriptwriters, directors and sound editors are all part of

24

the audio description process and can integrate this with their inherent understanding
and vision of the show; thus creating an unified piece of work. It is my opinion that the process proposed by Fels et al. (2006b) is comparable to that used for the creation of DVD menu and content; hence, the next section will look at this process to highlight the similarities.

Identify spaces &
timing for
Creative

description

team decides
on approach

Record/Deliver
description

Script

writer/describer
writes

clescription to

reflect approach

Figure 2: Alternative audio description process

2.4,2 DVD extras
With the advent of the DVD as the main method of home film consumption, came the creation of the DVD extra, where the average viewer was able to receive a more indepth look at their favourite movies DVD bonfrs features began, as a necessity, as a result of Warner Brothers' 1999 release of The Matrix DVD with two documentaries

about the film (Moerk, 2005). These bonus features helped to drive sales of the The
Matrix DVD to over a million copies, with only 3 million DVD players owned by consumers (Moerk, 2005). DVD extras have become so popular that many major films
25

have their own DVD crew who work with the production team to produce the DVD event

(Moerk, 2005). Similar to the rest of the production, the main DVD producer meets with
the director to understand his vision of the movie as well as to share ideas about what

should be included and how she can help. When DVD production team attempts to
avoid or exclude the director, the bonus features truly suffer and are often medicore at best (Moerk, 2005). The director now views being involved in the DVD extra process as
part of the normal operation; not being included would be considered unaccepted (The Hollywood Reporter, 2003). The director views the DVD production as their opportunity

to present the film as they envision it. However, like all other parts of the production, the director oversees the process but the responsibility for implementing this vision rests
withof the DVD production team, who must create the extras in accordance with the director's vision (The Hollywood Reporter, 2003). It would seem that the creation of the

audio description follows this similar procedure as a DVD extra.

2.5 In-house approach
Fels et. al.'s (2006a) put their proposed audio description process to the test, in a comparative study which gauged viewer reaction to the current style of audio description versus the newly created first person approach. Fels et. al. (2006a) showed

14 participants (seven sighted, and seven blind) short clips of an adult comedy series
called Odd Job Jack in both styles of description. The viewers were then asked to rate their preferences for each style, in terms of the quality and quantity of the information presented, and the entertainment value of each type of audio description. They found
that three times as many participants preferred the first person approach over the

traditional approach (Fels D., Udo, Diamond, & Diamond, 2006a). However, these
26

results conflicted with the fact that the first person approach received more negative feedback regarding the trustworthiness of the description than the traditional approach (Fels D. , Udo, Diamond, & Diamond, 2006a). This conflicting finding could be a result
of the novelty effect from the new style of narration, the fact that first person narrative is

less trustworthy than third person narrative form, or the participants had a negative
reaction to the content of the show. Unfamiliarity with description style may cause the viewer to be more critical of the presentation, and may have played a contributing role in the belief that this technique is less trustworthy than the traditional styles.

There are several limitations to the study performed by Fels et. al. (2006a), which I
intend to address in this thesis in order to advance the knowledge in audio description

practice. First, the study used only seven blind participants. While this is a fairly typical
number of participants in assistive technology, the generalization of the results is limited. For the purposes of my study I would like to have at least doubled the number of
participants.

In addition, many of the participants were not part of the target audience of the show
that was chosen for the study. The show used was a cartoon comedy series aimed at a

target audience of 18-35 year old males. This might not appeal to those outside of this target audience and some of the comments from the participants may have reflected their negative reaction to the show itself. Therefore, the viewers' preferences could have
biased the study as the participants might bp inclined to evaluate the shows content instead of the description techniques. However, with the limited number of blind or low

vision people within the target audience of this show, it will be difficult to fully correct this
bias.
27

Finally, the participants were only shown four short clips of about 1.5 minutes each.

This approach is contradictory to the standard method of consuming television watching the show one episode at a time (Fels D., Udo, Diamond, & Diamond, 2006a).
This resulted in a novelty effect, where the new method of describing was perceived to be interesting and exciting, thus receiving higher positive feedback. To eliminate this novelty effect, I will be showing multiple full episodes of the show, and measuring their change in opinion over the course of the episodes to help eliminate this novelty effect.

2.6 Perceptions of quality
One of the major issues of evaluating alternative styles of audio description is that we are required to measure the audience's perceptions of quality. Thus, it is important to look at other factors that may influence the audience's opinion of the audio description

as well as the show as a whole. Jumisko-Pyykko (2008) points out that one's perception
of quality is dependent on particular characteristics of each sensory channel. Generally,
for film or television this would involve a combination of the processes amongst the

visual and auditory sensors (Jumisko-Pyykko, 2008). Blind viewers present a unique situation where they are using the auditory information to create and understand the visual images they are unable to see. Hence, perceptions of audio description will be more heavily influenced by attributes that affect auditory processes, which include,

factors that have been identified by Jumisko-Pyykko (2008), pitch, loudness, timbre and
location: In 1991, Neuman, Crigler, and Bove performed a study attempting to

determine how audio quality affected and influenced viewer's perceptions of the
television viewing experience. They tested multiple dimensions of audio quality,

including mono vs. stereo sound, and low fidelity vs. high fidelity, to determine how
28

differences amongst these variables affected the audience perception of the television
show. Ultimately, they found that shows with the combination of better quality (high

fidelity) and stereo sound were perceived by the audience "as more likeable, interesting,
and involving" (Neuman, Crigler & Bove, 1991, paragraph 1). For the purposes of my

study, I must be aware of this issue, through the administration of the study as well as
the analysis of my results.

2.7Flow
Katz , Gurevitch, and Haas (1973) suggest that there five basic needs for mass
communication, such as television, in society:

· ·

Cognitive - obtaining knowledge Affective - emotion and pleasure

·
·
·

Personal integrative - providing confidence and strengthen credibility
Social integrative - strengthens connections with others
Tension release - escape from life

For my thesis I wanted to focus on the Affective and Tension release factors because these are factors are individual measures. Research in audio description is so new
especially regarding style that involving a more complex group assessment is

premature. In order to aid in the evaluation of the affective and tension release factors I will be using Csikszentmihalyi's (1990) concept of flow as it has measurable attributes that relate directly to these two factors as described in the next paragraphs. Also, I use a comprehension test as a simple first measure of the cognitive factor. The
comprehension test measures understanding and meaning making is one important

cogntive process used in mass communication. Although the social and personal

integrative factors are important reasons for watching television (as described in

29

Kirchner and Schmeidler (2001)), it is a more complex undertaking to assess them that

is beyond the scope of this thesis. It is important to understand the impact that audio
description style has on the individual who is blind before attempting to determine the impact it has on a group of sighted and blind or low vision individuals together.

The film literature examined earlier emphasized the concept of the unified whole. When a film achieves unity, the audience is able to lose itself in the film without the
realization that they are even watching a movie. This type of effortless involvement to activities is called flow. The concept of flow was developed and has been extensively

studied by Csikszentmihalyi (1990, 1992). Flow is a cognitive state of intense euphoria
through concentration and involvement in an activity or task (Johnson & Wiles, 2003). When Csikszentmihalyi first developed the concept of flow he was attempting to
enhance the existing knowledge base and understanding of human happiness. He

determined that it would be most appropriate to develop a model to represent the optimal human experience. He chose the term flow to represent this experience, because it elicits a sense of effortless movement or involvement (Csikszentmihalyi,
1990).

Csikszenmihalyi's developed this concept by studying top performers from a variety of different fields, ranging from athletics, to medicine, to the arts. His intention was to have them describe their mindset when they are in an optimal state of performance. He

then compared the information he gathered from common people, about how they
experience their optimal performance. From this he was able to conclude that,

irrespective of age, profession, gender, culture, or activity, people often described their happiest experiences in terms of flow (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). Thus, he was able to
30

00} s| Ajjajjob 9i|} jj 'seieojpu! £ 9jn6y sy (0661 '!A|Bij!W}U9zs>|!So) Ajjaijob \e\# u\ 6upBj
sj eq yem 96u9||Bip 9ij} 0} }U9|BAmb9 9q }snupS9!J!i!qB jo s||i>|s p9A!90J9d s(9uo '

9onpuj A||BnpB o\ Ajjajjob ub joj J9pjo u| (©661 '!A|Bq!iu}U9zs>|!So) s||!>)s jo IBOjsAqd Aijoujs oj-ywoy. ^iljuji ;ou S9op s\m\ 'J9A9/woq :s9|ru Aq punoq puB p9}U9uo

|B06 A||BJ9U96 9JB S9f)jAj)0e eUjOnpUj-MOIJ a9)9|dUJ00 O) ||!>|S S9Jjnb9J \Bi\\ A}|A!PB
6U!6ll9||Bl|0 B Uj p9A|0AU| 9q 0} S| MOy 6UJA9IH0B ±0 S}U9U0dW00 JOfBLJU 9^ p 9U0

v VL'Z

9SU9S p9J9}|B

S49UO J9A0 |OJ}UOO J.0 9SU9S V

·

b 6uunp ss9usnopsuoo
B >|SB} UO

! pUB S|B06 JB9|0 L|}!M >|SB} V

ss9U9jbmb puB uojpB j.o 6u;6ja|/\|
S9Jjnb9J }Bl|} AjjAflOB 6U|6U9||BL|0 V

9onpuj 0} >|SB} b 9|qBU9

U9A9S

! (0661) |A|BL|!UJ}U9zs>|!S0 (0661 '!A|Bq!LJU}U9ZS>|!So)
9Jinb9J Moy 9onpu! yem sb\\\a\\ob '.sim puoA9q S9o6

'9jnsB9|d p

b A|dai!S jou

p

b\j(\

puB}SJ9pun 0}

sj

(£002
'S9|!/v\ ^ uosuqop) suo!}oai9 puB s;i|6noq} }uba9|9Jjj jo AjBSS909Uun p uoj;bu!LU!|9
9L|VS9pnpUj Sjqi pUBq }B AjjAjPB B\J(\ U\ p9qJ0SqB Sj 91JS JO 9LJ SB JU9PJJJ.9 pUB

S9iuoo9q 9uo '90U9U9dx9 |BLU!}do p 9}B}s 0L|) u| 9|!i|M \bu(\ 9pnpuoo

r
difficult, people experience anxiety, while if it is too easy, the participant is bored. Flow
is only achieved when there is congruence between skill and challenge.

High

CD

M. "m
sz

C

O

Low Low

Skills

High

Figure 3: Optimal challenge graph (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990)

2.7.2 Merging of action & awareness
To be in a state of flow, the participant's skills must be matched with the challenge offered by the activity. In order to achieve this, all of the participant's relevant skills must

be recruited, which then leads to an intense concentration on accomplishing the tasks of

the activity. All distractions are ignored by the participant because of this intense effort
which leads to automatic and effortless interactions and behaviours.

32

2.7.3 Clear goals and feedback
In order to induce flow it is often required that tasks have specific goals, not generic ones such as a winning (Csikszentmihaiyi, 1990). These goals are often regulated and measured by the rules of the activity. In addition, it is important the participant receives

immediate feedback on his progress towards the ultimate goal. Although these goals
are not always clear or present in the mind of the participant; he or she must have a

strong understanding of their intentions (Csikszentmihaiyi, 1990). Consider a friendly
game of tennis where the goal of winning is no longer relevant. This game can still be

flow inducing because it has other relevant goals, such as returning the ball over the net
after it is hit by the other player. In addition, the player knows whether they are successful after every hit because it either goes over the net or not and the other player

hits it back; hence they are receiving immediate feedback (Csikszentmihaiyi, 1990).

2.7.4 Concentration on task at hand

Often times when a participant is immersed in a task he or she becomes so focused

that nothing else can enter his or her consciousness. During the state of flow, a participant becomes so focused that all anxieties and preoccupations are blocked from
consciousness allowing for an enjoyable experience (Csikszentmihaiyi, 1990). This

concept ties directly into the concept of a unified film production as discussed earlier. A

unified world allows the viewer to concentrate on the film, and become immersed within
it, forgetting about her own problems and issues. However, when a filmmaker breaks the system he or she is creating a distraction that does not allow the viewer to

33

concentrate; hence allowing the issues of their own life to flood back into
consciousness.

2.7.5 Loss of self-consciousness
The loss of self-consciousness is closely related to the previous element of being able to concentrate on the tasks. In everyday life, there are certain events that threaten our own self-image, which will result in anxiety and self scrutiny. During the state of flow
the self image is never threatened, because the participant is both concentrated on the

task at hand, and his skill level is equivalent to the challenge (Csikszentmihalyi,
1990).Csikszentmihalyi claims that as one concentrates and works hard to improve skills and complete tasks, one is able to achieve self growth, and a stronger sense of
self (1990).

Loss of self-consciousness is not equivalent to the complete lack of awareness of

body or mind. Even though flow can often help automate one's actions, it requires an
active role from the mind or body to analyze the environment. Consider a good hockey

player, the player is not focusing on skating by consciously moving one leg at a time, and carefully focusing on the exact form of each stride; as this is an automatic response for good players (as explained earlier). Instead, she is focusing on the higher level task of analyzing the action of the game. She is required to understand where she is in relation to the rest of the players, and attempt to anticipate the opposing team's actions, in order to counter them. Now that she has decided where to go she most mobilize her body to get there accounting for variables such as speed and direction. If she needs to speed up to beat another player to the puck, she is going to have to possess the

34

awareness to take quicker strides. Hence both her body and mind are playing active
roles in her success.

Csikszentmihalyi does point out that the loss of self-consciousness allows the
participants to block out body signals that are unnecessary to complete the task at

hand, this can include hunger, fatigue, and even injury (1990).

2.7.6 Paradox of control
While in a state of flow, people will often report on their ability to control the current
situation or at least the perception that they can control what occurs. A video game player has the ability to control what her character does, she can move her character left, right, up, or down, to duck their enemies or defeat them etc. Through the ability to

control the character the player is enabled to beat the game. If this rule is violated, and

the ability to beat the game was out of the players control it would seriously contravene
her sense of flow. Oddly enough this rule can hold true even in situations where the concept of control

would be illogical, such as gambling. Professional gamblers report that they rely on their skill not luck to win games even though they are playing games of chance
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). He suggests that this phenomenon occurs because people are actually experiencing a lack of worry, and only precieve this as control (1990). Returning to our gaming example, unlike real life, the user can run into a battlefield and fight hundreds of enemies without harrti to themselves; thus there is no real reason for
her to worry.

35

Yet gambling has real consequences (such as losing money), how could the gambler not be worried? Csikszentmihalyi would point out that people who experience flow during high risk (like gambling) or life threatening (such as skydiving) activities have built up the necessary skills to mitigate against being worried. For example, a

professional skydiver is well trained in all the safety procedures and techniques for a
safe landing; thus, reducing the need for them to worry (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990).

2.7.7 Transformation of time When taking part in a flow activity, losing sense of time is often reported

(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). An activity can be so pleasurable that a person's sense of
time becomes altered so that what may have been several hours can seem like mere
minutes (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990).

It is important to note that it is not necessary for all of these conditions to be present

in order for one to experience flow. In addition, activities that induce flow are autotelic, meaning that they are done for their own intrinsic rewards with no concern for current or future benefit. Thus, people continue to take part in these activities as they are for pure
enjoyment.

Much of the research carried out by Csikszentmihalyi focused on understanding the

experiences of experts, such as top athletes or surgeons. Yet the phenomenon of flow can be experienced in many different situations by many different people. In fact,
Csikszentmihalyi identifies that, among people who are blind, reading is often an activity
that induces flow. If we then extend this concept to listening to audio description, some
y

of the same mechanisms might apply.

36

Consider how the flow conditions or variables might relate to the experiences of television or film audiences. First, film provides a challenging activity, as it is bound by rules and conventions of language as well as the customs and norms of the culture in
which the film is set. Thus, the audience must understand the rules of the language and

the cultural customs and norms or it will be very difficult to enjoy the film. Clearly, if the film is in an unknown language without subtitles, the audience is unable to understand or enjoy the film fully. In addition, the audience must have the ability to interpret words,
images and sounds, understand the plot, empathize with the characters, and finally evaluate the film.

Similar to reading a book, a truly enjoyable film allows individuals to become
immersed in the storyline, plot and lives of the characters; thus, the reader/viewer

becomes less self-conscious and eliminates unpleasant thoughts or anxieties
(Csikszentmihalyi, 199Q). In addition, it can be easy to lose track of the sense of time

when watching films or television shows, again indicating a flow experience.
I would like to suggest then that the theory of flow supports the notion that people who are blind want an equivalent entertainment experience while watching television or

films to that of sighted audiences. The flow conditions should then apply similarly to all
audience members. As indicated in early research in audio description style (see Fels

et. al., 2006), blind audiences preferred the entertainment value of description over the trustworthiness of the information perhaps because it induces flow. My research will build on the hypothesis that first person video description will help to induce flow, as it is
integrated into the storyline and reduces distractions, thus allowing the viewer to

concentrate on the show. If the viewer is able to better concentrate on the show, she
37

should experience an altered sense of time, and the elimination of unpleasant thoughts
from consciousness.

2.7.8 Self-selection

It is important to mention that four participants dropped out of my study. Two of these four participants choose to quit the study because they did not enjoy, and were not
entertained by the show.

38

3. Universal design
Audio description is still a new concept and practice in television and film relative to other practices, such as closed captioning; hence, there are few theoretical frameworks that have been created and very little supporting research to guide this practice. It is important to look at the wider field of accessibility and assistive technology, where much more research has been conducted. One of the more prominent paradigms used in this field is universal design. Universal design is focused on the creation of usable products, practices or environments for all people, without adaption or specialized design (Preiser & Ostroff, 2001). There are seven principles that are at the core of universal design
(Burgstahler, 2008) (Preiser & Ostroff, 2001).

·

Equitable use o Products should be designed to be usable and marketable for all people, including those with diverse abilities. For example, a well designed website should be able to be accessed by those who are both sighted and

blind (through the help of a screen reader). This accessible design ensures that everyone who visits the website is able to access the
information they need.
· Flexible use

o

Products have a flexible design in order to accommodate for differences in
user preferences and abilities. Almost all DVDs now come with options for

the user to hear the film in different languages, as well as, with close

captioning for those who are deaf or hard of hearing.
39

·

Simple and intuitive use

o

The product's design should be easy to use for all customers, regardless
of their experience, knowledge, or ability. Windows Vista (a computer

operating system), is simple and intuitive so that all users are able to
perform the basic tasks necessary. · Perceptible information

o

The product design communicates all necessary information regardless of user abilities. A disposable camera does a creative job of this, providing

detailed instructions on the back of the camera as well as colourful
indicators to help guide the user.
· Tolerance for error

o

The design should minimize and protect the user from hazards or
consequences as a result of an accident. All major computer programs

such as Microsoft Word provide safety from the user accidently closing the
program, by prompting the user to ensure they wanted to shut down; as

opposed to instantly closing and having the user lose all unsaved work.
· Low physical effort

o

Products should be designed so that they can easily be used without
requiring strenuous or fatiguing actions. A grocery store installing an

automatic sliding door allows customers to easily enter and exit while
carrying heavy parcels, or pushing a cart. n ,

40

·

Size and space for approach and use o Products and spaces should be designed to be accessed and used by all people regardless of physical ability, or size. Public washrooms are designed so that people in wheelchairs have enough space to enter, use the washroom and wash their hands without strain or aid from others.

Clearly many of these rules (such as, size and space) are not applicable to audio
description research as they are focused on physical barriers or boundaries. However,

many of these principles, especially simple and intuitive use, or perceptible information,
are important to the practice of audio description.

The principle of perceptible information must be considered in word choice of audio descriptions. A describer has a very short period of time to convey the most information
possible. In conventional form, it is the describer who must decide what information is

important to describe and then formulate appropriate neutral words to represent that information. An example of this is to use more verbs, such as crying compared to
adjectives, such as sad. In conventional audio description, words, such as sad convey

an interpretation of an emotion while crying describes the action of being sad (or happy
or angry etc.) and the audience must decide whether it is sad or happy based on other cues. Hence, this is not perceptible information, as it is not directing the user to the

correct emotion that is being displayed. For a sighted person all of the cues including
facial expressions are given to indicate that the person is sad or happy, there is really
no interpretation required.

41

The words used by the describer should also be simple and intuitive (Preiser & Ostroff, 2001). The level of simplicity may also need to be adjusted depending on the
target audience; however it is extremely important to use words that are easily

understandable and clear to convey the message to the audience. For example, for a show that is targeted towards teenagers, the describer might want to avoid using words such as nonplus or superfluous. Despite the fact they are descriptive and unique, many
young teenagers would probably not understand their meaning. Instead, it would be

better for the describer to use more common words such as, baffled to replace nonplus,
and unnecessary would be a suitable replacement for superfluous.

The fact that there is such a gap between the way a sighted person and a blind person experience and process the film contravenes the equitable use rule. Clearly, the audio description does not allow the blind and low vision audience access to the same

information as those who are sighted. In addition, the current style and quality of audio description is also contravening this rule. It is being created with the sole purpose of
allowing blind and low vision viewers to understand; while possibly diminishing the

entertainment experience of sighted viewers. Audio description should be created so
that all viewers, sighted or blind are able to enjoy the show, film or play. In fact, audio description that places more emphasis on entertainment could help to serve a wider
audience, beyond the blind and low vision viewer, and ultimately create a new revenue

stream for film and television production companies.

42

4. The audio film industry
When a production company utilizes character driven and entertainment focused
audio description, they are essentially creating an auditory version of the film. This

auditory film allows the listener to develop their own visual images based on the
description; thus, the product would be consumed as though it were an audio book. This

will open a new revenue stream for production companies as they are easily able to
enter and compete in the audio book industry. Adding to the attractiveness of this

proposition is the fact that production and film companies will be able to enter this
market without incurring much additional expense.

The creation of audio description would be done by production team members who are already on staff. The recording of the audio description would take place during the

post production. This process may require several extra days in the recording studio. All of the marketing of the product would be linked to the marketing of the film and the DVD (Kozloff, 1995). The studios would incur extra costs in the manufacturing of the physical audio description product if they chose to utilize CD formats of the audio film. If the production company wanted to avoid or minimize these cost, it would be advantageous for them to bundle it on the DVD, while selling it separately through online distribution
channels, such as l-tunes. This online distribution would allow the production company to avoid extraneous production costs for the physical product.

In fact, introducing a line of audio films is not a novel idea in the film industry. Walt Disney Studios, for example, started producing audio books as tie-ins to their movies in

1957. Disney's marketing muscle was able to propel many of these audio books to sell

43

over one million copies (Kozloff, 1995). Kozloff suggests that most audio publishers

have miniscule promotional budgets, thus, they rely on creating tie-ins to movies (1995).

She even suggests that the entire industry could one day become a promotional tool of
the film industry (Kozloff, 1995).

In the early 1990's Blockbuster Video rentals even began to carry audio book cassettes. This initiative did not meet Blockbuster Video's expectations, so they were

quickly removed from the shelves (Kozloff, 1995). Audio publishers were quick to point out that the test was premature and that store staff were not adequately trained to
promote the genre (Kozloff, 1995).

It might be possible for the film industry to attempt to enter this market again as much

has changed since the early 90's As mentioned earlier, the creation of the DVD extra
has created a public expectation that features accompany a DVD. In addition, films are consumed much differently than they were in the early 90's. Consumers no longer need

to go to the theatre or watch films on their television, films are now mobile (The
Hollywood Reporter, 2003). DVD players are in cars, and the popularity of the all-in-one
handheld device such as the IPOD, allows viewers to consume movies anywhere,

anytime. Consider a family car trip where the parents (in the front seat) are able to enjoy
the film with their children, because of the quality of the audio description, while still

being able to concentrate on the road. While, commuters using their IPODs or other
handheld devices are able to better enjoy their film with watching on a small screen, as
 

opposed to straining their eyes. Essentially you have a marketplace that is primed to use audio description on its own or to enhance the viewing of their favourite television
show or movie.

44

This brief analysis of how audio films could be cheaply produced, and the possible
consumer uses, demonstrates that audio description is a viable option for production
companies. However, this discussion does not indicate that it will be a profitable

venture. It is important to take a brief look at the audio book industry to understand their

market, and if it would be appropriate to enter.

4.1 Audio book industry
The audio book industry has seen steady growth since the mid 1980's when major

publishing houses first began to release auditory versions of popular books (Neary, 2005). In 2007, the Audio Publishers Association (APA) released their bi-annual report
on industry profitability, as well as consumer profiles. In this report they stated that

yearly industry-wide profits were estimated to be $923 million, a 6% increase from 2005
(Audio Publishers Association, 2007). The APA also reports that 24.6% or approximately one quarter of the American population reported that they have listened

to at least one audio book within the last year. In addition, they are reporting an

increase of total sales online by 14%, which is a 5 percentage point increase compared
to the 2005 report (Audio Publishers Association, 2007). These are all positive

indicators that entering the industry could be a profitable venture for production/film
companies. Clearly, this brief discussion does not provide enough evidence or in-depth

analysis for companies to make a proper evaluation as to whether it would be appropriate to enter this markfet. In order to do this it would require a tremendous amount of industry and consumer research, which is well beyond the scope of this

45

paper. Without definitive evidence that this first person audio description is acceptable, and a significant improvement over the current process, it would be fruitless to
determine its marketability

46

5. Methodology
It is my intention to expand on the research described in the literature review, with a focus on examining audience levels of content comprehension, and enjoyment as defined by flow, over a longer period of exposure to the alternative style of audio
description. These results will be compared with the conventional style of audio
description.

5.1 Research questions
For the purpose of my research, I compare two different styles of audio description, which have been developed in previous literature (conventional third person/third-party
produced and first person/production studio created) for use in an animated comedy

series. I will be attempting to build upon previous research by examining viewer preferences, and the impact of stylistic variations on audience understanding. Thus, my
research questions are as follows:

1. Which style of audio description is preferred by blind and low vision viewers?

2. What is the impact of different styles on the understanding of the show's plot,
setting and characters?

To adequately answer these questions, I attempt to explore differences between the
trustworthiness of the audio description, and the entertainment value of it. As such, I

must also investigate the following sub-questions:

47

1.

Is there a difference in trustworthiness between the first person and third person
approach? r

2. What is the impact of audio description style on entertainment experienced by
blind and low vision viewers?

5.1.2 Understanding the show

The main purpose of audio description, regardless of the method used, is to always increase the blind or low vision viewer understanding of and engagement in the

storyline (VSA Arts Of Texas, 2007). It is important that the audio description provide accurate information, so that the viewer can follow and understand the progression and
plot of the show. My research topic relates specifically to which descriptive approach

provides enough information to satisfy the informational and entertainment needs of the
blind and low vision audience, within the time restrictions imposed by the pace and
dialogue of the show.

5.1.2 Entertainment experience

One of the initial purposes for the existence of audio description was to enhance the entertainment value of productions for the blind and low vision audience (Standards For Audio Description, 2007). Thus, it is important that my study determine whether there are differences in the entertainment value of each description method. If a method
reduces the entertainment value or interferes with it then the goal of audio description

has not been achieved. Ultimately, one method should lead to a more unified and
interesting film, thus creating a better entertainment experience for the audience.
48

5.13 Trustworthiness

It is also important to determine whether the viewer believes that the information they are receiving from the audio description narrative is valid and accurate. If the viewer does not trust the audio description then the value of the method will be diminished. In
Fels et al.'s (2006) audio description study, there was a belief among the participants

that the first person approach was less trustworthy but more entertaining. However, this
was based on short (one-minute) clips; the audience did not even view one whole episode. I will investigate whether this trend is maintained over longer exposure or

whether there is a change in attitude over time.

53 Research design
In order to attract as many participants as possible, I chose to run the study in two

different venues at the same time. Participants had the choice to take part in either an
online version of the study (2 participants) or a group session (16 participants). In both

of these studies, the same three, 22 minute episodes of the Comedy Network television show Odd Job Jack were used. Odd Job Jack is an adult cartoon in the style of Family Guy and South Park. The
premise of this is show is that the main character, Jack Ryder, works for a temporary

employment agency. In each episode Jack is given a new job where he has an unusual adventure. For example, in one episode Jack becomes a magician's assistant, who ends receiving his own full hour special. The show tends to use vulgar, rude and
inappropriate humour. The target audience is males between the ages of 18 and 35.

Odd Job Jack was used because it was the only show available that was audio

49

described in the first person style and the conventional/third person style audio
description. Odd Job Jack's audio description was created using the exact process

advocated by Fels et al (2006) as explained in section 2.4.1 and figure 2. For this study,

I anticipate that viewing three, 22 minute episodes is sufficient to overcome some of the
novelty effects limiting the study reported by Fels et aJ (2006a).

In the group session, the study participants were divided into two groups, the

alternative style group (9 participants) and the conventional style group (9 participants). The alternative style group watched all three episodes of Odd Job Jac/cwith the first person style of audio description. The conventional style group watched the same three episodes of Odd Job Jack (in a different order) using the conventional style of audio
description as produced by AudioVision Canada, a professional video description
company.

Due to the difficulties in recruiting enough subjects who are blind or low vision and
between the ages of 18-35 (the target audience for Odd Job Jack), the target age

demographic was expanded to include all adults. This may result in the same issues

identified in Fels et al (2006a) study, where there was an increase in negative reactions to the audio description because of audience's dislike of the show which was related to
age. Although the intention was to keep the online version and the study group as

similar as possible there were some slight differences that I will outline in the following
two sections.

An ethics application was submitted and approved by the Ryerson Research Ethics
r

board (see Appendix H).

50

5.3.1 Online study
For the online portion of the study, I created a website that was accessible for the
blind and low vision participants. This website allowed the participants to gain access to the study using their preferred accessible technologies for accessing the text-based
documents and questionnaires. This website used an accessible flash video player and

online forms were formatted for access by screen readers. Each user was given a
unique username for logging into the site. The user answered questions and gave opinions that could be tracked and clustered together for analysis using these unique

identifiers. The username feature also allowed the website to be customized to only
show the next relevant task for the participant. When the participant logged in for the

first time, she was assigned to one of the two groups at random. In addition, the order in which the episodes were watched was randomized to avoid an order effect. Appendix I shows sample screen shots of the login procedure, and the questionnaires.
Using an online platform provided several distinct advantages over the study group

format. First, it allowed the participants to watch the shows on their schedule in a more convenient setting, at their preferred times and in their own home. Participants could
also watch the shows over multiple sittings, which is similar to how television is

generally consumed, one episode at a time over the course of several days or weeks. Using the online platform also allowed me to recruit participants from beyond the Greater Toronto Area, where there are a limited number of blind and low vision viewers.

51

5.3.2 Study group

The participants in the study group watched all three episodes in a row, with only one

short break between episodes two and three, as well as at the completion of each
questionnaire. The alternative group (AG) watched the episodes in the following order:

episode one, Nobody likes a Gorilla, episode two, The Mindhumper, and episode three
The American Wiener. The conventional group (CG) watched the shows in the reverse order, to mitigate against a possible order effect. The participants were assigned to a group randomly, based on their arrival to the study location and there were equal number of participants in each group. To administer the questionnaires volunteers sat
with the participants and read them the questions, and record their responses.

5.3.3 Data collection

As members of the study, the participants were asked to complete three different types of questionnaires; a pre-study questionnaire, post-episode questionnaire

(participants completed three of these), and post-study questionnaire. At the conclusion
of the study, we held an informal discussion that was recorded so that participants could stay and voice their opinion about the audio description. The whole study including the
discussion component lasted approximately two hours.

5.3.3.1 Pre-study questionnaire (See Appendix B)

The purpose of the pre-study questionnaire was to gather demographic information
(questions 1-5) and determine the users experience with, and opinion of, the current methods of audio description (questions 6-10). This questionnaire was administered
after the participant consented to be part of the study.
52

5.3.3.2 Post-episode questionnaire (See Appendix C, E, F, G)

The post-episode questionnaire was administered at the completion of each episode and was comprised of two distinct sections. The first section was a set of 7

comprehension questions for episodes 1 and 3 and a set of 6 comprehension questions for episode 2, which were directly related to the episode participants had just watched.
The purpose of the comprehension questions was to determine the viewer's understanding of the episode. The second section of the post-episode questionnaire was used to track the
participant's change in opinions and attitudes overtime (questions 1-6). The response

categories were forced-choice 5-point Likert scales/This helped to determine whether
the description style was affecting the participant's reaction to the show. This

questionnaire was also used to evaluate the impact, over time, on entertainment, flow and understanding (questions 7 -14). These questions were also forced-choice 5-point
Likert scale where 1was strongly agree (the best), 3 was neutral and 5 was strongly disagree (the worst).

5.3.3.3 Post-study questionnaire (see Appendix D)

The post-study questionnaire was administered at the completion of the entire study to allow the viewer to provide overall opinions and attitudes about the methods of audio description. This questionnaire consisted of 13 questions, which measured the audiences perception of changes over time using a forced-choice Likert scale (questions 1-5)where 1 was better over time, three was neutral and 5 was worse over

time. The opinion of the audio description in comparison to standard audio description

53

was judged using a 4 point scale, where 1 was more enjoyable/trustworthy, 2 was

neutral, 3 was less enjoyable/trustworthy and 4 was neither is^njoyable (questions 6
and 7). This questionnaire also measured whether they enjoyed the show on similar 5
point Likert to question 1-5 where one was enjoyable, 3 was neutral and 5 was not enjoyable (question 8); as well as, relevant market information about their opinion on

possible uses (questions 9 and 10), and whether they would prefer the use of the
alternative audio description (questions 11-13)

5.3.3.4 Group discussion (See Appendix J)

A group discussion took place at the completion of the study, and only those

participants who wanted to provide additional verbal feedback and input were asked to
stay. This discussion was audio recorded using two microphones and a laptop computer

for later analysis. Similar discussions were held in both rooms. We led the discussion by posing 5 questions to the group. These questions helped to evaluate the positive and negative aspects of the styles of audio description, and how to improve on the style (questions 1- 3). I also asked people's opinion of Odd Job Jack and asked them to
expand on their answers from the questionnaire (question 4). To finish the discussion, I opened the floor to general comments about audio description in general (question 5). The purpose of this discussion was to gain a deeper understanding of the participants'

opinion, as well as to allow them to provide feedback for further improvements. The
discussion for the CG lasted 19 minutes and the one for AG lasted 31 minutes.

54

5-3.4. Participant characteristics
There were a total of 18 participants, 16 in the group sessions, and two in the online
study, divided evenly between the CG and AG groups. Of these 18 participants, four

dropped out of the study before its completion, three from CG, and one from AG. As

there were only two participants in the online portion, the data were combined with that
from the group sessions

There were 12 male subjects and 6 female subjects, the average age of the
participants was 42.78 years old ranging from 18 and 59 years old. Seven of the participants referred to themselves as "totally blind", and seven said that there were

"legally blind". Four of the participants were "low vision", but not legally blind. A majority

of the group (11 of 18 participants) had a University or College education, while four
participants reported having a post graduate or doctoral degree, and three stated they

had a secondary school diploma. A majority of the participants (14 of 18) stated that
they did not watch television with audio description, two stating that they did not watch

television at all; and only two subjects watched one to two hours per week of television
with audio description. Of the 18 participants, six stated that they watched adult cartoons, such as the Simpsons, or Family Guy, and only one participant had watched

Odd Job Jack. Most of the participants (13 of 18) reported being neither satisfied nor

dissatisfied with the current level of audio description, five were dissatisfied, and only one respondent was satisfied with the current standard of audio description.

55

5A Data analysis
Of the 18 participants in my study, 14 participants watched all three episodes, while two participants watched two episodes, and another two participants watched only one

episode. As noted before the online data was combined with the rest of the data, as the

population was too small for any significance to be measured between the types of
study groups. The four participants who did not complete the study are still included in

the statistical analysis for the sections that they were able to complete; however, all of
the dropout's entries were excluded for the repeated measures analysis For the purpose of my study, I determined five main hypotheses that relate to the
research questions outline in Section 5.1:

·

H1: The style of audio description has no effect on the blind or low vision audience's ability to understand the show (including plot, characters and
setting).

·

H2: The style of audio description has no effect on the blind or low vision

audience's ability to trust the information provided to them by the audio
description narrative.

·

H3: The style of audio description has no effect on the blind and low vision
audience's entertainment experience.

·

H4: The blind and low vision audience, as a whole, has no preference
towards one specific style of audio description.

·

H5: The above variables are not affected over time

56

A 95 % confidence level was deemed acceptable to use in all of the statistical
analyses. Hence, any data resulting in a significance level (p) of less than .05 was considered to be significant. In addition, significance levels between 05 and .055 were
further investigated for trending purposes

Because of the small number of subjects, I used the nonparametric statistical technique, the Mann-Whitney test, to analyze the between-subjects data (description style as grouping variable). The Mann-Whitney test allowed me to determine whether variations in style affected the central tendencies of the group on the audience's understanding, the trustworthiness of the audio description, and the entertainment

experience (dependent variables). However, the results will be much less generalizable
compared with those that could be interpreted from parametric techniques.

I used a Repeated Measure Analysis, to examine differences that may have occurred

between each episode (within-subjects variable) from information gathered in the postepisode questionnaires. This within-subjects analysis allowed me to determine the

differences among the same factors over time. I used this technique to determine if
there was a change in the reaction of the viewer to the different styles of audio description over time. In order for the repeated measures analysis to work the data
must meet the sphericity assumption, which is essentially an extension of homogeneity

of variance assumption for ANOVA (the variance of the populations from which the
groups are sampled from are equivalent) (Baguley, 2004). If this assumption is violated the results will be analyzed using either the Greenhouse and Geisser correction. This method relaxes the assumption of sphericity by reducing the degrees of freedom
(Baguley, 2004).
57

T
The data from the two small group discussions were evaluated to determine whether there was any pertinent information that would help explain or support the statistical analyses. This also allowed me to understand the needs and opinions of the audio
description audience providing a springboard for future research.

58

6. Results

6.1 Effects on understanding: HI
A Mann-Whitney analysis was carried out on the comprehension scores between AG

and CG for each of the three episodes, to evaluate the impact of the description style on the audiences understanding (H1). Comprehension scores were graded using the
marking scheme where one point was awarded for each correct answer. A higher score
would show better comprehension for a single audience member. There was no

significant difference in comprehension scores between the two groups. The

hypothesis, H1, stated that the style of audio description has no effect on the blind and low vision audience's ability to understand the show's plot, characters, or setting cannot
be rejected.

Figure 4 and Table 1 shows the mean comprehension scores and standard deviations (SD) for each episode. The scores for the alternative style are consistently
higher than those for the conventional style.

59

7

6

5
<u

0

4

[

i

i

.

H Alternative ?, Conventional

1 3
2 1

0
Epl

Episodes

EP2

Ep3

Figure 4: Mean and sd bars for comprehension scores

Episode 1 Mean

Episode 2 Mean

Episode 3 Mean

Standard Deviation
2.14

Standard
Deviation

Standard
Deviation

Alternative
Conventional

3.89 3.86

3.13 2.29

1.46 0.88

3.25

1.49
1.41

0.99

2.66

Table 1: Means and standard deviation for the Comprehension tests

6.1.1 Repeated measures analysis of understanding: HI & H5

6.1.1.1 Comprehension scores: H5

A repeated measures analysis was performed on all six of the understanding

variables from the post-episode questionnaires to determine whether there were any significant differences over time (H5). These analyses were used to evaluate significance between subjects (grouped by style) and within subjects (grouped by episode). The Mauchly's test of sphericity was not significant (p =.648) so the

assumption of sphercity for this data holds. Of the understanding variables tested, only
60

two variables, the comprehension scores and a rating of whether the audio description

provided adequate information to understand the plot, provided significant results from
either the univariate or multivariate analyses.

The univariate analysis of the comprehension scores did not reveal any interaction
between the comprehension scores and the style of audio description. However, there was significance across the three episodes for the whole group [F (2, 14) = 4.247, p=.O26]. From the trend analysis there is a significant trend [F (2, 14) = 5.466, p=.O38]. Examining the mean scores for understanding (see Figure 4), it appears that both
groups preformed best on the episode 1 test, regardless of order, and worst on the

episode 2 tests, with episode 3 test scores falling somewhere in the middle (see Table 1 for means and standard deviation). Since each group watched the episodes in a different order; this trend is not an effect that occurred over time; thus, the hypothesis
(H5) cannot be rejected for understanding. Rather, it seems that episode 1 was more memorable than the others. An analysis of the means as depicted in Figure 5 shows that there is a noticeable difference between episode 1 and 2, and an even more
noticeable difference between episode 1 and 3.

61

100.00%

90.00%

80.00% 70.00% 60.00% 50.00%
40.00% 30.00% 20.00% 10.00% 0.00%

Episode 1

Episode 2
Episodes

Epi ode 3

Figure 5: Percentage of correct answers for both styles
6.1.1.2 Information leads to understand the episode: HI & H5

The rating of whether the audio description provided enough information to understand the plot obtained from the questionnaire showed significant interaction

between understanding and style in the multivariate [F (14, 2) = 5.26, p=0.03] and univariate [F (14, 2) = 3.817, p = .021] tests. However, this analysis did not meet Mauchly's Test of Sphericity (p = .025). As a result, the Greenhouse-Geisser analysis was used and this test also indicated a significant interaction [F (14, 1.34) = 5.68,

p=. 04].
This variable was rated on a 5-point Likert where 1 was strongly agree (the best), 3

was neutral, and 5 was strongly disagree (the worst). These findings allow for the
rejection of the hypothesis H1 or that the audio description style seems to have an impact on understanding. As Figure 6 illustrates, the AG's rating of this variable is

consistently higher in comparison to the rating by the CG, across all episodes.

62

The trend analysis of this variable also revealed significant differences in
understanding overtime [F (14, 1) = 7.440, p = 0.33]. Figure 6 shows the mean and
standard deviation of scores for this variable across the episodes for AG and CG, where a lower mean score indicates a more favourable rating. In Figure 6, there is an

improvement overtime for the AG group. Participants in the AG reported gaining more
information from audio description as they watched more content using the alternative style. Keeping in mind that the conventional group watched the episodes in a different order (episode 3, 2, 1), there is a noticeable worsening of the ratings between episode 3
and 1 but not between 2 and 3. This shows that there is some improvement over time

but this change may be a result of some external factor, rather than time. These findings
allow for the rejection of the null hypothesis, H5 so that understanding changes over time. It seems that the audio description style has an impact on the perception of understanding. Although there is some improvement in the ratings for CG for the last
episode viewed, improvement for AG is significantly better.

1

I Alternative

Conventional

Viewing 1

Viewing 2

Viewing 3

Viewing order

Figure 6: Means ratings and sd for information that leads to understanding
63

6.2 Effects on trust: H2
6.2.1 Post-study findings: H2

To test the effects of the audio description style on the audience's ability to trust the

information provided by the narrative script (H2), two variables from the post-study
questionnaire were examined, the perceived change in trustworthiness of the audio description and the overall trustworthiness in comparison to the audio description currently available on television. A Mann-Whitney test for change in trustworthiness and

the overall comparison with standard description showed no significance between
description styles for trusting the information for either question. As such, the

hypothesis, H2, that the style of audio description does not affect the audience's ability
to trust the narrative script cannot be rejected. The mean and standard deviation of these ratings are shown in Figures 7 and 8% where a rating of 1 was more trustworthy (the best), 3 being equally trustworthy

(neutral) and 5 was less trustworthy (the worst). Figure 8 shows that viewers in the CG
found the information provided by the conventional style became more trustworthy (mean =1.857, sd =.99) across the episodes (4 of the 7 participants suggested that the audio description became much more trustworthy, with the remaining 3 suggesting it remained the same). Although for the AG the information provided by the alternative

style became slightly more trustworthy it was to a lesser extent than those in the CG. 2
of the eight participants (25%) in the AG stated that the audio description became much more trustworthy, whilei participant rated the trustworthiness as slightly better, 1 participant rated it as staying the same, 2 participants rated it as becoming slightly less

64

trustworthy, with the final participant suggesting it was much less trustworthy over time.

This distribution resulted in the AG's mean being close to the neutral rating (mean =
2.88, sd =1.458).

However, compared with the standard audio description as seen on television (the

CG group viewed this style), the AG group ranked the trustworthiness as better than the
standard (mean = 2.0, sd = 0.76) while the CG rated it as having similar level of
trustworthiness (mean = 2.75, sd = 1.09).

5 k5
4

4.5

3.5
ttt

i.5 3

!.5
2 ..5
1

75 2 a: *"

Alternative

I Conventional

\ Alternative

Conventional

Figure 7: Perceived Change in Trust

Figure 8: Trust compared to Standard on Television

6.2.2 Repeated-measures findings for trust H5

A repeated measures analysis was also performed for the ratings of the trustworthiness of the audio description style to determine if there was any difference over time (H5). A

Greenhouse- Geisser analysis revealed no significant results for the effect of this
variable over time. The hypothesis that trustworthiness of audio description is not

affected by time cannot be rejected. This variable was rated on a 5-point Likert where 1
65

was very trustworthy (the best), 3 was neutral and 5 was not trustworthy at all (the worst). As Figure 9 illustrates, the trustworthiness of the audio description remained
fairly consistent for the AG, while the CG showed a slight increase over time. In

addition, CG group consistently provided a higher rating of trustworthiness in
comparison to the AG group.

II Alternative Conventional

Viewing 1

Viewing 2 Viewing order

Viewing 3

Figure 9: Mean and sd trustworthiness over viewings.

63 Effects on entertainment experience: H3& H5
In order to investigate H3, the effects of audio description style on the entertainment experience in the audience, responses to questions related to enjoyment from the poststudy, and post-episodes questionnaires were used.

6-3-lPost-study responses to enjoyment: H3 Mann-Whitney tests for audience ratings of overall enjoyment, the perceived change of enjoyment, and the enjoyment of Odd Job Jack between styles showed no significant

66

differences. The hypothesis, H3, that audio description style has no effect on
entertainment based on these variables cannot be rejected.

However, if we examine the audience's ratings of their overall enjoyment of the show
compared to what they normally watch, their perceived change in enjoyment over the

episodes and whether they liked Odd Job Jack there are some surprising results (see Figures 10, 11 and 12). Responses were provided on a scale from 1 to 5, where a rating

of "1" indicates that the experience of watching the show was very enjoyable (the best),
a rating of 3 was equally enjoyable (neutral) and five was not enjoyable at all (the
worst).

5
-) -"

4.5
4

5
4
5

^

3.5

2.5 2
1.5 1

5

--
-

2 5 -

-

1 -

J

«

0.5 0

0.5 -0 1

Alternative Conventional Description Styles

Alternative Conventional Description Styles

Figure 10: Means and sd for perceived enjoyment

Figure 11: Means and sd for enjoyment compared to
standards on television

67

5 -j

4.5 i a «.

y

1

5

4-*

I
S

32.5~
2 1.5 1 -

[

H




0.5 0 -

 
Alternative
Description Styles

_

Conventional

Figure 12: Mean and sd of enjoyment ratings of Odd Job Jack In the case of the overall comparison, the CG group rated the style of audio description to be more enjoyable (2 out of 5 stating it was much more enjoyable, with 1

suggesting it was somewhat more enjoyable, and 2 suggesting it was equally enjoyable)
in comparison with the standard audio description on television even though they were

watching the standard audio description style (mean = 2.0, sd =0.89). From the post-study questionnaire, the CG group ratings also indicated that they perceived the level of enjoyment over time as increasing. Four of the 7 participants responded that audio description quality was much more enjoyable, with 2 suggesting it was somewhat more enjoyable and 1 person stated that the enjoyability of the episodes didn't change (mean =1.57, sd = 2.38 ). However, they found the show, Odd Job Jack, to be just less likable in comparison to the AG (see Figures 13 and 14 for a comparison

of likability of OJJ between CG and AG). In fact, in the CG group one participant left
after two episodes stating that he "could not bear to watch another episode".

68

The AG rated the perceived enjoyment over time (mean = 2.38, sd = 1.46) and the
overall comparison (mean = 2.75, sd =. 1.089) as worse than the CG (as described

above). Yet, the AG group rated the enjoyability of the show itself (mean = 2.25, sd = 1.04) much higher than the CG group. In fact, Sixty-two percent of the alternative group stated that they liked the Odd Job Jack, with only 13% saying they disliked it and the remaining 25% stating they were neutral. To illustrate this difference Figures 13 and 14 show the distribution of responses for each category' from the CG and AG, respectively.

Neutral 29%

Figure13: Distribution of likeability responses for the conventional groups

Figure 14: Distribution of likeability responses to Odd Job Jack for alternative group

6.3.2 Enjoyment findings from post-episode: H3

To investigate whether there were changes in enjoyment or the experience of flow (H3), the ratings for enjoyment of each episode, as well as ratings from two questions that measured flow, an altered sense of time, and distractibility, were used from the
post-episode questionnaires. Mann-Whitney tests showed that there was a significant
69

difference for altered sense of time between CG and AG, for episode 2 (U (15) = 9, p=0.02) and for episode 3 (U (17) = 15, p=0.04). For distractibility and enjoyment there were no significant differences between CG and AG in any episode. We are able to
reject the hypothesis, H3, for flow but not for enjoyment.

Figure15 shows the mean and standard deviation of enjoyment for each episode in the order they were viewed. Enjoyment was rated on a 5-point Likert where 1 was very

enjoyable (the best), 3 was equally enjoyable (neutral), and 5 was not enjoyable at all

(the worst). It seems that enjoyment became progressively worse for the AG group
while it improved over time for the CG group.


A
j

·(0

3

J

*2.5

21.5

8 2
1

1

T
II Alternative
--

0.5 0

LJH.

--IB

=1

Conventional

--
Viewing 2

--^Bl
Viewings

_^B

--

Viewing 1

Viewing 3

Figure 15: Mean scores and sd for enjoyment across viewings Figure 16 illustrates the mean and standard deviation of the audience's agreement

with the show's ability to alter their sense of time. This variable was rated on a 5-point Likert where 1 was strongly agree (the best), 3 was neutral, and 5 was strongly disagree (the worst). It seems the CG group did not experience much sense of altered time while

70

the AG group did, especially for the first and second viewings. However, for the CG
group there was an improvement in this variable for the third viewing (episode 1).

c

A

<;

4
-

+3
c re

3



l! Alternative
Conventional

->

S1.5
1

--
Viewing 1 viewing 2 Viewing Order viewing 3

0.5

0

Figure 16: Mean ratings and sd for altered sense of time across viewings

Figure 17 shows the mean and standard deviation for the audience's level of distraction of the audio description. This variable was rated on a 5-point Likert where 1was strongly agree (the best), 3 was neutral and 5 was strongly disagree (the worst). It

seems that episode 2 has a lower level of distractibility for the AG and CG, while
episodes 1 and 3 are at a similar rating.

71

5 4.5
4

u»3.5
W>

_JT"

u n

 

 Alternative

i 2
1

L

JUML'

Conventional

0.5 0

_JBB-__^^
Viewing 1

--IBI'

~^l

----IIIIIJII

.^^^^^^^
Viewing 3

--

Viewing 2 Viewings Order

Figure 17: Mean ratings for experience of distractions across viewings

6.3.3 Repeated Measures Analysis of Entertainment: H5
A repeated measures analysis was performed on the variables that to examine the

audience's entertainment experience to assess differences over time (H5). Table 2 lists the variables that showed significance from the univariate and multivariate analysis.
Mauchly's test for sphericity was not significant for any of the variables listed in table two, therefore they follow the sphericity assumption. There were three variables that

showed significance across the episodes: ranking of whether the audio description
provided the audience member with enough information about the show for them to

enjoy it, and both of the flow variables, altered sense of time and distractibility.

72

Factor

(Multivariate or Univariate) Multivariate Multivariate

Interaction with
style

Df
2

F

P 0.036 0.045 0.030 0.05

Information Leads to
Enjoyment Distractibility

No
No

4.562

2

4.18 4.9 6.759

Altered Sense of Time
Altered Sense of Time

Multivariate
Univariate

Yes
Yes

2
2

Table 2: Significant Entertainment results from repeated measures testing.

Factor

df
1

F

P

Information Enjoyment
Altered Time vs. Style

9.310
6.655

0.010
0.024 0.011

1

Eliminate Distractions

1

9.019

Table 3: Trending analysis for entertainment experience

6.3.3.1 Information enjoyment: H5

A multivariate analysis of the participants' opinion of whether the information provided by the audio description allowed them to enjoy the show indicated that there were significant findings across the episodes. However, there was no significant interaction

between this variable and the style of audio description. There was a significant trend for this variable (see Table 3). The mean ratings for this variable as seen in Figure17
show episode 2 has the lowest rating for both styles. This variable was rated on a 5point Likert where 1 was strongly agree (the best), 3 was neutral and 5 was strongly

disagree (the worst). Given that the episodes were viewed in different order, it is likely

73

that the effect is related to the episode itself; as such, the hypothesis H5 enjoyment of
the show will not improve over time cannot be rejected. .

5 4.5
A

2 .

3.5

_

1.5 1

I
- _
liiiililil

0.5
n

iiiil

_"I

-B

-1
i
.

T

II Alternative

Conventional

JBL._
Viewing 3

Viewing 1

Viewing 2 Viewing s

Figure 18: Mean and sd scores for

information leads to enjoyment
6.3.3.3 Elimination of distraction: H5

Similar to both of the other entertainment variables, the multivariate, repeated measures test revealed significance for the elimination of distraction for both audio description styles (see Table 2). In addition, there is quadratic trend (see Table 3).

Figure 18 shows the means and standard deviation of distractibility for all episodes. It shows that episode 2 was rated the lowest or easiest to be distracted. This finding provides additional evidence that episode 2 is less enjoyable because of some factor in
I

the episode rather than the order in which was seen.

It would seem that the distractibility and the information that leads to enjoyment are
related because as a result of the audience having lower quality information about the

74

show they were not able to cpncentrate and become as involved in the episode. However, there is no evidence that it is due to one specific audio description style or
effects over time; as such, H5 cannot be rejected.

I Alternative
Conventional

Viewingl

Viewing2

Viewing3

Viewing order

Figure 19: Mean ratings and sd for distractibility by viewing
6,3.3.4 Alteration of time: H3& H5

In contrast to the other significant findings from the repeated measure analysis of the
entertainment experience, the alteration of time is the only variable to reveal

significance across the univariate and multivariate tests as well as an interaction with
the style of audio description (see Table 2). Figure 19 represents the mean ratings and
standard deviation over time for each episode. This variable was rated on a 5-point

Likert where 1was strongly agree (the best), 3 was neutral and 5 was strongly disagree (the worst). Figure 19 shows that there is a large difference in the ratings between episodes 2 and 3 (See Table 4 for means and standard deviation)

75

Group
Mean

Episode 1 Standard
Deviation Mean

E Disode 2 Standard
Mean

Episode 3 Standard Deviation 1.88
3.44 0.84

Deviation
2.0
3.57

Alternative
Conventional

2.55
2.14

1.42

0.93 1.18

0.83

0.83

Table 4: Means and standard deviations for altered sense of time for Episodes 1-3

The ratings from AG become stronger across episodes from mean = 2.55 and sd = 1.42 for the first viewed episode to mean = 1.88 and sd = 0.84 for the last episode. There appears to be an interaction between entertainment experience and the style of
audio description where the AG group had a more positive entertainment experience than those in CG. Figures 19 and 20 also indicate that there is a slight increase in this

variable overtime. Based on these results both hypotheses, H3 and H5, can be rejected
for the altered sense of time flow variable.

3.5

-

--

-

<,

,--

2.5
z

~

 Alternative

1.5
1

-

ZB -.Z
Episod(
Episode2

m Conventional

0.5

-

0 -

Episode3

Episode

Figure 20: Mean and sd of ratings for altered sense of time across episodes

76

3.5 3 2.5
<£

-

2 1.5
1

_ -

0.5

-

--H --M-. |j|

IE: ^ m -

T .

L"
^B * --

 Alternative Conventional

0 -

B.

_r.

*

--,

Viewing 1

Viewing 2 Viewing

Viewing 3

Figure 21: Mean and sd of ratings for altered sense of time across viewing

6A Audience's audio description preference: H3
The final hypothesis tested was whether the audience preferred one of the audio description styles for use in television and films, H4. Only the AG ratings were used as
the viewers in this group were the only participants with experience of both audio

description styles (alternative for the study and experience with conventional description from watching television at home).The participant was asked to choose between the
conventional style, the alternative style or an untested style as their preference. The

participants who chose the untested approach were stating that they wanted a third
description option that was, as yet, unavailable. Figure 21 shows the number of

participants that chose each style. The conventional and alternative approaches were preferred by two participants each. Three participants stated that they would prefer a
third approach. <

77

T
3.5

3
2.5

I

jjf 1.5
1

0.5

0

Conventional

Alternative

Unte ted Approach

Audio description Styles

Figure 22: Frequency of ratings for three different audio description styles

78

7. Discussion
There were some surprising results from this study and some that were expected.

i

|

Five hypotheses were developed to explore the three research questions in this thesis.
Two of five hypotheses were rejected based on my analysis, and three could not; this
will be further expanded and discussed in the next sections.

»

j

7.1

Research question 1: Preferences forsStyle among the blind and low vision audience (H4)

The blind and low vision audiences had no obvious preference regarding the audio description style. In fact, the group of eight participants who had experienced both
styles (alternative and standard) were generally divided evenly with two (25%) participants preferring conventional, two the alternative style (25%), and three

participants an untested approach (37.5%). This seems contradictory to the results

found by Fels et al. (2006a) who reported that three times as many participants
preferred the alternative method of audio description in comparison with the
conventional method. One (12.5%) participant in my study refused to answer this

question, stating that he could not make a fair judgment because he did not have enough experience with the alternative style of audio description. This statement

introduced another interesting question; was viewing three episodes sufficient for the
novelty effect to dissipate so that participants could assess their preferences? There was, however, a significant difference in the ratings of enjoyment for each episode where episode 3 was rated as the least enjoyable (mean = 3, sd = 1.41). From the recorded discussion after the study, some insight was gained as to why people had
79

preferences for certain episodes. There were multiple complaints from the participants about the sound quality in episode 3. It is important to consider the possible impact that the poor audio quality had on the audience's opinion of the alternative audio description
style. Neuman, et al., (1991) found that shows with poor audio quality were perceived to be less enjoyable than those with good quality regardless of content. The audio quality

of a show may then have the greatest impact on preferences rather than other factors
such as description style and style of the show.

However, it can be very difficult to balance two audio tracks particularly when using a

copy of the master tape. The alternative audio description for episode 3 was produced
after the show had been mastered while episodes 1 and 2 were produced during the
original mastering process so that there was better control over volume levels. In

addition, producing audio description was a new experience for the company who made Odd Job Jack and episode 3 was their first episode produced with audio description. For the conventional description, all of the descriptions were made by the same professional description company, two at the same time and one earlier, from a copy of

the master. There may have been more consistency. However, unless researchers are
prepared to produce audio description directly and have the knowledge and resources

to do so, it may be difficult to have much control over the volume level factor.

Another issue that may explain these preference results is attributes of the show
itself. One participant who preferred the conventional style commented that English was

his second language and that the pace of the alternative description was too fast. The
cultural content of the show was also unfamiliar to him. From this participant's

statements and comprehension scores I would suggest that the participant did not fully
80

understand the concept of the show. This is a situation where the challenge of following the audio description, and probably the narrative of the show, was likely overwhelming for the participant and interfered with his flow experience and resulting enjoyment of the
show.

There is likely a strong relationship between a person's ability to understand and

follow the context and narrative of a show with their ability to understand and appreciate
the audio description. This will then affect their ability to evaluate the enjoyability of the
audio description as an entity separate from the show. This could also be one of the reasons that the participants chose a preference for an untested approach.

Future researchers need to be aware of this issue and include this variable in their study or exclude those who are not fluent in the English language and culture. However,

with the limited number of blind and low vision participants/a preferable solution may be
to include first spoken language as a possible factor for correlation with the enjoyability,

performance and flow data. If the sample size is small it might be preferable for the
investigator to perform interviews with the participant to determine if there was a
language barrier and whether it influenced the participant's ratings.

The first research question was to determine the preference of the blind and low

vision viewer. The data from this study seem to indicate there is no obvious preference regarding audio description style and actually had a preference for another, as yet,

unproduced style. It fe possible that neither of the styles used in my study followed the
universal design principle of being flexible for use regardless of preferences. It is also possible that participants did not have enough experience or time to become accustomed to the alternative style. Additional longitudinal studies are required that
81

allow viewers to take the necessary time to become familiar with the different styles. Only then can we be confident that the results are free from potential novelty effects.

7.2 Research question 2: impact on understanding (HI, H5)
The investigation of comprehension scores provided one measure of evaluating

differences in a participant's level of understanding of the show between the different
audio description styles. The results of this study showed that the AG group consistently had a higher mean score on the comprehension tests than the conventional group;

however, these differences were not statistically significant/The better performance on the comprehension tests by the AG was most likely a result of their increased enjoyment of the show (mean = 2.25, sd = 1.04) over the CG group (mean = 3.286, sd = 1.385). People were likely better able to concentrate and pay attention to the show as a

result of their enjoyment, which then could translate into a better understanding of it.
The results from the post-episode questionnaire provided some evidence that the alternative style did have a positive impact on the level of understanding. As the episodes progressed, the AG reported that audio description narrative provided significantly more information about the plot to aid their understanding in comparison to the CG. In addition, the alternative group's rating of this variable improved with each episode (episode 1 mean = 2.778, sd = 1.394; episode 2 mean = 2.5, sd = 1.069;

episode 3 mean = 2.25 sd = 0.886). This increase may be due to a learning or novelty

effect - as the viewer watches more content that uses the alternative style of audio
description, they become more accustomed to this style, less distracted by the newness
of it, and are able to gather more information from the audio description narrative. This finding from the subjective results is somewhat supported by the comprehension test
82

results but not statistically. As the viewer becomes more comfortable with the style of
audio description, they may perceive it as providing them with better information.

Whether or not this translates to better performance on comprehension tests may not be as important as increases in the perceived understanding value. Only two participants in the study had any experience with audio description which means that for
most participants audio description in any style was new and this may have affected

their ability to construct meaning from the audio description and original audio track of

the show. As people become more comfortable with audio description, their ability to
understand the information may increase regardless of the style.

From this analysis, it is evident that there is a trend showing that the alternative style of audio description can provide a better level of understanding for the blind and low vision viewers. Further research with more subjects is required to determine whether this trend
is predictable and becomes statistically significant.

73 Research question 3: Impact on trustworthiness (H2)
Although there was no significant difference between AG and CG for trustworthiness ratings, there is some evidence that the alternative style was more trustworthy (mean =

2, sd =76) than conventional audio description (mean = 2.75 sd = 1.09) in general.
However, the alternative group also found the audio description to become less
trustworthy over time (see Figure 8), and was rated lower in each episode (see Figure

9). While the latter evidence supports the results found by Fels et al. (2006a) who
reported that viewers found first person description to be rated as less trustworthy than

conventional description, the former evidence refutes it.

83

One of the factors that could have negatively affectedihe trustworthiness of the content
was audio quality. For example one participant stated in the discussion following the study that the first two episodes were very trustworthy, but the third one was "dreadful",
therefore he was forced to provide a lower rating for trust and entertainment value. The

third episode for the AG group had poorer sound quality than the first and second
episodes as explained in Section 7.1. The sound levels were not mentioned as problematic by the CG group. It would then seem that even though one of the episodes was rated as having poor trustworthiness in the AG group, the episodes with alternative descriptions were more trustworthy than the episodes with standard descriptions. In addition, the comprehensibility of the content could play an important role in affecting the trustworthiness of the audio description. If the information provided to the audience does not allow people to gain an adequate understanding of the plot, characters, and

setting, then the information may not be as trustworthy. In this study, the AG, although not statistically significant, had a superior level of comprehension for the three episodes
(as discussed in Section 7.2). These results then suggest that there is a trend for the alternative style of audio description to be more trustworthy, a surprising finding. Further research is required to determine the level of impact that variations in sound quality of the audio description/original sound track mix has on the trustworthiness and comprehensibility of television and film content. In addition, examining the relationship

between trustworthiness and comprehension may shed some light on the reasons for
these results. Finally, further research is required to determine how important

trustworthiness and comprehensibility are on the overall experience of the content by
viewers.
84

7A Research question 4: Impact on entertainment experience (H3, H5)
In this study, entertainment experience was measured using three variables that asked participants to rate their general enjoyment and their level of two flow variables,
distractibility and having an altered sense of time.

There was a significant difference between groups for the variable related to having an altered sense of time. Csikszentmihalyi (1991) contends that when users are in a state

of flow they lose their sense of time, so that several hours could pass in what seemed to
be mere minutes. The AG group reported having a stronger sense of loss of time
(Episodei - mean = 2.56 , sd = 1.42; Episode 2 - mean = 2.0, sd = 0.93; Episode 3 mean = 1.88, sd = 0.84) than the CG group (Episodei - mean = 2.14 , sd = 0.83;

Episode 2 - mean = 3.57 , sd = 1.18; Episode 3 - mean = 3.44, sd = 1.50). Six
participants in the AG group reported that time passed quickly in all three episodes

while only two participants in the CG reported this. This seems to indicate that people in the AG were more likely to achieve a state of flow as defined by having a loss of sense

of time. In addition, as the study progressed and the AG watched more episodes, this
alternation of time variable was rated higher (see figure 21). This would indicate that as

AG became more comfortable with the style of audio description they were able achieve
a deeper state of flow as defined by having a loss of sense of time.

Based on the theories explained in the literature review regarding the responsibility of
the creative team, the result that AG is more entertaining was expected. By having the
production team creates the entire piece of art with a singular focus (providing entertainment) there would be more unity and cohesion within the episodes. This unity

85

draws the audience into the episode, helping to induce flow, and create a more
entertaining experience.

Although the other flow variable designed to measure entertainment, distractibility, did
not have significant differences between groups, the descriptive data show that there is

a trend as indicated in figure 17 in section 6.3.2 whereby the AG group reported a more positive entertainment experience and had less distraction. The AG rating of distractibility was consistently higher in comparison to CG, Again, this finding wasn't
unexpected based on the film and flow literature in section 2. The alternative style

provides a more seamless and unified show, which allows the audienpe to become more involved in the storyline and the reality of the show. As the audience becomes more involved in the show they become less aware of their own reality, hence other
distracting thoughts do not enter consciousness. P

Participants were asked to rate their enjoyment of Odd Job Jack on the premise that if
the audio description provided a better entertainment experience, the audience would

be more likely to enjoy the show. For the enjoyment ratings, 62% of the AG group liked the show, 13% of the audience disliked the show, and the other 25% were neutral. While for the CG group, 28% liked the show, 43% disliked it, and 29% of audience was neutral towards it. This seems to indicate that the AG group enjoyed the episodes with
alternative description more than the CG group enjoyed the same episodes with
standard description

During the discussion group one participant provided a possible explanation for this
finding. He stated that at home he would never watch an adult cartoon because the

humour was far too visual for him to enjoy it, yet he was able to enjoy it with this style of
86

audio description. Although he did not indicate why he thought this would be the case

for him, I would suggest that by having the humour and emotion driving the audio
description, he was able to achieve a better entertainment experience and have
improved levels of understanding.

The enjoyment ratings in the post-study questionnaire, although not significantly
different, could have been affected by the order in which the participants viewed the
episodes. The alternative group watched episodes in one order (episode 1, 2, and 3),

while the conventional group watched in the episodes in the reverse order. Although the
enjoyment ratings between the groups were similar for each episode, the alternative group watched the least enjoyable show last and it was fresher in their mind when
answering the post-study questionnaire. This could have influenced the participant's
rating of enjoyment in the AG group.

In addition, the entertainment experience could have also been negatively affected by
the sound quality issues of episode 3 as described in Section 7.1. Based on Neuman et

al.'s (1991) study, which examined the impact of sound quality and the perceived quality of the television show (with only sighted viewers); it is possible that the poor sound quality of third episode of Odd Job Jack negatively affected the ratings of enjoyment in
the AG group.

During the discussion group, there was an interesting topic that was brought forth by one of the fully blind participants. She indicated that the current style of audio

description has a negative effect on the enjoyment of television by her sighted relatives. She mentioned that some of these sighted relatives would not watch television with her
when the audio description channel playing as they found it diminishes the
87

entertainment value of the show too much. This can then leave the blind person in an untenable quandary because if she wants to watch the program she must do it alone, or

without audio description; both alternatives may not be acceptable. In this case, the
r .

principle of universal design of being marketable and usable for everyone regardless of ability seems to be disregarded. The participant then stated that she believed that the

alternative style would not have the same negative effect on her sighted relatives,
allowing her to watch television with them. Although, in my study sighted participants
were not included because it was important to first determine that the alternative audio

description provides adequate service to the blind and low vision viewers. If the
alternative style was not suitable for the blind and low vision user then it would not qualify under the equable use principle of universal design, making it pointless to evaluate with sighted participant. Further research examining the enjoyment levels of sighted and blind audiences would now be recommended and useful.

7.5 Summary of discussion
This study presented in this thesis allowed me to evaluate the impact that variations

in the style of audio description had on multiple factors of comprehension, trustworthiness, enjoyment and flow. Although some variables did not produce statistical

significance between alternative and conventional description styles, there was some
evidence that the comprehension level and trustworthiness of the alternative audio description increased overtime. In addition, comprehension and trustworthiness were higher for the alternative audio description. These trends indicate that further research
with a larger sample size would be useful and may strengthen these trends to show that

88

indeed there is statistical support showing that alternative description is more
trustworthy, understandable and enjoyable than conventional description.

However, the stated preferences by the participants assigned to AG did not indicate a

preference for either style of audio description. In fact, 37.5% of people in the study said
they would prefer an untested approach. This may be because neither the alternative
nor the conventional approaches were satisfactory.

The only research question to be answered with significant findings was the impact of
the alternative style on the entertainment value of the show was measured using two

flow variables as identified by Csikszentmihalyi as being critical to the experience of
being totally immersed in the environment or task. The results point to the alternative

style of audio description providing a more entertaining experience for the blind and low vision audience and that participants experience flow more readily with the alternative
description style. It would seem like a good next step to examine whether these findings can be replicated for other content from different genres and whether it can be
sustained longitudinally.

89

8. Limitations
Although my study took strides in eliminating many of the limitations that plagued previous research such as evaluating entertainment and using full episodes (which help to eliminate the novelty effect found in Fels et al. (2006a) study), there are still several

factors that must to be addressed in order to enhance the generalizability of the results.
The small sample size of the audience remains the most prominent limitation of my
study. The study consisted of 18 participants, with only 14 participants completing the entire study. As a result, I was required to use non-parametric statistical analyses.

Some trends were identified through these analyses and the descriptive data but the
generalizability of them is weak at best. I was also unable to carry out statistical

analyses on the distribution of the answers to questions as a result of the low numbers. It is difficult to find blind and low vision people who are interested iii participating in research. CNIB (2008) reports that only 2.5% of the population in Canada is classified as blind or low vision and that translate into a very small subject pool in the Toronto

j

area. However, in order to provide more compelling support of the advantages and
disadvantages of various audio description styles more generalizable findings are

f !

necessary. New studies with larger number of participants or perhaps a within subjects
approach might assist in gaining a sufficient sample size. In addition to the small sample size, the distribution of the participants by gender and
...

\

|

\

vision level was not balanced. This was due to the random assignment of participants to
the audio description style groups when they arrived for the study. I did not know with certainty how many people would attend the study so I was only able to randomly

;

assign people to groups based on when they arrived. As a result, there was an
90

{

unbalanced representation of people with the various vision status demographics and there was insufficient numbers to determine whether there was a correlation of the

findings with vision status. The alternative style group had five totally blind, two legally
blind, and two low vision participants; while the conventional style group had two totally

blind, five legally blind participants and two low vision participants. To determine whether demographic variables significantly affect the opinions or preferences of audio
description, future studies should attempt to recruit sufficient numbers in each
demographic group and have a more even distribution among the categories. In addition to the unbalanced representation of vision status, my study also suffered

from a misalignment of the average age with the target audience of Odd Job Jack (ages
18 - 35). This is a significant issue when studying audio description, because the blind and low vision population is typically skewed to the older age ranges (Packer &
Kirchner, 1997).

Another limitation of my study was that I only used one show, Odd Job Jack, an adult
cartoon comedy that would fall into the same genre as South Park or Family Guy.

Although the show can be funny for some, it can also be interpreted by others as offensive humour, potentially having an impact on their enjoyment regardless of the style of audio description. In fact, three people left the study early because they found the show offensive. In addition, most of the people in the study did not fit the target demographic for the show, being male between the ages of 18 and 35. As already mentioned, finding enough participants who are blind or low vision is already a difficult
task. Most people who are blind or low vision are older people (reference) making the

91

task of finding appropriate numbers of participants in a younger target demographic even more challenging, in fact, highly unlikely. Odd Job Jack was the only television show currently using the alternative style of audio description, and so it was my only option. I would suggest that further research use different genres of content. The preference and enjoyment ratings, performance

and flow data may be very different for the two audio description styles.
In fact, this is the second study to use Odd Job Jack, and have similar positive
results. It could be the case that the creative team who developed the audio description

narrative for Odd Job Jack have an ability to produce high quality audio description,

which is not shared amongst the entire television and film industry. As such, future
studies must evaluate different programs across multiple genres and with different
production houses. In order to gain access to this new audio description material,

production companies must be convinced of the benefits that they will receive from using the alternative process, this issue will be further discussed in the future directions
section.

Another limitation of this study was the administration of the three episodes. Initially, I
wanted to try and simulate how the episodes would be viewed on television, one per viewing over multiple sessions (e.g., weeks) in a regular television viewing setting. The

online study was designed to allow that to happen. However, people seemed to be
unwilling to complete the entire study online or invest the time that was necessary

without any incentive. As a result, I changed my strategy to use a group, face-to-face
environment and people were asked to watch all three episodes in the same sitting.

92

The participants were located in a classroom for two hours and were asked to watch three consecutive episodes with short breaks in between for filling out questionnaires
and other activities. This environment is different from how television is normally
consumed as well. In general, television is watched at one's home, either alone or with

close friends or family; and it is unusual that people would watch multiple episodes of a
television that they had not seen before in one sitting. Recreating this experience would

likely change the results because people would be more relaxed and have more time to
process and become accustomed to the audio description styles.

In addition to the difference in viewing experience, it would be optimal if the

participants within the groups could watch the show in different orders. In my study, the participants in each group watched the show together and the episodes in the same

order, which likely biased my results. The alternative style audio described episode
three had very poor sound quality and was watched last. The negative impression as a

result of this technical difficulty was most recent in people's minds when they completed
their final evaluation. This may have led the alternative style group to answering the questionnaire differently than they might have if the sound quality was better. It is

important to attempt to control for the level of production quality for all materials, however, that can be very difficult to achieve especially when materials are often produced by different people and at different times, particularly true for the first person
audio description style.

Another limitation of my study was that the comprehension questions were
constructed by a sighted researcher. I may have inadvertently used visual cues to

develop the questions, possibly making it more difficult for a blind participant to answer.
93

Having a blind researcher or educator participate in the development of comprehension
questions based on her understanding of the show from the audio description may
mitigate this concern for future research.

Another significant limitation of my study is that I only evaluated two of the five basic
uses for television. Future research should expand the selection of television programs

to include more shows from different genres, so that the cognitive and personal integrative aspects could be evaluated. In addition, future researchers should evaluate

how the different styles of audio description impact the social integration aspect of
watching television by having a group setting more representative of how people normally watch television together. It is important to determine whether the alternative

style audio description provides blind and low vision viewers with the same confidence
and ability to discuss the film or television show with sighted peers as was found by
Kirchner and Schmeidler (2001).

A final limitation to my study was that volunteers were required to read all of the survey questions to the participants and fill-in or check off answers as directed by the
participants. The online study was designed for participants to complete the surveys

themselves using their own customized computer-based assistive technology. The group setting did not allow for use of computer-based technologies for answering the survey questions because 1) most computer-based assistive technology is not mobile;

and 2) sound levels in the room would be unbearable with so many screen readers
being used (although using headphone could be an option). Allowing participants to complete the study instruments independently is important to not introduce any biases

94

from the researcher in the discussion or reading of the survey questions and to ensure
participants can be confident of the privacy of their answers.

95

9. Future directions
In addition to my discussion on the limitations of my study, I have found that there is ample opportunity for future research directions; some have been identified in the
Discussion section. I believe that I have contributed some useful and interesting data

and some evidence to support the hypothesis that the alternative style of audio
description provides a better entertainment experience for blind and low vision viewers.

Another direction that I believe is worth investigating relates to the business of
creating and marketing audio description products. As part of this investigation,

supports and processes that would enable production companies to create audio
description, and adopt a different modus operandi for audio description are also

required. I suggest that there are two main factors that could help to instigate this investigation: 1) examining the business models and opportunities for audio description;
and 2) impact on corporate responsibility objectives.

In Section 4, an alternative business model was proposed where the production

companies market entertaining versions of audio description to sighted users for
multiple purposes. This would require the producers and broadcasters to consider
creating, launching, and sustaining a new product, audio television (similar to the audio

book). In order to determine if this is a viable option, market research into possible uses

for the product with sighted customers is required, as well as, an in depth analysis of the audio book industry, and the likelihood of profitability.

96

I would argue that the production of the alternative style of audio description would be
no different than the production of DVD extras, and it would actually open up a new
revenue stream for the production studios to compete in the audio book industry.

The second possible driver of this new direction comes from the recent emphasis on
the importance of corporate social responsibility (CSR). When a company practices

CSR they are attempting to balance "economic, environmental, and social imperatives
while at the same time addressing shareholder and stakeholder expectations" (Industry

Canada, 2007, paragraph 1). Is it corporately responsible for production companies to
create audio description narratives that are unsatisfactory? To answer this question, one must analyze this issue through a corporate social responsibility framework.

97

10.

Conclusions and recommendations

At the beginning of this study, I set out to compare blind and low vision participants'

levels of understanding, trust and entertainment between the alternative style of audio
description introduced by Fels et al. (2006b) and the current convention of the audio
description industry over a longer term exposure. Ultimately, I wanted to determine

which style of audio description was preferred by the blind and low vision community. Four research questions were formulated in an attempt to address this research goal: 1. Which style of audio description is preferred by blind and low vision viewers? 2. What is the impact of first person audio description on the understanding of the
show's plot, setting and characters?

3. Does the viewer trust the information provided by the first person approach? 4. What is the impact of audio description style on entertainment experienced by
blind and low vision viewers?

The current style of audio description uses third person narration and is produced

independently from the production it is describing. The conventional idea is to provide
as much visual information as possible without emotion or interpretation. The alternative style of audio description uses character driven/first person narration, produced by the
production team. The main purpose behind audio description to provide entertainment;
thus, it can include subjective information and emotions.

I also chose to examine the current style of audio description through the framework of the universal design paradigm, which revealed that the conventional \audio

98

description contravenes several of the universal design principles. This provided yet
another reason as why alternative methods of audio description are necessary.

In order to answer the research questions posed, I evaluated both styles of audio description with blind and low vision audiences. Two groups of participants watched three different episodes of Odd Job Jack. One group watched the alternative style and
the second group watched the conventional styles of audio description. Eighteen blind and low vision participants were recruited in the study (16 in person, and 2 online) and

only 14 participants completed it.
Participants viewed either all episodes using the alternative style or the conventional style. Participants were asked to complete five questionnaires during the study, a pre and post-study questionnaire as well as three post-episode questionnaires (one for

each episode). The post-episode questionnaire also included a set of comprehension
questions about each episode. At the completion of the study, there was a brief group

discussion for those who wanted to participate. The purpose of the discussion was to gain greater insight into the blind and low vision viewers' opinion of audio description as well as their suggestions or concerns about the alternative style. This also provided
them a forum to explain some of their questionnaire answers in detail or voice any

concerns they had about the study. Non-parametric statistical analyses and descriptive data analysis were applied to the
questionnaire results. The data were analyzed in order to answer the research questions as stated above. Thus, there was progression made in determining the

impact that variations in the style of audio description had on the above four factors.

99

The analysis of the findings indicated that both the understanding and the

trustworthiness levels of the alternative audio description increased over time for the alternative audio description. This increase of approval over time is indicative of the
novelty effect. This trend suggests that as the viewer becomes more accustomed to the alternative style of audio description she is able to trust it more and derive more
information from the description. Overall, there was also a trend to indicate that alternative style provided better understanding, and was more trustworthy in
comparison to the conventional audio description.

. The examination of the entertainment experience provided the most promising

results as both the evaluation of the means and the statistical analysis indicated that the
alternative style of audio description provided a more entertaining and enjoyable experience for the audience. However, this trend needs to be examined in future research with a larger sample size in order to generalize these findings.

The final variable analyzed was the audience's preference for audio description style. Only the AG was used in this analysis as they are the only participants to experience

both styles. However, this analysis revealed no significant findings, and the preference for audio description style was spread across the three choose fairly evenly (2 preferred conventional, two preferred alternative, and 3 preferred an untested approach). Thus,
from these findings there was no distinct preference amongst the audience.

There were a number of limitations that had an impact on my study. The small number of participants turned out to be one of the major limitations of my study, which
ultimately limited the generalizability of my results. In addition, only one type and genre

of show was used, the episodes were viewed in an unnatural setting, and participants
100

had to watch them in one sitting. This may have negatively affected the preference and
enjoyment results.

Future research should attempt to add new genres such as drama, sitcom, action,
and documentaries that have been produced with the alternative and conventional styles. These studies must also be performed over a longer period of time (weeks), in a
more natural viewing environment, and with a broader and more equal balance of

participant types and characteristics such as age and gender. This will allow

researchers to gain a better understanding of the impact of audio description style on blind, low vision and sighted audiences. However, the research presented in this thesis points to some of the advantages and disadvantages of each style of audio description
and that alternatives are workable and possible.

Future research must explore the financial feasibility of creating and distributing
content containing the alternative style of audio description. In addition, there could be an argument made that by producing poor quality audio description, film companies are

not living up to the standards set by corporate social responsibility (CSR) and the goals of universal design. These issues could be analyzed through a CSR framework to help
answer these questions, and to help drive change and adoption of this new style of
audio description

10.1

Appendix A: Ethics Review

To: John Riccio

Re: REB 2008-089: A Longitudinal Study Comparing Alternative Audio Description
Methods Date: May 5, 2008

Dear John Riccio

The review of your protocol REB File REB 2008-089 is now complete. The project has been approved for a one year period. Please note that before proceeding with your

project, compliance with other required University approvals/certifications, institutional
requirements, or governmental authorizations may be required.

This approval may be extended after one year upon request. Please be advised that if
the project is not renewed, approval will expire and no more research involving humans

may take place. If this is a funded project, access to research funds may also be affected.

Please note that REB approval policies require that you adhere strictly to the protocol as last reviewed by the REB and that any modifications must be approved by the Board before they can be implemented. Adverse or unexpected events must be reported to the
REB as soon as possible with an indication from the Principal Investigator as to how, in

the view of the Principal Investigator, these events affect the continuation of the protocol.

Finally, if research subjects are in the care of a health facility, at a school, or other
institution or community organization, it is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator to ensure that the ethical guidelines and approvals of those facilities or institutions are
obtained and filed with the REB prior to the initiation of any research.

Please quote your REB file number (REB 2008-089) on future correspondence.

102

Congratulations and best of luck in conducting your research.

Nancy Walton, Ph.D.

Chair, Research Ethics Board

103

Appendix B: Pre-Study Questionnaire

This purpose of this questionnaire is to gather information about you and your

opinions about the current state of audio description. It should take you about ten

minutes to complete this questionnaire. Thank you in advance for your time and
assistance.

1.

Gender:




Male
Female

2. Age  18-29

 30-39
 40-49  50-59

 60 and older

3. What is your last completed level of education
  Post Graduate University Degree

 College Diploma   High School Diploma Less than High school

4. What is your level of vision impairment?
 Totally blind



Legally blind
104



Low vision

5.

Which of the following television shows do you enjoy watching (please select all that apply)? 


Lost
Desperate Housewives

 The Office
 Odd Job Jack



Family Guy

 Steven Colbert
 Simpsons  King of the Hill

 American Dad

6.

How often do you watch television without audio description?
 I don't watch television



One to two hours per week

 Two to four hours per week



More than four hours per week

7.

How often do you watch television WITH audio description?
 I don't watch television



I never watch television with audio description

 One to two hours per week  Two to four hours per week  More than four hours per week
105

8.

How satisfied are you with the current quality of audio description on television?
 Satisfied  Somewhat Satisfied



Neither Satisfied nor Dissatisfied

 Somewhat Dissatisfied
 Dissatisfied

9.

How satisfied are you with the current amount of audio description used in
advertisements and commercials?
 Satisfied  Somewhat Satisfied

 Neither Satisfied nor Dissatisfied
  Somewhat Dissatisfied Dissatisfied

 I have never heard audio description for advertisements or commercials.

10. Please describe the characteristics of good quality description for television.

106

Appendix C: Post-Episode Questionnaire
The purpose of this questionnaire is to gather your opinion of the audio description used in the episode of Odd Job Jack. There are 14 questions on this questionnaire, thus

it should take you approximately 14 minutes to complete. Thank you in advance for your
time and assistance.

1.

Please rate the level of enjoyment of the audio description in the Odd Job Jack
episode you watched.  Very Enjoyable.



Enjoyable.

 Can't decide.




Not that enjoyable.
Not Enjoyable at all.

2.

How trustworthy was the information provided to you through the audio
description.

 Very trustworthy.

 Somewhat Trustworthy.
 Can't decide.  Not that trustworthy.

 Not Trustworthy at all.

3.

Did the audio description provide adequate information about the plot?
 It provided too much information about the plot.



It provided just enough information about the plot.

 More information about the plot was needed.  The information provided was unsatisfactory.

4.

Did the audio description provide adequate information about the setting?
 It provided too much information about the setting.

 It provided just enough information about the setting.
 More information about the setting was needed.
107

 The information provided was unsatisfactory.

5.

Did the audio description provide adequate information about the character
describing the episode?

 It provided too much information about the character
 It provided just enough information about the character

 More information about the character was needed  The information provided was unsatisfactory 6. Did the audio description provide adequate information about the other

characters in the episode (besides the main character)?
 It provided too much information about the characters



It provided just enough information about the characters

 More information about the characters was needed
 The information provided was unsatisfactory

7.

Rate your level of agreement or disagreement with the following statement "I
didn't notice the time when watching the episodes of odd job. The time seemed
to pass quickly."
 Strongly Agree

 Agree





Neither agree nor disagree.
Disagree
Strongly Disagree

8.

Rate your level of agreement or disagreement with the following "While watching

Odd Job Jack I was able to forget about other aspects of my life."
 Strongly Agree  Agree




Neutral
Strongly Disagree

 Disagree

9.

Rate your level of agreement or disagreement with the following " The audio

description provided me with enough information to enjoy the show"
 Strongly Agree  Agree




Neutral
Disagree

 Strongly Disagree

108

10. Rate your level of agreement or disagreement with the following " The audio
description provided me with enough information to understand the plot"
 Strongly Agree
 Agree   Neutral Disagree

 Strongly Disagree

11. Rate your level of agreement or disagreement with the following: "The style of the
audio description allowed me to enjoy the show."  Strongly Agree
 Agree
 Neutral



Disagree

 Strongly Disagree

12. Rate your level of agreement or disagreement with the following: "The style of the
audio description helped me understand the show."
 Strongly Agree
 Agree

 Neutral
 Disagree  Strongly Disagree

13. Rate your level of like or dislike of the style of the audio description.
  Like it very much Liked it.



Neither liked it nor disliked it.

 Disliked it.

 Strongly disliked it.

14. Why did you like or dislike the style of video description as rated in question 13?

109

Appendix D: Post-Study Questionnaire
The purpose of this questionnaire is to gather your opinions about the audio

description after watching all the episodes, and to understand if your opinion about the video description changed over the course of this study. There are 11 questions on this questionnaire, thus it should take you approximately ten minutes to complete. Thank
you in advance for your time and assistance.

1.

Rate the change in your level of enjoyment of the audio description for Odd Job
Jack over all three episodes you watched. The audio description of Odd Job Jack:
 Got more enjoyable with each episode.
 Got somewhat more enjoyable. 


Didn't change over the episodes.
Got somewhat less enjoyable.

 Got a lot less enjoyable with each episode.

2.

Rate the change in the level of trustworthiness of the information provided to you
through the audio description over the three episodes.
 Got more trustworthy over time.
 Got somewhat more trustworthy.




Did not change over time.
Got somewhat less trustworthy over time.

 Got much less trustworthy over time.

3. Over those three episodes, did the audio description provide better/worse quality
information about the plot?

 The quality of the information about the plot got much better over the three
episodes

 The quality of information about the plot got somewhat better over the three
episodes

 The quality of information about the plot was about the same for all three
episodes.

 The quality of plot information got somewhat worse over the three episodes
110

 The quality of plot information got much worse over the three episodes

4.

Over those three episodes, did the audio description provide better/worse quality
information about the setting?

 The quality of the setting information got much better over the three
episodes

 The quality of setting information got somewhat better over the three
episodes

 The quality of setting information was about the same for all three episodes.
 The quality of setting information got somewhat worse over the three
episodes

 The quality of the setting information got much worse over the three
episodes

5.

Over the three episodes, did the audio description provide better/worse quality
information about the characters?

 The quality of the character information got much better over the three
episodes

1

 The quality of character information got somewhat better over the three
episodes

 The quality of character information was about the same for all three
episodes.

P

 The quality of character information got somewhat worse over the three
episodes.

 The quality of the character information got much worse over the three
episodes

6. When comparing the overall audib description style of Odd Job Jack to the
conventional style of audio description on television, it is




More Enjoyable
Equally Enjoyable

 Less Enjoyable  Neither style is enjoyable

7. When comparing the trustworthiness of the audio description style of Odd Job

Jack in this study to the standard style of audio description, it is
Q  More trustworthy Equally trustworthy

 Less trustworthy
111



Neither technique is trustworthy

8.

Did you enjoy Odd Job Jack
  I really enjoyed it I enjoyed it





I am neutral about it.
I disliked it
I disliked it very much.

9.

If you had to recommend genres of television programming that could benefit from
the style of audio description used in Odd Job Jack, which would you
recommend?  Comedy
 
Q 

Drama Mystery
Horror Commercials/advertisements

 Action 


Educational
Romance



News

10. Which genres would you not recommend for the style of audio description used in
Odd Job Jack?  Comedy
   Drama Mystery Horror

 Action

 Commercials/advertisements  Educational




Romance
News

11. Rate your level of agreement or disagreement with the following: "I would pay an

extra dollar for a television show or movie DVD if it used the same style of audio
description as Odd Job Jack"  Strongly Agree
 Agree



Neutral
112

 Disagree
 Strongly Disagree

12. Which style of audio description do you prefer to be used for television shows and
movies?  Conventional Style  Odd Job Jack Style

 An alternative style

13. Please provide us with a few general comments (both positive or negative) about
your experience with audio description for Odd Job Jack.

113

Appendix E: Comprehension Questions Episode 3
The purpose of this questionnaire is to evaluate whether the audio description is providing you with strong understanding of the show's plot, and characters. There are seven questions on this questionnaire and it will take you approximately ten minutes to
complete. Thank you in advance for your time and assistance.
1. Why does Leo go on the trip with Jack
 Jack asked him to help drive  He likes a good time




His house was being raided by police
He likes wieners

2. What kind of car does Jack drive?
  1978 Chrysler Le Baron Refrigerated Truck

 A Wiener Mobile  Corvette

3. What happened when Jack visited Detroit?
 He roasted wieners

 Thugs stole his wieners
 Jack won a wiener eating contest

 Jack didn't visit Detroit

4.

How did Jacks vehicle get across the cliff to the other side




He drove it really fast
His vehicle sprouted wings
He didn't make it across

 Alien intervention

5. Who eats the special wieners
 Jack

 The Hitch Hiker




Bobby
Leo

6. What happened to Jacques when he and Jack were fighting?
 Jacques falls down.

 Jacques gets hit in the nose.
 Jacques hits an underpass.
114



Nothing happens.

7.

Please Provide a brief synopsis of the Episode

115

Appendix F: Comprehension Questions Episodel
The purpose of this questionnaire is to evaluate whether the audio description is
providing you with a strong understanding of the show's plot, and characters. There are seven questions on this questionnaire and it will take you approximately ten minutes to
complete. Thank you in advance for your time and assistance. 8. Who wants to see the blue man group?
 Jack
 Dario

 The children who are beating up Jack
 Jack's fleas

£

9.

What   


does Leo receive in the mail? An eviction Notice Letters from his mother Flyers for free pizza
Magazines

10. Jack falls in love with a girl selling?
  Mattresses Leather Jackets



Mustard

 Trips to Mexico

11. Why can't the character get out of the ape suit?
 The zipper broke

 

If he takes off the ape suit he will get fleas His boss pays him more to wear it all the time

 The ape suit impresses the ladies

12. Who goes to Mexico?  Bobby and Leo  Dario and Jack  Jack and the Girl  The Alligator Mascot and The Girl 13. Why does Jack fight with the Alligator?  They both want the same job  They both want to date the same girl
 Jack crossed the territory line Q The Alligator thinks Jack doesn't deserve to be a mascot
116

14. Please Provide a brief synopsis of the Episode

117

Appendix G: Comprehension Questions Episode 2
The purpose of this questionnaire is to evaluate whether the audio description is
providing you with strong understanding of the show's plot, and characters. There are six questions on this questionnaire and it will take you approximately ten minutes to
complete. Thank you in advance for your time and assistance.
1. What kind of guitar does Jack play?  A double necked guitar
 An acoustic guitar  Jack doesn't play guitar Leo does

2.

In which country is Jack's career counselor in?
 
 

Canada USA
India China {

3.

What does the Magic talisman do?  Allows Leo to be comfortable in his own skin  Switches Leo and Bobby's brains
  Gives Jack Magical Power Nothing at all

4. Which of the following DOES NOT happen to Bobby while he is in Leo's body?
 


Burn's his hand Plays Basketball
Gets chased by villagers



Dances on a hillside covered in flowers

5. What happens when Jack's assistants warn him against the dangers of his final
trick



He cancels the show

 He fires them all

 He tricks the real magician into doing the trick
 He just walks away

6.

Please provide a Brief Synopsis of the episode

118

614

Appendix H - Consent Information
Project Title: Principal
Investigator:

John Riccio, Graduate Student, Ryerson, Masters
of Management Science (416) 979-5000 ext. 2522 or iriccio@rverson.ca

Supervisor:

Deborah Fels, P.Eng., Ph.D., Ryerson University
(416)-979-5000 ext. 7619 or dfels@rverson.ca

Consent to Participate in Study from Subject
Information Form

The purpose of this study is to evaluate different styles of audio description, and to evaluate which of these styles provides the best entertainment experience for the audience. In order to do this, I ask that you watch three episodes of an animated comedy series called Odd Job Jack. Each of these episodes runs approximately 20 minutes long. Immediately after watching each episode you will be asked to complete a short survey. You are also asked to complete two additional surveys, one prior to the study and one at the conclusion of the study.

Confidentiality

All raw data will be kept strictly confidential; however a summary of the data will be published in academic venues but no individual details will be identified in this summary. Your email address will be recorded with participant ID for administration purposes. This list will be destroyed at the conclusion of the study. The information gathered from surveys will be strictly used for research and academic purposes with only the principal investigator and his supervisor having access to it

Risks and Discomforts

The risks associated with participating in this study are minimal. As part of measuring the value of audio description, you will be asked comprehension questions about the plot, and characters of the episodes. You may experience some frustration or stress if the questions become too difficult. However, you are able to take breaks at any time or even stop participation in the study without penalty.

Expected Benefits

Individual participants will receive $40 to cover travel expenses. This study will benefit the general community of audio description users. This study will test different styles of audio description that will assist in developing new practices for audio
120

description. We hope that this information may lead to improvements in audio
description technologies and techniques.

Voluntary Nature of Participation:

Participation in this study is entirely voluntary. If you do not wish to participate in this study it will not affect current or future relations with Ryerson University or The Centre for Learning Technology. If you choose to participate, you have the ability to leave the study at any time and for any reason without penalty. In addition, you may refuse to answer any questions or participate in any task at any point of the study without penalty.

Questions about the Study:

If you have any questions or concerns, about this study please feel free to contact John Riccio at (416) 979-5000 ext. 2522 or Deborah Fels at 416.979.5000 ext. 7619. If you have any concerns or complaints about this study in regards to its ethical nature please contact the Research Ethics Board, c/o Office of the Vice President, Research and Innovation, Ryerson University, 350 Victoria St., Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Tel: 416979-5042

I have been informed of the alternatives to participation in this study, including my right not to participate and the right to withdraw without penalty. I hereby consent to participate in the study.

I agree (sign here)

I disagree (Sign Here)_

Group Discussion Consent

At the completion of the post study questionnaire we will be holding a optional discussion group for all those who want to stay. This discussion will help to further our understanding of how you experienced the audio description, as well as offer you a venue to provide feedback and input. We will be recording this discussion using microphones, a mixer and Adobe Audition software. This recording will be transcribed, for further analysis. The information gathered from this transcription will be strictly used for research and academic purposes with only the principal investigator and his
supervisor having access to it.
121

I have been informed of the alternatives to participation in discussion, including my right not to participate and the right to withdraw without penalty. I hereby consent to participate in the discussion and be recorded.

I agree (sign here)_

I disagree (Sign Here )_

122

Appendix I Screen Prints

Log in

Audio Description Study Login
ibpage was designed to be viewed using internet explorer, It also required Adobe Flash Player to watch the videos to download this player
Usemame^

(

Login

s

w
User Clicks hem to

123

Quiz

Episode 3 Comprehension Questions

Question L Why does Leo go on the trip with Jack?

O Jack asked him. to help drive OHe likes a good time

Olfis ho^se v^as bemg raideti by police OHe likes wkaers

Question 2, What kind of vwhSte does Jwk <h*w?

O 197S Clirysler Lc Bat'on O Refrigerated Tmck

O A Wiener Mobile/A gpnt wiener O Corvette

Question 3, What happened when Jack vwtiied Detroit?

O He roasted wieners O Thugs stole te wieners O Jack won a wiener eating contest O Jack didnt visit Detroit

Question 4 How clid Jmfks vehicle get across the cliff to th^ other nffle?

OHe drove it. really fast O IHBs vdadck sprouted vmgs OHe didn't ixiake it across

Question 5> Ulient l^peu^d to Jmqu&i vdwt\ lie and Jack wml1* flgliting?

'-O.tar««.«l,A«

--

^

_--. 1

124

References
Audio Description International. (2003). Audio Description Guildlines. Retrieved
June27th , 2008, from ADInternational.org:

http://www.adinternational.org/ADIguidelines.html.
Audio Publishers Association. (2007). Americans are tuning in to audio: Audiobook

sales are on the rise nationally. Retrieved May 21st, 2008, from Audio Publishers

Association: http://www.audiopub.org/resources-industry-data.asp.
Baguley, T. (2004). An Introduction to Sphericity. Retrieved September 12, 2008, from
University of Aberdeen:

http://www.abdn.ac.uk/~psy317/personal/files/teaching/spheric.htm.
Baldwin, C. (2003). Stage Direction. Ramsbury: The Crowood Press Ltd.

Ball, W. (1984). A Sense of Direction. New York: Drama Book Publishers. Benedetti, R. (1985). The Director at Work. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall Inc.

Brockett, O., & Ball, R. (2004). The Essential Theatre. Belmont: Thomson Learning:
Wadsworth.

Burgstahler, S. (2008). Universal Design Process, Principles and Applications.
Retrieved July 15, 2008, from University of Washington:

http://www.washington.edu/doit/Brochures/Programs/ud.html.
CNIB. (2008).FQA. Retrieved September 3, 2008, from CNIB's Official Website: http://www.cnib.ca/en/faq/vision-loss/default.aspx#3.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience . New York :
HarperCollins Publishers.

Disability Arts in London. (2002). Audio Description: Art or Industry? Retrieved May 21,
2008, from Raina Haig's Official Website:

http://rainahaig.com/index.php?id=55&txjppageteaser_pi1[backld]=2.
Fiske, J (1987). Television Culture. London: Routledge.

Fels, D., Udo, J. P., Diamond, J., & Diamond, J. (2006a). A comparison of Alternative Narrative Approaches to Video Description for Animated Comedy. Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindess, 100(5) , 295-305.
Fels, D., Udo, J., Ting, P., Diamond, E., & Diamond, J. (2006b). Odd Job Jack Described: A universal design approach to described video. Univ Access Info Soc, 5(1)73-78.
Haig, R. (2005). Verbalising the Visual: The construction of meaning in audio
description. Retrieved June 27th, 2008, from RainaHaig.com:

Http://rainahaig.com/index.php?id=60.
125

Hall, S. (2006). Encoding/Decoding. In M. Durham, & D. Kellner, Media and Cultural
Studies: Key works (pp. 163-174). Maiden: BlackwellPublishing.

Independent Television Commission. (2000). Guidance on Standards for Audio
Description. Retrieved June 25th, 2008, from OfCom.org: http://www.ofcom.org. uk/static/archive/itc/itc_publications/codes_guidance/audio_de
scription/lndex.asp.html

Industry Canada. (2007). What is CSR. Retrieved August 20th, 2008, from Industry
Canada Official Website: http://www.ic.gc.ca/epic/site/csrrse.nsf/en/h_rs00094e.html.

Johnson, D., & Wiles, J. (2003). Effective affective user interface design in games.
Ergonomics, 46(13-14), 1332-1345.

Jumisko-Pyykko, S. (2008). I would like to see the subtitles and the face or at least hear

the voices: Effects of picture ratio and audio-video bitrate ratio on perception for
quality in mobile television . MultimeTools Appl, 36(1-2), 167-184.

Katz, E., Gurevitch, M.,& Haas, H.(1973). On the use of the mass media for important
things. American Sociological Review, 38, 164-181.

Kirchner, C, & Schmeidler, E. (2001). Adding Audio Description: Does it Make a Difference? Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 95(4) ,197-212.

Kozloff, S. (1995). Audio Books in a Visual Culture. Journal of American Culture, 18(4),
83-99.

Moerk, C. (2005). The DVD's bonus feature creates stars of their own. Retrieved June
12 2008, from International Herald Tribune :
www.iht.com/articles/2005/04/03/business/dvds04.php.

Neary, L. (2005). Heard Any Good Books Lately? An Industry Booms. Retrieved May
21, 2008, from National Public Radio:

http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyld=4460548.
Neuman, W. R., Crigler, A. N., & Bove, V. M. (1991). Television and Viewer
Perceptions. 9th International Conference: Television Sound Today and Tomorrow.
Audio Engineering Society.

Packer, J. & Kirchner, C. (1997). Who's watching? American Foundation for the Blind.
Retrieved 15 November 2007 from http/www.empowermentzone.com/watching.txt.

Pettitt, B., Sharpe, K., & Cooper, S. (1996). Audetel: Enhancing Television forvisually
impaired people. Retrieved October 12, 2007 from British Journal of Visual

Impairment http://www.visugate.biz/bjvi/may1996/may1996.html Pfanstiehl, M., & Pfanstiehl, C. (1985). The Play's the Thing: Audio description in the
theatre. The British Journal of Visual Impairment. 91-92.
126

Preiser, W., & Ostroff, E. (2001). Universal Design Handbook. McGraw-Hill
Professional.

Snyder, J. (2007). Audio Description: The visual made verbal. Retrieved June 27, 2008,
from Audio Description.com:

http://www.audiodescribe.com/about/articles/adjnternational_journal_07.pdf
The Hollywood Reporter. (2003). DVD Roundtable: Extra Extra. Retrieved May 21st,
2008, from Hollywood Reporter.

http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/search/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=
2043433.

VSA Arts Of Texas. (2007). Audio Description for People who are Blind or have Low
Vision. Retrieved October 12th, 2007, from VSA Arts of Texas:
http://www.vsatx.org/audio.html

Wall, J. (2002). European Information society. Retrieved October 11th, 2007, from
European Commission:

http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/topics/telecoms/regulatory/publiconsult/
comments/barriers_to_widespread_access/anec3.pdf.

127

