Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2011

Are media exposure and self-control related?
Julian House
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Psychology Commons Recommended Citation
House, Julian, "Are media exposure and self-control related?" (2011). Theses and dissertations. Paper 882.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

ARE MEDIA EXPOSURE AND SELF-CONTROL RELATED? By Julian House Bachelor of Science in International Relations & History, 2005, London School of Economics A Thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts In the Program of Psychology

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2011 © Julian House 2011

Author's Declarations I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

__________________ Julian House I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

___________________ Julian House

ii

Are Media Exposure and Self-Control Related? Julian House Master of Arts in Psychology, 2011, Ryerson University

Abstract One critical dimension of self-control is attention control, the ability to wilfully determine the content of conscious thought. It is argued here that the amount of effort required to exercise attention control while critically engaging in different media, specifically text and television, is significantly different. It is hypothesized that the amount of self-control exerted while reading will be significantly greater than while watching television. An experiment comparing a film clip with its screen play demonstrates that participants` self-control is more depleted after 30 minutes of reading than 30 minutes of viewing. Furthermore, it is hypothesized that differential habitual exposure to media will predict trait levels of self-control, with exposure to television and reading negatively and positively correlated with self-control, respectively. An internet survey testing these relationships is reported in which a small but significant negative relationship between TV exposure and trait selfcontrol is found.

iii

Table of Contents Introduction................................................................................................................................................ 1 Study 1......................................................................................................................................................... 15 Study 2......................................................................................................................................................... 20 General Discussion.................................................................................................................................... 31 Appendix A................................................................................................................................................. 34 Appendix B................................................................................................................................................. 35 Appendix C................................................................................................................................................. 37 References................................................................................................................................................... 38

iv

List of Tables Statistics describing the distribution of the survey data obtained in study 2....................................... 24

v

List of Figures Figure 1: Handgrip persistence (repeated measure) by condition........................................................ 18 Figure 2: American Time Use Survey (ATUS) medians of the number of hours spent watching television in 2009 as a function of day of the week................................................................................ 23 Figure 3: Histograms comparing data distributions of the present study with the ATUS for television viewing........................................................................................................................................................... 26 Figure 4: Histograms comparing data distributions of the present study with the ATUS for television reading............................................................................................................................................................ 27

vi

Are Media Exposure and Self-Control Related? Self-control is the conscious effort to bring one`s behaviour into accord with an internal or external standard through both inhibition of undesirable behaviour and/or initiation of desirable behaviour (Baumeister, Gailliot & Tice, 2009). Self-control therefore involves reflexive awareness that allows for self-monitoring, self-evaluation and self-reaction (Bandura, 1991; Carver & Scheier, 1981). Also known as self-regulation, it includes regulating thoughts, emotions, impulses, task performance and attention. Freud famously theorised that the inhibition of impulses and striving to meet standards was the crux of civilization (1930). Although contemporary evidence does not support Freud`s conclusion that high levels of self-control have pathological consequences for the individual (Baumeister & Alquist, 2009), his view that this ability was essential for society may not be far off the mark. Self-control is essential in order to translate humans` logical reasoning faculties into goal-directed behaviour; it enables us to enact flexible behavioural patterns that maximise our subjective benefit across different circumstances, rather than behaviour that is dictated by automatic responding or respondent conditioning to the environment. Therefore, Baumeister and colleagues have described self-control as one of the most important adaptations of the human psyche and deficiencies in self-control as underlying many of the social and personal problems that confront Western society, such as crime, addiction, debt, sexually-transmitted infections and obesity, to name a few (Tangney, Baumeister & Boone, 2004; Baumeister, Heatherton & Tice, 1994). How Does Self-Control Work? Interest in self-control has burgeoned during the past decade as a result of accumulating evidence for the limited resource theory of self-control. Many converging studies with disparate methodologies have shown that people exhibit diminished self-regulation after a previous task that required self-control, relative to a control task that did not (see Baumeister, Gailliot & Tice, 2009,

1

for a review). Across all of these experimental manipulations, which have variously ruled out task difficulty, participant fatigue, diminished self-efficacy and other potential confounds, the most parsimonious explanation of the results is that exerting self-control depletes a limited but generalised resource which is required for additional acts of self-control, irrespective of domain. Examples of laboratory tasks that require self-control are stifling emotional responses, ignoring salient distracters and resisting the temptation of freshly-baked cookies. Participants in these self-control manipulations perform relatively worse on subsequent measures of self-control, such as persisting on frustrating puzzles, endurance of discomfort, Stroop tasks and rational decision-making, compared to controls (e.g., Baumeister, Bratlavsky, Muraven & Tice, 1998; Gailliot et al., 2007; Pocheptsova, Amir, Dhar & Baumeister, 2009). Recently, evidence has emerged that it is available blood stream glucose that is depleted by exertion of self-control and that this drop in blood glucose levels mediates subsequent declines in self-control performance (Gailliot et al., 2007; Gailliot & Baumeister, 2007). Blood glucose levels drop after self-control manipulations, predict performance on subsequent self-control tasks and boosting them temporarily by administering glucose drinks prevents self-control depletion. This evidence suggests that the brain mechanisms responsible for self-control are relatively inefficient compared to those involved in automatic processes in terms of glucose consumption and that this is why the ability to self-regulate is limited, but replenishes with rest. In addition to fluctuations in self-control as a function of previous exertion (i.e. state selfcontrol), trait levels of self-control, or the efficiency with which this limited resource is used, vary across individuals. Like the self-control depletion studies, trait self-control is conceived of as generalised and applies to all domains of self-control. Consistent with the explanation that available blood glucose accounts for the limited nature of self-control, studies have shown that diabetic individuals, and those with poor glucose tolerance--or the ability to maintain a stable level of blood 2

glucose--exhibit behaviour consistent with lower trait self-control, such as reduced attention control (Lane, et al., 1988; Lustman, Frank & McGill, 1991; Rovet & Ehrlich, 1988), impaired emotional control (Fabrykant & Pacella, 1948; Barglow et al., 1951; Barglow, Hatcher, Berndt & Phelps, 1985; Eren, Erdi & Özcankaya, 2003), impulsivity (Lustman, et al., 1991) and addiction (Goodwin, Hoven & Spitzer, 2003; Rehm et al., 2003). As a construct, trait self-control has demonstrated both good convergent and construct validity. One of the most widely used measures of trait self-control, the self-control scale (Tangney et al., 2004), is a self-report instrument that has been correlated with diverse behavioural measures of selfcontrol such as suppressing undesirable thoughts (Gailliot, Schmeichel & Baumeister, 2006), restraining inappropriate sexual behaviour (Gailliot & Baumeister, 2007), and enduring discomfort (Schmeichel & Zell, 2007). Whether trait self-control is measured via behaviour, self-report or the reports of others, it is positively correlated with a wide-range of beneficial outcomes. People with more self-control exhibit better academic performance, fewer impulse control problems like alcohol abuse, healthier psychological adjustment and more satisfying relationships (see Baumeister & Alquist, 2009 for a review). To date, there is no evidence that high levels of self-control produce negative psychological consequences, contrary to Freud`s predictions. In repeated studies, the relationship between self-control and measures of positive life outcomes has always been linear (Baumeister & Alquist, 2009). Although this research is only correlational, it is consistent with the common intuition that higher levels of trait self-control help individuals in the real world to avoid procrastination, prevent distraction and inhibit impulses that would get in the way of their goals and interpersonal relationships. Self-Control During Free Time

3

One area of life in which more self-control research is warranted is adults` use of free time. As opposed to leisure time, which has a more variable definition tied to subjective notions of pleasure, free time refers to time spent doing things which are less essential for daily survival, including volunteering, socialising, recreation, and hobbies. Adults` free time deserves an examination from the self-control perspective for two reasons. First, it is during adults` free time when there is the least external constraint on behaviour. External constraints, such as economic imperatives, work quotas or family expectations surrounding household chores, can obscure the relationship between self-control and behaviour because they provide strong environmental cues that dictate proper responses. During free time, however, an adult is at greater liberty to pursue their own subjective self-interest and must provide their own behavioural constraints, in the form of selfcontrol, in order to direct their behaviour. For example, during their free time adults can choose to exercise regularly and curtail unhealthy snack foods, which their doctors and countless public service announcements have told them is important for avoiding illness, or they can munch potato chips while watching television. Therefore, an analysis of behaviour during adults` free time is probably most likely to reveal effects of trait self-control. Second, free time is an important area of study in and of itself because North Americans have a great deal of it. Both in Canada and the United States, individuals have on average 40 hours of free time every week (Statistics Canada, 2005; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2008a). This is five hours more free time a week than Americans had in 1965 and one hour more than they had in 1975 (Robinson & Godbey, 1999). Although it often seems to not be the case, about 37% of North Americans` waking hours are free time; sleep is the only category in which more time is spent (Statistics Canada, 2005; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2008a). The large majority of free time, just over 60%, involves consuming some kind of textual, audio or visual media (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2007a, 2007b). Given the preponderance of free time spent with media, it is proposed that free time media use represents an important area of 4

study which shall be the focus of this research. The objectives of the present research are twofold: (1) to investigate whether different media require, and therefore deplete, different amounts of selfcontrol, and (2) whether quotidian media exposure patterns are related to different levels of trait self-control in individuals. Hypothesised relationships between these two variables and justifications for these hypotheses are explicated below using the examples of television and text. Requisite Attention Control Varies Across Media An important dimension of self-control for investigating the relationship between media use and self-control is attention control. Attention control tasks, such as ignoring distracter stimuli while attending to a primary stimulus, ignoring a forbidden thought while thinking about other things and Stroop tasks have all been used in self-control studies to demonstrate that attention control uses and depletes self-control resources (e.g., Schmeichel, Vohs & Baumeister, 2003; Gailliot, Schmeichel & Baumeister, 2007; Gailliot et al., 2006). Focussing attention on one thought or stimulus requires selfcontrol because attention automatically orients to salient environmental stimuli (Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977) and task-unrelated thoughts (Giambra, 1989). It has been argued that attention control is the most crucial form of self-control because it underlies many other self-regulatory domains as an effective self-control mechanism (Baumeister, Heatherton & Tice, 1994; Rueda, Posner & Rothbart, 2004; Kaplan & Berman, 2010). For example, when behavioural inhibition is tested in children using a delayed gratification task, children are much more successful at resisting the immediate temptation of a marshmallow if the marshmallow is placed under a cup or if they are given instructions regarding thoughts they should distract themselves with (Shoda, Mischel & Peake, 1990). Even though the tempting marshmallow is just as close, children can inhibit the impulse to eat it successfully when aided in directing their attention elsewhere. Similarly, one can attempt to improve one`s current mood by thinking about one`s favourite things and when trying to maintain

5

an elevated level of task performance it is essential to stay focussed and avoid distraction. In addition, for self-regulation to take place at all, one has to pay attention to one`s own intentions and behaviour and compare these to a desired standard before any appropriate modification strategies can be implemented. The level of attention control required to meaningfully engage with different media differs according to the structural features of each medium. Reading, for example, with its lack of movement and sound, demands the exertion of greater attention control than does television viewing. Evidence for this comes from self-report, correlational and physiological studies. A large experience sampling study, which involved participants being signalled via pager to complete an activity questionnaire at random points throughout their day, found that reading was reported as the domestic activity involving the greatest concentration (Kubey & Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). Measures of trait attention control have been correlated with reading comprehension in children, even when decoding and language comprehension skills are controlled for (Conners, 2009) and college students who spend more time reading report being less distractible (Levine, Waite & Bowman, 2007). Being able to control one`s attention while reading is important because attentional lapses during reading, known as mind wandering, impair both comprehension of, and drawing inferences from, text (Smallwood, McSpadden & Schooler, 2008; Schooler, Reichle, & Halpern, 2005). Beta wave activity and alpha suppression, two indicators of focussed attention measured by electro encephalography (EEG), are relatively pronounced during reading compared to other activities and marginally greater than during television viewing (Walker, 1980). Given that attention control has been shown to be negatively affected by self-regulation depletion (Inzlicht & Gutsell, 2007; Gailloit et al., 2007), it is not surprising that following a self-control depletion task participants were found to perform poorly on a reading comprehension task relative to controls (Schmeichel et al., 2003).

6

In contrast to reading, participants report that television viewing is one of the most relaxing and least effortful activities of the day, involving minimal concentration (Kubey & Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). This is because when it comes to television, it is the medium, rather than the consumer, which is directing attention. As variously prey and predator throughout our evolution, it was adaptive that humans attend to novel motion and sound in their environment. The orienting response, first proposed by Pavlov (1927), is an automatic behavioural response to novel stimuli accompanied by a consistent set of physiological changes (Lynn, 1966). An orienting response is characterised by directing sensory receptors towards the triggering stimulus, increased blood flow to the brain, decreased heart rate, increased skin conductance response (SCR) and alpha wave suppression. This physiological response set is thought to be demonstrative of a state of sensory attention (Campbell, Wood & McBride, 1997). Both heart rate deceleration (Lang, 1990; Lang, Geiger, Strickweda & Sumner, 1993; Thorson & Lang, 1992; Potter, Lang & Bolls, 1997) and alpha suppression (Reeves, et al., 1985) appear to index orienting responses to cuts, edits, camera movements, voice changes and sound effects characteristic of television. Simmons, Detenber, Cuthbert and Scwartz (2003) have also demonstrated heart rate deceleration, alpha suppression and SCR increases to moving images relative to still images and argued that this indicates sustained attention. The importance of movement in automatically directing attention is also apparent in the great difficulty of detecting change that occurs without movement, known as change blindness (Rensink, 1997). The magnetic properties of television on attention are familiar to everyone who has tried to hold a conversation with someone while a flickering background television set continually lured wandering eyes, and has been observed in infants as young as six to eight weeks old (Lemish, 1987). The attention-engrossing properties of television are so strong in fact, that it can be used as both an anxiolytic and analgesic for painful dental and medical procedures (Wang, Sun & Chen, 2009; Prabhakar, Marwah & Raju, 2007; Bellieni et al., 2006). 7

Therefore, because attention control is an important dimension of self-control and because television and text require different levels of top-down attention control for meaningful consumer engagement, it is hypothesized that television and text will require and deplete self-control to different degrees. Specifically, it is hypothesized that watching television requires and depletes fewer self-control resources than does reading text. Why Would Trait Self-Control Vary with Media Use? Trait self-control and attraction to media. There are several possible reasons why trait self-control may be correlated with media use. The first and most obvious explanation is that trait self-control shapes media preferences. Trait self-control is related to general cognitive preferences. Those who are more capable of controlling their thoughts and attention engage in effortful thought processes more frequently and enjoy doing so more (Bertrams & Dickhäuser, 2009). Known as need for cognition, this preference for effortful cognitive tasks is negatively correlated with television viewing hours (Henning & Vorderer, 2001), presumably because television obviates the need for excessive cognition. Individuals with low trait self-control may also get more involved in television narratives and thus feel a stronger need to watch these narratives unfold. A recent study found a relationship between participants` self-reported ability to control their emotions and attention and their tendency to develop parasocial interactions with television characters and feel transported into television programs (Greenwood, 2008). The extent to which this finding also holds for narratives that are read instead of watched is not clear, although there is an argument to be made that this is less likely given the need for attention control while reading. Finally, the general tendency to conserve self-control resources, especially when they are reduced, may influence individuals` preference for activities that require more or less self-control 8

exertion. As discussed above, different media require different levels of attention control. Focussing one`s attention on text, for example, may be relatively more depleting for individuals with low selfcontrol than those with greater self-control. In contrast, we have little reason to suspect that television requires significant self-control exertion. Muraven and Slessareva (2003) suggest that participants` natural tendency is to conserve self-control resources after exertion unless sufficient motivation is offered to expend what remains. At the end of a day`s work, we can expect that individuals with low trait self-control would have less remaining resources to invest in further cognitive effort and therefore would make media or activity choices that match their tendency to conserve available willpower. Trait self-control and the quality of free time decisions. Another factor that could be influencing any relationship between trait self-control and media use is the quality of individuals` free time decision-making. Actively making choices has been demonstrated to deplete self-control (Vohs et al., 2008). It is also the case that the desire to make choices and the quality of rational decisionmaking declines when self-control resources have been reduced (Pocheptsova et al., 2008). This dependence of decision-making quality on self-control resources would lead us to expect that individuals with low trait self-control would make less optimal choices about how to spend their free time. This hypothesis offers an interesting answer to a striking paradox of leisure time in developed countries: although television is the most popular free time activity by far in almost every developed country, it is also one of the least enjoyed activities (Juster, 1985; Robinson & Godbey, 1999). This low ranking of television is surprisingly magnified for those who spend more time watching television; although heavy viewers (more than four hours a day) spend more than twice as much time watching than do light viewers (less than two hours), they actually report deriving less satisfaction from television than their light-viewing counterparts (Kubey & Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). Although it is tempting to interpret these low ratings of television enjoyment as the product of 9

socially desirable responding, these data have to be interpreted in the context of the studies from which they came; the participants who were denying the enjoyableness of television were also reporting how much time they had spent watching television the previous day or week. Therefore, the reports that television is an unsatisfying activity appear to reflect people`s experiences while watching television; experience sampling indicates that people experience very little positive affect and arousal during viewing (Kubey & Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). This unfavourable rating of television is also consistent with the negative correlation between time spent with television and life satisfaction (Frey, Benesch & Stutzer, 2007); if people derived satisfactory pleasure from television then we would expect this relationship to be positive. People seem to recognise this paradox for themselves without necessarily doing anything about it. Gallup polls have consistently demonstrated over recent decades that a large proportion of the US population believes that they watch too much television (Kubey & Csikszentmihalyi, 2002; Kubey, 2009). Therefore, it may be that people who spend more time with television do so because they are making poor decisions about how to spend their free time, and one personality trait which may contribute to making such poor decisions is low self-control. Some media may be habit forming. Although still controversial, a substantial number of researchers claim that compulsive behavioural disorders surrounding certain media need to be recognised (Kubey, 2009; McIlwraith, 1998; Young, 2009; Grüsser, Thalemann & Griffiths, 2007). Kubey argues that it is the distracting nature of television, discussed above, that makes dependence on this medium possible (Kubey, 2009). This view of problematic television use aligns with the negative reinforcement model of addiction, which posits that negative reward, or the removal of aversive stimuli, helps to explain addiction behaviour (Conger, 1956; Baker, Piper, McCarthy, Majeski & Fiore, 2004). According to mood management theory of television addiction, rumination about negative life events or general malaise may be temporarily avoided by absorbing one`s 10

attention in television (Zillmann, 1982). There is evidence to suggest that some heavy viewers use television as a negative reward to remove the aversive experience of rumination in this way. Overall, people who are less satisfied with their lives tend to watch more television (Frey, et al., 2007). Heavy viewers report lower overall mood than light viewers, especially during unstructured time when they are most likely to be troubled by their own thoughts (Kubey & Csikzentmihalyi, 1990). Anderson, Collins, Schmitt and Jacobvitz (1996) found that recent negative life events predicted time spent with television and participants` score on a television addiction scale in separate experiments. Selfdescribed television addicts in fact report using television to distract themselves from negative cognitions more frequently than healthy controls (McIlwraith, 1991, 1998). Recently, it has also been shown that poor emotion regulation tendencies, like rumination, predict television use during negative moods (Greenwood & Long, 2009). Although the case for television dependence or addiction is not yet closed, taken together this evidence suggests that some heavy television users are less capable of emotional control and therefore turn to television as a means of distracting themselves from their problems. In contrast, a thorough search of PsycINFO returned no literature suggesting the existence of compulsive reading. Although it is arguable that this absence could be the result of a confirmation bias by psychologists who expect to find participants addicted to television, internet and video games but not text, another possibility is that reading is not conducive to negative reinforcement habit formation. As discussed above, it is thought that television offers the potential for compulsive use because it provides negative reinforcement by relieving users from stress through distraction. Reading, on the other hand, is a more distractible than distracting medium. Libraries, for example, have traditionally encouraged quiet talking and often offer silent study areas to facilitate concentration whereas the bustle of sports bars, arcades and internet cafés does not tend to disturb most patrons. Reading is probably less distracting than television because of the working memory 11

and perceptual loads involved with this medium. As an individual`s working memory load increases, so does their distractibility (Lavie, Hirst, Fockert & Viding, 2004; Kane et al., 2007), seemingly because filtering out irrelevant distracters draws on the same cognitive resource underlying working memory. The act of reading requires significant working memory resources to keep the component parts of sentences, paragraphs and arguments online so that recent statements can be combined with previous information to create a cohesive narrative (Baddley, 1996; Vos, Gunter, Schriefers & Friederici, 2001; Daneman & Carpenter, 1980). The opposite is the case for perceptual load; as the number of stimuli a person attends increases, they become less distractible (Forster & Lavie, 2009). Reading, with its austere presentation of text on blank background involves lower perceptual load than the bustling movement on video screens. Thus reading serves as a poor media choice for blocking out negative cognitions and therefore does not offer the same negative reinforcement potential as television. Media use may alter trait self-control. The above explanations assert that different levels of trait self-control have the potential to cause different patterns of media consumption. Those low in self-control may turn to television either in an effort to preserve self-control`s limited supply, or for distraction from negative thoughts, or because low self-control affects the quality of their leisuretime decision making. Alternatively, it may be the case that habitual media use causes trait selfcontrol change. Several experimental manipulations have recently been able to demonstrate that selfcontrol can be increased with practice. Much as a muscle is temporarily fatigued immediately after use, but ultimately becomes stronger through such use, so the capacity for self-control is depleted when it is exerted but increases in the long term through such exertion. As little as two weeks of self-control exercises, like correcting one`s posture, implementing money management techniques or starting an exercise or study regimen, have been shown to lead to increases in self-control (Muraven, Baumeister & Tice, 1999; Oaten & Cheng, 2006a, 2006b; Oaten & Cheng, 2007; Muraven, 2010). 12

Just as with these self-control exercises, it is hypothesized that reading, in contrast to television, is an activity that will temporarily deplete self-control. Therefore, regular consumption of media that involve greater degrees of attention and cognitive control may similarly exercise and increase selfcontrol over time. Moreover, frequent consumption of media that require minimal attention control may deny consumers the opportunity to exercise self-regulation and therefore contribute to trait self-control atrophy. Thus it is hypothesized that habitual reading will be positively correlated with trait self-control while habitual television watching will be negatively correlated with it. Preliminary Evidence that Self-Control and Media Use may be Related Although there have been no studies to date that expressly investigated the link between selfcontrol and media use, there is some intriguing tangential evidence suggestive of such relationships. As with most psychological research into media, the majority of this evidence pertains to television use. One of the most interesting and famous studies exploring the effects of television produced evidence relevant to the question of trait self-control. Prior to the introduction of cable television, Williams and colleagues (1986) compared a Canadian town that could not receive television signals due to its location in a valley, referred to as Notel, with two demographically matched towns to search for behavioural, cognitive and personality differences between town residents. This study is of great notoriety because the unique circumstance constituted a natural experiment that provides insight into television`s causal effects: an entire town, typical in other respects, was deprived of television for decades due to a geographic anomaly as opposed to self-selection. One question Williams et al. sought to answer was whether television viewing reduced creative thinking. In doing so, they also demonstrated that television had a negative effect on persistence on a challenging task, a classic measure of self-control. The paradigm they used to measure creativity was the Duncker Candle Problem, in which participants attempt to affix a candle to a billboard using everyday objects

13

in novel ways. In addition to finding that residents of Notel were more likely to solve this problem, they also found that, of those people who failed to solve the problem, Notel residents persisted longer at the task before giving up than did residents of the two other towns. In addition, despite the small sample size of non-solvers, there was a trend towards significance for a negative relationship between time spent watching television and time spent attempting to solve the problem in the two comparator towns (Suedfeld, Little, Rank, Rank & Ballard, 1986). Voluntary persistence on frustrating tasks is one of the standard measures for self-control because this represents an attempt to meet a standard despite diminishing motivation to do so (Baumeister et al., 1998). Therefore, although Williams and her colleagues did not mention the implications of this study for self-control, their findings suggest that exposure to television may cause diminished trait self-control. Several other, less seminal studies also provide evidence that there may be a negative relationship between television and self-control. Kubey and Csikszentmihalyi (1990) found that heavy television viewers reported feeling less in control of their behaviour throughout their day than did light viewers. In two studies by Oaten and Cheng, which were designed to measure improvements in self-control induced by self-control exercises, the exercises (in addition to increasing self-control) had the effect of reducing the amount of television participants reported watching (2006a, 2006b). Most promisingly, Duckworth et al. (2005) found a significant negative relationship (r =-.33) between eighth graders` time spent watching television and a composite measure of self-control. There is also one study of which the author is aware in which amount of reading time was negatively related to reported distractibility (Levine et al., 2007), suggesting that time spent reading predicts better attention control. Taken together, these studies provide tentative evidence that there may in fact be relationships between media use and trait self-control. Currently the evidence is

14

ambiguous as to the causal direction of this relationship. The Notel study suggests that media exposure may be causing self-control changes whereas the studies by Oaten and Cheng imply that trait self-control may contribute to media consumption patterns.

Study 1--Reading and Watching Deplete Self-Control to Different Degrees Despite the evidence presented above, it still remains to be demonstrated that different media require and therefore deplete different amounts of self-control. In order to establish this, a randomized between-participants experiment was conducted in which participants` state self-control was measured before and after either watching a video clip or reading the screenplay that corresponded to that clip for thirty minutes. The chosen measure of self-control was how long participants could continuously squeeze a handgrip. This measure has been shown to be unrelated to grip strength (Hejak, 1989; Rethlingshafer, 1942; Thornton, 1939) and instead is a well-validated measure of self-control (Muraven, Tice & Baumeister, 1998; Bray, Ginis, Hicks & Woodgate, 2008; Martijn et al., 2007; Muraven & Shmueli, 2006). The content to which participants were exposed was the first thirty minutes from the main story of A Serious Man by Joel and Ethan Coen (2009) and the film`s screenplay (Coen & Coen, 2007). This film was selected because the screenplay provides comprehensive descriptions of the auditory and visual features of the film and because it was judged to be a film that undergraduates were unlikely to have seen with actors that are relatively obscure. The hypothesized result of this experiment was as follows: H1: Participants will exhibit greater self-control depletion, in the form of a greater reduction in time spent squeezing the handgrip, after having read the screenplay compared to participants who viewed the same content in the video clip.

15

Method Participants. Eighty-seven undergraduate students (83.9% female) who had previously reported that English was their first language and who were enrolled in introductory psychology courses at Ryerson University were offered course credit in exchange for participating in this study. Participant ages ranged from 17-43 (M = 20.5, SD = 4.59). Participants were recruited using an online sign-up system and the study was advertised as an experiment investigating the relationship between attitudes, personality and media. The experiment was completed in individual, hour-long sessions. Eight participants were excluded from analysis or did not provide the data required for analysis because of non-compliance with instructions, lapses in consciousness during the experiment or because they reported slipping of the handgrip during measurement. Procedure. Participants were told that the first part of the study consisted of a physiological measure of stamina. They were instructed to squeeze a solid rubber eraser between the handles of the handgrip for as long as they could comfortably do so. This initial measure provided an individual self-control baseline for each participant that could be used for evaluating self-control performance subsequent to the media consumption task. Participants` performance was monitored by the experimenter and timed using a stop watch, although no feedback was provided to participants until the end of the experiment. Next, participants were seated at a computer and were instructed to either watch the film or read from the screenplay presented on a computer monitor as though they were watching or reading in their spare time. Participants were left alone in the experiment room while they consumed the media and after thirty minutes the computer program stopped them and instructed them to notify the experimenter that they had finished with the media. At this point the experimenter returned and informed participants that they would again have their stamina measured in order to achieve a more 16

reliable statistic. Immediately after the second self-control measure, participants completed the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (Watson, Clark & Tellegen, 1988, appendix A) on the computer, as well
as two questions that assessed their comprehension of the video and screenplay`s plot, demographic information, and a suspicion probe. When participants finished all questions they were debriefed and dismissed.

Results and Discussion A two (video or screenplay) by two (self-control baseline or self-control after media exposure) analysis of variance (ANOVA), with repeated measures on the second factor, was conducted in order to test the hypothesis that reading would cause a greater depletion in self-control as indexed by time spent squeezing the handgrip. Figure 1 graphically represents the calculated means from this experiment. A main effect of time of measurement was observed, F(1, 77) = 11.99, p = .001, p2 = .135, indicating that participants` self-control decreased from baseline (M = 71 seconds, SE = 6.5) subsequent to media exposure (M = 58 seconds, SE = 5.4). While there was no main effect of media condition, F(1, 77) = 0.63, p = .632, p2 = .003, these main effects were qualified by a significant interaction, F(1, 77) = 5.29, p = .024, p2 = .064. In order to confirm that this interaction supported the hypothesis that reading would lead to the greater reduction in selfcontrol, simple effects tests were conducted for differences in self-control within the separate media conditions. While participants assigned to watch the film clip did not exhibit a significant decrease in self-control from baseline (M = 69 seconds, SE = 9.2) subsequent to the media exposure (M = 65 seconds, SE = 7.6), F(1, 77) = 0.69, p = .410, those who read the screenplay did display a significant reduction in self-control from baseline (M = 72 seconds, SE = 9.4) subsequent to reading (M = 51 seconds, SE = 7.8), F(1, 77) = 16.39, p < .001. This indicates that although watching the video clip

17

did not significantly deplete participants` self-control, reading the same information for the same amount of time did significantly deplete participants` state level of self-control. Figure 1. Handgrip persistence (repeated measure) by condition.

repeated measure by condition
85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 Before media exposure After media exposure

Handgrip Persistence

Mean Time (seconds)

Watching Reading

The Positive and Negative Affect Scale was administered in order to determine whether the observed effect could be explained as a result of emotional differences resulting from exposure to either the film or its screenplay. Although participants did not report any differences in negative affect depending on what media condition they were assigned to, t(77) = .181, p = .857, those assigned to the film condition did report experiencing greater positive emotions than did participants in the reading condition, t(77) = 2.313, p = .023. Therefore, reported positive emotions were statistically controlled for, using a multiple linear regression procedure, to determine whether the experimental manipulation explained significant variance in self-control depletion (handgrip persistence before media exposure minus persistence after media exposure) once emotional differences were accounted for. As indicated by the ANOVA analysis above, the experimental condition was a significant predictor of self-control depletion, with participants in the reading condition reducing their persistence on the handgrip measure by 16 seconds more than participants 18

in the video condition b = 16.7, p = .024. This relationship was essentially unchanged by adding positive emotions into the multiple regression equation, producing a R square change of zero. Furthermore, positive emotion did not significantly predict self-control depletion by itself, b = -.312, p = .61, or when entered into the multiple regression equation with the experimental manipulation, b = .033, p = .95. As well, a tolerance score of .935 and a variance inflation factor of 1.07 indicated that there was no evidence of multicollinearity between experimental condition and self-reported positive emotion. Therefore it was concluded that the experimental manipulation explained the decrease in self-control independently of positive emotion. In an attempt to filter out those participants who were not genuinely engaged with the media, two multiple choice questions probing knowledge of the plot were posed to participants. These questions were answered correctly by 86.1% and 94.9% of participants, respectively. Neither removing those participants that answered both questions incorrectly nor removing those participants that answered either question incorrectly diminished the interaction effect observed in either the ANOVA or ANCOVA. Therefore the null hypothesis that different media do not differentially deplete self-control was rejected and H1 was accepted as the most likely alternative. In other words, Study 1 suggests that watching a video requires, and thus depletes, less self-control than does reading, even when the content of the two media is held constant. Limitations of Study 1 include questions about ecological validity and the absence of a control condition. In an effort to minimize differences between conditions, the reading condition consisted of a screenplay presented on the same computer screen which displayed the video clip to participants in the other condition. This experimental control came at the cost of ecological validity, however, as screenplays are not common reading material and many people prefer to read printed text to avoid eye strain. Both of these features of the reading condition

19

may have added to the self-control required to read and any follow-up studies should probably aim to enhance ecological validity by using content written in prose and printed on paper, now that a more rigorously controlled experiment has been conducted. It should also be noted that the absence of an appropriate control condition means that although conclusions can be drawn about the relative levels of self-control required for watching video and reading, estimates of absolute levels of self-control required for each activity remain undetermined. Study 2--Correlating Quotidian Media Consumption with Trait Self-Control In addition to generating evidence that reading and video watching require different amounts of self-control, this research project also sought to discover if there is a long-term relationship between habitual consumption of these media and individuals` levels of trait self-control. In order to determine whether self-control and media consumption patterns were related in individuals` everyday lives, an internet survey was conducted asking people about their trait level of self-control and their media consumption habits. According to evidence from the literature and Study 1, reading requires more self-control than does watching video. Moreover, the literature suggests that exerting self-control habitually over time eventually leads to increases in trait self-control. Based on this evidence, two hypotheses were generated concerning the results of this survey. H2: habitual video watching would be negatively correlated with trait self-control and H3: habitual reading would be positively correlated with trait self-control. As there is no reason to believe that video delivered by different technologies (e.g. television, cinema, internet) would be related to self-control in unique ways, participants were asked about their total video viewing time regardless of how or where that video was viewed. Therefore, any reference to television below refers to all video sources. Similarly, participants were asked about their total

20

time spent reading, irrespective of whether the text was presented in a book, newspaper, magazine or electronic device. Method Participants. Assuming that undergraduates likely exhibit media consumption patterns that differ from the general population--they read out of requirement a great deal more than the population as a whole and are less likely to own televisions, especially in their first year when they are living in residence--the introductory psychology participant pool was not considered an ideal population for such an investigation. Instead, this study recruited participants living in the United States from Amazon.com`s Mechanical Turk (MTurk) worker pool by offering $1 in exchange for completing the survey questions. MTurk is an efficient tool for collecting high quality data and compensating participants online (Paolacci, Chandler, & Ipeirotis, 2010; Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling, in press). Responses were collected from three hundred ninety-five participants from the MTurk worker pool (59.1% female). The age of the sample ranged between 18-67 with an average of 31.45 years (SD = 10.33) and Caucasians were not overrepresented, composing 76.2% of the sample, compared to 72.4% of the US population (US Census, 2010). Seven participants that reported watching television and reading for more than 20 hours per day were considered to be anomalies and were excluded from the analysis. Procedure. In order to get a more reliable and valid measure of quotidian time spent watching television and reading, two separate self-report measures were used. Participants were first asked to estimate the average amount of television and text they consumed in a typical week and then how much they had actually consumed in the previous three days. Both these methodologies of global estimation and recent consumption recall have been shown to have adequate validity for habitual television viewing compared to more precise measures such as diary logs and electronic 21

monitoring, although people tend to slightly underreport their actual time spent viewing television with these estimates (Clark, et al., 2008; Matton, et al., 2007; Otten, Littenberg & Harvey-Berino, 2010). Using recalled consumption during the past three days compliments global time use estimates because memory of the previous days` activities are not as biased by social desirability or reliance on heuristics (Robinson & Godbey, 1999). Because there is no theoretical reason to anticipate that specific technologies delivering video (e.g. television versus cinema) or text (e.g. reading the newspaper versus reading online blogs) will affect the relationship with self-control, participants were asked to estimate the time they spend watching all sources of video and reading. The survey was conducted on a Thursday and Friday at the end of September in order to avoid two potential sources of error variance. First, it was considered important to avoid the summer holidays when many people take their vacations and television stations mostly show reruns as this could cause media consumption patterns to differ from the rest of the year. Second, to avoid introducing systematic error variance into the data due to the fact that Americans watch different amounts of television on different days of the week, H(6) = 157.50, p < .001 (Kruskal-Wallis test of data from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009), weekends had to be excluded from the 3-day recall measure of television time (see figure 2 for American Time Use Survey data medians of hours spent viewing television by day of the week). Monday to Friday, however, there is no statistical difference in the amount of television Americans watch, H(4) = 6.7, p = .14 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009), allowing us to combine participants who were recruited on Thursday with those recruited on Friday.

22

Figure 2. American Time Use Survey (ATUS) medians of the number of hours spent watching television in 2009 as a function of day of the week.

N.b. Medians are reported because the data are not normally distributed. Prior to the measures of media consumption, participants were administered the Brief SelfControl Scale (Tangney et al., 2004, appendix B) as a measure of their trait self-control. This instrument has been demonstrated to have good reliability and validity and has been used in a number of studies of trait self-control (e.g., Duckworth et al. 2005; Bertrams & Dickhäuser, 2009). Due to the fact that this scale is correlated with socially desirable responding (Tangney et al., 2004), participants were subsequently asked to complete a short form of the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale (Crowne & Marlowe, 1960, appendix B) so that these scores could be partialled out from the variance between daily media use and trait self-control. Results and Discussion Consistent with the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics` most recent ATUS (2009), self-reports of time spent watching television and reading were not normally distributed and exhibited a strong positive skew and leptokurtosis (see table 1 for reported statistics of data distribution). Log, square

23

root and inverse transformations were attempted, but none successfully normalized the data`s distribution due to a large number of participants reporting no time spent with either television or text. Additionally, scores on the Self-Control Scale were normally distributed, so even if transforming the media consumption data had lead to an approximation of a Gaussian distribution for media exposure, performing these transformations on the trait self-control data would have been counterproductive for the self-control variable. Therefore a mixture of parametric and nonparametric statistical tests were carried out to interpret the data. Table 1. Statistics describing the distribution of the survey data obtained in study 2. Shapiro-Francia W' (395) .857** .844** .906** .791** Skew (z) 17.03** 14.69** 12.20** 20.98** Kurtosis (z) 35.41** 16.68** 14.07** 43.13**

Estimate of weekly TV Estimate of weekly reading Estimate of TV during previous 3 days Estimate of reading during previous 3 days ** p < .001

As evidence of the validity of the current research`s estimates of the time participants spent watching television and reading, these estimates were compared with ATUS figures of typical American media consumption patterns from 2009. In 2009 the ATUS collected data from a nationally representative sample of over thirteen thousand Americans on how they had spent their time the previous day using a computer-assisted time-diary telephone interview, making it an extremely accurate estimate of the American population`s time use. If the sample in the current data reports media consumption patterns that reflect the typical pattern of the American population, then we can be more confident that the sample`s estimates accurately represent their actual media consumption behaviour. In order to compare the weekly estimates from the current research with 24

the daily statistics provided by ATUS, the global estimates of time typically spent viewing television and reading per week were divided by seven to create an estimate of average daily time expenditure. Likewise, the 3-day recall measure was divided by three. The global estimate was compared with ATUS data averaged across everyday of the week since participants` estimates of time spent in a typical week should have included weekends. In contrast, the 3-day recall measure was only compared with averaged weekday ATUS data because no weekends were included in days covered by the 3-day recall measure by design. Figure 3 shows histograms representing the distribution of the data obtained in this study compared to the appropriate data from the ATUS for television viewing and figure 4 shows histograms for reading.

25

Figure 3. Histograms comparing data distributions of the present study with the ATUS for television viewing.

26

Figure 4. Histograms comparing data distributions of the present study with the ATUS for television reading.

Mann-Whitney nonparametric tests were used to compare the present survey results to ATUS data because it was impossible to find a transformation that would adequately normalise both datasets. For the global estimates, Mann-Whitney nonparametric tests revealed that while participants in the current study did not differ in their estimates of the number of hours they spent 27

watching television per day (Mdn = 2.14 hours) compared to the ATUS data (Mdn = 2.17 hours), U = 2.63 x 106, Z = -0.25, p = .98, they estimated that they did significantly more hours of leisure reading per day (Mdn = 0.86 hours) than the typical American (Mdn = 0.00 hours), U = 8.33 x 105, Z = 29.83, p < .001. The same comparison was made with the 3-day recall data and ATUS weekday data, producing similar results: there was no statistical difference between the television viewing hours reported by this study`s participants (Mdn = 1.83 hours) and ATUS weekday television time (Mdn = 2.00 hours), U = 1.30 x 106, Z = -0.36, p = .72 but participants in the present study again reported reading more per day (Mdn = 1.33 hours) than the Average American (Mdn = 0.00 hours), U = 3.43 x 105, Z = 30.9, p < .001. Although it is certainly possible that the participants recruited for the present study do in fact spend more time reading per day than the average American, it is also possible that this difference reflects the relative difficulty of estimating time spent reading compared to time spent watching television. Whereas reading can be started and stopped at any time at the reader`s discretion, television shows that regularly appear at the same time each week for either thirty minutes or an hour facilitate accurate recall and time estimation. In any event, while the discrepancy in the reading data suggests exercising caution in interpretations of these results, the similarity between both the global estimate and the 3-day recall of time spent watching television with American population statistics gives us greater confidence in the validity of these estimates in subsequent analyses. Nonparametric tests of correlation confirmed that the global estimates of media consumption and the 3-day recall measures were highly correlated for both television,  = .67, p < .001, and reading  = .78, p < .001. Therefore these two measures of media consumption were averaged to create composite indexes of quotidian television viewing and reading for use in subsequent analysis. The Brief Self-Control Scale (Tangey, et al., 2004) demonstrated high reliability in our sample ( = .861), suggesting that the data were of sufficient quality to proceed with analyses. In 28

testing for a correlation between habitual television consumption and trait self-control, both nonparametric,  = -.12, p = .016 and parametric tests, r = -.10, p < .046, revealed a weak but statistically significant negative relationship between television consumption and trait self-control. This relationship remained significant when socially desirable responding was controlled for, r = -.12, p = .022. In contrast, reported habitual reading was uncorrelated with trait self-control according to both nonparametric,  = -.015, p = .767, and parametric statistics, r = .015, p = .765, and controlling for socially desirable responding did not change this, r = .004, p = .936. Thus the null hypothesis for H2 was rejected and it was concluded that there was a negative relationship between habitual television watching and trait self-control. The null hypothesis for H3 could not be rejected, however, so it was not possible to conclude if there was a relationship between habitual reading and trait selfcontrol. It is difficult to assess the import of the findings of Study 2. While the relationship between habitual television watching and self-control is statistically significant, it is small enough to be considered potentially inconsequential (Kramer, et al., 2003). This is especially the case considering that both variables undoubtedly share method variance because they are both based on self-report from the same individual. That being said, the relationship between television and self-control persists when individual differences in socially desirable responding are controlled for, suggesting that at least the most obvious confound is unlikely to explain this covariance. Thus before sound conclusions about the real world relationship between television and trait self-control may be drawn, further study is needed. Specifically, research involving time diaries of television viewing would help to both improve the validity of the television exposure variable and reduce shared method variance. The lack of any evidence for a relationship between reading and self-control is also difficult to interpret. One possibility is that the amount of self-control required for reading is too small to

29

exhibit a noticeable relationship with trait self-control. Although Study 1 demonstrated that reading requires more self-control than does watching television, which appeared to require almost no selfcontrol, the lack of a control condition in Study 1 precludes drawing any conclusions about the absolute magnitude of self-control required for reading. Thus it is possible that although reading requires greater self-control than does watching television, it still only requires a moderate amount of self-control relative to other, more demanding activities. If this were the case, it is conceivable that habitual reading has no relation to trait self-control because it requires relatively average amounts of self-control exertion. While the frequency of participation in activities that demand large amounts of self-control, like following a personal study, fiscal or exercise regimen (Oatten & Cheng, 2006a, 2006b, 2007), are positively correlated with trait self-control because they train and make the relevant brain areas more efficient, reading may not require sufficient self-control to have this effect. On the other hand, although frequency of participation in activities that require almost no selfcontrol, such as television, may be negatively correlated with trait self-control because they lead to self-control atrophy, supplant more self-control intensive activities or are simply more attractive to individuals who have little trait self-control to begin with, reading may require too much self-control to have this effect. Therefore, it is possible that habitual reading simply has no effect on trait selfcontrol. The other, more tangible possibility is that the data from the present study are flawed and have produced a type II error by failing to capture a relationship that actually exists. There are two reasons that this is a distinct possibility. The first pertains to the evidence presented above that calls into question the validity of the self-reported measure of reading in Study 2. Participants in Study 2 reported reading significantly more than the American population, from which this sample was drawn, suggesting that either the measure or the sample was biased. If this were the sole source of error, then the same time diary method suggested for television viewing estimation, possibly in 30

combination with more sophisticated sampling techniques, would probably provide ample remedy. A second, more challenging flaw with the data reflects a much wider social trend, however. As graphically illustrated in figure 4, the infrequency with which the American population reads makes a restriction in range of habitual reading almost unavoidable in samples of natural behaviour. With so many people reporting that they do not read at all, and so few reporting that they read a good deal, there is very little variance in reading frequency and thus it is very difficult to observe any significant covariance with any other variable. In order to fix this problem either special populations of avid readers need to be sought out and compared with the average population or participants need to be assigned reading in a longitudinal experimental study. General Discussion The present investigation was intended to serve as a preliminary exploration of the relationship between self-control and media exposure. A burgeoning literature demonstrates that self-control is an influential personality trait that is positively correlated with a wide range of positive life outcomes. Given that Americans and Canadians spend so much of their time watching television, it is of interest to determine whether this pervasive behaviour is related to this important dimension of individual differences. As was hypothesized, Study 1 provides evidence that reading depletes individuals` limited self-control resource to a greater degree than does watching television. Although one study is certainly insufficient to draw firm conclusions, this finding is consistent with the demands that meaningfully engaging with text and television place on attention control. Attention control is a central domain of self-control, so because reading requires more attention control than does watching television, it results in more self-control depletion. Future study of the effect of reading

31

and watching television on self-control should focus on ecological validity in order to exclude any of the laboratory artifice from Study 1 as potential confounds. The findings from Study 2 are more ambiguous because the small effect size and the null effect. Nevertheless, the negative correlation between habitual television consumption and trait selfcontrol was consistent with the a priori hypothesis and the findings from Study 1. If watching television is an activity which requires little self-control, then habitual television consumption should be negatively correlated with trait self-control. There are a number of potential explanations for this relationship but the present evidence is inconclusive in deciding between them and further study is therefore proposed. The most satisfactory way to address the questions posed and the problems encountered in the present research would be to conduct longitudinal research. This would involve using time diaries to track participants` media consumption over a specified period. Time diaries would increase the validity of the measure of media consumption and would also help to minimize shared method variance with self-control measures. In order to get a more even distribution of time spent reading, special populations might be sought out by recruiting through libraries, bookstores or other locations where frequent readers are likely to congregate. Mediating variables that might help to illuminate the mechanism underlying any discovered relationships could include measures of compulsive media consumption and satisfaction with personal media consumption habits. These potential mediators would help to reveal the extent to which preference, decision-making quality and compulsive behaviour explain the relationship between trait self-control and media consumption. Such a study would still not be able to verify whether self-control was causing media consumption patterns or vice-versa, however, so an additional longitudinal study in which participants are randomly assigned to consume different levels of text and television would be necessary for a final conclusion.

32

Previous studies (Oatten & Cheng, 2006a, 2006b, 2007) have used a two week intervention period and found that significant changes to self-control resulted. Not only would such a study be able to determine the causal direction of the relationship, but it would also avoid the problems caused by the distribution of media consumption patterns in the general public. Thus, although the relationship between trait self-control and habitual media consumption patterns remains ambiguous, this investigation has produced preliminary evidence suggesting the existence of this relationship and a clear plan for further study has been outlined. Given the explanatory power of the self-control construct in predicting a wide range of positive life outcomes, as well as the large proportion of time that North Americans spend with media, future research on this question may be warranted. If convincing evidence of a significantly sized relationship between self-control and habitual media consumption patterns could be found, then this could enhance our understanding of the environmental aetiology of trait self-control as well as providing easily accessible remedial actions for improving self-control in individuals.

33

Appendix A State Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (Watson, Clark & Tellegen, 1988) This scale consists of a number of words that describe different feelings and emotions. Read each item and then mark the appropriate answer in the space next to that word. Indicate to what extent you feel this way right now, that is, at the present moment. Use the following scale to record your answers. 1 Very slightly or not at all 2 A little 3 Moderately 4 Quite a bit 5 Extremely

_________ Interested _________ Distressed _________ Excited _________ Upset _________ Strong _________ Guilty _________ Scared _________ Hostile _________ Enthusiastic _________ Proud

_________ Irritable _________ Alert _________ Ashamed _________ Inspired _________ Nervous _________ Determined _________ Attentive _________ Jittery _________ Active _________ Afraid

34

Appendix B Self-Control Scale (Tangney et al., 2004) Using the scale provided, please indicate how much each of the following statements reflects how you typically are. Not at all  Very Much 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5

* 1. (R) (R) (R) * 2. * 3. * 4. 5. (R) * 6. 7. (R) (R) (R) (R) (R) 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. * 13. (R) 14. 15. (R) (R) 16. * 17. 18. (R) (R) 19. 20.

I am good at resisting temptation. I have a hard time breaking bad habits I am lazy. I say inappropriate things. I never allow myself to lose control. I do certain things that are bad for me, if they are fun. People can count on me to keep on schedule. Getting up in the morning is hard for me. I have trouble saying no. I change my mind fairly often. I blurt out whatever is on my mind. People would describe me as impulsive. I refuse things that are bad for me. I spend too much money. I keep everything neat. I am self-indulgent at times. I wish I had more self-discipline. I am reliable. I get carried away by my feelings. I do many things on the spur of the moment.

35

(R)

21. * 22.

I don`t keep secrets very well. People would say that I have iron self-discipline. I have worked or studied all night at the last minute. I`m not easily discouraged. I`d be better off if I stopped to think before acting. I engage in healthy practices. I eat healthy foods. Pleasure and fun sometimes keep me from getting work done. I have trouble concentrating. I am able to work effectively toward long-term goals. Sometimes I can`t stop myself from doing something, even if I know it is wrong.

1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5

(R)

23. 24.

(R)

25. 26. 27.

(R) (R)

* 28. * 29. * 30.

(R)

* 31.

(R) (R) (R) (R)

* 32. 33. 34. 35. 36.

I often act without thinking through all the alternatives. I lose my temper too easily. I often interrupt people. I sometimes drink or use drugs to excess. I am always on time.

1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5 1--2--3--4--5

(R) *

Reversed items. 13 Items included in the Brief Self-Control Measure.

36

Appendix C Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale: Short Form (Strahan & Gerbasi, 1972) Listed below are a number of statements concerning personal attitudes and traits. Read each item and decide whether the statement is true or false as it pertains to you personally. (F) (T) (T) (T) (F) (F) (F) (T) (T) (T) 11. I like to gossip at times. 15. There have been occasions when I took advantage of someone. 16. I`m always willing to admit it when I make a mistake. 17. I always try to practice what I preach. 19. I sometimes try to get even rather than forgive and forget. 22. At times I have really insisted on having things my own way. 23. There have been occasions when I felt like smashing things. 25. I never resent being asked to return a favour. 26. I have never been irked when people expressed ideas very different from my own. 33. I have never deliberately said something that hurt someone`s feelings.

37

References Anderson, D.R., Collins, P.A., Schmitt, K.L. & Jacobvitz, R.S. (1996). Stressful life events and television viewing. Communication research, 23, 243-260. Baker, T.B., Piper, M.E., McCarthy, D.E., Majeskie, M.R. & Fiore, M.C. (2004). Addiction motivation reformulated: An affective processing model of negative reinforcement. Psychological Review, 111, 33-51. Baddeley, A. (1996). Exploring the central executive. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A, 5-28. Bandura, A. (1991). Social cognitive theory of self-regulation. Organizational Behaviour and Human Decision Processes, 50, 248-287. Baumeister, R.F., Heatherton, T.F. & Tice, D.M. (1994). Losing control: How and why people fail at selfregulation. San Diego: Academic Press. Baumeister, R.F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M & Tice, D.M. (1998). Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1252-1265. Baumeister, R.F., Gailliot, M.T. & Tice, D.M. (2009). Free willpower: A limited resource theory of volition, choice, and self-regulation. In E. Morsella, J.A. Bargh & P.M. Gollwitzer (Eds.), Oxford handbook of human action (487-508). Toronto: Oxford University Press. Baumeister, R.F. & Alquist, J.L. (2009). Is there a downside to good self-control? Self and Identity, 8, 115-130.

38

Bellieni, C.V., Cordelli, D.M., Raffaelli, M., Ricci, B., Morgese, G. & Buonocore, G. (2006). Analgesic effect of watching TV during venipuncture. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 91, 1015-1017. Bertrams, A. & Dickhäuser, O. (2009). High-school students` need for cognition, self-control capacity, and school achievement: Testing a mediation hypothesis. Learning and Individual Differences, 19, 135-138. Bray, S.R., Ginis, K.A.M., Hicks, A.L. & Woodgate, J. (2008). Effects of self-regulatory strength depletion on muscular performance and EMG activation. Psychophysiology, 45, 337-343. Buhrmester, M.D., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S.D. (in press). Amazon`s Mechanical Turk: A new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science. Campbell, B.A., Wood, G. & McBride, T. (1997). Origins of orienting and defensive responses: An evolutionary perspective. In P.J. Lang, R.F. Simons & M. Balaban (Eds.), Attention and orienting: Sensory and motivational processes (41-68). Hilssdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Carver, C.S. & Scheier, M.F. (1981). Attention and self-regulation: A control theory approach to human behaviour. New York: Springer-Verlag. Chory, R.M. & Banfield, S. (2009). Media dependence and relational maintenance in interpersonal relationships. Communication Reports, 22, 41-53. Clark, B.K., Sugiyama, T., Healy, G.N., Salmon, J., Dunstan, D.W. & Owen, N. (2008). Validity and reliability of measures of television viewing time and other non-occupational sedentary behaviour of adults: A review. Obesity Reviews, 10, 7-16.

39

Coen, J. & Coen, E. (June 4, 2007) A serious man. Retrieved from http://www.coenbrothers.net/scripts/aseriousman.pdf Coen, J. & Coen, E. (Producers), & Coen J. & Coen, E. (Directors). (2009). A serious man [Motion picture]. United States: Focus Features. Conger, J. (1956). Reinforcement theory and the dynamics of alcoholism. Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 17, 296-305. Conners, F.A. (2009). Attentional control and the simple view of reading. Reading and writing, 22, 591613. Crowne, D.P. & Marlowe, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability independent of psychopathology. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 24, 349-354. Csikszentmihalyi, M. & Graef, R. (1980). The experience of freedom in daily life. American Journal of Community Psychology, 8, 401-414. Daneman, M. & Carpenter, P.A. (1980). Individual difference in working memory and reading. Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behaviour, 19, 450-466. Fabrykant, M., & Pacella, B. (1948). Labile diabetes: Electroencephalographic status and effect of anticonvulsive therapy. Annals of Internal Medicine, 29, 860-877. Forster, S. & Lavie, N. (2009). Harnessing the wandering mind: The role of perceptual load. Cognition, 111, 345-355. Freud, S. (1930). Civilization and its discontents. London: Hogarth.

40

Frey, B.S., Benesch, C. & Stutzer, A. (2007). Does watching TV make us happy? Journal of Economic Psychology, 28, 283-313. Gailliot, M.T., Schmeichel, B.J. & Baumeister, R.F. (2006). Self-regulatory processes defend against the threat of death: Effects of self-control depletion and trait self-control on thoughts and fears of dying. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 49-62. Gailliot, M.T. & Baumeister, R.F. (2007). The physiology of willpower: linking blood glucose to selfcontrol. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11, 303-327. Gailliot, M.T. & Baumeister, R.F. (2007). Self-regulation and sexual restraint: Dispositionally and temporarily poor self-regulatory abilities contribute to failures at restraining sexual behaviour. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 173-186. Gailliot, M.T., Baumeister, R.F., DeWall, C.N., Maner, J.K., Plant, E.A., Tice, D., Brewer, L.E. & Schmeichel, B.J. (2007). Self-control relies on glucose as a limited energy source: Willpower is more than a metaphor. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 325-336. Giambra, L.M. (1989). Task-unrelated thought frequency as a function of age: A laboratory study. Psychology and Aging, 4, 136-143. Greenberg, J.L., Lewis, S.E. & Dodd, D.K. (1999). Overlapping addictions and self-esteem among college men and women. Addictive Behaviors, 24, 565-571. Greemwood, D.N. (2008). Television as escape from self: Psychological predictors of media involvement. Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 414-424. Greenwood, D.N. & Long, C.R. (2009). Mood specific media use and emotion regulation: Patterns and individual differences. Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 616-621. 41

Grüsser, S.M., Thalemann, R. & Griffiths, M.D. (2007). Excessive computer game playing: Evidence for addiction and aggression? CyberPsychology & Behavior, 10, 290-293. Harris, K.J., Golbeck, A.L., Cronk, N.J., Catley, D., Conway, K. & Williams, K.B. (2009). Timeline follow-back versus global self-reports of tobacco smoking: A comparison of findings with nondaily smokers. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 23, 368-372. Henning, B. & Vorderer, P. (2001). Psychological escapism: Predicting the amount of television viewing by need for cognition. Journal of Communication, 51, 100-120. Hejak, P. (1989). Breath holding and success in stopping smoking: What does breath holding measure? International Journal of the Addictions, 24, 633-639. Inzlicht, M. & Gutsell, J.N. (2007). Running on empty: Neural signals for self-control failure. Psychological Science, 18, 933-937. Juster, F.T. (1985). Preferences for Work and Leisure. In F.T. Juster & F.P. Stafford (Eds.), Time, goods, and well-being (333-351). Ann Arbor: Institute for Sociala Research, The University of Michigan. Kane, M.J., Brown, L.H., McVay, J.C., Silvia, P.J., Myin-Germeys, I. & Kwapil, T.R. (2007). For whome the mind wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study of working memory and executive control in daily life. Psychological Science, 18, 614-621. Kim, E.J., Namkoong, K., Ku, T. & Kim, S.J. (2008). The relationship between online game addiction and aggression, self-control and narcissistic personality traits. European Psychiatry, 23, 212-218.

42

Kaplan, S. & Berman, M.G. (2010). Directed attention as a common resource for executive functioning and self-regulation. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 43-57. Kramer, H.C., Morgan, G.A., Leech, N.L., Gliner, J.A., Vaske, J.J. & Harmon, R.J. (2003). Measures of clinical significance. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 42, 1524-1529. Kubey, R.W. & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Television and the quality of life: How viewing shapes everyday experience. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Kubey, R.W. & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). Television addiction is no mere metaphor. Scientific American, 286(2), 74-81. Kubey, R.W. (2009). Addiction to television: With commentary on dependence on video games and the internet. In A. Browne-Miller (Ed.), The Praeger international collection on addictions (vol. 4): Behavioral addictions from concept to compulsion (pp. 27-51). Santa Barbara: Praeger. Lane, J.D., Stabler, B., Ross, S.L., Morris, M.A., Litton, J.C., & Surwitt, R. S. (1988). Psychological predictors of glucose control in patients with IDDM. Diabetes Care, 11, 798-800. Lang, A. (1990). Involuntary attention and physiological arousal evoked by structural features and mild emotion in TV commercials. Communication Research, 17, 275-299. Lang, A., Geiger, S., Strickwerda, M. & Sumner, J. (1993). The effects of related and unrelated cuts on viewers` memory for television: A limited capacity theory of television viewing. Communication Research, 20, 4-29. LaRose, R., Lin, C.A. & Eastin, M.S. (2003). Unregulated internet usage: Addicion, habit or deficient self-regulation? Media Psychology, 5, 225-253. 43

Lee, K.C. & Perry, S.D. (2004). Student instant message use in a ubiquitous computing environment: Effects of deficient self-regulation. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48, 399-420. Lemish, D. (1987). Viewers in diapers: The early development of television viewing. In T. Lindlof (Ed.), Natural audiences: Qualitative research of media use and effects. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing. Levine, L.E., Waite, B.M. & Bowman, L.L. (2007). Electronic media use, reading, and academic distractibility in college youth. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 10, 560-566. Lustman, P.J., Frank, B.L., & McGill, J.B. (1991). Relationship of personality characteristics to glucose regulation in adults with diabetes. Psychosomatic Medicine, 53, 305-312. Lynn, R. (1966). Attention, arousal, and the orientation reaction. Oxford: Pergamon Press. Marlatt, G.A., Baer, J.S., Donovan, D.M. & Kivlahan, D.R. (1998). Addictive behaviors: Etiology and treatment. Annual Review of Psychology, 39, 223-252. Martijn, C., Alberts, H.J.E.M., Merckelbach, H., Havermans, R., Huijts, A. & De Vries, N.K. (2007). Overcoming ego depletion: The influence of exemplar priming on self-control performance. European Journal of Social Psychology, 27, 231-238. Matton, L., Wijndaele, K., Duvigneaud, N., Duquet, W., Philippaert, R., Thomis, M. & Lefevre, J. (2007). Reliability and validity of the Flemish physical activity computerized questionnaire in adults. Measurement and Evaluation, 78, 293-306. McIlwraith, R.D. (1998). I`m addicted to television`: The personality, imagination, and TV watching patterns of self-identified TV addicts. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 42, 371-387.

44

Muraven, M., Tice, D.M. & Baumeister, R.F. (1998). Self-control as limited resource: Regulatory depletion patterns. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 774-789. Muraven, M., Baumeister, R.F. & Tice, D.M. (1999). Longitudinal improvement of self-regulation through practice: Building self-control through repeated exercise. Journal of Social Psychology, 139, 446-457. Muraven, M. & Shmueli, D. (2006). The self-control costs of fighting the temptation to drink. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 20, 154-160. Muraven, M. (2010). Building self-control strength: Practicing self-control leads to improved selfcontrol performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 465-468. Oaten, M. & Cheng, K. (2006a). Longitudinal gains in self-control from regular physical exercise. British Journal of Health Psychology, 11, 717-733.\ Oaten, M. & Cheng, K. (2006b). Improved self-control: The benefits of a regular program of academic study. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 28, 1-16. Oaten, M. & Cheng, K. (2007). Improvements in self-control from financial monitoring. Journal of Economic Psychology, 28, 487-501. Otten, J.J., Littenberg, B. & Harvey-Berino, J.R. (2010). Relationship between self-report and an objective measure of television-viewing time in adults. Obesity, 18, 1273-1275. Pavlov, I.P. (1927). Conditional reflexes: An investigation of the physiological activity of the cerebral cortex. London: Wexford University Press. Pocheptsova, A., Amir, O., Dhar, R. & Baumeister, R.F. (2009). Deciding without resources: Resource depletion and choice in context. Journal of Marketing Research, 46, 344-355. 45

Paolacci, G., Chandler, J., & Ipeirotis, P. G. (2010). Running experiments on amazon mechanical turk. Judgment and Decision Making, 5(5), 411-419. Potter, R., Lang, A. & Bolls, P. (1997). Orienting responses to structural features of media. Psychophysiology, 34, Supplement 1, S72. Prabhakar, A.R., Marwah, N. & Raju, O.S. (2007). A comparison between audio and audiovisual distraction techniques in managing anxious pediatric dental patients. Journal of Indian Society of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, 25, 177-182. Reeves, B., Thorson, E., Rothschild, M., McDonald, D., Hirsch, J. & Goldstein, R. (1985). Attention to television: Intra stimulus effects of movement and scene changes on alpha variation over time. International Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 241-255. Rensink, R.A., O`Regan, J.K. & Clark, J.J. (1997). To see or not to see: The need for attention to perceive changes in scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368-373. Rethlingshafer, D. (1942). Relationship of test of persistence to other measure of continuance of activities. Journal of Abnormal Social Psychology, 37, 71-82. Robinson, J.P. & Godbey, G. (1999). Time for life: The surprising ways Americans use their time (2nd ed.). University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. Rovet, J. F., & Ehrlich, R.M. (1988). Effects of temperament on metabolic control in children with diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care, 11, 77-82. Rueda, M.R., Posner, M.I. & Rothbart, M.K. (2004). Attentional control and self-regulation. In R.F. Baumeister & K.D. Vohs (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation: Research, theory, and applications (283-300). New York: The Guilford Press. 46

Schiffrin, S.M. & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and automatic human information processing: I. Detection, search, and attention. Psychological Review, 84, 1-66. Schmeichel, B.J., Vohs, K.D. & Baumeister, R.F. (2003). Intellectual performance and ego depletion: Role of the self in logical reasoning and other information processing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 33-46. Schmeichel, B.J. & Zell, A. (2007). Trait self-control predicts performance on behavioural tests of self-control. Journal of Personality, 75, 743-756. Schooler, J.W., Reichle, E.D. & Halpern, D.V. (2005). Zoning-out during reading: Evidence for dissociations between experience and meta-consciousness. In D.T. Levin (Ed.), Thinking and seeing: Visual metacognition in adults and children (203-226). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Schroder, K.E., Johnson, C.J. & Wiebe, J.S. (2007). Interactive voice response technology applied to sexual behavior reports: A comparison of three methods. AIDS Behavior, 11, 313-232 Shek, D.T.L., Tang, V.M.Y., Lo, C.Y. (2008). Internet addiction in Chinese adolescents in Hong Kong: Assessment, profiles, and psychosocial correlates. The Scientific World Journal, 8, 776787. Simmons, R.F., Detenber, B.H., Cuthbert, B.N., Schwartz, D.D. & Reiss, J.E. (2003). Attention to television: Alpha power and its relationship to image motion and emotional content. Media Psychology, 5, 283-301. Smallwood, J., McSpadden, M. & Schooler, J.W. (2008). When attention matters: The curious incident of the wandering mind. Memory & Cognition, 36, 1144-1150.

47

Sobell, L.C. & Sobell, M.B. (1992). Timeline follow-back: A technique for assessing self-reported alcohol consumption (41-72). In R. Litten & J. Allen (Eds.). Measuring Alcohol Consumption. Totowa, NJ: The Humana Press, Inc. Sookeun, B., Ruffini, C., Mills, J.E., Douglas, A.C., Niang, M., Stepchenkova, S., Lee, S.K., Loutfi, J., Lee, J., Atallah, M. & Blanton, M. (2009). Internet addiction: Metasynthesis of 1996-2006 Quantitative Research. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 12, 203-207. Suedfeld, P., Little, B.R., Rank, A.D., Rank, D.S. & Ballard, E.J. (1986). Television and adults: Thinking, personality, and attitudes. In T.M. Williams (Ed.), The impact of television: A natural experiment in three communities (361-390). Orlando, FA: Academic Press. Tangney, J.P., Baumeister, R.F. & Boone, A.G. (2004). High self-control predicts good adjustment, less pathology, better grades and interpersonal success. Journal of Personality, 72, 271-324. Thornton, G.R. (1939). A factor analysis of tests designed to measure persistence. Psychological Monographs, 51, 1-42. Thorson, E. & Lang, A. (1992). Effects of television video graphics and lecture familiarity on adult cardiac orienting responses and memory. Communication Research, 19, 346-369. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, American Time Use Survey (2007a). Time spent in detailed primary activities and percent of the civilian population engaging in each detailed primary activity category, averages per day by sex, 2007 annual averages (Table A-1). Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/tus/tables/a1_2007.pdf U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, American Time Use Survey (2007b). Leisure time on an average day. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/tus/charts/chart9.pdf

48

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, American Time Use Survey (2008a). Time spent in detailed primary activities and percent of the civilian population engaging in each detailed primary activity category, averages per day by sex, 2008 annual averages (Table A-1). Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/tus/tables/a1_2008.pdf U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, American Time Use Survey (2008b). Activity summary file [Data file]. Retrieved from ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/tus/atussum_2008.zip U.S. Census. 2010. 2010 Census Data. Retrieved from http://2010.census.gov/2010census/data/index.php
Vohs, K.D., Schmeichel, B.J., Nelson, N.M., Baumeister, R.F., Twenge, J.M. & Tice, D.M. (2008). Making choices impairs subsequent self-control: A limited-resource account of decision making, selfregulation, and active initiative. Personality Processes and Individual Differences, 94, 883-898.

Vos, S.H., Gunter, T.C., Schriefers, H. & Friederici, A.D. (2001). Syntactic parsing and working memory: The effects of syntactic complexity, reading span and concurrent load. Language and Cognitive Processes, 16, 65-103. Walker, J.L. (1980). Changes in EEG rhythms during television viewing ­ Preliminary comparisons with reading and other tasks. Perceptual and motor skills, 51, 255-261. Wang, Z., Sun, L. & Chen, A. (2009). The efficacy of non-pharmacological methods of pain management in school age children receiving venepuncture in a paediatric department: a randomized controlled trial of audiovisual distraction and routine psychological intervention. Swiss medical weekly, 138, 579-584.

49

Watson, D., Clark, L.A. & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063-1070. T.M. Williams (Ed.), The impact of television: A natural experiment in three communities (361-390). Orlando, FA: Academic Press. Wood, R.T.A. (2008). Problems with the concept of video game addiction: Some case study examples. International Journal of Mental Health Addiction, 6, 169-178. Young, K.S. (2009). Assessment and treatment of internet addiction. In A. Browne-Miller (Ed.), The Praeger international collection on addictions (vol. 4): Behavioral addictions from concept to compulsion (pp. 217-234). Santa Barbara: Praeger. Young, K. S. (2009). Online gaming addiction: Symptoms, risk factors, and treatment. In A. Browne-Miller (Ed.), The Praeger international collection on addictions (vol. 4): Behavioral addictions from concept to compulsion (pp. 321-337). Santa Barbara: Praeger.
Zillmannm, D. (1982). Television viewing and arousal. In D. Pearl, L. Bouthilet & J. Lazar (Eds.), Television and behavior: Ten years of scientific progress and implications for the eighties (vol. 2): Technical reviews (53-67). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

50

