Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Pre-service education : preparing teachers for english language learners in the classroom
Nina Lee
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Education Commons Recommended Citation
Lee, Nina, "Pre-service education : preparing teachers for english language learners in the classroom" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 593.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

PRE-SERVICE EDUCATION: PREPARING TEACHERS FOR ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS IN THE CLASSROOM

by

Nina Lee B.A., Ryerson University, 2007

A Major Research Paper

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts
in the program of Early Childhood Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008

© Nina Lee 2008

PROPERTY ©F

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the
purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other

means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of
scholarly research.

Signature

in

PRE-SERVICE EDUCATION: PREPARING TEACHERS FOR ENGLISH

LANGUAGE LEARNERS IN THE CLASSROOM

© Nina Lee, 2008

Master of Arts
Early Childhood Studies Ryerson University

ABSTRACT

English language learners (ELLs) in classrooms is becoming a common occurrence with Ontario's escalating immigration trends. This influx pressures teachers who encounter barriers and inadequate training for linguistically diverse needs. Teacher education has the potential to overcome these barriers through effective ELL training. This qualitative study explores current teacher preparation practices through pre-service teachers' (PT) perspectives. This study aims to address a Canadian literature void by exploring how prepared primary-junior PTs are to teach ELLs in Southwestern Ontario. Using a structured interview, six certified graduates shared descriptive experiences, knowledge and beliefs. The findings are organized as; 1) Faculties of Education, 2) PTs' Beliefs, 3) In Future Classrooms and 4) Beyond the Classroom. Although moving towards greater ELL awareness and inclusive mindsets, there is a good indication that

well-intentioned teachers lack the competence necessary for effective classroom practice. This
exploration is an initial step towards a better understanding of teacher preparation.

Key Words: Teacher Preparation, English Language Learner (ELL), Pre-service Teacher Education, Primary-Junior Pre-service Teachers, Teacher competence, Early Childhood Teacher
Education.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The Major Research Paper (MRP) pushed my limits as it demanded for the utmost of

self-discipline, leadership, organization and commitment. However, I could not have completed

it without the support of a number of people. I would like to acknowledge the support provided
prior to and during the MRP process.

First and foremost, I thank my Supervisor, Dr. Angela Valeo for providing endless support, outstanding guidance and words of encouragement. I have sincere gratitude towards Dr. Valeo for her commitment to seeing me through to the completion of this MRP. Dr. Valeo was exceptionally insightful and consistently positive; her words of wisdom offered me strength through each stage of the process. Dr. Valeo carefully edited multiple drafts of work, which most definitely consumed a large portion of her personal time. I am grateful and appreciate her patience, direction and feedback. Thank you Dr. Angela Valeo for all that you have done to
make this experience both positive and rewarding.

I would like to thank Dr. Jason Nolan, my second reader, whose attention to detail and

meticulous editing have significantly contributed to the final MRP. I am also grateful to Dr.
Nolan for serving as a member on my research committee and offering his time and feedback
throughout this process. I would further like to thank Dr. Rachel Berman for serving as my

research committee chair. My appreciation goes out to Dr. Celina Kwan-Green, Dr. Judith Bernhard and Dr. Marni Binder for having never-ending faith in my abilities and for encouraging
me to pursue and fulfil my research aspirations.

I would also like to thank my participants for taking the time out of their busy schedules

and for making this study possible. I am grateful to my family, friends and colleagues who
showed sincere interest in my research topic and whom I could always turn to for support.

Thank you all for holding my hand through the difficult times and reminding me to take life,
one step at a time.

vn

DEDICATIONS

T. Philip J. Webster

I would like to extend my love and gratitude to Phil Webster, whose unconditional support, patience, sacrifices, and encouragement throughout this difficult journey meant the world to me.

You encouraged me to strive and indefinitely helped me achieve my vision for this study. Yet again, you have supported me through another milestone and helped me surpass another hurdle in my academic journey. For the endless comfort you provide, I am dedicating this document to
you.

Gina Lee

I also dedicate this Major Research Paper to Gina Lee; my loving big sister who keeps me

strong, enthusiastic and composed. You always are, and will always be, a source of comfort and
energy for me. Thank you for celebrating life with me and encouraging me to reach for the stars.

My Parents

My dedication and appreciation further goes out to my parents, whom believed in me since the beginning of this process. You are a great motivation and continually inspire me to follow my
dreams wholeheartedly. Your hard work and selflessness have given me many opportunities that

I would otherwise not have. I am indescribably appreciative for your generosity. Your gentle push has led me to fulfilling more then I imagined. You have been my financial, emotional and spiritual support for many years. You give me the strength, discipline and courage to proceed when faced with adversity. I am forever indebted to you for your endless support. I try my best in
everything I do, for the both of you. I love you.

IX

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Author's Declaration
Abstract

iii
v

Acknowledgements

vii

Dedication
Table of Contents
List of Tables & Appendices

ix
xi
xv

CHAPTER I: Introduction

Overview of the Issues Research Questions

1 2

Significance of the Study
Definition of Terms

2
4

CHAPTER II: Review of the Literature Pre-service Teachers' ELL Competence 5

Pre-service Teachers' Perspective
Pre-service Teachers' Attitudes Common Teacher Education Curriculums

6
7 8

Critical Learning Experiences
Gaps Re-examining the Role of Education

10
12

Graduation Requirements

13

CHAPTER III: Methodology Research Design
Protection of Human Participants
Ensuring Confidentiality

14
14
15

Recruitment

15

xi

Participant Demographics Olivia Stevenson
Katie Long Mary Densmore

17 17
18 18

Tina Goodwin
Francis Newman

19
20

Linda Cornwall Data Collection Structured Interview Questionnaire Data Analysis Authenticity and Trustworthiness Researcher's Statement

21 22 22 24 25 26

CHAPTER IV: Findings and Discussion

Teacher Preparation
Southwestern Ontario's Faculties of Education Courses and Content Pertaining to ELLs 27 27

Lessons Learned Through the Elective Course
Multicultural Education: Is Cultural Sensitivity Enough? Placement Pre-service Teachers' Beliefs

32
33 35 38

Self-Efficacy Assessment Graduating Peers

39 41 44

Myths and Misconceptions
Mandatory Course Versus Infusion

46
51

In Future Classrooms Self-Reported Future Practices: Strategies

55 55

Efficacy of Strategies
Where the Strategies Were Learned
Communication

60
61
62

xu

Special Needs: Modifications and Accommodations

67

Building Relationships
Comfort in the Classroom: Tokenism School Environment and Administration ESL Supports and Educational Assistants Beyond the Classroom: The Value of English Benefits of Multilingualism Encouraging English in Homes

68
69 71 72 76 77 78

CHAPTER V: General Discussion of Findings, Recommendations and Implications

General Discussion and Recommendations

82

Implications
Limitations to the Study Direction for Further Research

89
89 91

CHAPTER VI: Conclusion

93

APPENDICES

Appendix A: Consent Agreement
Appendix B: Cover Letter to Interview Appendix C: Structured Interview Questionnaire: Pre-Service Teacher Graduates

94
97 98

References

103

Glossary

109

xni

LIST OF TABLES & APPENDICES

Table 1: Strategies Mentioned by Pre-service Teachers & the Frequency of Reference

57

Appendix A: Consent Agreement Appendix B: Cover Letter to Interview

94 97

Appendix C: Structured Interview Questionnaire: Pre-Service Teacher Graduates

98

xv

CHAPTER I Introduction

Overview of the Issues

Ontario is the province of choice for over fifty percent of newcomers to Canada (Chui, Tran & Maheux, 2007; People for Education, 2008). Immigration continues to fuel Ontario's population growth while significantly contributing to linguistic diversity. As immigration increases, the prevalence of English language learners (ELLs) in regular classrooms will become a common occurrence. ELLs are the fastest growing segment of elementary students (Antunez, 2002; Buck, Mast, Ehlers & Franklin, 2005; Harper & de Jong, 2004). This influx pressures teachers who encounter barriers and inadequate training for the engagement of children with diverse needs. This struggle is well documented in worldwide scholarly literature. Pre-service teacher (PT) training has the potential to overcome these inclusion barriers through effective preparation which includes ELLs in the classroom. Since ELLs receive most of their instruction

in the regular classroom, it is crucial that PTs are prepared to meet the challenges. If demographic changes are not reflected in the teacher curriculum, ELLs are at risk of having their needs
neglected which may ultimately lead to failure in our schools. The intent of this study is based on the need for all programs to re-examine their core

curriculum through the perspective of their graduates to identify gaps in ELL training. These graduates will increasingly become teachers who are solely accountable for the education of ELLs (Barnes, 2006; Buck et al., 2005; Clair, 1995; Meskill, 2005). The purpose of this qualitative study is to address the Canadian context void in the literature by exploring how prepared primary-junior PTs are to teach ELLs in Southwestern Ontario. It is an exploration of

the beliefs, attitudes and perceptions held by a group of PT graduates regarding ELLs. This study

has been conducted to explore the depth, breadth and needs of teacher preparation.

1

Research questions. This qualitative study addresses the following central research

question: how prepared are primary-junior pre-service teachers to meet the needs of English
language learners? This central research question was explored and refined with the following
sub-questions:

a) How do pre-service teachers feel about teaching ELLs in their future classrooms?
b) How do pre-service teachers perceive their ELL competence?

c) What is known about ELLs? (Including second language acquisition, myths and the
learning needs of linguistically diverse children)

d) Where and how was ELL information and classroom strategies acquired?



Significance of the Study

The need to better prepare teachers for ELLs is widely recognized (Taylor & Sobel, 2003). As the number of ELLs rapidly escalates, it becomes important to explore whether the
Faculties of Education in Southwestern Ontario are effectively revamping their programs to

respond to the changing demographics. Faculties of Education are responsible for certifying and
preparing teachers who are prepared to meet the needs of linguistically diverse children. The perspectives of recent PT graduates from Southwestern Faculties of Education are explored in
this study.

The literature reviewed exemplifies the current and immediate need for this study. With

only a single Canadian study conducted on the interrelated topic of PTs and multiculturalism, it is
necessary to build on the emerging body of literature focused on PTs and ELLs within the

Canadian context. Southwestern Ontario is a prime location containing the greatest numbers of
newcomers and thus high levels of linguistic diversity (Chui, Tran & Maheux, 2007). Moreover,

since the single Canadian study produced less than promising results it is necessary to explore

other areas of diversity and teaching. This study hopes to shed some light on the status of teacher
preparation for teaching ELLs. There is an important need to carefully evaluate PTs' training and preparation prior to claiming that they are professionally equipped to address the learning needs of our changing society (Valentine, 2006). This study is also significant because the preliminary findings have constructive implications for the Faculties of Education. The results could provide insights into improving teacher preparation programs. The findings may inform curriculum planning (Pappamihiel, 2004). The input of graduates is crucial to the ongoing process of improving and updating teaching curriculum. The results from this study are also useful for teacher educators and PTs since they may relate and identify potential weaknesses in their skills or knowledge and may encourage further training in perceived areas of weakness. This study is also personally significant because of my experiences as a Canadian-bom
ELL child in Ontario. As I child I endured the negative consequences of educational

professionals who lacked knowledge in multilingual acquisition. As a result of my elementary
experiences, I lost my heritage language at a young age. It was believed that the simultaneous development of two languages was detrimental to the English language development necessary to

academically succeed in Ontario. These personal childhood experiences as well as additional scholarly findings have generated a personal and professional interest in this topic. It is of
particular importance to me that these types of situations are no longer occurring in Ontario's

education system.

Definition of Terms
Competence

Competence, or more specifically ELL competence, is defined as a classroom teacher's

ability to carry out multiple roles and responsibilities required to meet the needs of ELL
learners. This includes; planning and implementing curriculum standards,

accommodations to teaching strategies, inducing meaningful classroom engagement and
true assessments or evaluation. English Language Learner (ELL)

An English language learner refers to any child who is; in kindergarten to grade 6,
Canadian born or newly arrived, whose first language is not English or is a variety,

significantly different from that used in Ontario elementary schools and who may require
educational language supports to attain English proficiency (Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly &
Driscoll, 2005; Ontario Ministry of Education and Training, 2005).
Faculty of Education

Afaculty ofeducation is a Canadian term which is synonymous to the commonly used
American terms in the literature; Teacher Education, Pre-service Teacher Education, Teacher Preparation and Teacher Training. Regardless of the title, Faculties ofEducation provide pre-service teachers with the necessary education, experiences and training
required for certification and to effectively undertake teaching.
Pre-service Teacher (PT)

Pre-service teachers are often referred to in the literature as student teachers or teacher candidates. PTs are post-degree students enrolled in and attending a faculty of education
in pursuit of teacher certification and teacher training.
Teacher Preparation

Teacher preparation is the result of adequate and effective faculty of education

programs. For the purpose of this study, the level of preparation is determined by the
teacher's knowledge of ELLs, ELL experiences or events and ELL competence (see
competence).

CHAPTER II

Review of the Literature

Ontario has been the province of choice for more than half of the 1.1 million newcomers

to Canada in the past five years (Chui, Tran & Maheux, 2007). In the past few decades, the
foreign-born population has tripled with nearly 150 different native languages reported (Chui, Tran & Maheux, 2007; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). With the increase of immigration, ELLs have
become the fastest growing population in mainstream elementary classrooms (Antunez, 2002;

Buck, Mast, Ehlers & Franklin, 2005; Flynn & Hill, 2005; Harper & de Jong, 2004). This influx
in schools has placed pressure on classroom teachers who are not well trained to engage children with diverse needs. This struggle is well documented in scholarly literature across the globe (Aired, 1994; Flynn & Hill, 2005). Teachers require competence, self-belief, and a well-formed

education ingrained with ELL training. The curriculum must include realistic placements, faculty
and peer support, ELL strategies, reflective practice, and active efforts to confront and remove misconceptions (Barnes, 2006; Buck et al., 2005; Cruz & Patterson, 2005; Giambo & Szecsi,
2005; Mujawamariya & Mahrouse, 2004; Pappamihiel, 2004; Siwatu, 2007; Valentine, 2006).

The present review explores current literature concerning the role of PT training for

diverse classrooms, diverse children and for teaching ELLs. The objective of this review is to understand the adequacy and efficacy of teacher's ELL preparation from multiple professional
perspectives. This literature review identified the following themes; pre-service teacher's ELL competence, common teacher education curriculums, critical learning experiences, gaps reexamining the role of education, and graduation requirements.
Pre-service Teachers' ELL Competence

Many Faculties of Education are responding to the rapidly growing population of ELLs in

the classroom. This response includes new pedagogies with the intention of increasing teacher's

competence and confidence to execute practices that meet the needs of all children in the regular classroom. The central goal of teacher education is to produce classroom teachers capable of fulfilling the many roles of the profession. Unfortunately, it is well documented from many
perspectives that PTs do not feel that they possess the ability, skills or knowledge necessary to

execute successful ELL inclusion. For the purpose of this study, ELL competence is defined as
the ability to fulfil the multiple roles and responsibilities of a classroom teacher, required to meet ELL learner needs. This includes planning and implementing curriculum standards,
accommodations to teaching strategies, and true assessments or evaluation.

PTs graduate without having to develop the strategies necessary to support the academic
content development and English language development of ELLs (Buck et al., 2005; Evans,

Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). These teachers enter the field with
limited cross-cultural knowledge and lack understanding of classroom challenges (Barnes, 2006;

Buck et al., 2005; Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Harper & de Jong, 2004; Taylor & Sobel,
2003). Teachers are taught to understand diversity as mere celebrations and appreciation of differences. With limited knowledge, PTs are susceptible to misinterpreting the capabilities of ELLs (Buck et al., 2005; McLaughlin, 1992). Ineffectual core courses yield low inclusion competence, low levels of ELL sensitivity, lead to premature assumptions and blinders to the
assets that ELLs bring to the learning of all children (Pappamihiel, 2004).
Pre-service Teachers' Perspective

PTs' perspectives are crucial indicators of the gains received from their teacher training programs. Pappamihiel (2004) claims that PTs' perceptions of their self-efficacy may be the most
accurate predictor of their future classroom behaviours and for this reason it is crucial to investigate. Many PTs feel inadequately prepared to effectively teach ELLs in general classrooms
(Dianda, 1992; Flynn & Hill, 2005; Meskill, 2005; Tellez & Waxman, 2005; Youngs & Youngs,

2001). Meskill (2005) found many PTs to be unaware of their responsibilities in educating ELLs due to the lack of emphasis in training. Faculty members play a crucial role in influencing PTs'
attitudes towards ELLs. Pappamihiel (2004) calls attention to the likelihood of PTs imitating the
behaviour of those they deem as competent. Faculty are responsible for transforming PTs into inclusively minded experts dedicated to academic potential and success (Taylor & Sobel, 2003). Taylor & Sobel (2003) state that 73% of PTs identify student diversity as their greatest teaching challenge. Mujawamariya & Mahrouse (2004) provide deeper insights into this concern

as PTs critique their own multicultural education. Many programs opt for a simple 'celebration of
difference' paradigm which produce low levels of ELL competence. Although cultural inclusion and respect have been gained, PTs express a need for greater cultural content knowledge, explicit instructions with demonstrations, open discussion, practical teaching styles, problem solving techniques and opportunities to realistically implement theory (Barnes, 2006; Taylor & Sobel, 2003; Valentine, 2006). These components are believed to contribute to ELL competence, yet are not apparent in the curriculum. Without adequate ELL training, PTs remain uncertain of their ability to integrate ELL's needs with the curriculum goals, assessments and supportive teaching (Emporia State University, 1994; Flynn & Hill, 2005; Menken & Antunez, 2001; Valentine, 2006). ELLs will continue to suffer academically with teachers incompetent in these areas. Based on the perspectives of PTs currently in the literature, the future of ELLs seems problematic. Conversely, optimism exists as it can be seen in the studies of intervention

conducted by Barnes, Buck et al. (2006), Meskill (2005) and Pappamihiel (2004). These studies
contribute to the improvement of education by enhancing competence levels through increasing

the depth of knowledge, improving and contributing strategies to enhance practice.

Pre-service Teacher's Attitudes
Few studies have been conducted on attitudes towards ELLs in the classroom (Youngs &

Youngs, Jr. 2001). However, attitudes towards ELLs and their needs influence the learning

environment, teaching behaviours and the effectiveness of the academic experiences created thus
impacting ELL competence. PTs' attitudes must be explored and confronted since they are

essential to future teaching efficacy (Baker & Prys Jones, 1998). Regrettably, attitudes are often
neglected in training programs rather then being placed at the forefront of the education process.

Ideally, the exploration of personal attitudes, beliefs and biases would occur prior to field experiences to enhance awareness and sensitivity (Barnes, 2006). It is important to note that this
process is more easy to outline than implement. Programs that unknowingly choose to reinforce

stereotypes and prejudices negatively affect PTs' attitudes and expectations of ELLs in the
classroom (Barnes, 2006; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). ELLs are highly aware of these low expectations which further impound their achievement (Buck et al, 2005; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). More positively, when PTs are exposed to qualified teachers with effective ELL practices they gain positive attitudes and increased competence. Effective role models, increased exposure

and training consequently motivate positive ELL-related attitudes (Youngs & Youngs, Jr. 2001). The creation of a multicultural focus in a program, without the vital components, merely continues the perpetuation of incompetent PTs who have not developed the awareness, values or
understanding of inequity required to respond to ELLs' needs (Emporia State University, 1994;

Flynn & Hill, 2005; Taylor & Sobel, 2003; Valentine, 2006). Training programs are obligated to

fulfil their responsibility of suitably preparing teachers. The Faculties of Education are obligated and expected by society to prepare competent teachers who are able to meet the challenges of
educating diverse classroom demographics (Valentine, 2006). Common Teacher Education Curriculums

Three common teacher education curriculums, including pedagogies and approaches, are explored in the literature. There are positive features that can be taken from each model.

8

f
Culturally Responsive Teaching (CRT) focuses on training for academic success, cultural
competence and socio-political consciousness (Barnes, 2006). CRT is also known as culturally congruent/appropriate/compatible instruction or culturally relevant teaching (Pappamihiel, 2004). It is evident that this approach is centred in culturally sensitive practice. Extended placements and

courses are focused on realistic settings, family interactions and faculty debriefing (Barnes, 2006;
Pappamihiel, 2004). The benefits of CRT are; transforming attitudes/beliefs about diversity, solid cultural knowledge base, reflections on actions and interactions, implementation of ELL skills,
and internalizing roles in education (Barnes, 2006; Pappamihiel, 2004). These benefits come with

much effort since changing ingrained attitudes and beliefs is a difficult feat. An added complexity involves altering known teaching practices to include ELLs.
Training All Teachers (TAT) is focused on establishing an enhanced understanding of the

complex aspects of teaching ELLs (Meskill, 2005). Similar to CRT, TAT stresses the importance
of gently confronting ingrained myths associated with the English language and language

learning (Meskill, 2005). The major components are; field work, group workshops with followup support, peer presentations, explicit teaching of cultural tolerance, and unlearning racism (Meskill, 2005). The benefits include the following; greater understanding of issues experienced

by ELLs, increased appreciation of home experiences, practical strategies, cross-cultural empathy
and greater respect for differences. Regrettably, the TAT program maintains the lessons of most multicultural initiatives in the acceptance and respect for differences at the surface level.
The Multicultural Education (ME) curriculum is implemented in many Faculties of

Education across Canada (Mujawamariya & Mahrouse, 2004). Its major objective is to prepare

future teachers with the knowledge necessary to respond to the academic needs of all children. Multiple variations of this objective can be found in each Canadian Faculty of Education. The
purpose of this approach is to promote an inclusive and equitable education system. According to

PTs enrolled in Ottawa University's variation of the initiative, the curriculum is perceived as
lacking by not specifically targeting ELLs. An ESL course is offered as a special-interest course rather than integrated as an essential component of teacher preparation (Majawamariya &
Mahrouse, 2004).

Based on the multicultural-focused curriculums explored, many overlapping similarities and differences are evident. Although each initiative is focused on improving the competence of

PTs, none of these effectively meet its objectives. Though many gains were made in training, a
shallow understanding of ELL inclusion will continue the trend of unprepared teachers in the
field. Critical Learning Experiences

The following review identifies critical learning experiences crucial to ELL competence.

A major similarity of the curriculums explored is the deficiency in preparing teachers for

teaching ELLs. However, each curriculum contributes to a body of knowledge required for
including ELLs in all aspects of education. The following critical learning experiences were
extracted.

Field experiences with ELLs are crucial to personally understanding their needs (Barnes,

2006; Emporia State University, 1994; Pappamihiel, 2004; Valentine, 2006). Mastering
experiences with professional support is vital to ELL competence. Pappamihiel (2004) declares that mastery experiences are the most influential source in the development of self-efficacy. PTs

require exposure and opportunities for experience with ELLs (Youngs & Youngs, Jr., 2001). However, for experiences to be valuable they must be followed with faculty or peer debriefing (Barnes, 2006; Meskill, 2005). Through this dialogue, students apply learned theories to their

lived experiences which add meaning. Furthermore, as peers share their learning with others, they
gain insight into real solutions and consequences to particular behaviours (Meskill, 2005). This

10

process contributes significantly to their learning and is often overlooked in the curriculum. Discussion with colleagues is a required skill, as classroom teachers they will most definitely
need to collaborate with other professionals to create classrooms conducive to the needs of children, including ELLs (Buck et al., 2005; Emporia State University, 1994). Reflective practice is also a critical component to effective programs. Reflective practice leads to the reinterpretation of teaching, thinking and interactions with ELLs (Barnes, 2006; Buck

et al., 2005; Cruz & Patterson, 2005; Farrell, 2006). This component is oversimplified in many
programs as a passive and mindless exercise. With reflective practice, PTs can also explore their effect and role in the education system (Barnes, 2006; Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Farrell, 2006). Through thorough reflections, teachers dismantle their ingrained misconceptions which contribute to the oppression of minorities in education (Meskill, 2005). This process contributes to an increased understanding of the culture and produce cultural sensitivity required
by classroom teachers (Pappamihiel, 2004).

Many of the PTs interviewed in this study emphasized the need to be taught practical ELL strategies. Strategies include: hands-on activities, methods of encouraging cooperation, incorporating home languages and the interpretation of visuals, gestures and adapted assessments (Barnes, 2006; Buck et al., 2005; Meskill, 2005). Along with explicit instruction and

demonstration, PTs require an in-depth understanding of their purpose (Pappamihiel, 2004). It is

insufficient to provide a list of strategies without an explanation of their necessity. Thus,
coursework must be aligned with realism to uphold the professional standards required in

education (Taylor & Sobel, 2003).
The above components were identified as necessary for successful training outcomes and to maintain classroom professionalism. With the high demand in ELL competence, teachers must

be, and feel, adequately equipped to meet the challenge. Several programs are incorporating
11

many of the above components. A major flaw recognized by Valentine (2006) is the fact that these pieces are taught in elective courses rather then infused throughout. This must be addressed for teachers to understand their responsibility in teaching ELLs curriculum standards and the

English language (Harper & de Jong, 2004). This remains highly improbable for PTs untrained in
this area. Elective courses on antiracism, multiculturalism, equity and ESL must become essential requirements in Canadian teacher preparation programs (Mujawamariya & Mahrouse, 2004).
Gaps Re-examining the Role ofEducation

The low levels of ELL competence, professional insights, and the list of oversimplified learning indicate that programs are struggling to prepare PTs for classroom realities. All
programs should re-examine their core curriculum through the perspective of their graduates to

identify gaps in ELL training. These graduates will become teachers who are solely accountable
for the education of ELLs (Barnes, 2006; Buck et al., 2005; Meskill, 2005).

Reforms focused on better preparing teachers cannot be limited to a single course or left
to practicum (Meskill, 2005; Mujawamariya & Mahrouse, 2004; Taylor & Sobel, 2003). Barnes

(2006) recommends moving away from the Eurocentric assignment driven to the objective driven approach. Oppressive issues must hold a central role. Optional courses do not provide justice to

the issues in education (Barnes, 2006; Mujawamariya & Mahrouse, 2004). A cohesive systematic

change including theories of language acquisition, diversity issues and learning needs is required
(Barnes, 2006; Buck et al., 2005; Emporia State University, 1994; Giambo & Szecsi, 2005). Programs must urgently append these authentic complexities to claim or teach equity and
inclusion (Buck et al., 2005; Meskill, 2005).

Equally as important are the negative components which require removal since they taint

curriculum objectives and teaching standards. Misconceptions, biases and harmful attitudes about
teaching ELLs continue to influence the curriculum. These beliefs blame ELLs for not fitting into
12

the norms created by strict instructional paradigms (Harper & de Jong, 2004; Meskill, 2005). The
existing theoretical foundation is packed with notions that limit teachers' abilities to provide

environments and lessons for ELLs (Harper & de Jong, 2004). Mere exposure to multiculturalism
is substandard. A lack of deeper understanding leads to the misuse of accommodations, modifications and reinforces biases. Education is built on oppressive language and interpretations, with deficits and labels (Buck et al., 2005; Meskill, 2005). ELLs require
opportunities for equitable outcomes and unbiased assessments that accurately evaluate learning. Alternative assessments incorporate the use of portfolios, home languages, visuals and gestures to explain concepts. Without practical substitutes, ELLs are integrated without the instructions or

feedback required for concept learning and academic language proficiency (Cummins, 2003;
Dianda, 1992; Harper & de Jong, 2004; Valentine, 2006). Graduation Requirements

To ensure teacher quality the graduation requirements from the Faculty of Education must

be rigorous. Teacher quality is the most powerful school-related influence on students' academic

performance (Barnes, 2006). Graduation requirements must incorporate standards concerning
teacher responsibilities in the education system and the capacity to create equal-outcome
opportunities (Barnes, 2006). Pappamihiel (2004) declares a need for PTs to demonstrate their

ability to effectively teach all children prior to graduation. The responsibility of adequately
preparing teachers lies with the Faculties of Education (Buck et al., 2005; Giambo & Szecsi, 2005).

Without ELL training and corresponding graduation requirements, teachers are unqualified and
no longer ensure quality education. Many Canadian Faculties of Education have undergone

reform yet may still not meet the demands of the profession. The literature reinforces the need to

further investigate the level of ELL preparation and efficacy of PTs. This problem must be
investigated in Ontario to ensure that teacher quality is upheld on this robustly diverse province.

13

CHAPTER III
Methodology

Research Design

The central research question was best addressed using qualitative research since it is

exploratory and since no Canadian studies have been conducted on this phenomenon (Creswell,
2003). The qualitative research design allowed for the data to emerge from the participants'

responses. The participants were allowed to openly discuss their thoughts, knowledge and ideas
regarding many of the interview topics. The primary intent of the qualitative approach was to develop themes, insight and connections from the data collected (Creswell, 2003). Ethnographic case study is the particular qualitative research design used in this study.
This design is the most suitable in describing, analyzing, and interpreting a culture-sharing group

(Creswell, 2005). The culture under investigation is the culture of elementary teaching. The
participants qualify as a culture-sharing group since they interact, share patterns of behaviour

(e.g. ELL strategies implemented in the classroom and the sharing of beliefs, attitudes, truths, myths, misconceptions, and expectations) (Creswell, 2005). These behaviours and beliefs are

developed or nurtured over the period of time in pre-service education. The study of a group of
PTs from this culture can provide insight onto the larger issue of teacher preparation for teaching
ELLs. The case study aspect of the investigation is necessary since this is an in-depth exploration of a bounded system (Creswell, 2005). The Faculties of Education explored are bound by time, activity (education), demographics and physical boundaries (Creswell, 2003; Creswell, 2005).

Protection ofHuman Participants

The following were potential threats for participants that could have arisen during any

phase of this study. These issues were considered to ensure that the study was designed ethically

14

and to minimize such threats. To protect human participants and research sites, the research plans were reviewed by the Research Ethics Board of Ryerson University (REB). The ethics board also ensured that the protocols, purpose, design and procedures were compliant with high professional standards. Also mandated by the REB were strict structures for participant consent agreements.
An REB accepted consent form ensures that the participant's rights have been protected (Creswell, 2003) and that they were aware of what the study entails (please see Appendix Afar the
Consent Agreement).

This study does not use language or words that are biased, against any persons or groups, in any of its communications or written reports. The data collected was specifically described, sensitive and an accurate depiction (Creswell, 2005).

Ensuring Confidentiality

The confidentiality and anonymity of participants was ensured throughout all phases of

the study. As Creswell (2003) states, it is part of the ethical code for researchers to protect the
privacy of all participants involved in a study. To ensure this ethical code was met, the participants' names were disassociated from their responses during the recording and coding

procedures. The use of pseudonyms for individuals and places further protects the identity of all
participants (Creswell, 2003).

Recruitment
Primary-junior PT graduates were recruited using purposeful and snowball sampling

methods. All participants were recruited based on necessary characteristics that met the requirements

of the study, accessibility to the researcher and willingness to be interviewed (Del Baso & Lewis,
2001). This non-random sampling method allowed the researcher to identify PTs on the verge of

15

graduating from the primary-junior division. The researcher also attempted to recruit individuals who are reflective of a variation of educational choices and experiences to maximize perspectives. These ·
methods best serve the research purpose. Nonetheless, sampling does not interfere with the

investigation since the purpose of the procedures is to elicit rich data. Although the results of this
sample cannot be generalized, the selected PTs will provide critical insight into the understanding of

the central phenomenon of teacher preparation. All participants were recruited using the following
script:

Hello, my name is Nina Lee. I am a graduate student at Ryerson University. I would like to invite you to participate in my major research study. The authenticity of my credentials and this study can be validated by Dr. Valeo at Ryerson University. This study is a requirementfor a Masters degree in Early Childhood Studies. Ifyou choose to voluntarily participate, I am asking you to participate in a single 60 minute audio-recorded interview
that will include the following types of questions: demographic, descriptive, experience, knowledge andfeeling questions regarding your education and experiences with particular classroom children. This interview will be confidential and anonymous. I would like to meet with you to review the consent agreement and provide further details
about the study, prior to the interview.

If the prospective participant, declined the invitation the following statement was given:
Thank you for listening to my proposed study. I wish you the best in yourfuture
endeavours.

If the potential participant, accepts the invitation to partake in the study the following was said;
Thank you for agreeing to meet with me for greater detail and a potential interview. I would like to arrange a meeting time and location that is convenient, private and comfortable for you. Ifyou do not have a preference, I may arrangefor an interview
location.

Since some of the recruited participants are known to the researcher, potential issues

regarding coercion or influence to participate were considered. Carefully considered measures of I
reviewing and validation were used to mitigate these potential issues and to ensure

professionalism during the recruitment and interview process. There were no verbal or physical
signs of discomfort or lack of interest from any of the participants. However if these had
occurred, the interview would have been ended to maintain credibility. During the recruitment

16

process, referrals were also solicited for potential participants. To ensure that those referring additional participants had no knowledge of whether or not those they referred actually decided to participate or not, participants passed on the researcher's contact information to others and if
interested, contacted the researcher directly.

Participant Demographics

Recent PT graduates were the population chosen since they are newly trained, recently certified and their knowledge is most relevant to the intent of the study. A total of six participants were recruited for this investigation. All participants had recently completed a 2007-08
Southwestern Ontario Faculty of Education program in the primary-junior division. The individuals selected have shared characteristics as well as differing educational choices and
experiences.

Participant one: Olivia Stevenson* (pseudonym) had thee practicum blocks in her Bachelor of Education program. All of Olivia's experiences were in the Public School Board. Her

first practicum experience was in the primary division and consisted of a two-week block. Olivia describes her placement as follows:
... Was diverse in the sense that it has a large immigrant population, there is a diversity of learning needs, it's mono-cultural really... it's allfrom the South Asian community... it's

diverse in needs and language abilities and stuff... There was Arabic, there was Hindi, there was Urdu or Punjabi, they were all very similar so those language were sort of used

Olivia's second and third practicums were in the junior grades and in the same school. The
second practicum lasted two-weeks while the third practicum experience consisted of a three-

week block. These experiences were situated in a gifted classroom described by Olivia as being

in a well established middle class neighbourhood. Olivia completed her Bachelor of Education in
a program for Early Childhood Education graduates only. Olivia's definition of the term English

Language Learner is as follows:

17

An ELL is somebody who has prior language skills in another language, so it doesn 't necessarily mean that English is their second language, it means that they are now learning English. As they have prior knowledge in another language, at least one.

Participant two: Katie Long* (pseudonym) had two practicum blocks and a final internship in her B. Ed. program. Each experience was five-weeks in duration. Katie's first practicum experience and final internship were located in what Katie described as a very affluent private school. Both of her learning experiences in this school were with grade-three children.
Katie provided the following response when asked to describe her second practicum experience:
My second was in a grade-four class and this was an inner city school so there were a lot of differences I saw here, a lot of the children they weren 't motivated to do any school work, there wasn 't very much parent involvement in anything at the school that I saw

Katie described her second placement as being "a very diverse class" with Gujrati and Tamil present in the classroom, whereas the others were not at all diverse and no alternative languages were present. Katie's definition of the term English Language Learner was as follows:
...It means someone who, they... they are in the process of earning or building their language skills in the English language, it doesn't mean that they are necessarily, like they don't know any of it butjust that they are building on what they do know

Participant three: Mary Densmore* (pseudonym) had two practicums and an internship in her Faculty of Education. Her experiences were in the Public School system. Both practicums began with six Fridays of observation over a month-and-a-half which led into a four-week teaching block. The first practicum was in a grade-one class that was diverse in terms of culture

and learning. The following languages were present in the classroom: Vietnamese, Chinese and
Spanish. She elaborated on her first practicum with the following detailed description:
...It's an area where there are a lot ofELLs... they didn 't have ESL classes, so they were all in the grade one class, not really any issues with them but there were two children in

particular that sort of had like... one child had a behavioural issue and was supposed to be in a special needs class and my teacher was trying to send away... this other child had like a learning disability or something... like IEP all it consisted of was learning the first five letters of the alphabet and she couldn 't even do that, I was like wow. [An educational

18

assistant] was shared between the kindergarten room and our room, so she wasn 't officially ours, she would only come over ifshe had time

Mary's second placement was in a grade-four classroom. She found this 'very social' age group and classroom situation to be particularly difficult and challenging to her teaching abilities.

Mary described the classroom demographics as mostly European backgrounds and mainly white. Mary's internship was five-weeks long with no assigned observation days prior to the experience. Therefore, the first week of the internship was used for observation while lesson plans were implemented during the second week. The following description of her internship was provided:
...That was a crazy class because she [field educator] was supposed to be a Learning Enrichment Academic Program [LEAP] teacher which is for students who have had a gap in their education but the school used her as an ESL teacher... and because of that... oh she was only supposed to have, teach grade three, four, five but then she is a really nice person so she wanted to help the students who didn 't have ESL classes so she took in a grade two kid and she took in the grade six kids so it rangedfrom grade two to grade six.

Unlike the other participants of this study, Mary faced numerous difficult ELL experiences
within her Faculty of Education. Her classroom experiences incorporated the highest percentage

of ELLs in comparison to the other PTs. Mary is one of the only PTs who had the opportunity to
work with an educational assistant and was the only PT to have had an experience in an ESL/LEAP program. Mary's definition of English language learner was as follows:
...A student that is trying to learn the English language and it doesn 't matter if, if they were born here in Canada... as long as they are trying to learn the language itself

Participantfour: Tina Goodwin* (pseudonym) had two practicum experiences in her

Bachelor of Education program. Tina's practicums were both in the Public School system. Tina
provided the following description for her first placement:

The first one was at... an affluent school... a grade two placement... the class had twenty kids, only one student was on an IEP... the others werejust typically developing and had their own challenges of course and then the second semester 1was in a grade five... again a class of20 except two of them were in the home school program meaning thatfor language and math they were working below, very below the grade level... so they would get intensive help in the morning... that was in an intercity classroom...

19

Tina's first practicum was described as "absolutely not" diverse, with only two Asian kids amongst the rest that were "white". The second school was described as "absolutely [diverse]" in terms of visibly diverse and from "all different walks of life". Children in the second school also

spoke Patois in the classroom, which Tina defined as, "it's slang... it's like, in Jamaica they have
English, it's basically broken English". Children in the classroom would use Patois when speaking amongst themselves, but never during group discussions or main classroom learning.
Tina defines English language learner as the following:
Someone who's language, first language is not English. It can be anything, someone who's learning English as something other then their mother tongue.

Participantfive: Francis Newman* (pseudonym) had two practicum blocks and an internship in her Bachelor of Education program. For the final internship, PTs were able to choose any area of experience to fulfil the intern requirement. Francis completed her first
practicum and final internship in the Catholic School Board, while her second practicum was

fulfilled in the Public School system. Francis described her placement as follows:
Myfirst one... was in grade two, the second one was a grade six classroom where I had not one associate teachers but two they were team teaching... andfor my internship I
chose to do core French...

Francis regarded her first practicum as 'definitely less diverse' while her second was considered to be more racially and linguistically diverse. The difference in diversity was attributed to different city locations. Francis is the only participant who had the opportunity to co-

teach with two associate teachers who were team teaching. She is also the only participant who pursued experiences in the Catholic Board and is the only participant with a teachable, French.
The following is Francis's definition of English language learner. ... To me it means basically someone learning the English language... personally it doesn 't mean that the person doesn 't already know a lot about the English language, like I think many people are ELLs, but they might be an ELL at a different level...

20

Participant six: Linda Cornwall* (pseudonym) had three practicum blocks in her

Bachelor of Education program. Linda reported the following about her practicums:
My first experience was with a gradefive/six split class, and it was with a teacher who... was close to being retired... and my second was in a grade one and I've previously had experience teaching grade one... so I was comfortable... like the teacher was amazing, she was young, so it was easier to get along with her and the class had a few behaviours and special needs... my third placement was with a grade three classroom... it was six weeks... my second placement was a month and myfirst was three weeks and then a week at the beginning ofthe school year. I would say the most diverse was my [second]... there were a lot ofnew immigrants, it was a what's it called, a performance plus school....

When asked about linguistic diversity being present in the classroom, Linda responded with:
/ think so, I think in all the classrooms I was in, there were probably students who were from other countries, and there were some, there were some children with ESLyes.

Linda's Faculty of Education is the most Northerly located University in comparison to those of
the other participants. Linda defines of the term English language learner as follows:
...A student could either be comingfrom another country and they speak their language at home and then they are, they have to learn like English in the school system or they can speak more then one language... and then are also learning English... and its student who are not... likefluent in the English language and that they need extra help

Although the selected participants have varying experiences and educational choices,

there are many shared characteristics among them. All of the research participants were female

and eager to participate in this study. None of the participants had any additional certifications

related to education besides their recently obtained Bachelor of Education degree and teacher
certification from the Ontario College of Teachers. All participants of this study have all
successfully completed a 2007-08 pre-service education program and have obtained similar

knowledge on what is deemed to be necessary for classroom teacher preparation.
The participants of this study were not technically PTs, but recent graduates from Teacher

Education programs. During data collection, they were PTs reflecting back on their learning
experiences. By the completion of this study, the PTs had graduated from their training programs.

21

Data Collection

The primary method of data collection used for this study is face-to-face, individual data

collection. All participants were offered refreshments upon arrival. Participants were provided
with adequate time to review the consent agreement and the cover letter to the interview {please see Appendix Bfor the Cover Letter to Interview). Data collection procedures began with the

interviewer reviewing the research purpose, the type of data collected and its uses, potential risks and benefits, and the voluntary nature of participation. Participants' were also reminded that they
would be audio-taped while brief notes were taken and the procedures used to ensure confidentiality were re-emphasized. Participant questions were then invited and answered. Each interview was conducted in a location that was familiar and comfortable to the PT. Interview locations included secluded locations in cafeterias or cafes, homes and public libraries. Ensuring comfort reduced the potential psychological risk associated with participation. This

minimal risk includes feeling intimidated or uncomfortable responding to questions in the
researcher's presence. To further manage this risk, efforts were made to establish rapport and a sense of trust and respect prior, during and after the interview. The interviewer administered a 60

minute interview with each participant using a structured interview questionnaire. Immediately
after the fieldwork was complete, the audio-recorded interviews were transcribed. Each PT

received their interview transcript by email and was asked for comments, clarification and corrections, if necessary. This procedure ensured the accuracy of the information recorded.
Structured Interview Questionnaire

The primary research tool used for this investigation was a structured interview guided by
a prepared interview protocol {please see Appendix Cfor the Structured Interview Questionnaire

for Pre-service Teachers). The interview protocol includes the following components; a heading,
demographic information, pre-interview, key research questions and additional probes, spaces for

·

22

recording written comments for analysis and post-interview. The key research questions used consisted of demographic, descriptive, experience, knowledge and feeling questions (Creswell,

2005). The interview method was selected since it provided useful information that cannot be
directly observed (i.e. past experiences, educational experiences, attitudes and future practices or teaching behaviours). Interviews allowed each participant to share their interpretation of their education and experiences. Interviews also allowed the researcher control of the direction of the discussion and the use of prompts to elicit detail. Each participant's interview required a single 60 minute session. The interview process was guided by open-ended, pre-worded questions and predetermined sequence (Creswell, 2005).
This interview type helped obtain simple demographic information and quickly established a general level of knowledge based on common ELL myths. All interviewees were asked to

respond to the same myths and misconceptions during this portion of the interview. The
discussion then proceeded into an interview guide approach where open-ended questions were used to obtain rich detail. With this interview type, the participant has more freedom in their

response. The open-ended questions addressed their knowledge related to: ELLs, ELL needs,
teaching methods and strategies, personal experiences, teacher education and language acquisition. Overall, this interview sequence was deemed as most logical. To obtain a concrete copy of the necessary information, the interview was audio-recorded while comments and

reflexive notes were taken. The reflexive notes included personal thoughts, such as in-field
analysis, "speculation, feelings, problems, ideas, hunches, impressions and prejudices" (Creswell,

2003, p. 189). All other notes were recorded under the comments section of the protocol.

23

Data Analysis

Data analysis procedures began in the field, in the form of reflexive notes during data

collection. These pieces of field information began the organization process. Notes regarding the
methodology were also considered during the interpretation of the information. During the post-

interview, the researcher also verified any initial interpretations made in the field with the
participants.

After the completed written transcriptions were also confirmed, the researcher read

through the data and searched for regularities, themes and patterns (Creswell, 2003). Words and
phrases were noted, rephrased as titles or concepts and assigned a different colour. As new

categories emerged, they were included in the coding system. The data collected was then
organized using flat coding and further synthesized using hierarchical coding (Creswell, 2003).
The synthesized data began to present major links and contradictions in participants' responses.

Once the hierarchical coding was established, all data within each category was summarized with

extracted descriptive information for each theme. Each summary was then organized for
interpretation, reflection and overall meaning based on the researcher's personal lens. The researcher developed interpretive ideas about the findings and began relating them to relevant
literature, broad concerns and concepts to support personal ideas (Creswell, 2005).

The study also identified areas of recommendation during the interpretation process and

in collaboration with participants. After the interpretation, the researcher developed a visual

outline of the ideas to further organize the data for the final report (Creswell, 2005). The outlined
categories were then used, expanded and explained in the written report.

24

Authenticity and Trustworthiness

Credibility (internal validity) was maintained using respondent validation to avoid
misinterpretations of the collected data. The researcher debriefed with each participant upon the

completion of the interview to verify accuracy (Creswell, 2003). Since the data was verified, readers can be assured that good scientific practice occurred (Bryman & Teevan, 2005). The
validation process also ensured a good connection between the participants' perspectives, experiences and responses and the researcher's interpretations (Bryman & Teevan, 2005). The participant was also invited to participate in member checking within approximately two months
time.

Transferability (external validity) is upheld with the incorporation of rich and thick descriptions in the findings and recommendations (Bryman & Teevan, 2005). Detailed accounts of the culture, varied viewpoint, participant quotes and demographics provide others with a

comprehensive database to make judgements about the transferability of the findings (Bryman &
Teevan, 2005). Readers have a sense of the context and details used to derive to interpretations.

Dependability (reliability) was preserved using the auditing approach of completing full records of all phases of the study (Bryman & Teevan, 2005). The second method used external

auditors. To minimize misanalysis or personal biases, two external auditors were used to verify
proper procedures and to assess the justification of connected themes (Bryman & Teevan, 2005).

The first auditor is the research supervisor who audited the process throughout the study. The
supervisor constantly reviewed the document and process to ensure clarity and objectivity. The
second auditor was the second reader who reviews the overall major research paper.

25

Confirm-ability (objectivity) was sustained using the clarifying researcher bias method. Since total objectivity is impossible, the researcher stated their past experiences, educational background, personal views and theoretical inclination (Creswell, 2003). This statement provided readers with the lens used to interpret the data. Based on this statement and the presentation of

contrary findings, it is apparent that personal values were not allowed to excessively direct the
findings (Bryman & Teevan, 2005). Authenticity is also kept through the use of various forms of narratives including text embedded quotes and the participant's original words.
Researcher's Statement

To understand the mindset and lens used for the interpretation of the findings, the researcher's past experiences, educational background, personal views and theoretical inclination
are explored. As a graduate of Early Childhood Education (B.A.) I have pursued research in

relevant fields as course requirements for my undergraduate degree. I have excelled in both,
Research I and Research II, as course requirements in 2005-06 at Ryerson University. More recently, I have completed CS8929: Linguistic Issues of Minority Language

Children, in fall 2007 as an educational elective. I have also recently completed and excelled in
CS8901: Research Methods in Early Childhood Studies, winter 2008 semester, as a requirement

of the Master of Arts degree in Early Childhood Studies at Ryerson University. Professional
development relevant to the topic of this study, include attending; OISE/University of Toronto

Symposium: Linguistic and Cultural Diversity in Education: Norwegian and Canadian Research,

Programs and Policies [October 22-23, 2007], the 23rd Annual International Conference on
Young children with Special Needs and their Families: Crossing New Borders [October 26-27,
2007] and most recently the Symposium on English Language Learners [May 16, 2008]. My

post-secondary education has focused on research in educational equity, diversity, inclusion,
education, children and families.

26

CHAPTER IV Findings and Discussion

Teacher Preparation Southwestern Ontario's Faculties ofEducation

There is growing evidence in scholarly literature that classroom teachers are not prepared
to effectively educate ELLs in regular classrooms (Flynn & Hill, 2005). Recent literature also

suggests that teacher education programs have attempted to respond to the changes in classroom
demographics by creating additional courses and programs focused on promoting effective methods of language learning (Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003; Tellez & Waxman, 2005). Teacher educators must emphasize the fact that ELL competence relies heavily on profound commitment, professional and personal development, and active effort on the part of all PTs (Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005). National reforms must continue to target efforts at
ensuring the ability and quality of all classroom teachers (Menken & Antunez, 2001). Consequently, it is crucial to consistently review and analyze all ELL course content included in teacher education to assure that it is the most current information and relevant.

Courses and Content Pertaining to ELLs

Teacher preparation consists of fundamental and intertwined, yet necessary components.

The breadth and depth of preparation programs must be explored through the perspective of
graduates to make certain that programs are effectively building on all of the fundamental components necessary for high quality primary-junior teachers. Among the obvious components

is knowledge of Ontario's standardized curriculum and the competence or skill-set necessary to
transfer such knowledge to all young learners in the classroom. However, in many cases little

attention is given to the diverse learners themselves, in particular the linguistically diverse. This

27

poses an issue since young children in Southwestern Ontario are increasingly from diverse linguistic backgrounds due to the increase and reliance on immigration (Marx, 2000). It is naive for any classroom teacher to believe that they can evade encountering such linguistic diversity in any future teaching situation. Effective teacher preparation adequately prepares teachers for all

learners in the classroom regardless of their English language proficiency. PTs should be
prepared for the "typical" school day routine and content, but they must also be prepared to encounter and conquer the probable population as demographics constantly change. All teachers who are adequately and effectively prepared are equipped for the linguistically diverse.
It is commonly misconceived that ELL-related knowledge is reserved for ESL/ELL

specialists, yet such knowledge has become necessary for all teachers who plan on successfully educating children within Southwestern Ontario. With a growing multilingual population, every teacher will have the opportunity to work with ELLs and thus must be prepared (Antunez, 2002; Dianda, 1992; Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005). In order to understand how prepared these
teaching candidates feel about their readiness to teach ELLs upon graduation, the participants

were asked to provide their perspective on their Faculty of Education's courses and content
related to ELLs and English as a second language. When asked to elaborate on ELL or ESL

related courses and course content, these participants responded as follows:
We touched upon it on a course... so there was a one-day lecture, like a one day period,

spent on talking about ELL needs and a... we did workshops and it talked about ELLs again. We learned about, well we went through the stages of language development and... theyfigured that, they assumed that we already have some background in theory so we talked about strategies and ways to adapt and a little bit where to get resources from. My professor... actually showed us quite valuable techniques, strategies that he would use in Reading Recovery that could be applicable to a ELL (Olivia) ... We learned different strategies on how to be inclusive, what teachers can do to
encourage students, to motivate... and how we can help parents to build trust in teachers,

students as well in that case (Katie believes that her elective ELL course was in-depth)

28

None. We only had like two classes where a teacher came in to talk to us about ESL

kids... hi terms of course content: ""This book that's provided by the government it's called... Many Roots, Many Voices... they gave that to us and then we had to go through
it and look at what are the strategies that you can use with ELLs and how a majority of our students are ELL learners so... these strategies should apply to all of them (Mary) Oh none. Well we had language class, but again, it was just maybe one, three-hour

session was spent on ELLs... In terms of course content: 'just basically how... how learning the letters and learning the phonetics and the rules is difficult because... English is so complex. Andjust different strategies for helping them learn language the same way
you wouldfor a child who was developmentally like delayed in language (Tina) We had a... seminar basically where they took random, very random days to talk about ESL or ELL so I didn 't have one particular course that addressed it, it was maybe over

the course of the year, maybe four orfive, three-hour classes were dedicated to discussing
that, there was an ELL course that was offered as your extra curricular course but I

didn't take that one. In terms of course content: We learned a lot about ways to
accommodate them in the classroom but it was very broad... and we did activities... and
learning about information, and learning techniques such as including visuals, or hand

gestures, very basic ... ifI had to sit down and work with a group ofELLs, I don't know if

I would know a lot about it (Francis)
We did a course, not that I remember any of it, it was like a diversity like learners course and I guess that would relate the most... I would probably say that [my undergraduate program] taught me more then I learned there. Course content: Ijust remember reading articles just about how to break things down I guess and... allowing them to have that language in the classroom and notforbidding them to speak that or write in that language if that helps them to formulate their thoughts, like they can write in both... and then we can just talk about it together, and it's important not to like shun who they are and where

they come from 'cause then they won't want to learn at all... (Linda) Overall, there were no mandatory courses based on ELLs, instead there were sessions or
lectures rooted in ELL content which were embedded in mandatory courses. The only ELL

course available was an elective which was mentioned by two graduates. All of the participants who experienced the periodic sessions and lectures unanimously agreed that the content was

undoubtedly an overview as opposed to an in-depth exploration. PTs would have liked to receive
greater detailed content to enhance their ELL competence. This finding is congruent with Waxman & Tellez's (2002) study which also recognizes the need for more information regarding

29

helping ELLs meet high academic standards. Mary's comment below reinforces the need to
consider the depth of learning involved: Overview, definitely overview... we didn 't go into depth at all and then when we had to read the [ELL-related] documents, we had to read them ourselves and then we weren 't
even given enough time to read it or go through it in detail... (Mary)

PTs in this study describe their ELL sessions as what is deemed to be a 'typical introductory ELL workshop' for professionals outside of the ESL/ELL "specialization" (Harper & de Jong, 2004). In introductory workshops, the theoretical foundation necessary for ELL

preparation is overly simplified while emphasizing the overlap between first and second language
learning and ignoring the important differences (Dianda, 1992; Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000; Harper & de Jong, 2004). The complex components of English language learning are condensed to the most basic pieces of point-form information. When crucial ELL preparation information is condensed to such minimalism, many teachers falsely feel at ease believing that they will be able to learn what they need in the field with minimal groundwork. Graduates with this mentality are under the misconception that learning English may occur by exposure (Dianda, 1992; Harper & de Jong, 2004). Four of the participants agreed that exposure would enhance the pace and ability to learn English. The

following is Tina's comment reflecting this belief:
Exposure and... because its an active process so notjust assuming that by sitting in a classroom that the students are going to pick it up but by... making accommodations to

lessons to... assist the language learners in the classroom so lets say, you know, you 're
doing a lesson... have things labelled so that they are seeing the word, they are hearing

the word, and then, you know ensuring that you know spelling, spelling is apart ofyour,
ofyour literacy program, and that... (Tina)

The remaining two participants refuted the exposure claim with consideration for the child's

comprehension of the language, learning context, possibilities of culture-shock, and readiness to
learn the language. Francis noted:

30

... Really depends on the child and it also depends on the context of where they are, I am trying to think ofan example... for whatever reason it might even be cult-, maybe a

culture shock that they are not ready... to learn the language but they have been placed
in a situation where they need it... (Francis)

Exposure to the English language must be paired with motivation, purpose and the explicit teaching of the functions, genres, phonological, grammatical, and morphological aspects of English (Harper & de Jong, 2004). Exposure without interaction, feedback, and opportunities to
respond; is simply insufficient for language learning. However, it is apparent in this study and the literature at large, that teacher preparation still lacks enough focus on the topics of English

language learning and teaching, resulting in graduates with a lack of ELL expertise and competence (Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Gandara Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005). Teachers require deep subject-matter pertaining to ELLs so as to assist them in achieving the
grade-level standards (Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005; Menken & Antunez, 2001).

Without explicit instruction, PTs are unaware and do not possess the pedagogy necessary to enable access to the academic knowledge and skills ingrained in the curriculum (Menken & Antunez, 2001; Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003). PTs also lack a thorough understanding of language acquisition processes which limits their comprehension of needs and overall efficacy. Two of the PTs in this study are relying on receiving inservice professional development
for ELLs if need be, in future teaching environments. This expectation is not surprising as

Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith (1999) also found that many respondents expected their employers to provide training once employed, rather then being responsible for their own professional development prior to encountering the situation. To further exploit this issue, Menken & Antunez

(2001) and Mongomery, Roberts & Growe (2003) found these types of inservice workshops to be
short-term and to only superficially expose teachers to ELL-related concepts without providing

the in-depth knowledge or connections necessary for lasting effects on teaching practice. In

31

reality, there is no quick-fix solution to this complex situation, comprehensive training is required
(Clair, 1995).

Currently, pre-service and inservice training focus heavily on establishing English
proficiency and classroom strategies rather than the who, how and why of English language teaching and learning (Cruz & Patterson, 2005; Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000; Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003). The fact that PTs rely on inservice development

uncovers their assumptions about what is deemed 'important preparation' (Evans, Arnot-Hopffer
& Jurich, 2005).

Lessons Learned Through the Elective ELL Course

According to the PT who chose the elective ELL course, there are essential components to

ELL teaching that she feels other graduates lack. She feels that other PTs are without ELL

strategies and generally don't know what to do with ELLs because they chose not to take this course. Katie felt that this course was "very valuable" to her training because of the increasing prevalence of ELLs in Ontario schools. To better illustrate the number of 'unequipped' certified
teachers, within Katie's B. Ed. cohort of 65 PTs, only two chose to enrol in this course. Katie
comments:

It's just very importantfor teacher going into thefield to actually know what to do in the classroom situation... the teacher I worked with would not speak to the parents because she was afraid of their accent and that she wouldn 't be able to understand what the parents are saying, she is in the teaching situation and was actually afraid to talk to
parents and caregivers (Katie)

Everyday classroom situations may become extremely difficult or addressed inappropriately due
to lack of training. These types of situations should be addressed in teacher preparation to ensure

that teachers know how to react, both effectively and professionally. Katie believes that the 63

32

PTs who did not take the course may experience negative repercussions in the classroom due to
their lack of information. Again, Katie notes:
I don't think that they will be able to build a strong relationship or a strong rapport with a
childfrom, or who speaks a different language, I think it's harder to build a rapport with

family members as well in that situation, I think that... the teachers they wont be able to implement certain activities in a certain way, they mightjust teach all children at the same level using the same strategy even though that child may not understand what's going on so it

will be harderfor them to change that (Katie) Although the single course on ELLs is more effective than no course at all, having several topics contained within a single three-hour half-semester course can only realistically provide a cursory examination of the more detailed topics (Menken & Antunez, 2001). According to Katie,

none of the pre-service programs in Southwestern Ontario are providing enough information to
all of their PTs which raises significant concerns regarding prospective teacher's ELL
competence.

Multicultural Education: Is Cultural Sensitivity Enough?

All of the participants agreed that diversity topics were infused and focused on throughout

all mandatory courses. A range of diversity issues were discussed, including gender stereotypes, Colour, homophobia, upper and middle class biases, family background, and family units. However, even with a wide-range of diversity emphasized in the multicultural education focus, the literature notes that teacher education programs are not preparing future teachers to deal with the linguistic diversity in classrooms (Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000; Reiff & Cannella,
1992). Cultural sensitivity is definitely inadequate to allow prospective teachers to work

effectively with ELLs (Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999). Two participants criticized the lack of ELL content in their mandatory courses on 'societies'. The exclusion of ELL content was

33

disappointing to these PTs and they questioned the reasoning for its absence. Although the literature suggests that preparation programs recognize the importance and need of incorporating

ELL preparation for all prospective teachers (Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000), based on
the findings of this study, it is evident that minimal actions have been taken.

In addition, the participants in this study appeared unsure of the approximate number of
hours spent on ELL-related topics. This led to most responses beginning with "maybe", "wasn't

much", "not very much", "less then", and "very basic". The following validates such instances:
Maybe two (Tina)
Less then six hours. (Mary)

The same, not very much (Katie)

On average four hours were spent on learning about second language acquisition while between "maybe 2 hours" and 10 hours were spent on learning about practical ELL strategies. Most participants felt that less-then-six hours were spent on learning about practical ELL strategies.

Katie, who took a course dedicated to ELL preparation, approximated only three hours being
dedicated to ELL strategies. When it came to 'classroom learning needs for linguistically diverse

children', two participants claimed that zero hours were spent on that topic. Another three made comments of "I don't think it was much", "not very much" and "very basic". These comments
indicate a lack of thoroughness and depth to the discussions regarding this topic. On average
three hours were spent on this very important topic.

Although little time was spent on the knowledge of linguistics and linguistic diversity, all

classroom teachers need to understand the basic constructs of bilingualism, the structure of the
English language, multilingual development, language proficiency, the role of the first language and culture in learning and education, and the demands that Ontario's curriculum places on ELLs (Alfred, 1994; Dianda, 1992; Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005; Gonzalez & Darling-

34

Hammond, 2000; Menken & Antunez, 2001; Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003; Waxman &

Tellez, 2002). Effective classroom instruction is dependent upon a thorough understanding of language and its structure (Menken & Antunez, 2001). Teachers must understand their students not only as cultural beings, but also linguistic beings. Deep content knowledge significantly
influences a teacher's effectiveness in the classroom (Menken & Antunez, 2001; Youngs & Youngs, 2001). Therefore, it would appear imperative that teacher preparation programs expose

all future teachers to the different components of language knowledge, methodologies, and effective methods for promoting student success in English and academic content (Menken &
Antunez, 2001).

The aim of multicultural education must extend beyond a 'celebration of difference' or an

increase in cultural sensitivity and appreciation (Dianda, 1992; Menken & Antunez, 2001). A
common criticism of multicultural education is the focus on types of diversity rather than how to

teach, facilitate and empower diverse students (Dianda, 1992; Reiff & Cannella, 1992). Even
compassionate and dedicated teachers who do not have ELL competence, perpetuate existing

biases, myths and misconceptions; making it difficult to create a beneficial difference for ELLs (Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005). Beginning teacher's first ELLs will have a sub-standard
educational experience in their classrooms until their teachers establish ELL competence through

the trial-and-error of children's education.

Placement Placements provide PTs with a practical component where they can translate course

content into practice. Field experiences also provide learning opportunities through observing successful and unsuccessful teachers in the field. PTs with successful role models have the chance to observe the implementation of effective teaching strategies, experiment with their own

35

strategies whilst being provided with constructive feedback (Cruz & Patterson, 2005; Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Menken & Antunez, 2001; Romi & Leyser, 2006). Effective programs

will also debrief placement experiences to allow peers to learn from each other's unique experiences and to further explore their own. Colleagues can also offer additional support,
resources, classroom ideas and immediate feedback (Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000). It is

evident in the following statement that Olivia would have benefited from a whole group
debriefing: ... Ifelt that at my placement, because there was the ESL support through a resource

teacher I really didn 't have to modify as much because she came into the classroom... so Ifeel that I don't have as much experience with that, because there was so much support
in the school that I was at (Olivia)

.

PTs require realistic classroom experiences with linguistically diverse individuals. Linguistic differences and intercultural communications are intimidating and uncomfortable to

those who have not had the opportunity to encounter these experiences either first or second hand
(Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005; Reiff & Cannella,
1992; Youngs & Youngs, 2001). Facilities of Education have the ability to increase positive

attitudes by establishing contact with ELLs with guidance and support from experienced teachers and faculty (Cruz & Patterson, 2005; Youngs & Youngs, 2001). It is particularly important to establish this level of comfort prior to graduation. Francis and Linda comment on their desire to
"know more" before graduating:

/ took initiative... it wasn 't something that was told to you, like I, it was more I had to test things out, and see what worked with this child but... it was helpful in that sense, but it wasn't like my associate teacher sat me down and said ok this is how you are going to do this, and it was a lot of testing and seeing what worked (Francis)
... What would be great is have a placement where you have to be in a situation where you were working with someone... that correlates specifically to what to do in these situations when you are dealing with ELLs... I think it would be beneficial, but... each classroom I was in especially now... in Ontario you will encounter it and I did even... where it was predominately white and English speaking... I think probably every classroom will so...

36

but I think it, it's mandatory to speak about it and to... make sure the teacher understand that they can't leave those students behind, they need to have extra supportjust like it was a special need because in a way it is (Linda)

A practicum experience in a realistic environment is an essential component to any preparation program (Cruz & Patterson, 2005; Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005; Menken &

Antunez, 2001). Mary felt that some of the ELL knowledge would not have been acquired without her ELL placement. She states:
/ would say now more confident then I was before had my internship because I learned a lotfrom this teacher she was really good... she integrated like subjects linked to
curriculum expectations... for ELL learners so I was really shocked that she was able to

do that... (Mary)

Practical experiences allow PTs to explore theories, models, strategies, research findings, policies
as well as classroom issues; under experienced supervision. Teachers must understand that ELLs

have academic and language needs that are different from most classroom children. Gandara,
Maxwell-Jolly & Discoll (2005) reassert that teachers cannot be given all the credit or blame for ELL academic achievement, however it is evident that they play a crucial role in their education. Therefore, the quality and extent of professional placements is critical and must be reassessed for

effectiveness in preparing prospective teachers for meeting the needs of ELL children (Emporia
State University, 1994; Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005).

37

Pre-service Teachers' Beliefs

PTs' beliefs are complex and understanding them is essential to appreciating the efficacy of teacher education and to improving future programs (Romi & Leyser, 2006). PTs' perspectives on their education, certification programs, knowledge and experience are also measures of their effectiveness in the classroom with ELLs (Menken & Antunez, 2001). It has been suggested that self-efficacy beliefs be evaluated and explored throughout training programs to monitor learning (Romi & Leyser, 2006). All PTs come to teacher education with prior beliefs, knowledge and experiences about learning and teaching in the classroom. These beliefs are used as a lens in which they view and filter the information received during the training (Farrell, 2006). PTs need to learn to identify their beliefs and take them into consideration as they learn new knowledge that may compete and replace their existing beliefs and theories (Farrell, 2006; Torok & Aguilar,
2000). Beliefs tend to be resistant to change and require confrontation, discomfort and active efforts. The process of examining beliefs cannot be trivialized or oversimplified (Evans, Arnot-

Hopffer & Jurich, 2005). Ingrained beliefs are not usually consciously articulated without some assistance and effort. Regardless of the effort required; these beliefs must be made explicit, analyzed and critically reflected upon (Cruz & Patterson, 2005; Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith,

1999; Farrell, 2006). Unfortunately, there is an indication that if PTs' beliefs are not adequately
challenged, naively held generalizations and prejudices will continue to dominate PTs'
perspectives (Torok & Aguilar, 2000).

Menken & Antunez (2001) further emphasize the importance of exploring PT beliefs by stating that a teacher's expertise in teaching is the 'single most important factor' in predicting student achievement. Too many PTs are unaware of their own biases and beliefs that may hinder
their teaching practice. Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith (1999) stated that PTs do not indicate a need to even examine their biases or beliefs about teaching and learning in diverse classrooms.

38

Preparation faculty must specifically address issues related to teacher's harmful beliefs, attitudes and perceptions of ELLs prior to graduation and teacher certification (Waxman & Tellez, 2002). Pre-service teachers' beliefs regarding self-efficacy were also topics of discussion for the
participants of this study.

Self-Efficacy

When teachers are highly prepared for the profession, there is a high level of confidence in their teaching skills and abilities. The more competent teachers feel after preparation, the more
successful they will be in the classroom (Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Farrell, 2006; Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). As Farrell (2006) states, attitude is the foundation for all other success. Attitudes of self-efficacy can have more influence

on future teaching methods than any information they received during preparation (Farrell, 2006).
This idea is reinforced by Katie's and Tina's comments:
Ifyou have a teacher who teaches something that they themselves are not comfortable

with that plays a major role in the child being able to learn something (Katie) ... A lot ofwhat it is, is narrow mindedness and it is really hard to change someone's narrow minded thinking ...I think that it should have to be seen... like your course
instructor would have to... observe you... incorporating language into your program

because its one thing if during an interview you say, oh yah its really important and you say oh yah I will definitely make an attempt, cause you could say anything... (Tina)

Attitudes are a powerful predictor of classroom practice and affect what ELLs learn

(Alfred, 1994; Youngs & Youngs, 2001). Negative attitudes lead to expected behaviours.
Whether the teacher is aware or not, they are communicating messages to their students and negatively affecting the learning process (Youngs & Youngs, 2001). The depth and quality of

teacher education contributes greatly to overall teacher quality. Therefore, if PTs have doubtful
responses about their abilities, it is a good indication that there is a lack of adequate preparation.

39

The PTs in this study did not hesitate to express their concerns regarding particular areas of weakness in their programs. Lack of information and preparation regarding the assessment of ELLs was a particular concern. Other concerns included a lack of confidence regarding whether a
teacher could meet all of the responsibilities required. But overall, the PTs in this study felt

confident. The following remarks illustrate this confidence in their abilities to fulfil the multiple
roles and responsibilities of the classroom teacher: Ifeel, confident, enough that... if... I have some knowledge right now... when I start,

when I have my own classroom, I will know where to go to get support... (Olivia)
In terms of assessments or evaluations that's my weak point... I need more practice in

that, so I'm not very confident in that... and we should have had more class hours for.... We only had like maybe two classes on assessment... that was it (Mary)
I think that I am getting there, I would say that I am maybe at like a 50 to 60 percent, preparation percentage but ifI was really in, ifI was in it... like instantaneously my brain would be going and thinking about ok well what do they need, how do Iprepare, who do I talk to, and then it would slowly increase. And yah, then I'd be more prepared
(Tina).

/ am not sure, I don't know... it would definitely be a challenge, definitely be a challenge.

Would I be able to do it? I think, I think yes. It would, I would probably rely a lot on
resources, and rely a lot on people within my school, community. But I think in the end, I would be able to do it, maybe not perfectly thefirst time, but... eventually through

experiencing it and pooling all my resources around me, I think it would be good
(Francis)

Francis also identified concerns regarding issues of fairness and exclusion due to the attention she may have to give one group over another, in order to meet their needs. She notes:
.... there is so much to accommodate to, I'd be afraid that ifI am accommodating too much to one child, that I would be missing somethingfrom another child, or ifI am spending time on one, it's like spending time on one curriculum you are missing a part of the other curriculum, like it's so broad that. I think that b-, maybe not a barrier but a challenge would be to, to do it
consistently and effectively (Francis)

This is a common concern that was also discussed in Dorrington & Ramierez-Smiths's (1999) article. Tellez & Waxman (2005) and Youngs & Youngs (2001) state that one of the greatest educational challenges is that teachers of ELLs do not feel that they are prepared for ELL's

40

needs. Although it is difficult to foresee all future difficulties, it is unmistakable that PTs do
foresee some challenges. Therefore, PTs need to be given more opportunities to explore areas of concern to resolve fears and enhance self-efficacy beliefs (Alfred, 1994). There is a good indication that many PTs have not reached a comfort level that enables them to feel confident in

their abilities to work with ELLs in the same way as other classroom children (Dorrington &
Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Flynn & Hill, 2005). As a professional preparation program, it must ensure that all certified teachers are experts in their trained field. The following statement by Menken & Antunez (2001) is the goal we should strive for, for all of our certified teachers:
"Cultivating one new teacher to perform to high standards through effective preparation impacts every student that teacher encounters during his or her career " (pg. 16)

Assessment. Current assessment methods are exceedingly monocultural. The content used in standardized assessments may present messages that are culturally biased which elicit negative

feelings (Reiff & Cannella, 1992; Youngs & Youngs, 2001). Without exposure to alternatives
and content insensitivity; teachers maintain a cycle of inaccurate assessments. Teacher education

needs to provide the knowledge, understanding and practice necessary to adapt assessments to
meet individual needs (Emporia State University, 1994; Menken & Antunez, 2001; Tellez & Waxman, 2005; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). It is imperative that teachers know how to

appropriately adapt assessments without a reliance on surrounding professionals, since they are not always available or knowledgeable. Teachers themselves are obligated to record progress and to know if they are meeting a child's language and educational needs (Verdugo & Flores, 2007).
In this study, the lack of confidence in assessment practices is echoed by Tina and Francis:
I hate giving my kids a grade, assessment is one ofmy, my biggest things, I am, I'm terrified ofgiving a kid a mark on their report card and I'm going to have a parent knocking on my door saying my kid doesn 't deserve this mark or you know and then having to sit there andjustify it and even ifI have work samples and even ifI have you

41

know objectives for the grade given well, like what if that's not good enough? Like what
do I do? That's one thing that I'm really worried about, I'm worried about assessment...

I'm really worried about sitting across from a parent and, and then having them want to hear that their kid is doingfantastically... what do I say to the parent whose kid is struggling? Like... how do I... how do I start that conversation obviously you always

begin with strengths of what's going well... what do I do after that? Like how do I say you know, my concerns are... and what if they yell at me, like what do I do? (Tina) Oh [assessments for ELLs], that is a good one, you know what, I don't know.... (Francis)

Assessment is a common concern that emerged from the majority of participants. Several issues arise with the assessment of ELL's language proficiency and curriculum knowledge. With the current emphasis on testing and standardized testing in the schools, ELL assessment is a valid
concern. Standardized tests are normed using native English speakers and Canadian-content.

These tests are inaccurate and culturally inappropriate for ELLs. It may be impossible to determine whether an ELL's scores are the result of limited language, low content knowledge or

both (Coelho, 2007; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). All teachers ought to possess an awareness of
alternative, formal and informal, assessments. Teachers must also understand that accommodations may complicate test results and thus must know how to make English a non-

factor without altering the assessment (Verdugo & Flores, 2007). Faculties of Education should require PTs to demonstrate their ability to adapt assessments and use assessment data to plan

further instruction, prior to graduation (Emporia State University, 1994). Assessments are crucial
to guiding academic progress, thus it is a central concern when PTs are not explicitly taught how
to modify assessments for ELLs, and this was noted by the participants in this study: The most challenging partfor me is going to be assessments, is assessing students work
and learning and... although we, we are required to do some of that in our practicum, its

not our own classroom, school or children, we 're not with them every day, thosefamilies we don't know very well so I think that's the biggest challenge and, and apparently for my colleagues and, and teachers that I work with right now they, they have felt similar like that, that's, that's something that you have to really work hard at and have a variety ofassessment tools and be able to justify the grades and the levels and what you do in your classroom, so I think that, I don'tfeel that I'm... I'm confident enough thatlwill

42

be... I know that, that will be a challengefor me and that I will definitely need to seek supportfrom fellow staff to, to help me do that better (Olivia)
Didn 't... really go in-depth into it... and itjust, it wasn 't enough for me... Burns/Roe One it's informal reading inventory and it basically assess what level they are at, so I think ifI had an ELL student I would start with that... I was looking through it... it seemed more for like a Canadian, like it had stories that, like stories we read about in our childhood
and I don't, think it would be appropriate for ELLs, so I went on the internet and saw

some reviews and they gave it like three out offive or two or one but like my teacher says its really good, so I 'm like I don't know... (Mary)

What are some otherforms ofassessment other then rubrics? I've only ever really seen
the rubric... like what else besides a rubric... and ok yah I can use a checklist but what the hell kind of checklist can I be using in math? You know (Tina)

Preparation programs are responsible for thoroughly instructing future teachers on the nature and implications of assessment (Menken & Antunez, 2001). Teacher education must help

all classroom teachers to be able to readily identify and assess students' knowledge and address
student differences (Waxman & Tellez, 2002). Providing the Ministry of Education's resource document Many Roots, Many Voices: Supporting English Language Learners in Every Classroom (Ontario Ministry of Education) is an inadequate solution to this issue since it only

provides general suggestions on initial assessments (Coelho, 2007). Although the Ministry has

attempted to assist teachers with publications on responsive teaching, these are ineffective if they
are not utilized in preparation programs or mandated in schools (Coelho, 2007). Too many

certified teachers are still questioning how to teach children with diverse linguistic backgrounds. As a society that prides itself on its multicultural mosaic, this is not a minor issue. This creates significant concern for our future as the presence of ELLs continues to grow with the consistently increasing flow of immigrants that essentially shapes Ontario's population growth (Chui, Tran &
Maheux, 2007; Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005; Verdugo & Flores, 2007).

43

Graduating Peers

Five PTs believe that their graduating peers do not know enough about ELLs to work effectively with them in the classroom. These participants feel that their peers are unprepared for
ELLs due to a lack of ELL related preparation and information. They comment:

/ think as for the faculty training, everything we learned was really an overview because
it was in, it was a nine month program I think that those who had experience in practicum that had many ELLs may be more prepared then others, but I cant, I cant quite
say (Olivia)

No I don't, out of my cohort... I think only two of us out ofa group of 65 took that course on ELLs and yah thatjust surprised me knowing that a lot of us graduates now we don't really know what to do like we talked a bit in class and we think we know but that class
would have been needed (Katie)

[Immediate response of] No. I would definitely say not unless, unless they 've had

previous experience like through practicum or whatever but like no I think this is something that, that you really need to be taught direct instruction and direct strategies and... given lots of examples of how to do it, which we didn 't get (Mary) / think the ones who are an English language learners are. Are much better prepared then I am... but no, everybody isn 't, there's a lot ofpeople who aren 't. And a lot of people who don't care enough to become really good at that because they know that they are going to be working in a board or they know that they are going to be working in an area where it's not really a concern. And that's scary... [I know some people don't care] because... you can... just because the things that they 've said, things you can see in the class... some people skip, don't say, don't ever say anything, don't contribute and... it just doesn 't appear that they 're willing to broaden their horizons and learn something
new. Just personal observation. (Tina)

...there are a lot ofpeople who just coast... and a lot ofpeople who just get by because they 've done the bare minimum and that's all that they think is required of them... those

are the people that worry me because... for half the people in my program, ifmy kid were in their classroom, I would pull them out right away. Simply because I don't think that they are ready... What you put into a program, how hard you work, and what you understand say a lot about who you are as a teacher, and... as a person... (Tina)
No I don 'tfeel that they know enough about it. But I think it will come with experience. I, I, we 've got basic, basic information, it would be realistic, realistically better to have more... I am not sure why it is [that everyone graduates], but... classes and assignments

weren 't taken seriously, it was kind of like, ifyou did it, you passed, what you did, didn't matter, just as long as you did it. So who is to say that, that person learned something out
of it? So there just needs to be more accountability (Francis)

44

I don't know, I'm going to say... maybe not... I don't know ifsomeone comingfrom a background in like English, Science or Law would have... as much experience as I have with children in the schools before I went to teachers college... so I, I don't. But... I don't know ifanyone even couldfully run their own classroom this year (laughs) after seen what, well like it was a good program but it... just having that I don't know how, like a lot ofpeople struggled a lot... especially ifyou took English or something... then, and then just now you are a teacher, not only are you learning information that may be new to you, but you have to learn how to teach it, and teach it so all the children in the class understand, its quite a tough situation (Linda)

These types of responses are from newly certified, teachers who are ready to enter the
teaching profession. Clearly, it is necessary for the certification requirements to be reanalyzed. Authorities granting the certification necessary to teach in our schools must be held accountable

for the quality of teachers in our schools (Clair, 1995). As an act of accountability, teacher
education programs may regulate high standards through the restoration of an exiting exam required for all classroom teachers. Tina further emphasizes this point:
We had a big debate in our class... about the teacher test that was removed, cause there
used to be a te-, a test that you had to take at the end of the program in order to like exit... and it was taken away, and there was this huge thing and I remember being on the side of yah we should have a test because... and my argument was are you going to let a doctor leave med school without testing what they know and what they understand about the medical profession? Yet we are going to take care ofhundreds upon thousands of

children's lives and theirfuture academic career and we are not going to be tested to see
whether or not we are capable ofdoing that? So I was one of the only ones who was fightingfor testing... it shouldn 't be the be all end all but I think a test definitely needs to be and is an integral part along with performance... and someone can see really what kind of teacher you are, are you the kind of teacher that coasts or are you the kind that
puts in everything that they have (Tina)

Currently, teacher certification does not require any type of preparation in the area of ELLs despite the significant proportion of ELLs in our classrooms. This indicates a severe
disconnect between preparation and the field of teaching. Today's teacher preparation must go above and beyond the training required for English-only classrooms (Emporia State University, 1994; Menken & Antunez, 2001; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). All teachers will have the

opportunity to work with ELLs and must be prepared to do so confidently and effectively.

45

Myths and Misconceptions

It is undeniable that all of the PTs interviewed are well-intentioned when it comes to the education and inclusion of ELLs. However, much of their education and knowledge is rooted in common misconceptions and myths regarding the English language, ELLs and learning English. These misconceptions and myths determine many of their decisions and actions as teachers and can have implications in the classroom (Genesse, 2007). These beliefs may result in avoidance, a misunderstanding of communication patterns, impoverished learning environments, undervaluing

diverse life experiences and background knowledge, and create a false need for lowered
expectations (Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005; Genesee, 2007).

Ingrained beliefs and attitudes are constructed over the PTs' lifetime as a result of school and community experiences, education, and personal life (Marx, 2000; Youngs & Youngs, 2001).

All prospective teachers must analyze their own social beliefs and conditions of schooling (Reiff
& Cannella, 1992). When myths are confronted, PTs become open to the many value systems that exist, recognize the multidimensionality of learning and the positive impact of diversity

(Dianda, 1992; Reiff & Cannella, 1992). All certified teachers must be able to recognize and
develop these strengths in all people (Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000). Common myths and misconceptions touch on the ease with which children learn languages, the relationship
between conversational and academic skills, and cultural and individual differences in language

learning styles (McLaughlin, 1992). Faculties of Education cannot rely on teachers to use their intuitive assumptions since they are often incorrect, unrealistic and can harm ELLs through
inaccurate understandings of the language learning process (McLaughlin, 1992). Through an exploration of beliefs, it was revealed that each PT in this study agreed with more than half of the commonly held false myths and misconceptions. The following myths are further explored in
detail.

46

Myth 1: Children learn second languages quickly and easily (McLaughlin, 1992). Myth 2: The younger the child, the more skilled in acquiring a second language
(Genesee, 2007; McLaughlin, 1992; Sorace, 2007).

Five participants agreed with each of these statements. Interestingly, four participants found these statements to be similar while the others stated true for one and false for the other. The
participants comment: ... Definitely yah... it's true because there's... I do know that there is a certain span where children can biologically acquire multiple languages quicker... (Olivia) Yah I suppose so, yah... because... they always say start young and that they are exposed
to different languages at a young age... I think they will learn itfaster (Mary)

True. I am just going offthe basic assumption that has been told to me that younger
children learn languages quicker then, older children would... it was mentioned in school, I think I'd heard it earlier then that but it was said in school (Francis) [True] because language, they are not set in their ways... They haven'tforgotten rules,

cause you know how all kids are born with the ability to say certain sounds and to, like, be receptive to certain like words and things and I think that as they are building their
repertoire ofwords, that it is easier to accommodate another wordfor chair when you are younger and still learning what a chair is as opposed to when you are older and already have solidified chair, that's always a chair and all that you call it (Tina) I guess I would say true, well I'm kind of in the middle because it depends a lot on... how young they are I think and how early they started learning the second language and how... and how well it was being taught to theme really like it really is about a lot of differentfactors but I think it, it is easyfor a student to learn as long as they have support

and it would have to come from the family as well as the teacher... thefirstfive years, six
years of life it is easiest to lean another language... (Linda)

These responses signify how deeply ingrained these beliefs truly are as PTs believed and proclaimed with conviction that they had witnessed or experienced such myths themselves. Participants who identified these statements as false did so because they believed that learning environments and opportunities for practice have major impacts on language learning. Yet research has shown that an early language start, between 2-3 years, is only necessary to attain the
same pronunciation results as native speakers (Sorace, 2007). Language acquisition can be an

equally frustrating and difficult experience for both adults and children, although there is a

47

widespread belief that children easily learn languages most likely due to the 'critical period hypothesis' (Genesee, 2007; McLaughlin, 1992). This theory remains controversial since there
are many interfering factors such as motivation, incentive, and social or individual differences (McLaughlin, 1992). Children may learn English faster because of eagerness to communicate with peers and establish friendships, whereas adults may get by with common phrases

(McLaughlin, 1992). Therefore, it is the incentive and motivation for learning English which

differs for these two age groups, rather than biological ability. Research comparing children and
adults learning second languages as immigrants, does not support the idea that children are more
efficient (McLaughlin, 1992).

Based on the literature, teachers should expect that learning English is an extremely difficult task for all people. Language learning for children may actually be more difficult since they do not have the memory techniques or other learning strategies that older learners have

already acquired and may utilize to learn vocabulary and grammatical rules (McLaughlin, 1992).
Also, children from some cultures are extremely anxious and embarrassed when called upon to perform in a language they are in the process of learning (McLaughlin, 1992). Aside from native

accents, empirical research does not support these commonly held beliefs. Younger children do
not have an advantage due to their cognitive and experiential limitation (McLaughlin, 1992).
Myth 3: Children soak up new languages like sponges (Genesee, 2007).

Four participants agreed with this statement. This myth refers to children being able to acquire
languages with limited or no instruction. The reality is that English syntax and phonology are extremely difficult to learn. Difficult enough that many ELLs do not achieve age-appropriate

competence in English which leads to low academic performance (Genesee, 2007). This does not occur because these children cannot learn English, it happens because their teachers don't know
how to teach English and have false beliefs about how they learn languages. Olivia notes:

48

...I think they do absorb the language if they 're immersed in itfor a continuous period of
time. And if they're children, as in... elementary, school-aged, yah (Olivia)

Many classroom teachers do not know that children require 5-7 years to catch up to their grade level peers in academic language skills. Therefore, language instruction and support for ELLs must be in place for many years. PTs need to know about the later stages of language acquisition as well as the beginning. Most PTs commented on newly arrived students rather than
students that may have been in the country for 4 or more years and still require support. Myth 4: Proficiency in oral English is a prerequisite for academic instruction
(Genesee, 2007).

Four participants agreed with this myth. However, one of the participants did not agree with this
because she had witnessed a teacher effectively scaffold an ELL by providing one-on-one

instructions, ensuring understanding, and supporting the child to help them succeed. This participant believed that teaching efficacy depended on the amount of effort the teacher is willing

to give because all children can succeed with the right support. A second participant believed this statement to be false because math and science are universal languages that do not require any knowledge of English to understand the concepts being taught. Because of the belief in English
acquisition as a necessary prerequisite for academic instruction, many teachers rely heavily on

ESL supports to teach English quickly in order for them, the classroom teacher, to take care of the rest of the child's education (Genesee, 2007). The following comments mirror this belief:
/ think so, yes... because... or at least they need to comprehend oral English, if not speak oral English, because if they 're giving a child instruction. Although they can use aids like pictures, and symbols. The language part of it is extremely valuable and they may not be
able to articulate what they want to back, but it' comprehending that oral language, I
think, is important, yah (Olivia)

... True, again just because other languages aren 't taught [or used in the classroom] (Katie)
... For academic success you would either need to know the language very well or have the
assistance there to get them through (Francis)

49

True, like if they can speak and understand then it would be easierfor them to learn (Linda)

In reality, ELLs are just as able to learn as any other child in the classroom as long as their language learning needs are addressed effectively (Genesee, 2007). All teachers, both classroom
and ESL, are responsible for teaching language skills. Classroom teachers can teach ELLs academic content as long as they utilize effective ELL strategies to support the child.
Myth 5: Children have a limited capacity for language. Learning two languages at

once can result in delays, incomplete mastery or even impairment in one of
the languages (Genesee, 2007; Sorace, 2007).

Myth 6: Bilingualism leads to linguistic confusion. E.g. children who switch between
two languages (Sorace, 2007).

Three participants agreed with each of these statements. They comment as follows: ...It's when parents or teachers intermix between the two that that's when the confusion
results... and that delays it... (Tina)

I guess that could be true. I guess that could be confusing but I guess its just when you are learning new languages it is important to do that so even if it might be hard to understandfor teachers, its something they need to... deal with I guess. I would say that
is true justfrom an experience that I've had... (Linda)

...It depends on how the child is understanding what's being taught (Katie)

When children switch between languages, known as code-switching, they do so deliberately

(Sorace, 2007). Teachers and families alike interpret code-switching as a sign of confusion and
begin to believe that additional languages should be introduced only when one has already been

well-established (Sorace, 2007). This belief deprives the child of valuable input (Sorace, 2007). Multilingual children actually have many cognitive advantages due to their multilingual
abilities, including an earlier awareness of others perspectives and better performance in certain

aspects of literacy based metalinguistic awareness (Genesee, 2007; Sorace, 2007). Children with better developed literacy skills in their first language acquire English skills more easily and to a
greater extent (Genesee, 2007). When teachers believe that children have a limited capacity for language, they tend to discourage first language maintenance and children do not reap the

50

benefits of multilingualism. Effective teachers draw on native language competence and prior
knowledge while encouraging its continued use (Genesee, 2007).

Unless teacher preparation programs have PTs address the myths and misconceptions that exist, their instruction, teaching strategies, feedback and assessment practices will be limited and only partially meet the needs of ELLs by superficially including them in the classroom (Emporia

State University, 1994; Harper & de Jong, 2004). Much of the PT education process is about 'unlearning' what we have been taught through prior experiences both inside and outside of the

classroom (McLaughlin, 1992; Torok & Aguilar, 2000). PTs may unlearn their false beliefs by
becoming consciously aware of their beliefs and their sources (Torok & Aguilar, 2000). PTs must

be exposed to diverse viewpoints and beliefs expressed by their peers and professionals in order
to further their understanding of myths and misconceptions and their effects on young learners.

Alternative perspectives may also be explored using simulations, readings, videos, and speakers. After exploring commonly held myths and misconceptions, PTs may begin to look at

teaching more critically and begin to identify the many educational inequities that exist (Torok & Aguilar, 2000). These findings are a good indication that PTs require more information about
how language learning and language teaching works in reality.

Mandatory Course Versus Infusion

All of the PTs believe that a mandatory course on ELL teaching would be valuable.
Parallel to the literature, the majority of participants believe that a large authentic experience
along with the course content would be the most effective method of enhancing ELL competence

in teacher preparation programs (Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003). The following comments illustrate this belief:

51

I definitely think that it would be, it would be... valuable however ifyou don't have

practical experience working with children who are ELLs Ifeel like that course would be
less valuable because when you are reading strategies out of textbook and you 've never

tried them, its great, I mean they are still valuable, and you are gaining valuable information and knowledge but ifyou cannot try them at all, put them to practice then when you get into the field you are going to have to learn it all over again. So I think that
it would be valuable if it had a large practical component to it (Olivia)

That would be extremely valuable... I would have liked to have... a whole course on that
but unfortunately we didn 't... was just a few hours which I thought was ridiculous... just

give us more direct instructions... in terms of how to teach them and how to assess them and because what we do with English language learners can be applied to all students... so we really should have like a whole, one whole course on it (Mary) Really valuable... I was lucky that in my placement it wasn 't really an issue and I say lucky because I don't think I would have really been prepared... we haven't really learned enough to know what to do, and ifI was to be in [a school] where 90% of the
kids in that school are ELLs, I'd be screwed! We definitely need a mandatory course in education... I'm concerned that I, right now, that I wouldn 't be prepared enough, I mean

I could, I would definitely be able to begin but I wouldn't necessarily be able to maintain... so I would have enough to begin but I would definitely need supportfrom everyone else to be able to best help that child learn what they need to learn (Tina)

/ think it would be really valuable because Ifeel like ...I don't know anything... I think I wouldjust want the experience actually working one-on-one and learning the techniques, rather then just being told... I want to see it, and I want to be able to do it... So if it was...
a course where it... gave me information but at the same time had a practical component, I think that would be... great (Francis)

Definitely important especially because we live in Ontario and it is a growing diverse community, probably one of the largest in Canada so we will encounter in all of our classrooms someone who speaks a different language so... definitely important (Linda)

Overall all participants agree that there needs to be more ELL content within their preparation and that a single elective course on ELLs or dismissing the content all together is ineffective. However, there was a variance in responses regarding appropriate methods of addressing the issue. While some participants believe that infusing throughout all of the existing courses is better, some believe that a mandatory course is better while the remaining believe that
implementing both simultaneously would be best.

According to the literature, infusing content into existing courses alone is just not enough
to prepare PTs for ELLs in the classroom. Romi & Leyser (2006) found that many universities

52

worldwide have begun to infuse content; regarding children with special needs, yet the addition of 'some' content is not effective. The infused content must be in-depth and also requires a practical component for optimal effectiveness (Romi & Leyser, 2006). The participants in this study had strong comments on this issue and many noted the superficiality of the infusion model.
They note:

/ think that infusing it through... to have more ofa component... I think equally with ELL as with special needs, I think throughout... I reallyfeel that there was an effort made to, to always bring in modifications and accommodations to lesson plans and to course, to, when
we 're talking about strategies and best practice, so I can't say that wasn 't done but I think to further do it would be valuable... Because you are not teaching ELLs in isolation... you are

still using the government curriculum and the content to teach your class... it would be different ifyou were working one-on-one with these children and that's what you would do as an ESL teacher... And you would get your additional qualifications to do that, so Ifeel that it should definitely be integrated through everything that we are learning about teaching
curriculum because that's what we 're actually going to be doing but I do still think that

somewhere in there, there should still be a practical component (Olivia) ...Justfocusing on it throughout all subjects, which they did a little bit butjust making
sure that... the students, the teachers are understanding that, how to respond to someone who is an English language learner, in all different areas (Linda)

/ think a mandatory course would be more beneficial because the classes didn 't even talk
about ELLs as much as that one [elective], and we learned so much about what we can

do... my friends and I were talking about it as well, how it should be mandatory (Katie)
I think that a lot of the time it gets lost when it gets infused... separate, just like they need separate time to learn English, we need separate time ofhow to teach. Basically I would
want... So that you know 'kay well a student comingfrom another country who is starting

right away... you can expect x, y and z, sort of... what are things that you can do to help bring them forward so if they have not have one word, for two weeks straight, ok well what do I do? How do I get this kid speaking in my classroom? How do I encourage them and say ok speak... what do I do? And so I think a case by case scenario which would be helpful, and then have like tools for us not only to help set up our classroom... What do
you do when language is a barrier also? So it would be really good to have some
strategies... Practical experience definitely important because that gives you opportunity to apply what it is you learned... ifyou don't have a chance to apply it, you are not going

to know what that looks like in real life (Tina)

Many of the graduates believed that a mandatory course would be more effective in

teaching the necessary knowledge for ELL competence. Participants believe that a mandatory course would be more in-depth and provide more linguistic knowledge then if it were infused

53

'lightly' throughout. Interestingly, one PT believes that the course would be better because she is
concerned with professors' ability to infuse the content. Despite these responses, according to

Farrell (2006) a single course is not enough for effective ELL preparation. When this information is isolated from other knowledge, the new information is minimal amongst other well established
beliefs (Farrell, 2006). Overall, a greater ELL focus is required for a well rounded program. Participants also believe that the course professor would have a facilitator rather than a
lecturer that delivers information by 'talking at' PTs for three-hours (Cruz & Patterson, 2005;

Torok & Aguilar, 2000). If information is heavily lectured, the likelihood of such information
being retained is minimal. Tina comments: ... You need to structure your classroom the way... you want children to learn so sitting and talking at me for three hours... is not beneficial to the way I learn and like what did I retain ? Pretty much nothing. What I learned and what I still understand all came from... hands on, because we weren 't talked atfor three hours... (Tina)

The sole participant, who exclusively believed that both should be implemented without
leniency towards either, stated the following:

/ think both should be done and that's how Ifelt it was done in my program where that discussion topic was brought up throughout the science, the gym, the language, everything. Because there won't only be... it be yah, it'll, they will be in all your subjects

right so you have to deal with it depending on what you are teaching (Linda)

It is evident in this statement that Linda is highly aware of the prevalence of ELLs in the classroom and all academic subjects. In accordance to the literature, all possible actions should be
taken in teacher education programs to enhance ELL competence and high quality teaching.

Since the literature suggests that neither alone is effective, yet each has its benefits, this is a good
indication that both should be actively pursued in teacher education.

54

In Future Classrooms

As demographics diversify, ELLs spend most of their day in regular classrooms. Even

with common ESL "pull-out" programs, ELLs are removed for a minimal portion in the day and
then returned to the classroom with teachers that have no ELL training (Clair, 1995; Dianda,

1992). All teachers need to recognize the many challenges ELLs encounter and know how to ease their transition into a predominantly English academic environment (Alfred, 1994; Tellez &
Waxman, 2005). Classroom teachers need to have a range of research-based instructional

practices that are found to be effective for ELLs, before entering any teaching situation (Waxman
& Tellez, 2002).

Self-Reported Future Practices: Strategies

Teachers of ELLs have to address the 'double demand' of teaching the English language and curriculum contents (Dianda, 1992; Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005; Flynn & Hill,

2005; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). Classroom teachers require an array of effective ELL classroom strategies to meet the needs of ELLs and provide them access to the curriculum content. A unique
combination of strategies will be necessary to respond to the number of native languages

represented and the unique individuals who speak them (Dianda, 1992; Gonzalez & DarlingHammond, 2000; Menken & Antunez, 2001; Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003; Verdugo & Flores, 2007; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). Effective instruction for ELLs goes beyond non-verbal supports, same native-speaking peers, relying on inservice development or experienced teachers that are in short supply (Dianda, 1992). In reality, many veteran teachers are also learning how to teach ELLs, alongside beginning colleagues (Dianda, 1992). Teachers must also understand that common strategies will not work for all children since they learn in different ways and different

55

rates. So what strategies do the participants in this study believe they will need in their future
classrooms? and where would they find them? Olivia, Mary and Francis comment as follows:
/ couldn 't list offstrategies until I sort ofknew the child and worked with the resource

teacher, but I know I'd get those strategies through... books and really through talking to
my colleagues about what works and what doesn 't and the level of the child... (Olivia)

... They sort ofjust like it would apply to any grade, but were are some things I know that
you can't do with older kids and that you can't do with younger kids... so that was ridiculous... but it was better then nothing... I guess... Yes, nothing was done in detail (Mary) ...I expected more understanding of the basic tools... and I think expected... more experience dealing with it, like I mean I was in apracticum where I had the... ELL

support worker... was my teacher and we barely talked about it... or Ijust expected it to be part of the... important information of the program, and it really wasn 't... a lot of the
ELL things that we learned were for children who were just beginning to learn the language, but it goes on, so I think it would have been beneficial to talk about how to... keep encouraging language development even if it is four orfive years later... that is one thing that I noticed, there was a lot offocus on younger, or newcomers to Canada... To

make sure that the students are ready, and have the tools, notjust the basic tools, and
have extensive understanding of the tools... (Francis)

There is no one right way to educate ELLs. Teachers should possess the skills of differentiated instruction to understand when their strategies are effective or ineffective for individual children (Coelho, 2007; Flynn & Hill, 2005; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). Tina appears to be aware of this
idea and she states:
They 're writing apiece about what they read, you are not going to correct the grammar,

you are not going to correct the spelling, you 're gonna look at what it, it, what the core
ofwhat they said (Tina)

Table 1 displays a list of strategies believed to be effective by PT graduates (seepage 57

for Table 1: Strategies Mentioned by Pre-Service Teachers & the Frequency ofReference). This

table should not be interpreted as prescribed best practices, but instead a highlight of a number of
practices that are identified as effective by the PTs through experience, research, courses and
education.

56

Table 1:

Strategies Mentioned by Pre-service Teachers & the Frequency ofReference
Strategy Frequency of

Reference 1) 2) 3) 4) Accommodations and Modifications Considering Learning Styles Draw pictures in journals Dual Language Books
2 2
2

1 1 2 1
1

5)
6) 7) 8)

Encouragement to Socialize (Intentional Friendship Building)
Guided Reading Hand Gestures Informal Reading Inventory (Burns/Roe One)

9)

Labelling Everything

3
1 1 1 1 4

10) Looking for Content (focusing on content)
11) Magnetic Letters

12) Media Literacy

13) Modeling (reading, writing, oral language) 14) Oral assessment of information
15) Peer Pairing (Share Native Language)

6 4 2 1 2
1 1

16) Pictures (Visual Cues/Aids)
17) Posters

18) Real Experiences 19) Scribe 20) Small Groups 21) The Arts (creative arts, music, drama) 22) Translators 23) Using a few key/common phrases in the Child's LI
24) Work with Names

6
6 1
1

25) Word Walls (bilingual/trilingual, if possible)

According to the literature, all of these strategies are found to be effective (Ontario

Ministry of Education and Training, 2005). However, an overreliance on a single or small set of

strategies is likely to be ineffective. It cannot be emphasized enough that each unique child
requires a combination of strategies that is effective for their learning needs. The PTs in this study most frequently commented on external supports within the school, changes to the classroom setting and materials, and teaching approaches. If PTs were given opportunities to share strategies, the 19 strategies with minimal frequency may have been better circulated.

57

Through the use of varying materials, instructional approaches, lessons and strategies,

teachers may provide ELLs access to the curriculum without watering down the knowledge or expectations (Dianda, 1992; Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003). With lowered expectations, ELLs are presented with a disservice that affects them even long after they leave an individual teacher's classroom (Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003). Innovative and creative strategies
may be implemented to better support ELLs, relieve struggles related to understanding instructions, participation in activities and the completion of classroom tasks (Evans, ArnotHopffer & Jurich, 2005).

One of the most common strategies found to be effective includes providing contextual

support such as visual materials, body language, gestures, thematic units, demonstrations, dual language books, written materials and visual arts. Contextual supports capture the symbolic

nature of oral and written languages (Waxman & Tellez, 2002). Modeling examples of finished
assignments as well as demonstrations of the process are effective contextual strategies used with ELLs (Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000). Contextual support limits the confusion caused by limited language proficiency. Other unmentioned contextual supports include concrete and auditory materials such as physical objects, films, graphic organizers and hands-on experiences (Dianda, 1992; Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). Although
rarely mentioned, media sources and technology-related strategies can also make classroom instruction more accessible for particular groups of children. The use of multilingual programs

will empower students to also utilize their own thinking skills and self-help, rather then total
reliance on the classroom teacher (Waxman & Tellez, 2002).

The Buddy System also known as peer pairing was a strategy recommended by all of the participants. The buddy system pairs the ELL with a fluent English-speaking student whose first language is the same as the ELL's (Dianda, 1992; Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005). The

58

purpose of this pairing is to have the fluent student assist the ELL with both language and understanding in the classroom (Dianda, 1992). Equally as important is varied grouping since
same-language buddies are not always available or willing to be paired with an ELL for all classroom activities. It cannot be assumed that there will always be access to a classroom buddy.

Varied groupings include pairs, triads and cooperative learning to provide opportunities of
hearing and speaking English (Dianda, 1992). Deliberately planned group activities and learning allow children to have social interactions which drive language learning, social cooperation and

collaborative learning (Flynn & Hill, 2005; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). Tina noted some of the
difficulties that may be involved with the use of a buddy system:
/ think a lot of times kids are put off a little bit, you know distant by kids who don't speak
the language that they speak so making sure that you foster a community of learners you

know where everyone is welcome... so that... this, that studentfeels apart of that classroom and can take risks and attempt to say words and not be afraid that they are

going to you know be made fun of or whatever (Tina)

When groups of children are given ample speaking time they establish relationships, take verbal risks and productive talk often emerges (Flynn & Hill, 2005). Conversation in many instances will be the means of learning for ELLs, therefore engagement them in academic

conversations with their peers is best. The teacher in all cases should act as only one language
model of the many available in the classroom (Waxman & Tellez, 2002),

Additional strategies that were not mentioned by PTs, but are highly emphasized in the literature as effective with ELLs include the use of visualization, recombination, questioning, read aloud, interactive journals, literature logs, instructional conversations, thinking aloud during explanations, breaking down the task into sequential and manageable segments, summarizing, key study skills (taking notes and preparing for tests), bilingual dictionaries, clarifying tasks, prelessons with key vocabulary and task previews, metacognitive strategies, large group discussions,

59

and building on cultural and linguistic knowledge (Dianda, 1992; Montgomery, Roberts &
Growe, 2003; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). Strategies such as colouring in pictures or cutting out shapes actually repress, discourage,

discriminate, and disenfranchise some individuals from participating in the classroom (Reiff &
Cannella, 1992). Children who are asked to do basic types of passive activities are not learning any academic content or English language and therefore it is not conducive to their learning or time in the classroom. Individual instructional activities should be limited in the classroom since children learn through interaction and conversation (Dianda, 1992). These activities can be very off-putting particularly if classroom peers are not doing a similar un-academic task. This situation emphasizes the importance of understanding instruction effectiveness and appropriate

expectations for all students (Emporia State University, 1994; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). All
children in the classroom, including ELLs, should complete activities that require higher

cognitive processes (Dianda, 1992). Children often interpret these basic activities as the teacher having low expectations of them (Waxman & Tellez, 2002). ELLs internalize these messages and begin to see themselves as incompetent; these feelings lead to 'learned helplessness' and may have lasting effects on the way ELLs continue through their education (Waxman & Tellez, 2002). All students require a balance of basic and complex skills which allows them to be challenged but
also successful in their schooling (Verdugo & Flores, 2007).

Efficacy ofstrategies. Many of the strategies implemented by teachers should be found
by research to be effective for ELLs (Waxman & Tellez, 2002). Unfortunately many beginning

classroom teachers rely on colleagues in the field to provide a list of strategies in which they may implement in their own classrooms. The use of colleague's strategies will not always yield favourable outcomes for the ELLs in the classroom. In order to understand the effectiveness of

60

strategies, PTs require opportunities to research their effects, test, experiment, practice and discuss strategies with peers and experts to evaluate and build a repertoire, prior to implementing
them with ELLs (Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000). While some PTs of this study believed

strategies learned from personal experiences, workshops, undergraduate programs, and readings about particular theorists would be effective, others blatantly stated that they didn't know, as the following comment from Tina shows:
/ think that you don't know if they are going to be effective you have to, its trial and error, you have to work with what you 've learned is an effective strategy and it may, it might not

work with this particular child so then you would have to take that cue and say ok well... and
try different things at that point to see ok well what does work, what does stick, and then

branch off that and buildfrom there (Tina)

Where the strategies were learned. Participants noted that many of their strategies were acquired from undergraduate programs, resource lists, workshops, conferences, course readings and discussions, personal experience and placement. Many Roots, Many Voices and Roots of Empathy are resources created by the Ministry of Education that were mentioned by the participants. Overall, textbooks were found to be the least effective method of acquiring and retaining new strategies. Several participants commented:
The name of the workshop, I don't remember... that was where I learned some of these

strategies... maybe an hour or something, on my own time. I wanted a certificate (Mary)
Personal [teaching] experience mostly... also... abroad, I went to Australia [...being in a

different environment really showed me what its likefor them] that personal experience stands out as one that really will help in the future... its common sense... you have to put

yourself in someone else's shoes of, someone who doesn 't understand a word ofEnglish, what would you need? And what would you want... and how would the classroom look to
you ifyou were trying your very best to pick up a new language... a lot of it comes from the ECE background in learning how to foster language with children who are typically developingfrom Canada, a lot of the strategies that you use are the same just more

geared towards the appropriate age level and the appropriate grade level.... (Tina)
Other places... my parents are teachers so, I think I saw a lot ofthat kind ofstuffas I

was growing up and I was in the classroom with them, so... that's one place I might have picked some ideas up... but overall it was mostly at school, discussing it (Francis)

61

I've learned many strategies in [a] placement with special needs children (Linda)

Looking further ahead, PTs plan to search for additional strategies on the internet where they can search for "what's new and what's worked for other teachers." Websites will also provide different exercises and activities for all levels of English language proficiency. PTs also plan to consult with parents and ESL teachers who have more experience, scholarly research, Ministry documents, and Teachers of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) books. Olivia
notes:

Well I would use the [ESL] curriculum... that would, that would be thefirst place I would
start, because those would be where I would get my objectives and some of the strategies

and the background of, the theory that I might not remember or even know myself, and I would use resources, I would go to the resource room at my school, or speak to the, the ESL resource teacher, if there wasn 't one I would, I would speak to another staffmember
whose... whose been, whose had ELL English language learning students in their

classrooms so I could hear about practical strategies that a person actually did not only read in a book. And also I have friends who were English language learners, and to even know what their experience was as children what they can remember and whatfrustrated them, I think that is an important place (Olivia)

Communication

Teachers with high-quality preparation are more likely to ensure that ELLs receive comprehendible communication (Dianda, 1992; Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005;

Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003). These teachers communicate easily, understand needs,
have a repertoire of strategies and resources, and are able to recognize when ELLs are not

learning (Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005). All classroom teachers who are prepared to teach ELLs have all of these skills when they graduate. Francis appears to be aware of the need to
have the skills in any event:
...I've never, I've never worked in a group ofall children who are learning English as a second language but... I think I would definitely need the resources (Francis)

62

When communicating with ELLs who have limited or no English proficiency, there are many language strategies that may be used for successful communication. Dianda (1992) highlights many strategies used by successful teachers of language minority students. In the
beginning stages of communication and English use, teachers must focus on the child's use of language for function and content rather than on grammatical form (Dianda, 1992; Gonzalez &

Darling-Hammond, 2000). When children are spoken to in the classroom, the English used must
be functional and purposeful. Children want to learn words that are useful and meaningful to

them (Dianda, 1992). These are the words that children will quickly acquire and use frequently. Students must be able to understand the words in order to learn them (Dianda, 1992). Linda
appeared to be aware of this basic approach to communication when she commented as follows:
What I did with one student was we labelled a lot of things, like we 'd do one day in the

classroom, one day in the kitchen, one day... and we labelled everything and they coloured it... and that worked out really well... (Linda)

With limited English proficiency, children require moments of modified speech in the
classroom instruction. Children require clarity, simplified language and slower speech in order for them to have the time necessary to process the input (Dianda, 1992; Flynn & Hill, 2005;

Verdugo & Flores, 2007). Effective teachers will frequently check for comprehension as they speak to ELLs. Although this type of attention is not always possible, it is crucial to monitor
comprehension and provide frequent opportunities to hear and use the English language. ELLs

require opportunities to transition into the English language without pressure, stress or any force. Like all other learners, ELLs require attention, praise, consideration, encouragement and support from their classroom teacher (Coelho, 2007). Students must be encouraged to speak English whenever possible, without any demands on their performance. ELLs also require appropriate background knowledge and extra time to interact with peers (Alfred, 1994; Flynn & Hill, 2005; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). Language learning does not occur without conversations and thus

63

children require opportunities to generate output and process input (Alfred, 1994). Allow ELLs to try, use, manipulate and practice the language and its sounds (Verdugo & Flores, 2007).

Speaking should be the first milestone for ELLs in the classroom and can be achieved through verbal scaffolding, high frequency words, modeling, questioning and instruction (Flynn

& Hill, 2005). Explicit instruction with letter sounds and recognition should be embedded in
interesting literature rather then through isolated drills and repetition (Flynn & Hill, 2005; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). At this stage of English learning, ELLs should be read to daily to provide vocabulary building opportunities, make predictions, book concepts and sequencing (Flynn & Hill, 2005). These concepts and skills are crucial to any student's academic success.
Once a minimal level of oral competence is established, the teacher can transition into

reading and writing (Dianda, 1992; Menken & Antunez, 2001). Although acquiring everyday English is relatively easy, ELLs will have more difficulty grasping the academic English which is highly connected to educational success (Flynn & Hill, 2005; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). For a

successful transition into reading and writing, children must also feel that they are ready to face the new challenge and must be given high interest reading material (Dianda, 1992; Flynn & Hill,
2005). According to Verdugo & Flores (2007) ELLs also require opportunities for discussion
before, during and after reading the text to assist with comprehension.

Recent graduates appear to have limited understanding of the process of teaching English
and communicating with ELLs in the classroom. Their responses are good indications of Faculties of Education requiring a greater emphasis on the stages of English language acquisition.
Many of the PTs have again turned to outside professional and other support for effective
communication with ELLs. They comment: / think the translator is really the biggest, biggest way to, to communicate (Olivia)

64

I would see if there's any other individual in the school who knows the language... or I would have translators if the school doesn 't already have them (Katie)

If there's children in the class that speak their language, I will definitely pair them up
because that will be much more helpful to the student and myselfand if not I would try to find maybe other students in other classes or teachers who can speak their language... and really if no one I'lljust teach them really slow and go step by step, repeat things a lot... and label everything in their language and English ifI can (Mary) ... And then I mean if need really be, going to the board and having a translator come into your classroom for a certain portion of the day to help foster that connection at the very beginning, so yah, translator... (Tina)

Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith (1999) found PTs to stress the need and importance for
ELLs to understand the teachers as opposed to the need for teachers to learn how to communicate

with their linguistically diverse students. However, participants of this study demonstrated more
of an understanding about communicating with ELLs, as they intend to incorporate some key

phrases in the learner's home language. They comment:
... If there... was another child in the room who spoke that child's first language, then I think it would be... applicable to, for them to be able to use that, like theirfirst language... really... quite often in the beginningfor giving instructions, for explaining
things but I cant really say I wouldfind a subject that would always be, that I'd always...

have the children use theirfirst language... (Olivia) Yes, I will... language arts for sure, drama, social studies, there is a lot ofhistory in different cultures you could bring that into language as well... yup (Katie) If it's beneficial to the students, they can write their like work out if theirfirst language and then translate it later and then have someone like proofread it... which subjects would I allow them to use theirfirst language? I think it depends on their level... so... if they are really, really low ELL learners it would be basically any subject... (Mary)

Yes in all subjects. Well because it gives you a chance to learn what, what someone else
calls something... whatever the other language is, it has its place throughout everything you do, its not isolatedjust in language orjust in math, its in a single part of everything

so using the verbal word using the written word I mean you cant label everything and you cant say everything in the other language but making an attempt to get apart of it (Tina)
Oh I love that, I love doing that stuff even, music, I think it is really important to bring

different music into the classroom, so music that incorporates different languages I think
it's is reallyfun to do, even having a board of the hello in all languages I think itjust

enhances the sense ofacceptance ofall differences, rather then pointing out the differences it is accepting them, and understanding them and respecting them (Francis)

... Rightfrom the beginning when they come into the school they have supportfrom...

there's ESL programs, so they 'II be like taken for core subjects... and that actually really speeds up the process, there is also a program called reading recovery... and that program helps with language acquisition as well, English language (Linda)

Children's home languages should be an important factor of teaching and learning in all

multicultural schools considering the wide array of benefits. The incorporation of children's first
language in the classrooms validates children's culture, beliefs, lifestyles and experiences. Children's native literature, music, art and expertise should be incorporated into classroom activities and the process of English acquisition. We need to further connect theory and practice in integrated ways that build on students' language, culture and experiences (Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000). It is important for classroom teachers to find ways to translate
important documents for children's families; this demonstrates meaningful efforts at communicating in a professional manner (Dianda, 1992; Flynn & Hill, 2005).

IT appears that the participants of this study recognize the importance of reciprocal
understanding. However in spite of this, the use of home languages is often short-lived and is simply used for the purpose of establishing a comfortable atmosphere and trustworthy learning environment until they acquire the English language. For that reason, the language strategies

mentioned, 'used' the students' linguistic diversity rather then embracing it in all aspects of learning. Including children's home language on a continuous basis will actually increase student
achievement, validate and build self-esteem, enhance their sense of their culture, and broaden world views (Alfred, 1994; Dianda, 1992; Menken & Antunez, 2001).

Children have a unique connection to their heritage language; this connection should be
explored in teacher education as a tool for teaching. Research consistently shows the link between increased student achievement with teachers who are inclusive of children's home

66

languages and cultures while teaching curriculum standards (Alfred, 1994; Menken & Antunez,
2001). Teachers must be linguistically responsive to students as well as culturally responsive.

Special Needs: Modifications and Accommodations Although many classroom strategies may successfully transfer from one need to another,

it is a common assumption that the needs of an ELL do not differ significantly from those of
other learners. However, strategies established for children with special needs are not always

appropriate for ELLs and ELLs are too often lumped with the broad grouping of children with
special needs. ELLs have different linguistic and academic needs from children with special needs, just as they do from the mainstream population (Antunez, 2002). Well prepared teachers

are able to recognize the difference between diverse needs and the methods required to address
them (Antunez, 2002; Emporia State University, 1994). Teacher education is obligated to prepare classroom teachers for the gifted to low functioning, special needs, learning styles, culturally

diverse and must also include the linguistically diverse (Emporia State University, 1994). The teacher is responsible for the academic and social competence of all their classroom children (Emporia State University, 1994). The certification requirements should necessitate PTs to understand and differentiate between children with special needs and ELLs to ensure teacher
quality in all Ontario classrooms.

There is an unmistakable influence towards the confusion of ELLs as children with special needs in teacher education. PTs indicate that the topic of ELLs would most often arise during discussions of articles regarding children with special needs, and modifications and

accommodations for special needs. A discussion regarding practices for children with special needs does not go hand-in-hand with discussions of effective ELL practice. Linda highlights the
misguided link between ELLs and special needs in the following:

61

Even with special needs we know that, that works really well and in some ways not knowing English is one type ofspecial need so I'd say that pictures would definitely work, that's something that they can recognize cause they, they have, probably have

seen it before, they have it in their, their home country as well... (Linda)

ELLs are not the same as children who have "challenges in language" because of the

associated cultural piece and other major factors. ELLs must be accommodated, monitored and
assessed as individuals with unique circumstances. Unlike some children with special needs, ELLs do not require modifications in the classroom unless the content is culturally biased. Academic instruction is understandable and accessible if language demands are reduced through accommodations unique to each ELL. However, accommodations may also be used as a tool for
academic language development (Alfred, 1994; Harper & de Jong, 2004). Accommodations must

go beyond helping ELLs to 'get around' academic language. Teachers must know how to provide appropriately scaffolded opportunities for ELLs to learn to use the language of the curriculum.

Accommodations should consider student's strengths, prior knowledge, skills, culture and needs.

Building Relationships

Establishing a relationship with a child who speaks limited or no English, may have experienced trauma, and may be experiencing culture shock is different then establishing a

relationship with any other child. PTs need explicit lessons on interpersonal relationships with
diverse children who have varying and difficult life experiences. Before graduating, teacher

education should require all PTs to demonstrate competence in the processes needed to establish
both ELL-teacher and ELL-peer interpersonal relationships (Emporia State University, 1994).

PTs should demonstrate cultural, social and affective knowledge as well as an understanding of
other variables that may affect interpersonal relationships in the learning environment (Emporia
State University, 1994). Classroom teachers need to understand appropriate and effective

68

assertiveness, gentleness and nonverbal communication in order to increase the self-control and

self-esteem of classroom children (Emporia State University, 1994). The need to establish a
relationship with the parents is evident in the following comments:
I would develop a relationship first... by, one of the, the members on the ESL team, if

there is an ESL team, it depending on the school does intake with the parents and gets
background knowledge about the sort of if their, their recent to the country and what

languages they speak and that sort of thing... make that extra effort to make them feel comfortable that they are open to learning and they know that they can trust you (Olivia) / would definitely speak to the parents ...I would make sure that my classroom is
inclusive so it has you know, like books and games that are from different cultures,

posters, just representing that people from different countries... for sure integrating language into the classroom somehow so if there are a few children who speak the
languagefrom a different county, integrating that into the classroom so just, ifyou sing like the good morning song or something they could say good morning in their own
language and then children start learning that as well (Katie)

... Reflect their culture in the classroom and not only on like a superficial basis where its
just like they 're in their traditional clothes or something but books that you know are written by Canadians of that, of that culture (Mary) I will try to learn a few of the key phrases in their language because that helps you develop a connection between them and if they see that you are making an effort to learn

at least something of what they bring with them to the classroom then they are more likely to, in return make an attempt to speak and learn English words so... (Tina) ... In terms of comfort in whole class in general I, I would probably set up some activities
to encourage community building in the classroom to involve that child in it, in a way that they would understand if their English was not there... (Francis)

The PTs in this study seem to understand the need to build relationships.

Comfort in the Classroom: Tokenism

Many teachers understand diversity at a superficial surface level. It is essential that
programs prepare PTs with a deeper understanding and commitment to diversity issues and the social injustices that exist in education. Creating comfort in the classroom goes further than the learning materials and publications. Teachers must reconsider their perspectives and examples, use learner-centred approaches, post children's work and communicate with families (Coelho,

69

2007; Dianda, 1992). Valuing diversity and inclusion, goes past the outside changes that most

people think of when it comes to classroom comfort. Changing posters, pictures and alphabets in
the classroom is inadequate to establishing a genuine sense of comfort and security.

The ability to create comfort in a multicultural or predominantly white classroom is the
same. All teachers require a deep understanding and ability to establish such a comfort since multilingualism is a Canadian reality (Coelho, 2007). Creating a sense of support and comfort in the classroom consists of changing beliefs and attitudes towards ELLs and about ELLs (Torok & Aguilar, 2000). When classroom peers and the teacher have an inclusive mindset and welcoming attitude, the classroom becomes a safe and comfortable place to take safe-risks and ask questions
(Flynn & Hill, 2005; Torok & Aguilar, 2000). This level of comfort will improve the acquisition

and retention of new knowledge and language, improve self-confidence and self-esteem, and increases the transfer between the classroom and out-of-school (Waxman & Tellez, 2002). The

following participants' comments indicate a good understanding of the need to build in comfort
and support in the classroom structures themselves. They comment:
...Label different parts of the room in that child's home language... I thinkjust to, to set

up the room so that the child is still interacting with other children so that, that you know, if, iffor some reason the teacher decides to have her kids in rows that are individual desks, to at least to put the child beside somebody, to set up that, that person,

that child is not alone in the room and, to definitely use a lot more visuals... (Olivia)
... Allow that child to, if like written assignments are given out to allow that child to write

in his or her home language which can be translated...just making sure to read books that incorporate the child's cultural background, having like... parent nights for parents to come in and maybe share somethingfrom their own culture with the children (Katie)
Just like making sure you say hello to them in the morning when they come in, you know

asking them did you have a good lunch, making sure that they know that they are apart of the classroom cause if they are new to the country or new to the city or whatever, they are not going to have the social connection that the students have had with each other from when they, you know like kindergarten, grade one,... grade four, so making them understand that they are equally as much apart of the classroom (Tina)

70

IfI have a student who doesn 't speak English, that would be a huge barrier, especially even in the very, basic things such as routine, something like if they wanted to go get a drink of water, I, I'm afraid thatlwouldn 't be able to understand, so very basic things like that... and then you don 'tfeel comfortable in the environment because you don't
know the language, like you... it's shocking, like they wouldn 'tfeel comfortable basically, I think that, that would be the basic barrier is a comfortfactor (Francis)

...It depends on the age group, but like doing like a cultural day, and like having like everyone bring in something, and kind ofget to know each other andfrom different
cultures... not like centering the student out of course, like he is differentfrom everyone

else you know, it would have to be like a whole class thing (Linda)

There is an indication that many participants are assuming that students have specific or unique experiences based on their local culture (Mongomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003). Utilizing cultural artefacts and cultural celebrations may be offensive or uncomforting to some individuals.
Teachers must understand that they need to proceed with caution and must get to know their

students, families and their experiences prior to changing the classroom environment. It is more important to build on what the child already knows, rather then focusing only on past experiences
and what they are familiar with. Connect the curriculum content to children's personal

experiences rather than their culture or background (Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003).
Using their authentic experiences is an effective method of establishing comfort in the classroom,

connecting with classmates while stimulating learning (Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003).

School environment and administration. A supportive school environment is necessary

to create positive school experiences and to enhance academic achievement. Exceptional schools are nurturing, inspiring, inclusive and caring environments with high attainable expectations for
all children (Dianda, 1992; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). All individuals, young and old, within the

school setting are seen in the same light. Although differences are recognized, they are accepted as important and no better or worse then any others (Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005).

71

Strong educational leadership and positive attitudes are crucial to effective ELL education within the school system (Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Flynn & Hill, 2005). All of the
professionals must be committed to equitable education even if it requires personal investments

and rising above frustrations (Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Waxman & Tellez, 2002). The school atmosphere and the professionals within it must come together to create a larger inclusive
community with shared goals and responsibilities, high levels of dedication and mutual respect.
The following comments identify the need for administrative support: If the school isn 't supportive of the program... there wont be this program and students

wont be able to learn it at... so it really depends on administration... in terms offunding my teacher got half of the funding that other classes got which was entirely unfair, so in that case it shows that the school wasn 't, it really wasn 't supportive at all... (Mary)
... Its important to have other members of the staff team to support you, I'd like to say that all schools are like that, but its not, the school community and atmosphere of within

.

the staff, I'm hoping its going to be very positive and supportive... that is a fear that I have that I'm in a school that isn't willing to support a new teacher (Olivia) I guess also... what I've seen is just, ifyou don't have a supporting staff or principal who had that mindset of diversity and inclusion... it becomes harder (Linda)
It is clear these PTs look to professional development in the schools.

ESL supports and educational assistants. Many PTs feel unprepared to collaborate with ESL professionals or Educational Assistants for the education of ELLs. In most cases, these feelings are caused by a lack of knowledge regarding the role of the support in comparison to
their own role. PTs' responses indicate, that they believe ELL supports are supposed to remove

the child from the classroom. This may be an indication that they would rather have the students withdrawn than have to teach them, which is consistent with the literature of unprepared teachers
(Alfred, 1994). The responsibility of teaching English is largely the responsibility of a

professional other than themselves, although they recognize that they are not totally removed
from the process. They comment:

72

Depending on, what level the child is at when they come, programs are built around the child and usually they are taken out of the class for... first it would be the alphabet and

then it would be reading and that program is working really, really well in Canada... to
get students up to grade standards or Ontario standards... oh gee I thought ofanother
one to say... oh and with ESL classes students are usually taken outfor math, science and

English because it's a smaller group and more one-on-one it tends to, it does tend to work really well and generally those subjects will be graded by that teacher so like report cards and again with that language (Linda) ... When I was in school I used to see a lot of teachers that would be designated to a specific
student, that would help that student learn English, I don't really know what would happen in

that class but the student would be pulled outfor a specific period of time and then... either
they would work on the school work that's being taught in the class but obviously they would

go much slower then the class would be going but the student would able to have that sufficient amount of time to work, so I think this is a teacher that's able to provide that much
time (Katie)

It's frustrating because some schools don't have ESL supports... and like what the hell are
you supposed to do? So my expectation if there was no ESL teacher onsite would befor the

board to have somebody extra, who comes into the school to, specifically to work with that
student, it would be my expectation that they wouldn 't say well, sorry no ESL teacher at this school, no ESL supportfor that kid... but to have somebody brought in... and... and making

sure that they didn 't slip through the cracks and like I would make sure of that too as the classroom teacher. [If there was an ESL support, they would] give me strategies of like things
that they 've done that work, things that I can incorporate on a day-to-day and to really do like an intensive... like an intensive programming time justfor that student one-on-one... or whatever their ratio would need to be... so that they are getting exposure to language in a small group 'cause that's really important too (Tina)

Faculties of Education need to teach PTs the role of ESL supports for effective

professional collaboration. PTs also need to know what to do should support be weak. Too many PTs have the false notion that children labelled as ELL are the concern of an alternative professional (Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005). The participants of this study have pre-established notions of the roles and responsibilities of ESL support workers. However, uncertainty is evident with their use of "I think". Based on the participants' comments it appears that their beliefs are rooted in non-training related experiences.
This inference is drawn from the lack of confidence in their responses and the fact that teacher

education was never mentioned. The following portray the reliance on 'specialist knowledge' for
the bulk of English language teaching and uncertainty:

73

... / think that persons there to provide you support and resources and to give you strategies to use in your room with your students and to, and to be a resource for you so I think that they have the expertise, the extra qualifications in this and classroom teachers may not, have it,
have that background (Olivia)

... Well I think their ultimate goal is to get the students integrated into mainstream classrooms with enough ofan English language background to help them and... if the student needs support during that transition period then the teacher even though she's not the ESL teacher for that kid anymore she should provide that support and help him out during you know... after school or whenever... when I went to the homeroom of one of my classes I was so
shocked to see that all of the ELL students were sitting at the back of the classroom in a row

and I'm wondering, yes I know she has like thirty kids but... I'm just wondering what she does to help out these students during like when they are learning about language and I think it should be the homeroom teachers responsibility, like they should work together with the ESL
teacher, so... even though the primary responsibility [of teaching the English language] is the ESL teacher, it, it, it really should be both. Both teacher's responsibilities (Mary)

To be honest, I have never been shown... what exactly they do, I have just been, the kids will leave for an hour a day and I have no idea what they do in that room, and I don't know, I'm sure the teachers know, but they, they haven't shared the information so my expectations of them... well overall, I, I would want them to help the students learn English and help them eventually, obviously not right away, but eventually reach their grade expectations in order to succeed in the future... but I don't think it is just the responsibility of the support teacher, I think it is also the responsibility of the classroom teacher to take some of those techniques
and that is why they should be working together (Francis)

Although the participants of this study claim that they will seek out professional support, the literature contradicts this finding. Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich (2005) found that the

knowledge ESL supports is often not valued or sought after and in some cases classroom teachers
went as far as resenting supports in their school. Despite these findings, it is important for the classroom teacher and ESL support to work in partnership for ELLs. Both professionals are integral to language programs and responsible for the documentation of English development,
monitoring progress and updating information (Coelho, 2007; Dianda, 1992; Evans, ArnotHopffer & Jurich, 2005).

The consequences of dividing educators as 'general' and 'specialist' plays out in tensions and disturbing ways as teachers fulfil only the roles they deem to be their own (Evans, ArnotHopffer & Jurich, 2005; Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000). This illusionary division of

74

responsibilities has major implications for ELLs. ELLs are left with classroom teachers who lack

competence, embrace biases and misconceptions, and hold falsely justified social distance from ELLs and professional team teaching (Dorrington & Ramirez-Smith, 1999; Evans, Arnot-Hopffer
& Jurich, 2005; Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000).

The assumption that classroom teachers do not need any ELL preparation is clearly incorrect and unacceptable. Classroom teachers, in reality, spend more time with ELLs then any
type of additional specialist that may supplement the classroom program. Teachers require much of the same information about ELLs that support teachers require (Evans, Arnot-Hopffer &

Jurich, 2005; People for Education, 2008). With or without ESL professionals, the classroom teacher must continue the English language development support in the classroom and must be
ready and knowledgeable to do so effectively (Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005; People for
Education, 2008).

75

Beyond the Classroom: The Value of English

In Canada, it is evident that a high value is associated with the English language. English

is viewed as a prestigious language. Thus, English is a language that many individuals are highly motivated to learn. Nevertheless, with all of the excitement of learning English many linguistically diverse individuals lose sight of home language maintenance and the value attached to it. Many teachers also encourage the use of English while unknowingly neglecting the importance of maintaining heritage languages. Rather than empowering students, promoting equity and embracing diversity, children are assimilated to into the Canadian culture and norms. In Faculties of Education, the value of English is not explicitly taught but instead is implied in many hidden messages. The idea of English being at the top of a language hierarchy is evident in the responses of the participants:
... In my experiences I haven't seen a lot ofdifferent languages being taught or children

being motivated to even speak their own languages in the classroom so I think English is
very important (Katie) ... It is also importantfor them [parents] to speak, to learn some English too I guess, if

they don't, because, ifthey are living here they are going to need to know English, (laughs) so that goes both ways (Linda)

In reality, the opposite is true as students are enriched by their multilingualism and benefit

from vast cognitive and social advantages (Dianda, 1992). Children are very sensitive to people's attitudes and are aware when their language is considered unvalued (Sorace, 2007). It is
important for children to feel that all of their languages are valued and that they can all be used in

Canadian life, present and future. Given that additional language acquisition takes time, children require continued support in their first language to ensure that they do not fall behind in content learning (McLaughlin, 1992). Competence in a heritage language can support the development of

English academic language skills (Genesee, 2007). Native language skills and content knowledge

76

can be transferred from one language to another if appropriately encouraged, supported and
guided.

Benefits ofMultilingualism

Language provides more than economic benefits to multilingual speakers. Language is

much more than the mere translation or understanding of words from one language to another.
Many of the participants in this study are aware of this benefit: ... There are benefits for employment, for, for even just supporting peers and colleagues
who have the same language and are still ELLs... (Olivia)

Oh yah there's lots ofbenefits. I think there's a lot ofjobs out there that being bilingual, trilingual can really help out a lot in this society especially with the number of
newcomers coming to Canada (Katie)

...Like I was telling my kids when you grow up its really helpful in terms ofjobs so like even though they don't know English now they know their own first language... it will help them when they grow up... when they... go... andfindjobs, they can do like translations and people will want to hire them more... then the person that can't, that is only unilingual so... Just in terms of translating, like helping the teachers translate, we use the kids a lot to help translatefor the newer students that didn 't speak English at all for the teachers, and then they can help to translate for parents (Mary) ... More and more everyday is it becoming apparent that having more then one language
gives you a one up, not only socially in our multicultural city but also in commerce, in

business, you will, ifyou have two candidates who are the exact same on paper and one speaks another language that person has one leg up on everybody else (Tina)

Language is a form of expression, relationships, culture and identity (Torok & Aguilar, 2000).
There are many non-linguistic advantages of multilingualism that are unknown by teachers due to

their lack of education in multilingualism. For example, Sorace (2007) found that bilinguals are better at coordinating different types of information and at ignoring irrelevant input. There is also
scholarly evidence that suggests that bilingualism may protect its speakers against deterioration

of cognitive abilities in old age (Sorace, 2007). These are two of the non-economic benefits of

77

multilingualism and also two more important reasons to encourage first language maintenance.
Again, Francis and Linda comment: First of all, I think it's just interesting, and I think kids find it interesting... going to

benefit me in the future because it is job opportunities, you are able to communicate with
certain people in everyday situations or even at a job and in Canada, when there is so

much diversity I think it is really important to be able to communicate with people who
may not speak English (Francis)

... It would definitely help you in the workforce... I guess still keeping that link to their

culture... is important... have that tie with theirfamily as well (Linda)

Multilingualism in the classroom is beneficial to all of the classroom children. When children are exposed to multilingualism in a supportive environment, all children in the classroom develop a respect for diverse languages and cultures. Multilinguals in the classroom can help other children to become further aware of the diversity that exists in this world, their communities and their classrooms (Torok & Aguilar, 2000). This was noted by Tina:
It gives them a window into someone else's culture, someone else's life and sort of opens up

the thinkingfrom a very box like fashion into an understanding that they are part of a global, like they are apart ofsomething global... and... that their world exists beyond the classroom, beyond the city that they live in, into different countries and they otherwise wouldn 't have that exposure to have first hand exposure is something... like so much more beneficial then
watching a video on Japan or whatever (Tina)

Encouraging English in Homes

Many people believe that being in an environment where you are exposed constantly to English will make you learn English quicker. It is believed that the more English children hear, the quicker their own skills may develop (McLaughlin, 1992). Conversely, research evidence

suggests that this is not necessarily true. The only skills being acquired are conversational skills
used for communication whereas academic proficiency is not being developed (McLaughlin, 1992). Therefore, teachers should not recommend English use at home because more English does not equal greater proficiency. On the contrary, this is a disservice to children since their

78

home language enables them to continue acquiring the knowledge and academic content required for educational success. A strong negative message is given when families are asked to relinquish their heritage languages for English. The participants in this study, however, appeared to believe that English should be practiced at home contrary to what the literature states. They comment:
/ would [encourage English in the home], because first of all I think that if the parents don't speak English it is importantfor them to know some key phrases as well, and the

student could... teach them in that sense and it could be kind ofa family challenge, and
that would make it... a little bit easierfor them to communicate with the school if they

had an issue or with the teacher if they had a concern, and it's practice (Francis)
/ would encourage the use ofEnglish language at home over the summer holidays,

definitely... I would... support the parents reading to the child in English (Olivia)

The urgency of having ELLs learn and understand English is understood by all educators. Language is clearly critical to the learning process since it is the medium of instruction (Flynn &

Hill, 2005). Yet, when families are encouraged to use English in their homes it merely provides
extra practice in conversational English at the expense of their native language proficiency. Language loss is an extremely disturbing issue and an additional struggle for ELLs and their families. When family members are encouraged to use English in the home, they are risking losing a part of their identity. Children's native languages should be an asset to their learning. Research has consistently shown that children who continue to develop their home language while learning English attain higher levels of literacy and academic achievement

compared to children who begin to lose their first language when learning English (Coelho, 2007; Genesee, 2007; Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000). Based on this fact, all teachers should be
encouraging multilingual families to nurture their heritage languages and avoid detrimental loses.

Teacher education should teach the importance of encouraging and incorporating heritage languages into English language development in any and every way possible. All teachers must

recognize the uniqueness and invaluable nature of home languages for the speakers of that

79

language (Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000). However, two of the participants did recognize the importance of maintaining the home language. They noted:
Iwouldn 't... really tell parents to, to focus more on one language than the other but

because I know my parents didn 't do that with us but we still learned Punjabi and
English, we spoke Punjabi at home all the time because parents don't want their children to lose their home cultures so I don't think I would really ask parents to do that (Katie) Yes but notforced like I don't think it's a necessary thing you have to speak language at
home in orderfor you to develop it in school but I think it's beneficialfor the student to

sort of help teach the parents also because a lot of times what will happen, the student then becomes a translator between home and the school, that's a lot ofstress and a lot of
pressure on anybody let alone a kid so if they are constantly having to go home and

explain everything that they did you know in another language or you know read a letter or you know like whatever the case may be that puts a lot ofstress on the kid so if they 're slowly introducing new words to their parents at home, while maintaining their home
language I think is very important to maintain their home language also and itjust

alleviates a little bit ofstress and a little bit ofanxietyfor the kid (Tina)

Heritage language proficiency has a direct positive relationship to the acquisition and

proficiency of additional languages (Genesee, 2007; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). As a classroom teacher of ELLs, it is necessary to understand the concept of transferability (Flynn & Hill, 2005; Genesee, 2007; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). Flynn & Hill (2005) and Dianda (1992) recommend that teachers actively pursue ways to support the child's continued development of their primary language at home since reading and academic knowledge may be transferred. The first language may be used as a tool in learning, by clarifying and enhancing a child's understanding of academic content in the classroom. An effective language strategy is for classroom teachers to

encourage children to get assistance at home in their first language from siblings, parents, extended family members or friends (Dianda, 1992). Linda comments as follows:
/ think I would encourage the use, and it would... have to work with the family as well, I
guess we 'd hope that there is someone in the family that can speak a little bit ofEnglish

to be able to help with that... yes so I think it is important to have that go on because if not, they wont learn as quickly, eventually they will learn but it wont happen as quickly if they don't have the support (Linda)

80

Rather then encouraging families to incorporate the English language into their homes, it is more effective and beneficial for the student to bring their 'home' into the classroom. Teachers

should make a genuine effort to know their classrooms student's language, culture and history
(Flynn & Hill, 2005; Verdugo & Flores, 2007). It is well known that a family's use of English in

the home does not necessarily promote English for academic purposes (Genesee, 2007). With this knowledge, teachers should instead make attempts to utilize the child's prior knowledge and experiences as important to the child's learning process. Teachers need not worry about the first
language impeding on the development of English since children will usually do better in the language spoken in the community (Sorace, 2007). In most cases, it is the home language that is threatened and in need of any concern.

81

CHAPTER V: GENERAL DISCUSSION, RECOMMENDATIONS AND
IMPLICATIONS

General Discussion and Recommendations

This exploratory study highlights essential issues and changes that need to take place.
Southwestern Ontario Faculties of Education are lagging behind the changes in classroom demographics. Although ELL knowledge is essential for all classroom teachers, this does not
appear to be reflected in professional teacher education programs.

This is particularly obvious when PTs themselves realize that they lack the necessary ELL

training, desire more linguistic knowledge and claim a lack of preparation. Too many PTs feel unconfident in their abilities to fulfil the multiple roles and responsibilities of a classroom teacher for ELLs in their future classrooms. However, PTs feel that they can overcome this issue in the
future through inservice development, experience, trial-and-error or support from experienced
teachers. The reality is that no certified teachers should feel or perceive their ELL competence as

being low. Unfortunately, in this investigation PTs did recognize their ELL competence as low in
most cases and also perceived their peer graduates as unprepared for ELLs in the classroom. The lack of ELL content within education programs has resulted in ill-prepared teachers; teachers who still embrace ingrained myths and misconceptions regarding ELLs, English learning and the English language. ELL knowledge has been dismissed as the responsibility of ESL 'specialists' or the knowledge of 'specialized' professionals. As ELLs appear in all classrooms,

this knowledge is no longer reserved for 'specialization', rather this knowledge is essential to all
classroom teachers for the effective education of ELLs. PTs require a greater extent of mandatory information regarding second language acquisition, bilingualism, and the needs of linguistically diverse children. Along with this information, PTs require strategies and guided practical
experiences with ELLs in realistic settings.

82

Professional preparation programs must be reassessed to ensure that they are comprehensive and thorough in their training and certification. Teacher education programs are largely responsible for this current condition of unpreparedness. Education programs continue to overlook the importance of preparing classroom teachers for linguistic diversity and the
importance of validating and encouraging native languages, inside and outside of the classroom

(Tellez & Waxman, 2005). Based on the preliminary findings in this study, there is a good
indication that primary-junior PTs are not adequately prepared to meet the needs of ELLs in the
classroom.

If high ELL standards were in place at the teacher preparation level, certification programs would be addressing the interests and needs of ELLs in the classroom. It is evident that the minimal mention of ELLs is a slight effort which moves towards an equitable education system, yet it is still inadequate for the frequency of ELLs present in the classroom. It is indisputably evident that Ontario's education system is still promoting a monolingual learning

environment and academic experience that highly values English as its language of preference in
all regards. Although educational equity may never be established in its purest sense for ELLs in the classroom, all educators must continue to strive for educational excellence, high quality teaching and learning, and the highest of standards for our future generations (Gandara, MaxwellJolly & Driscoll, 2005; Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003). Greater action needs to be taken to prepare teachers and enhance ELL competence. Faculties of Education, the Boards of Education and the Ministry of Education must revive their efforts of providing quality and equitable education to all students. The underachievement or

under-teaching of any student cannot be tolerated by any individuals, inside or outside of the classroom. This is especially true for a country that prides itself on multiculturalism and depends
on immigration.

83

The following recommendations and professional development needs were established based on the preliminary findings of this study and in collaboration with the participants to
ensure applicability to actual graduates of Southwestern Ontario's Faculties of Education.

Recommendation 1: It is recommended that the current graduation requirements and certification criteria are revised to include ELL preparation and competence.

The current graduation requirements do not certify that teachers have the breadth and

depth necessary to teach ELLs with the high standards expected. The current graduation
requirements and method of certification is an inadequate means of measuring knowledge, ability, and teaching skills. Teacher certification requires a rigorous and meticulous process to

ensure teacher quality. The mandated requirements must incorporate linguistic knowledge areas
to declare a professional level of teacher competence. Professional training for teaching ELLs

should be given a higher priority in preparation programs. The province's certification criteria must include more of an explicit focus on ELL's education (Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005). There is a serious and immediate issue when teacher preparation programs do not require
that their PTs are prepared to teach the ELLs in their classrooms. It is suggested that PTs be required to demonstrate their abilities, to ensure they have acquired ELL competence, prior to

graduation. Graduation requirements must explicit state the expectations of high-quality teachers.
Teacher certification criteria also determine the effect of preparation since courses are typically prepared based on the exiting requirements. If policy makers change the certification

requirements for classroom teachers, Faculties of Education would have no choice but to comply with the mandated policies (Menken & Antunez, 2001). We must set high demands of Ontario's
teacher candidates to ensure that the highest calibre of classroom teachers is maintained.

84

Recommendation 2: It is recommended that all Faculties of Education incorporate a

mandatory ELL course and an explicit focus or infusion of ELL course content. With the addition of a mandatory ELL course and content, teachers may begin to posses the knowledge, skills, understanding and practice necessary to enable their ELLs to access the same rigorous academic content as their peers (Menken & Antunez, 2001). The addition of a mandatory course will ensure that all PTs obtain at least a minimum level of ELL competence. All graduating teachers must be able to effectively teach ELLs due to their prevalence in Ontario classrooms. High-quality teachers must continue to be the aim of all professional teacher training
programs.

Recommendation 3: It is recommended that the Faculties of Education consider extending the duration of Pre-service Teacher Education to thoroughly prepare, explore areas and for adequate time to process all the newly acquired knowledge.

Many participants feel that their programs should be extended to incorporate all of the necessary components of teacher preparation. Programs may be lengthened by additional courses,
practicum experiences and practical pieces related to course contents. This recommendation

stems from the belief that no teacher should enter the classroom feeling unprepared to do so.
Faculties of Education are required to train competent teachers who are confident in facing classroom challenges, yet it is questionable whether our aims are realistic in a restrictive time.

Participants recommended that the teacher education program be extended to a minimum of 18
months and a maximum of 3 years.

Although many PTs were in favour of extending the pre-service programs to ensure a

thorough preparation, PTs also recommended the removal of particular courses if an extension were not possible. The purpose of removing a current course would be to insert a mandatory
course regarding ELLs or ELL-related topics.

85

Recommendation 4: It is recommended that there be more direct instruction, discussion, observation and greater understanding of ELLs classroom needs.

More time on ELL-related topics would have allowed PTs to collaborate with their
colleagues about effective teaching strategies, what not to do in the classroom, methods of

establishing a rapport with the child and their family, and other materials or tools that can be
included in the classroom. PTs recommend additional opportunities for intensive discussions on

materials, assessments and language acquisition. Parallel to the Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich
(2005) study, PTs were upset with the lack of time, in any of their Bachelor of Education courses, devoted to direct instructions or discussions regarding how to teach English to ELLs.
Policy makers, the Ministry of Education, education and inclusion experts, and classroom

teachers of ELLs must convene to identify the current needs of teacher preparation, teacher
responsibilities and ELL competencies necessary for classroom efficacy. The purpose of this
assembly is to chart a course of action to make the necessary changes and incorporate high quality instruction for all prospective teachers (Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005).

Recommendation 5: It is recommended that Faculties of Education take more accountability for the certification of Ontario teachers.

PTs recommended active efforts to change teacher's attitudes into inclusive attitudes with
the aim of ensuring that teachers are sincere in their commitments to effectively teach all

children. It is recommended that Faculties of Education or the Ontario Ministry of Education
develop an ELL program/resource evaluation tool to evaluate the quality of teacher training
programs for ELLs and identify areas in need of improvement (Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly &

Driscoll, 2005). Cultivating and fostering an inclusive mindset along with these program tools
will enhance the accountability of Faculties of Education for the quality of teachers they prepare.

86

Recommendation 6: It is recommended that amendments be made to the existing structure

of mandated placements and practical learning experiences.

In correspondence to Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll's (2005) results, the participants of this study expressed a need to observe or collaborate with a successful classroom teacher of ELLs. This observation or collaboration period must also be ongoing rather than a superficial

one-time experience since educators can be effective some days and less effective on others. The participants would have liked the opportunity to encompass more placements as a requirement of
the Bachelor of Education to diversify their experiences in the classroom. Many of the PTs would

like their programs to try and place students in at least one situation with ELLs in the classroom.

Recommendation 7: It is recommended that the following linguistic knowledge be
incorporated in one or more of the B. Ed. courses, since it is deemed necessary for all classroom teachers.

Researchers and classroom teachers have agreed that teachers of ELLs need at least the following knowledge and skills in order to effectively meet the needs of their students; a basic understanding of bilingualism and multilingual development, fundamentals of linguistics (basic
psycholinguistics and sociolinguistics), knowledge of current literature regarding ELLs, levels of

language proficiency, structure and grammar of English, role of languages and culture on learning, demands that education place on diverse learners, methods of making academic content

accessible to diverse learners, ability to integrate language development with academic
instruction, respect for diverse languages, incorporation of native languages in instruction, needs and characteristics of ELLs, needs and characteristics of children who've had limited schooling experience, defragmenting myths and misconceptions regarding ELLs, and belief in students as

individuals (Alfred, 1994; Antunez, 2002; Dianda, 1992; Evans, Arnot-Hopffer & Jurich, 2005;
Gonzalez & Darling-Hammond, 2000; Menken & Antunez, 2001; Montgomery, Roberts & Growe, 2003; Waxman & Tellez, 2002).

87

The content mentioned above is, beyond doubt, necessary for teachers to effectively assist
students in the process of English language and academic content learning. The current lack of deep linguistics knowledge poses a threat to the quality of teachers certified in Southwestern Ontario. Linguistics and the process of language learning are fundamental knowledge pieces that teachers require as certified experts in education. It is important to ensure that prospective

teachers are equally knowledgeable in cultural diversity and linguistic diversity since both are
required in multicultural Canada.

88

Implications

There is some indication that the Faculties of Education in Southwestern Ontario offer teacher certification while doing little to ready their PTs to work effectively with linguistically
diverse children. Teachers are not receiving the preparation necessary for them to fulfil their roles

as an educator. If PTs' beliefs can be altered by more knowledge about issues and needs, the quality, structure, and content of preparation courses must be evaluated and scrutinized. Teachers of ELLs require additional training, skills, knowledge and practice in order to effectively meet the needs of multilingual children. Based on the preliminary findings of this study, Faculties of
Education are not requiring PTs to prepare for our changing classroom demographics. The reality

is that all teachers must anticipate teaching at least one ELL during their teaching careers. An
educational reform must occur to ensure that teacher preparation programs are taking obligatory

actions to ensure high standards in education and optimal teacher quality in all classrooms. These issues are in serious need of attention or ELLs may continue to be neglected, mistreated, misinterpreted, undereducated and detrimentally impacted in our elementary classrooms. Based on this exploratory study, it is believed that teacher education in Southwestern Ontario requires a thorough investigation of their efficacy. In the meantime, it is necessary to incorporate the immediate addition of ELL-topics into the existing course content. All Faculties of Education must strive to maintain high standards and equity in education.

Limitations to the Study

Due to the nature of exploratory research, this study has particular limitations. Since the

sample was non-randomly chosen the results may not be generalized to the whole population. The results of this study will only apply to the sample of individuals used. Even so, the findings
are a useful indication of the effectiveness of the central phenomenon, teacher preparation, under

89

investigation. A relatively small sample was used because qualitative research standards rely on the quality of data collected rather then quantity. I was able to elicit large pieces of descriptive information from a small group of motivated volunteers interested in the study. These participants were eager to share their in-depth opinions, experiences and thoughts. These participants provided the richness of detail that was sought in this study. The participant depictions and contributions that emerged are inconsistent in their level of detail. This may be the result of my rapport with some participants and also due to particular
personality traits. Some participants were more revealing then others in their interview responses

and therefore were utilized more in the final report. A few participants were more narrowly focused in their interpretations of the interview questions and also in their provided responses. The quality of data collected and the interpretation of results are greatly dependant on the
skills and experience of the researcher. During the data collection process, the researcher may

have influenced the quantity and quality of information elicited from participants. The skills of the researcher also influence how well the data is summarized and analyzed for the final report. The insights of this study are based on the researcher's personal and professional lens. It is
understood by the researcher that alternative perspectives and interpretations may exist. This paper is an initial exploration of teacher preparation for ELLs in Southwestern

Ontario, from the PTs' perspective. These preliminary findings indicate the attitude, knowledge, skills, abilities and competence levels they are taking with them into their first classrooms where
their fears and the unknown will be played out, confronted, challenged and hopefully overcome.

90

Direction for Further Research

It is hoped that this exploratory study is seen as an initial step towards a better
understanding of teacher preparation in Ontario. It is evident that there are still areas of ELL
preparation that need further investigation. These preliminary findings aim to draw more

attention to the impact certified teachers have on ELLs when they are unprepared to educate

them. Without this attention, our future Canadians may face challenges in education and language
learning. Only limited progress has been made in the form of course electives and minimal

mention of ELLs. To sustain progress, further advocacy and research must be conducted
(Waxman & Tellez, 2002).

Based on these initial findings, there is an indication for a rigorous large scale study.

Based on my analysis of this investigation, there is a good indication that the Faculties of
Education may be largely responsible for ineffectively preparing teachers for ELLs in the classroom. This phenomenon requires a deeper investigation to determine the exact areas of

disconnect and lack of preparation. There are still many pieces of the inefficacy equation that
remain unknown, yet are crucial to the education and academic success of linguistically diverse learners. Teacher education is principally responsible for the efficacy of classroom teachers.

Further investigation should also explore the various methods of preparing PTs by examining the growing literature base. Although the overall number of empirical studies is limited on this phenomenon, there is some knowledge of the components necessary in teacher

preparation for the successful education of ELLs in the classroom. This data can be subtracted
from the qualitative studies and paired with expert opinions regarding the preparation of teachers for ELLs in mainstream classrooms (Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly & Driscoll, 2005). A deep and repeated investigation of PT graduates beliefs is also required to continue the evaluation of
teacher education's overall efficacy, linguistics knowledge and ELL competence.

91

A second investigation may involve a long-term study focused on following the PT

graduates into their first years of teaching. It is necessary to evaluate the accuracy of their responses. Teachers may respond to challenges differently than indicated by their response. This study may also explore what the PTs realized they were not prepared for, once in the profession. There are several variables that may be considered in this future investigation. The school environment, ESL support staff and the number of ELLs, are a few examples of variables which may affect the results of future classroom practices and teacher efficacy. For that reason, it is crucial to implement a deeper qualitative investigation with rich detailed responses from teachers. A third investigation may include the exploration of PTs with Early Childhood Education
(ECE) backgrounds in comparison to PTs with alternative undergraduate backgrounds. A number of references were given to ECE graduates which are good indications of a need for in-depth

investigation on this topic. If individuals believe that ECE graduates are better prepared to
educate children in the classroom, an important research question to explore whether undergraduate majors affect teacher preparation or the level of competence a teacher has. If so, should PTs in the primary-junior division be admitted only from particular programs? This is a necessary investigation given that our future deserves the best education possible. If ECE better prepares teachers, then Faculties of Education should give a higher preference or priority to ECE graduates for the primary-junior division.

92

CHAPTER VI: CONCLUSION

Relatively little research has focused directly on ELLs in the classroom or on pre-service training and ELLs, in comparison to the extensive literature on ESL (Youngs & Youngs, 2001).
Based on these exploratory findings, it is evident that PTs graduating from Southwestern
Ontario's Faculties of Education are struggling with inadequate preparation for ELLs in the classroom. There is a lack of preparedness for classroom teachers to work with students who
reflect realistic classroom demographics. As immigration continues to increase, the perceived

challenge of ELLs in the classroom will become more evident and severe. Without the skills necessary to face these challenges, teachers are left astray to fend for themselves in anyway they deem appropriate. Without adequate ELL competence and training, teachers in the field will not have the courage, confidence or knowledge necessary to accommodate these children. The trialand-error process, that many classroom teachers will likely use, may significantly harm the ELLs in their care. The Faculties of Education may largely be responsible for the consequences of certified teacher's ineffective classroom instructional behaviours with these children. Chances are that ELLs will be taught by a teacher who has received little to no training on how to teach ELLs. Classroom teachers appear to lack knowledge regarding English-language

development strategies, methods of integrating English language development with academic
objectives, strategies of providing primary language support and effective accommodations.

Classroom teachers must be inclusively minded and highly committed to the success of all their children. Our society and academic future relies on teacher education's ability to certify
competent teachers who engage all students while providing access to the curriculum despite English language proficiency.

93

APPENDICES
Appendix A: Consent Agreement

SCHOOL OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION FACULTY OF COMMUNITY SERVICES

Master of Arts in Early Childhood Studies
Ryerson University Major Research Paper Consent Agreement

Title: Pre-service Training: Preparing Teachers for English Language Learners in the Classroom You are being asked to participate in a research study. Before you give your consent to be a
volunteer, it is important that you read the following information and ask as many questions as

necessary to be sure you understand what you will be asked to do.

Investigator:

Principle Investigator/ Study Coordinator

Master of Early Childhood Studies: Ryerson Graduate Student: Nina Lee, B.A. Email: n3lee@ryerson.ca Telephone: (647) 345-5732

Master of Early Childhood Studies Instructor: Ryerson University Major Research Paper Supervisor: Dr. Angela Valeo, B.Sc, B.Ed., M.Ed, Ph.D., (OTC)

Email: avaleo@ryerson.ca

Office Telephone Number: (416) -979-5000 ext. 7696

Purpose of the Study:

The Major Research Paper is a graduation requirement of the Master of Arts in Early Childhood

Studies graduate program in the School of Early Childhood Education at Ryerson University.
Working directly with graduating pre-service teachers will help me understand their perspective of past experiences, recent educational experiences, attitudes, future practices and teaching behaviours

in regards to English language learners (ELLs). A total of six participants will be recruited to deeply explore the topic of teacher preparation for ELLs in Southwestern Ontario's Faculties of Education. The eligibility criteria used for prospective participants consists of; on the verge of graduating from the primary/junior division of a faculty of education and no more then two participants with the same undergraduate degree. The researcher will also attempt to select individuals who are reflective of varied course choices and experiences to encompass several perspectives and reduce overlap.

94

Description of the Study:

The researcher will investigate six pre-service teachers in Southwestern Ontario to investigate the effectiveness of the Faculties of Education, primary/junior division, in preparing teachers for ELLs in

the classroom. A single interview with the participant will be audio recorded and will include the following types of questions: demographic, descriptive, experience, knowledge and feeling questions. The following topics will be included in the questioning: demographic information and knowledge related to; ELLs, ELL needs, learned teaching methods and strategies, personal
experiences, teacher education and second language acquisition.
Location

Each interview will be conducted in a location that is familiar and comfortable to the pre-service teacher participant. This location may include a secluded location in their school cafeteria or cafe, family home, public library, the researcher's accommodations lobby/common area or any other room which will allow for privacy. All of the interview questions will explore the pre-service teacher's attitudes, knowledge, concerns and education related to English language learners. The expected
duration of the interview is 60 minutes.

None of the procedures or interview questions used in this study is experimental in nature. The only experimental aspect of this study is the gathering of information for the purpose of analysis.
Risks or Discomforts:

What is Experimental in this Study?

The only risks or discomforts associated with the research study are that the participant may, during the interview, exhibit unwillingness to proceed. In the event that a participant exhibits discomfort following the presentation of a specific question during the interview, they will be reminded that the
question can remain unanswered.

Potential benefits of the interviews will be the discussion of a topic, which is of concern to educators, as they plan and program for English language learners. It cannot be guaranteed, however, that participants will receive any benefits from participating in the study.
Confidentiality:

Benefits of the Study:

The data (audio recordings of the interviews and written comments) will be used to prepare the Major Research Paper written report. The data collected will be stored in a securely locked location with highly-restricted access. Only the primary investigator will have access to the tape recordings. Participants may review transcribed interviews, to ensure accuracy, prior to analysis and publication. During data collection confidentiality and anonymity will be maintained using pseudonyms. Codes will also be used to eliminate any chance of identifying participants or Faculties of Education
(research sites) in the final written report.

In April 2010, all tapes will be erased and all field notes will be destroyed (shredded). Incentives to Participate: The participant will not be paid to participate in the studies. Costs and/or Compensation for Participation: There are no costs associated with participation.

95

Voluntary Nature of Participation:

Participation in this study is voluntary. Your choice of whether or not to participate will not influence
your future relations with Ryerson University. If you decide to participate, you are free to withdraw

your consent and to stop your participation at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which you are allowed. At any particular point in the study, you may refuse to answer any particular question or stop
participation altogether.

Questions about the Study: If you have any questions about the research now, please ask. If you have questions later about the research, you may contact. Principle Investigator/Study coordinator Nina Lee, B.A. Early Childhood Studies (M.A.) Graduate Student School of Early Childhood Education
Ryerson University

Email: n31ee@ryerson.ca If you have questions regarding your rights as a human subject and participant in this study, you may contact the Ryerson University Research Ethics Board for information. Research Ethics Board c/o Office of the Vice President, Research and Innovation
Ryerson University

350 Victoria Street
Toronto, ON M5B 2K3 416-979-5042

Agreement:

Your signature below indicates that you have read the information in this agreement and have had a chance to ask any questions you have about the study. Your signature also indicates that you agree to be in the study and have been told that you can change your mind and withdraw your consent to participate at any time. You have been given a copy of this agreement. You have been told that by signing this consent agreement you are not giving up any of your legal rights.

Name of Participant (please print)

Signature of Participant

Date

Signature of Investigator

Date

96

Appendix B: Cover Letter to Interview

Ryerson University

350 Victoria Street

Toronto, ON M5B 2K3 Dear Pre-service Teacher Graduates,

My name is Nina Lee and I am a Masters candidate at Ryerson University in the Early Childhood Studies program. As a program requirement, I am conducting a Major Research Paper (MRP). I would like to invite you to participate in this study I
am conducting which is designed to explore the perspectives of 2007-08 pre-service teachers, primary/junior division, on issues concerning teacher preparation for the

education of English Language Learners (ELLs). As a recent graduate from a Southwestern Ontario Faculty of Education and future classroom teacher whose classes may some day enrol ELLs, your input will provide valuable insight into this
exploratory study.

I would like to ask you to participate in this study by completing a tape-recorded interview which should take approximately 1 hour to complete. Your participation in this study is completely voluntary. Additionally, please feel free to skip any question
that may make you feel uncomfortable or withdraw from participation at any time.

Although results from this Major Research Paper may be published or used professionally, this interview is anonymous and responses will not be linked to you
in any way.

Please keep this letter for your records and feel free to contact me with any questions or comments you may have by email fn3lee(5)rverson.ca'). Thank you for taking your time to read this letter and participate in my study.
Sincerely,

Nina Lee

M.A. Candidate Early Childhood Studies
Ryerson University

97

Appendix C: Structured Interview Questionnaire: Pre-Service Teacher Graduates

Study: Pre-service Training: Preparing Teachers for English Language Learners in the Classroom

Time of Interview (Start Time):
Interviewer:

(End Time):
Date:

Interviewee (Pseudonym): Faculty of Education (Pseudonym):

Pre-Interview:  Set-up interview location and offer a refreshment to the participant.


 

Introduce self.
Provide participant with the consent agreement to sign. Thank the participant for agreeing to take part in the study.

   


Review the research purpose, the type of data that will be collected and what it will be used for. Remind the participant that they will be audio-taped and that brief notes will be taken. Remind participant of the procedures that will be taken to ensure confidentiality. Remind participant of their right to stop the interview or skip questions at any point.
Invite questions.



Provide the participant with the estimated time duration for the interview.

Interview Questions:

DEMOGRAPHIC DATA

1.

In what program did you receive your undergraduate degree? Do you have any additional
certifications related to education?
Comments:

Reflective Notes:

2.

How many practicum blocks did you have? Tell me about your practicum experiences.
Probes: How long was each placement block?  
Comments:

Would you describe the classroom as diverse? Were there different languages present in the classroom?

Reflective Notes:

3.

What does the term "English Language Learner" mean to you? [Please define.]
Comments:

Reflective Notes:

98

4.

Which faculty of education courses were related to English language learners or ESL? Were these courses mandatory or elective? What, in relation to ELLs/ESL, did you learn about?
 Overview of the topics or in-depth?
Reflective Notes:

Comments:

5.

In total, how many hours of the program would you estimate were spent on learning about:  Practical ELL strategies  Classroom learning needs for linguistically diverse children
 Diversity issues  Second language acquisition
Reflective Notes:

Comments:

ENGLISH LANGUAGE ACQUISITION (quick measure of knowledge)

6. For the following statements, state whether they are true or false and elaborate on your choice.
6.1. Children learn second languages quickly and easily.
Comments:

Reflective Notes:

6. 2. The younger the child, the more skilled in acquiring a second language.



Reworded: The earlier, the better in learning a second language
Reflective Notes:

Comments:

3. The more time a student spends in a 2nd language context, the quicker they learn the language.
Comments:

Reflective Notes:

6.4. Children have acquired a second language once they can speak it.  Reworded: The ability to use English in day-to-day situations is enough to do well in school.
Comments:

Reflective Notes:

6. 5. All children learn a second language in the same way.



Reworded: There is one "magic " method or "one sizefits all"
Reflective Notes:

Comments:

99

6.6. Children soak up new languages like sponges.
Comments:

Reflective Notes:

6.7. Proficiency in oral English is a prerequisite for academic instruction.
Comments: Reflective Notes:

6.8. Children have a limited capacityfor language. Learning two languages at once can result in delays,
incomplete mastery or even impairment in one of the languages.

*

Reworded: Bilingualism leads to cognitive and linguistic delays
Reflective Notes:

Comments:

6.9. Bilingualism leads to linguistic confusion. Ex. Children who switch between two languages.
Comments: Reflective Notes:

6.10. Overall, what are the key components necessary for English Language Learning?
Comments:

Reflective Notes:

ELLS IN THE CLASSROOM: WHERE THE FACULTY OF EDUCATION STANDS

7.

Are there any benefits to having a first language other then English in Canada?

Probes: What are some of the benefits for the child? How does this benefit all children?
Comments: Reflective Notes:

8.

How would you develop a relationship with a newly arrived ELL in your future classroom? Probes: What types of strategies or methods would you use? 
Comments:

How will you make this child feel comfortable in the learning environment?
Reflective Notes:

100

9.

How will you communicate with ELLs who have no or limited English proficiency?
Probes: Will you make use of the home language?
9.10. In what ways and what subj ects? 9.11. Would you encourage the use of the English language at home? Why?
Comments:

Reflective Notes:

10.

What ELL classroom strategies do you plan to use with ELLs in the future? And Why? Probes: Ex. assessment strategies? How do you know these strategies are effective?



Where were these strategies learned? (Book titles, B.Ed, program, resource lists,
workshops, conferences, placement/personal experience)

Comments:

Reflective Notes:

11.

What other ELL tools or resources would you use? Why and where did you learn these from? Probe: Book titles, resource lists, workshops, conferences, placement/personal experience
Comments:

Reflective Notes:

12.

What are your expectations of school ESL supports and what are their responsibilities? Probe: What are your responsibilities in relation to these professionals and services?
Comments: Reflective Notes:

13.

How valuable would a mandatory course on ELL teaching be?

Probe: Would this be more effective then infusing the topic of ELLs though out existing courses?
Comments: Reflective Notes:

14.

What kind of classroom barriers do you anticipate in future teaching?
Probes: What is your greatest concern?


Comments:

Ex. cultural differences, language barriers, time constraints, parents...
Reflective Notes:

101

15.

Do you feel that all of your graduating peers know enough about ELLs and working with ELLs to be
an effective educator with them in the classroom? Probes: Why or why not? Please elaborate. 
Comments:

How could this situation be changed? (if necessary)
Reflective Notes:

16.

Do you feel confident in your own abilities to fulfil the multiple roles and responsibilities of the
classroom teacher for ELLs?

Probes: This includes; planning and implementing curriculum standards, accommodations to teaching strategies, inducing meaningful classroom engagement and true assessments
or evaluation. Comments:

Reflective Notes:

17.

What recommendations do you have for your faculty of education program, with regards to ELLs? Probes: Is there anything in particular that you expected to be taught? 

Comments:

Is there anything you think should be taught but isn't?
Is there anything you wish they taught you?
Reflective Notes:

Post-Interview: Ask the participant if they have any questions. Offer refreshments.

Remind the participant again that steps have been taken to ensure confidentiality.
Review any in-field interpretations to ensure accuracy.

Ask the participant if it would be possible to contact them if necessary to verify and confirm the data collected is accurate and reflective of their personal perspectives.

Q Yes
Best method of communication

 No

Ask the participant if they would be willing to read over the analysis, findings, interpretations and
conclusion at a later date to ensure accuracy (in approx. 2 months).

 Yes

 No

Thank the participant again for their time and willingness to participate.

102

References

Alfred, I. (1994, March 8-12). ESL in the mainstream: challenges and possibilities. Paper
presented at the Annual Meeting of the Teachers of English to Speakers of Other
Languages 28th, Baltimore, MD.

Antunez, B. (2002). The preparation and professional development of teachers of English

language learners. ERIC Digest. Washington, DC: ERIC Clearinghouse on Teaching and
Teacher Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service N. ED 477 724).

Baker, C. & Prys Jones, S. (1998). 8: Attitudes to languages. In Encyclopedia ofBilingualism
and Bilingual Education (pp. 174-180). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.

Barnes, C. J. (2006). Preparing pre-service teachers to teach in a culturally responsive way. The
Negro Educational Review, 57(1-2), 85-100.

Bryman, A. & Teevan, J. J. (2005). Social research methods (Canadian Edition). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.

Buck, G., Mast, C, Ehlers, N. & Franklin, E. (2005). Preparing teachers to create a mainstream science classroom conductive to the needs of English-language learners: A feminist action research project. Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching, 42(9), 1013-1031.

Chui, T., Tran, K., & Maheux, H. (2007). Highlights. Immigration in Canada: a portrait ofthe
foreign-born population, 2006 census, Statistics Canada (97-557-XIE). Retrieved Jan. 14,
2008, from http://wwwl2.statcan.ca/english/censusO6/analysis/immcit/highlights.cfm

Chui, T., Tran, K., & Maheux, H. (2007). Immigrants in the provinces and territories.
Immigration in Canada: a portrait of the foreign-born population, 2006 census, Statistics

Canada (97-557-XIE). Retrieved January 14, 2008, from
http://wwwl2.statcan.ca/english/census06/analysis/immcit/pdf/97-557-XIE2006001.pdf

103

Clair, N. (1995). Mainstream classroom teachers and ESL students. TESOL Quarterly, 29 (1),
189-196.

Coelho, E. (2007). How long does it take? Lessons from EQAO data on English language

learners in Ontario schools. Ontario Ministry of Education. Inspire, The Journal of Literacy and Numeracyfor Ontario. Toronto: Ontario Ministry of Education. Retrieved
May 24, 2008, from http://www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/literacynumeracy/inspire/equity/ ELL_July30.html

Creswell, J. (2003). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed method approaches.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Creswell, J. W. (2005). Educational research. Planning, conducting and evaluating quantitative and qualitative research. Upper Saddle River, N. J.: Pearson Merrill
Prentice Hall.

Cruz, B. C. & Patterson, J. M. (2005). Cross-cultural simulations in teacher education:
developing empathy and understanding. Multicultural Perspectives 7 (2), 40-47.

Cummins, J. (2003). BICS and CALP: Origins and rationale for the distinction. In C.b. Paulston & G.R. Tucker (Eds.), Sociolinguistics: The essential readings (pp. 322-328). London:
Blackwell.

Davis, L. E. & Whitener-Lepanto, V. (1994, November 9). Pre-service teachers and culturally diverse families: how do they perceive one another? Paper presented at the Annual
Meeting of the Mid-South Educational Research Association, Nashville, TN. Del Baso, M. & Lewis, A. (2001). First steps: A guide to social research. Toronto: Thomas
Nelson Learning.

104

Dianda, M. R. (1992). Promoting beginning teachers' success in teaching linguistically diverse students; a synthesis ofrelevant knowledge and practice. Southwest Regional Educational

Laboratory report (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED346104), 1-42. Dorrington, A. E. L & Ramirez-Smith, C. (1999). Teacher educators: a minority perspective on preparing majority pre-service teachers for diverse classrooms. (ERIC Document
Reproduction Service No. ED430955)

Emporia State University. (1994). Competencies, skills, and knowledge teacher education
programs need to teach the inclusion teacher (BBB16772). Emporia, KS: Emporia State
University.

Evans, C, Arnot-Hopffer, E., & Jurich, D. (2005). Making ends meet: bringing bilingual
education and mainstream students together in pre-service teacher education. Equity & Excellence in Education, 38, 75-88.

Farrell, T. S. C. (2006). 'The teacher is an octopus': uncovering pre-service English language
teachers' prior beliefs through metaphor analysis. SAGE Publications, 37(2), 236-248.

Flynn, K. & Hill, J. (2005, December). English language learners: A growing population. Policy Brief: Mid-Continent Research for Education and Learning, 1-12. Retrieved, March 23,
2008, fromwww.mcrel.org/PDF/PolicyBriefs/5052PI_PBEnglishLanguageLearners.pdf

Gandara, P, Maxwell-Jolly, J, & Driscoll, A. (2005). Listening to teachers ofEnglish language

learners: A survey of California teachers' challenges, experiences, and professional
development needs. Santa Cruz, CA: The Center for the Future of Teaching and Learning. Genesee, F. (2007). Myths and realities about educating minority language students. Giambo, D. & Szecsi, T. (2005). Opening up to the issues: Preparing pre-service teachers to work effectively with English language learners. Childhood Education, 82(2), 107-111.

105

Gonzalez, J. E. & Darling-Hammond, L. (2000). Programs that prepare teachers to work
effectively with students learning English. ERIC Digest. Washington, DC: ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics.

Harper, C, & de Jong, E. (2004). Misconceptions about teaching English-language learners.
Journal ofAdolescent and Adult Literacy, 48(2), 152-162.

Marx, S. (2000). An exploration of pre-service teacher perceptions of second language learners
in the mainstream classroom. Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education, 5(1), 207221.

McLaughlin, B. (1992). Myths and misconceptions about second language learners: What every

teacher needs to unlearn. Educational Practice Report: National Centre for Research on
Cultural Diversity and Second Language Learning. Menken, K. & Antunez, B. (2001). An overview of the preparation and certification of teachers

working with limited English proficient (LEP) students. ERIC # ED455231. Washington, DC: National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education.
Meskill, C. (2005). Infusing English language learner issues throughout professional educator curricula: The training all teacher project. Teachers College Record, 107(4), 739-756. Montgomery, P. S., Roberts, M. & Growe, R. (2003). English language learners: an issue of"

educational equity. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED482753).

Mujawamariya, D. & Mahrouse, G. (2004). Multicultural education in Canadian pre-service
programs: Teacher candidates' perspectives. Alberta Journal ofEducational
Research, 50(4), 336-353.

Ontario Ministry of Education and Training. (2005). Many roots, many voices: supporting English language learners in every classroom. Queens Park, Toronto: Author.

106

Pappamihiel, E. N. (2004). Hugs and smiles: Demonstrating caring in a multicultural early
childhood classroom. Early Child Development and Care, 174(6), 539-548.

People for Education. (2008). Ontario's urban and suburban schools: a discussion paper on the

schools we need in the 21st century. People for Education: Toronto, Ontario, 10-20.
Reiff, J. C. & Cannella, G. S. (1992, February 15-19). Preparing teachers for cultural diversity:

Rhetoric or reality. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association of Teacher
Educators, Orlando, FL.

Romi, S. & Leyser, Y. (2006). Exploring inclusion pre-service training needs: A study of variables associated with attitudes and self-efficacy beliefs. European Journal ofSpecial
Needs Education, 21(1), 85- 105.

Siwatu, K. O. (2007). Pre-service teachers' culturally responsive teaching self-efficacy and
outcome expectancy beliefs. Teaching and Teacher Education: An International Journal
ofResearch and Studies, 23(7), 1086-1101.

Sorace, A. (2007). Children with two tongues: Exploding the myths about bilingualism. The Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures & Commerce. Retrieved
Nov. 2007 from http://72.14.205.104/search?q=cache:kDRBhidmXdYJ:www.ling.ed.ac.
uk/~antonell/RSASorace.ppt+Sorace,+A.+(2007).+Children+with+two+tongues:+explod eing+the+myths+about+bilingualism.&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=l&gl=ca&client=firefox-a.

Taylor, S. V. & Sobel, D. M. (2003). Rich contexts to emphasize social justice in teacher
education: Curriculum and pedagogy in professional development schools. Equity &
Excellence, 38(3), 249-258.

Tellez, K. & Waxman, H. C. (2005). Effective professional development programs for teachers of English language learners. Laboratory for Student Success (LSS), The Mid-Atlantic
Regional Educational Laboratory, 803.

107

Torok, C. E. & Aguilar, T. E. (2000). Changes in pre-service teachers' knowledge and beliefs about language issues. Equity & Excellence in Education, 33(2), 24-31.

Valentine, S. (2006). Addressing diversity in teacher education programs. Education, 127(2),
196-202.

Verdugo, R. R. & Flores, B. (2007). English-language learners: Key issues. Education and
Urban Society, 39(2), 167-193.

Waxman, H. C. & Tellez, K. (2002). Research synthesis on effective teaching practicesfor

English language learners. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University, Mid-Atlantic Regional
Educational Laboratory, Laboratory for Student Success. (ERIC Document Retrieval No.
ED474821).

Youngs, C. S. & Youngs, Jr. G. A. (2001). Predictors of mainstream teacher's attitudes toward
ESL students. TESOL Quarterly, 35(1), 97-120.

108

Glossary Competence

Competence, or more specifically EZZ competence, is defined as a classroom teacher's ability to carry out multiple roles and responsibilities required to meet the needs of ELL learners. This includes; planning and implementing curriculum standards, accommodations to teaching strategies, inducing meaningful classroom engagement and
true assessments or evaluation. English Language Learner (ELL)

An English language learner refers to any child who is; in kindergarten to grade 6, Canadian born or newly arrived, whose first language is not English or is a variety significantly different from that used in Ontario elementary schools and who may require

educational language supports to attain English proficiency (Gandara, Maxwell-Jolly &
Driscoll, 2005; Ontario Ministry of Education and Training, 2005).
Faculty of Education

A faculty of education is a Canadian term which is synonymous to the commonly used American terms in the literature; Teacher Education, Pre-service Teacher Education, Teacher Preparation and Teacher Training. Regardless of the title, Faculties ofEducation provide pre-service teachers with the necessary education, experiences and training required for certification and to effectively undertake teaching.
Pre-service Teacher (PT)

Pre-service teachers are often referred to in the literature as student teachers or teacher candidates. PTs are post-degree students enrolled in and attending a faculty of education
in pursuit of teacher certification and teacher training.
Teacher Preparation

Teacher preparation is the result of adequate and effective faculty of education programs. For the purpose of this study, the level of preparation is determined by the teacher's knowledge of ELLs, ELL experiences or events and ELL competence (see
competence).

109

