Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Environmental policy creation : examining the Ontario municipal approach
Paul L. Nichols
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Economic History Commons Recommended Citation
Nichols, Paul L., "Environmental policy creation : examining the Ontario municipal approach" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 537.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY CREATION: EXAMINING THE ONTARIO
MUNICIPAL APPROACH

by

Paul L. Nichols, B.Sc. (Cardiff University, 2005)

A thesis presented to Ryerson University

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied
Science in the Program of Environmental Applied Science and Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2005

© Paul L. Nichols, 2008

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY OF

Abstract

Environmental Policy Creation: Examining the Ontario Municipal Approach
Paul L. Nichols M.A.Sc, Environmental Science and Management

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation. I authorize
Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Ryerson University, Toronto, 2008

This thesis examines the environmental content of municipal official plans in

Ontario, Canada. It is an exploration of how environmental policy can be measured, categorized and compared at the municipal level. The legislative and

societal framework from which municipal environmental policy emerges is
examined before a method for measuring the level of the policy is proposed. The results of the policy measurement are then analyzed quantitatively for

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by
relationships with demographic characteristics and qualitatively for strength of

photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other
language and level of policy as well as for spatial patterns in policy levels. From

institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.
these analyses conclusions are drawn regarding the presence of significant

variation in the environmental content found in municipal official plans.
Conclusions are also made regarding the attention given to individual

components of municipal environmental content. Finally, recommendations for
future environmental policy integration into municipal official plans are suggested as are recommendations for future research.

11

in

Acknowledgements

Dedication

First and foremost, I would like to thank my advisor, Dr. Doug Banting, whose guidance in this endeavour was inspirational and made this research possible.

To my patient wife, Helen Burnett-Nichols, thank you for your interminable love
and support in this and all of my endeavours.

To Dr. Steven Webber, thank you for your instruction and guidance in my
transition into the Ontario planning system.

To Noel Damba and Dan Jakubekfrom the Ryerson University Library, my gratitude to you both for all of your assistance in the development of the spatial
mapping portion of my research. I would also like to thank the Ryerson

University Geography Department for the use of their GIS facilities and Mike
MacDonald for his GIS problem-solving assistance.

Finally, to my defence committee: Dr. Ron Pushchak, Dr. Pamela Robinson and Dr. Alex Wellington, thank you for your sharing your time and expertise in the
development of my research.

IV

Table of Contents
Abstract . : ·-

5.1.1.6. Water Language

5.1.1.7. Natural Resources Language....

75

76

Acknowledgements
Dedication

jv
6.0.

5.2.

5.1.1.8. Agriculture Language 5.1.2. Spatial Analysis Interpretive Summary....

. 77 79 83

Table of Contents

vj

1.0.

Contextualization of the Study..... ...

1.4.

1.2. 1.3.

1.1.

Chapter breakdown
Introduction

Research questions and sub questions Scope of research

Introduction..

...............

'".'.'."."

4
6

2 3

1

1

Conclusions and Recommendations 6.1. Study Review 6.2. Addressing the Research Objectives.. 6.3 Developed Knowledge. 6.4. Recommendations.....

86 86 87 , 88 ·. 89

Appendices

·



93

References

101

2.0.

2.7.
3.0.

2.3. 2.4. 2.5. 2.6.

2.2.

2.1.

Municipal Environmental Policy Knowledge Review
The Provincial Push Societal Emphasis Legislative Empowerment Ontario Tier Structure

The Federal Approach..

<

6

....!...... 8
..'

Indices of Environmental Content
Greening of official plans

13 15 20 27

31

Methodology

37

3.5.
4.0.

3.4.

3.3.

3.2.

3.1.

Analysis

Collections & Limitations....

Sampling

\

Reproducibility

49

43

42

3g

37

4.2.

4.1.

Results and Interpretation.

4.2.2. Overall Score Analysis...

4.2.1. Individual Category Based Analysis...'.....
....

Quantitative Analysis

Results and Interpretation....

61

53

53

51

51

5.0.

Qualitative Results and Interpretation 5.1. Qualitative Analysis

5.1.1. Categorical Analysis

5.1.1.4. Energy Language 5.1.1.5. Waste Language

5.1.1.2. Built Environment Language... 5.1.1.3. Transportation Language

5.1.1.1. Environment Language

....!."!!."".'!!."".".'66
70 70
67

66 66

72 .....74

VI

Vll

Figures

Tables 3 1 Random Sampling Results........ ·

40 41

3 2

Systematic Sampling Results ......._

41"

A2

Cateqorical Score Means and Medians
Employment Variable Correlations..

Categorical Score Maximums, Minimums &Ranges

55

4.3".

3.1 4.1. 4.2. 5.1. 5.2. 5.3. 5.4. 5.5.

Outline of Methodology Transportation Score to Low Income Percentage R-score Frequencies Study Sample Distribution...... Municipal Density to OP Age Relationship Overall OP Score to OP Age Relationship Environmental Content Levels.. Transportation Content Levels

38 60 61 80 81 81 82 84

vni

IX

Chapter 1: Contextualization of the Study
Appendices

1.1. Introduction

A
B

Initial Sample Population List
Final Sample List

·

^
«» · yy
~

Environmental policy and municipal governance are not necessarily seen as directly related entities. More frequently, municipalities are seen as

C D

E

Indicator Table and Key Word List Statistics Canada Headings and Sub-headings.

Correlation Analysis Results

·

1UU

implementers of higher-level governmental policy. Yet municipalities are
becoming increasingly active in the environmental policy development process.
Contrary to the traditional assumptions, this model is well suited for addressing

both local and global environmental issues, if smaller municipalities and the
policy development process are supported by a strong structural framework.

Ontario's tiered municipal system provides such a framework. In addition, Ontario's municipalities are empowered to develop environmental policy through
provincial legislation. However, empowerment is not the same as requirement.

Therefore the environmental policy emerging from municipalities would be expected to experience variations in the level of attention given to environmental
issues. Existing research supports this suggestion, concluding that 'Canadian municipalities engaging in sustainable development seem to be at various stages along the learning curve' (Parkinson and Roseland, 2002, p. 424). The natural

question then becomes, what factors explain this variation? Are trends and
variations in municipal environmental policy in some way reflections of the communities from which they emerge? The answers to such questions have

important implications for municipal planners who sometimes fail to fully utilize their policy-making potential and often off-load their responsibilities to developers

or consultants.

The knowledge developed from these questions also has

analyzed? How can these 'levels' subsequently be combined to provide an
overall measure of the environmental content of official plans? Finally, after the
level of environmental content is measured, what socio-economic and physical

potential uses for local politicians, environmentalists and academics.

1.2. Research questions

characteristics of municipalities might be related to the measured levels and what
methods can be used to examine if and to what extent a relationship exists? The
answers to these questions provide the structure of the research and have

The goal of this study is primarily to answer the following research questions:

1. Is there a significant difference in the environmental content found in official plans and, if there is, what relationship exists between the level of environmental content of Ontario municipalities' official plans and socio-economic or physical
characteristics of their respective communities?

guided the study in its approach to answering the primary research questions.

2. Which components of municipal governance may be given greater attention or more authority through the use of language when environmental policy is
developed at the municipal level?

1.3. Scope of research

The scope of this research is based on the need to address a specific topic for which supporting knowledge exists but that has not been explicitly researched and thus remains insufficiently understood. Similarly, the case study approach is the result of the wealth of available data as well as the time required to collect
and process it.

In order to answer these questions fully, they must first be unpacked and
discussed in terms of several related issues. The initial set of issues focuses on

the governmental framework that empowers policymaking at the local level. What legislation empowers municipalities to create environmental policy?

Conversely, what limitations are placed on policymakers at the municipal level?
Also, what is the function of local environmental policy and where is it found within the context of municipal bureaucracy? Using the subsequent answers, the research questions are narrowed in a manner that increases study manageability
The information presented here is the result of a study of environmental policy creation within the context of official plans that govern Ontario municipalities. The study was undertaken between September 2006 and May 2008. The results

and provides the study with a focal point for examination in the form of municipal
official plans. The other set of issues focuses on how the environmental policy in
official plans is structured and how it can be studied. What are the components
of environmental policy used by policymakers at the municipal level? How can

of this research provide insights that may also be useful for municipalities outside of Ontario though, as the number and diversity of communities assessed in the
study reflect an opportunity to assess a broader relationship. However, the
utilization of this study's methodology in other provinces is required to fully measure the study's ability to assess the broader relationship. The study

the 'level' of components of environmental content be defined individually and

3

contributes to the larger discussion of the role of official plans within municipal
governance; are they intended to be the final word in planning decisions, or are

Chapter 3 utilizes the key components of previous studies discussed in Chapter
2 in the development of the research methodology. By drawing from previous
research, the study creates a unique approach to the study of environmental policy in official plans. The chapter details the sampling, collection and analysis
processes and discusses the limitations and reproducibility of the study.

they one tool in a larger planning toolkit. More importantly, what should their role
be and how closely does their implementation follow this role. With its current scope, the research allows for the presentation of a case study which begins to address questions regarding the origins and extent of such policy creation that

remain unanswered in the existing literature. By limiting the study to Ontario and
environmental policy creation at the municipal level, the study is firmly based on
well developed supporting literature.

In chapters 4 and 5, the results of the study are detailed and interpreted. The

chapters organize the presentation of the results and interpretation by analytical
method. The quantitative analyses are discussed initially, addressing both categorical and overall-score-based results. Subsequently the results of

1.4. Chapter breakdown

language and spatial analyses are discussed in the qualitative section. Finally,
the interpretations are summarized, allowing for conclusions to be drawn and
discussed in Chapter 6.

The study begins by reviewing the existing knowledge that surrounds municipal

policy creation and highlighting key gaps in that knowledge. The review provides
context for the study, detailing how federal and provincial practices have

encouraged and often burdened municipalities with the responsibility of

Chapter 6 begins with an overall review of the study, after which the results of the
study are once again detailed. From these results, several key conclusions are drawn and relevant recommendations are made with regard to improving the development of environmental policy at the municipal level. Finally,
recommendations for future research are proposed which would build naturally from the knowledge and methods created in the current study.

addressing environmental issues that often extend beyond traditional municipal
spheres. It also examines how societal trends have supported this new

paradigm. The review highlights key legislative measures and Ontario's

municipal tier structure, and discusses their importance in the empowerment of
municipalities in the environmental policy making process before transitioning
into Chapter 3 with a review of previous methods used in similar studies.

Chapter 2: Municipal Environmental Policy Knowledge Review
2.1. Introduction

their official plans which is lacking. This is not to say that none exists, Burke and Conroy's (2000) evaluation of sustainable development incorporation into local
planning provides six performance evaluation principals that help to
operationalize the broader sustainable development concept. Such work, along

There exists an abundance of literature on the subject of environmental

sustainability and the study of policies that purport to encourage sustainable development; countless debates on which policies and practices are sustainable, and even on how to define 'sustainability', clog the academic literature search
engines. A basic Scopus search for the term 'sustainable development' creates a list of over 40,000 academic articles and documents. Obviously, the list can easily be narrowed down using any number of keywords, locations or other

with the wider research into the relationship between municipalities and individual
environmental components and the discourse on Canadian environmental

policies and an understanding of federal and provincial legislation which both
empower and limit municipalities, do form a useful framework. These

discussions have guided this research, revealing the arenas in which municipal
policy can integrate environmental content and suggesting what forms that
content may take. However, the relationship between municipalities, their

details that specify the sub-topic of interest within the 'sustainable development'

discourse. This said, it is a disappointing commentary on the ill-defined nature of the term 'sustainability' when gaps the size of municipalities can easily be located
in such an abundance of literature. This is precisely the case however regarding
the contributions of some municipalities towards the creation of development
policy that addresses environmental sustainability.

characteristics, and the development of sustainable environmental policy through
key land use documents still requires discussion. By first contextualizing the subject through the existing literature and then discussing this research project's

methods and results, such a discussion is initiated and the existing literature gap
begins to contract.

It is not suggested here that literature devoted to municipalities, their surrounding environment and the global environment does not exist. Indeed, proper attention
has been paid to the individual relationships between municipalities and climate
This chapter examines environmental policy making in Canada and reviews the
current research. This examination begins by examining the Canadian federal

change, water quality, agriculture, energy, solid waste and so on (for examples
see: Wilbanks and Kates, 1999; Jenerette et al, 2006; Marsden et al, 1999; Dietz
and Vine, 1982; Ferrara and Missios, 2005). However, it is literature on

and Ontario provincial roles in and approaches to sustainable environmental policy creation. Structural and political influences at both levels are discussed and reveal why and how municipalities are currently involved in the policy making
process. In addition, shifts in population trends are discussed in terms of how

municipalities' attempts at developing more holistic environmental policy through

. 7

they suggest societal values are encouraging municipalities to become

development within an environmental context. Sustainable development is a
theoretical ideal with contextually varying measures making the concept
impossible to define concretely. The vagueness of its measures has not, however, diminished the importance of the concept in land-use planning or other

increasingly involved in the process as well as how municipalities are viewed as
the only level of Canadian government that has been successful at addressing
environmental issues. The discussion then shifts to the topic of how

municipalities are empowered to create environmental policy. Several key

fields (Hanna, 2005). At the broadest level, sustainable development was initially
defined in the Brundtland Report as the process of meeting 'the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own

pieces of legislation are reviewed and critical passages are analyzed in order to illustrate the powers and limitations endowed upon municipalities in their role as
environmental policymakers. In addition to detailing the extent to which the

needs' (Brundtland, 1987, p. 43). Additionally, the Brundtland Report signals 'the
emergence of "the environment" as a critically important facet' of governance

Province of Ontario dictates the type and amount of environmental content that
can be expected in municipal official plans, this section also suggests how realistic it is to expect municipalities to be effective in environmental policy
creation. The subsequent section details Ontario's tiered municipal system,

(Sneddon, 2006, p. 255). Contextualized into an environmental policy framework,
sustainable development suggests that environmental management and economic development can be a collaborative effort rather than separate and adversarial goals (Dryzek, 2005). And while this is a point of vigorous debate, it is not the focus of this examination. Instead, the goal of this research is to determine how the concepts of environmental sustainability and sustainable development find their way into municipal policy and what factors influence the
form and intensity they take.

providing the structural context needed to understand the importance of the

sampling approach used in the current study. Finally, the chapter is concluded by examining related research that provides useful components and approached
used in policy research that are subsequently integrated into the current study's
methodology in the following chapter.

2.2. The Federal Approach

In order to address the question of how environmental policy is integrated into
municipal policy documents, the wider Canadian approach to environmental

In attempting to understand how environmental policy is developed, it is critical to
first determine the goal or goals of the policies as well as the constraints under

policy must first be discussed. This is a necessity as the Canadian Constitution
does not delegate responsibility for environmental protection to any one level of government (Parker and Rowlands, 2007). Therefore a holistic understanding of

which they are developed. Currently, one of the most broadly discussed goals of
environmental policy is to achieve (or at least approach) sustainable

9

how the environment is approached in Canada is requisite in order to understand
how and why municipalities have subsequently entered the realm of
environmental policymakers.

Canada consistently showed similar levels of public support and (initially) the
political will at the highest political levels for the Kyoto Protocol, the Canadian

system of government had an institutional capacity to ratify the Protocol which
the U.S. lacked. In addition, significant environmental legislation, such as the

Broadly speaking, the federal approach to sustainable environmental policy in
Canada can be labelled as fractured, uncommitted, poorly rounded and negotiation-based. In his presidential address to the Canadian Agricultural Economics Society, Adamowicz (2007) suggests that the OCED's 2004 environmental performance report for Canada rightly criticized Canada's

Canadian Environmental Protection Act (CEPA), 1999, has emerged from the

federal level. This suggests that the broad Canadian approach to environmental
policy lacks a clear, long-term, federally-led environmental strategy, either holistic
in nature or sector based. And while calls for such strategy are not lacking, as

evidenced in the Federation of Canadian Municipalities' encouragement of the
Canadian Government to establish a national transit strategy (FCM, 2008) and

environmental policy. While his critiques are perhaps too economically focused,
he astutely draws from Copeland's (1998) work that Canada lacks integration

Council of Canadians demands for a national energy strategy (CoC, 2008), there
are clear reasons for the lack of such strategies in some sectors.

and commitment to sustainability and environmental goals. This is a point which also resonates throughout much of Kathryn Harrison's work (See Harrison, 1999;
Antweiler and Harrison, 2007), particularly with regard to Canada's negotiation-

Structurally, the jurisdictional authority of Canada's provinces and territories are considerable, making direct federal regulation constitutionally difficult (Henriques and Sadorsky, 2008). For instance, the delegation of responsibility for natural resources to Canadian provinces and territories makes development of a national strategy difficult; as such, a strategy would rely heavily on the cooperation of all

based approach to environmental policy. Negotiation-based approaches tend to
be legally nonbinding with standards that may vary from sector to sector
(Henriques and Sadorsky, 2008).

The allowance for such variation in standards illustrates Canada's lack of fortitude in comparison to the United States and other countries when it comes to mandating emission limits and abatement level. However, this does not suggest

the country's provinces whose economic reliance on their natural resources varies greatly (Harrison, 2007). This variability logically suggests that the

development of a national natural resource strategy would be highly problematic,
time-intensive and susceptible to change with every national and provincial election. Political realities, though, have an equal, if not greater, potential to

an absence of meaningful decisions regarding environmental policy at the federal level in Canada. Indeed, Harrison (2007) notes that while the United States and

10

11

explain the lack of national environmental strategies than do the technical
difficulties associated with their creation.

2.3. The Provincial Push

As a result of the Canadian constitution and governmental structure, matters of
the environment and its regulation generally occur at the provincial level

The most important political reality in explaining the failings of Canadian

(Henriques and Sadorsky, 2008). However, even at the provincial level, responsible environmental policy can be seen as somewhat diffuse. Ontario's Ministry of Environment (OMOE) is obviously a key source for environmental policy; however other ministries also contribute in a unique, but significant way.
Most relevant to this discussion, Ontario's Ministry of Municipal Affairs and

environmental policy at every level is blame avoidance. Harrison (1996)

suggests that when questions of responsibility and accountability arise in Canada, blame is generally funnelled down to the lowest common denominator possible.
Traditionally this has resulted in the resting of blame for environmental failings on

the provinces. However, it is possible for any level of government to practice

Housing (MMAH) addresses the environment through land use planning and its
surrounding issues. The importance of the MMAH in environmental policy is
discussed in further detail throughout this research; however, a greater

blame avoidance using other levels, either upper or lower. The contamination of
the water supply at Walkerton, Ontario in 2000 is a key example of provincial to municipal attempts at blame avoidance, with the provincial government of
Ontario quickly shifting blame for the contamination onto municipal managers

understanding of the Ontario government's overall commitment and influences on environmental policy is found through the context of the OMOE's recent
history.

whose actions were 'boarding on criminal negligence' (Prudham, 2004, p. 344).
Events such as this are a direct externality of the constitutional ambiguity

regarding environmental jurisdiction discussed previously. It also indicates the

Krajnc (2000) illustrates how party politics specifically contributed to the reduction of environmental policy output between the mid 1990s and 2000. Specifically, she notes that Bob Rae's New Democratic Party government cut $200 million from the ministry's capital and operations budget (though mainly from the capital budget) and subsequently Mike Harris' Conservative governments' reduced the ministry's overall staff and resources by a third from when it entered office
(Krajnc, 2000). More recently the OMOE has seen a renewed governmental

direct effect of environmental policy on the health and welfare of the public. The
relationship between these structural and political factors illustrates the limited role that the Canadian federal government plays in the development of

environmental policy. Thus it is critical to also examine the Ontario government's
commitment to the environment in order to further examine how municipalities
have become involved in the creation of environmental policy.

interest in its work. Under the Dalton McGuinty Liberal government the ministry's

12

13

budget has begun to increase once again, by approximately $23.3 million

of reduced output, result in potential gaps of knowledge or guidance for
municipalities needing to address new environmental issues.

between the 2006-2007 and the 2007-2008 budgets, and by $73.4 million

between the 2007-2008 and the 2008-2009 budgets (OMOE, 2007; OMOE,
2008). However, these events are not isolated. Since its inception in 1971, the
OMOE has seen significant fluctuations in support and funding from the
As noted above, while the OMOE is realizing an increase in its budgetary allowance today, much of the structural and functional impacts persist despite this increase. For example, powers of source water protection in Ontario are

Government of Ontario, often related to changes in public opinion and levels of
governmental party control in Queen's Park (Krajnc, 2000).

currently split between the province and municipalities. Specifically, the Planning
Act (RSO, 1990), Drainage Act (RSO, 1990, c. D. 17), and Conservation Land

The cumulative impact of the Rae and Harris governments' cuts significantly reduced the MoE's capacity and suggested a lack of commitment to the
addressing of environmental needs and issues by Ontario's government,

Act (RSO, 1990, c. C. 17) grant municipalities in Ontario the power to utilize their

official plans and sewer-use bylaws to control drainage, wastewater discharge flows and hold conservation easements in order to protect source water; however, if a contaminated site exists near a source water body, the power to require its
remediation rests with the province through the Environmental Protection Act (RSO, 1990) (Ivey et al, 2006). As a result, the issue of poor provincial guidance is subsequently compounded by the difficulty of trying to effectively address
environmental issues with splintered authority. Despite the fact that this problem is beyond the scope of the current study, it does begin to illustrate why and how

particularly during the Harris administration. In addition, the cuts resulted in an
inconsistent pace of environmental policy creation (Krajnc, 2000). The

subsequent effect on the municipalities was a reduction in support and guidance from upper-level governments. Under the traditional view of provincial-municipal
government relations, such a realization is notable. Traditionally, the provinces are responsible for the development of policy goals and objectives and, to

varying extents, the provision of financing to municipalities for the purposes of policy implementation (Greenbaum et al, 2002). The continuation of this line of
reasoning then suggests that Canadian 'cities have very little control over their

municipalities appear to be more involved in the environmental policymaking
process than they have been in the past.

[own] destinies' (Broadbent, 2000, p. 1). Thus variations in the pace of
environmental policymaking by Ontario's government, particularly during periods

2.4. Societal Emphasis

In addition to the political need for blame avoidance and the structural impacts of budgetary and legislative changes, societal change has also contributed to the

14

15

increased role that municipalities are playing in environmental policy. The

ecological footprint analysis is looking at the demands that human activity are
placing on nature and the planet (FCM, 2005). The extent to which this shift in
focus is a reflection of a shift away from the nature-culture dualism demanded by
Haila (1999a, 1999b) is unclear. None-the-less, it suggests that Canadian society is beginning to appreciate the direct relationship between its actions at the local level and the broad state of the environment. Anecdotally this appreciation appears to carry over to Canadians' expectations of their local governments; while a gap in the academic literature currently exists, the popular
media are full of potential evidence.

connection between 'global' and local' is becoming an increasingly popular topic
of discussion, visible through various 'think global, act local'-type campaigns

(Brundtland, 1987). In this way the 'local' can be seen to have found a 'voice' in
wider public debates. The development of such a 'voice' illustrates how the

importance of cities and location has actually increased in the face of globalization (Florida, 2008; Bradford, 2002). However, as the importance of the city 'voice' increases, so does the responsibility for addressing environmental
issues such as climate change (Parker and Rowlands, 2007).

The increase in the importance and the 'voice' of the 'local' in Canada is not surprising as the population continues to cluster together in cities, where at least

Locally focused articles cover a range of topics, including: concerns over the
environment impacts of urban sprawl and solutions to such sprawl, debates over the redevelopment of local parks, and ideas on renewable energy (Toronto Star, 2007; Cautillo, 2008; Roberts, 2007). The breadth and importance given to the coverage of environmental topics itself warrants an in-depth discussion, however
its place is not within this research.

80 per cent of Canadians have lived since 2001 (StatsCan, 2001). Examples of
this 'voice' can be seen in collective municipal efforts and organizations such as
the Partners for Climate Protection program, in which 120 Canadian

municipalities are partners (Parker and Rowlands, 2007).

Frequently though,

this connection is examined using a top-down, anthropocentric approach

(Wilbanks and Kates! 1999). For example, questions are posed in a way that
leads a discussion to detail how climate change might affect humans or the
environment.

What is of interest however, particularly in the context of local and regional events media coverage, is the attention being paid to municipally-based environmental policy development and implementation. The seemingly common knowledge that local governments are better able to realize the environmental

Recently however, research is beginning to ask, how human actions are

issues that surround them than those in higher-level government offices in

impacting the environment and how those impacts can be reduced. In particular,

Ottawa or elsewhere, is finally beginning to be plainly stated and widely accepted

16

17

(Simon and Dobra, 2003; Brandford, 2002; Fowler and Hartmann, 2002). And as
a result, suggestions that policymakers should consider using a 'bottom-up' approach are starting to evolve from the theoretical (See: Scott, 2003; Jacobs,
1992) to the applied (See: Brandford, 2002). This is not to say that the 'bottom-

cities are also beginning to develop their own 'Green Development Standard' and
environmental plans separate from their official plans (City of Toronto, 2000; City of Toronto, 2007). In fact, with regard to climate change, it has been suggested
that 'local government in Canada is the only level that can claim any real progress in terms of emissions reductions' (Robinson, 2006, p. 219). Therefore it appears that it is as not unreasonable to expect municipalities to 'reorder'

up' approach should completely replace more traditional methods; it simply suggests that the dialogue between tiers of government should be free of
hierarchy and that environmental policy can be 'designed to align objectives
across [all] the levels of government' (Brandford, 2002, p. 82).

themselves as Price (2002) suggests. The challenge then, is for municipalities to take the piecemeal changes and to combine them into a more holistic approach
(Fowler and Hartmann, 2002).

However, concerns remain regarding the ability to practically apply the 'local'
movement and 'bottom-up' policy creation theories. Indeed these concerns are
Ferrara and Missios (2005) note the importance of understanding the path

warranted; finding the political will and institutional capacity to affect change in
environmental policy at the municipal level has consistently proven to be a
challenge (Wheeler, 2000, Robinson and Gore, 2005). Price (2002, p. 139) even suggests that 'it would be quite unrealistic to expect the governments of cities to
be able to reorder the life and the organization of city functions to minimize
environmental impacts'.

between the policies that initiate environmental projects and the results of those
same projects. Indeed such an understanding is critical, however equally critical is an understanding of how the policies come to exist and why they exist in the

forms that they do. How are municipalities empowered to create environmental
policies? What limits are placed on that power? Indeed, how can municipalities address environmental issues using the holistic approach suggested above? Before an examination of the results of municipalities' attempts at creating

There are signs, however, that both will and capacity at the municipal level are
being strengthened and developed. For example, the emphasis that

meaningful environmental policy can take place, these questions must first be
answered.

municipalities are placing on finding solutions to their waste problems has led to steadily increasing diversion rates that currently reach levels of up to 55 per cent
(Regional Municipality of Halifax, 2006; Jones, 2008). In addition, Canadian

18

19

2.5. Legislative Empowerment

The power granted through s. 16(1)(a) of the Planning Act (RSO, 1990) provides the potential for Ontario municipalities to address planning issues through the
ecosystem approach. This approach focuses on the conservation of energy and

As Broadbent noted, Canadian municipalities 'are creatures of the provinces...

[they] have no independent constitutional ability to resist whatever conditions the

provinces opt to create for them' and thus they 'have very little control over their
destinies' (2000, p. 1). Thus, the methods and extents to which municipalities

resources in a manner which respects the environment (Price, 2002). However, municipalities' are not directed to use such an approach, suggesting the need to
investigate the extent to which the environment is being addressed in their official

can address environmental issues are highly dependent on the powers devolved
to them by the province. In Ontario, provincial legislation empowers and requires municipalities to develop and regularly update their official plans. Official plans are actually products of a process, of negotiations between various stakeholders;
at their best, they represent a truly inclusive communicative planning process.

plans. Such an investigation would need to be framed within the legislative limitations on municipal authority to establish policies related to management and
physical change that impact the natural environment.

However, from a legislative stance, an official plan is a set of municipal policies

Section 2 of the Planning Act (RSO, 1990) outlines 'Provincial Interests' which
municipalities 'shall have regard to' in their planning policies and processes. The interests extend into a wide range of policy areas, which with regard to

aimed to 'maximize the well-being of residents, promote economic growth, make
wise use of resources, and protect the environment from unnecessary harm' (Leo,
2002; p. 218). Official plans are seen to give a thorough consideration of the inter-related nature of various systems related to land-use and the environment

environmental policy, include the protection of ecological systems and functions,
agricultural and natural resources, the supply, efficient use and conservation of
water and energy, the minimization of waste, the location of growth and

as well as 'a "best" physical arrangement for future development' (Getzels and
Thurow, 1979, p. 34). With respect to Ontario, municipalities are empowered to develop official plans through the Planning Act (RSO, 1990), which states that:

development that is sustainable and that encourages public transit.

In addition, municipalities are required to have their official plans approved. The
16. (1) An official plan shall contain,

(a) goals, objectives and policies established primarily to manage and direct physical change and the effects on the social, economic and natural environment of the municipality or part of it, or an area that is
without municipal organization; and

approving body for official plans is determined by the municipality's tier-level.

Section 17 of the Planning Act (RSO, 1990) addresses the approval of official
plans. In particular, it states that:

(b) such other matters as may be prescribed. 2006, c. 23, s. 8.

20

21

17. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Minister is the approval authority in respect of the approval of a plan as an official
plan for the purposes of this section. 1996, c. 4, s. 9.
Approval by upper-tier municipality

more research into the environmental content is required in order to determine how comprehensively these issues are addressed in municipal policy documents.

(2) An upper-tier municipality is the approval authority in respect of an official plan of a lower-tier municipality for the purposes of this section
if the upper-tier municipality has an approved official plan.

Several other pieces of legislation relate to municipalities' official plans indirectly.
Section 1(1) of the Planning Act (RSO, 1990) states that references to 'provincial
plans'within the Act mean:

Finally, the Planning Act (RSO, 1990) dictates that municipalities must regularly review their official plans in order to ensure the plans address the provincial
policy statement. Section 3(10) states that:

(a) the Greenbelt Plan established under section 3 of the Greenbelt Act,
2005,

The Minister shall, at least every five years from the date that a policy statement is issued under subsection (1), ensure that a review of the policy statement is undertaken for the purpose of determining the need
for a revision of the policy statement.
While s. 3(5) states:

(b) the Niagara Escarpment Plan established under section 3 of the Niagara Escarpment Planning and Development Act, 1990,
(c) the Oak Ridges Moraine Conservation Plan established under section 3 of the Oak Ridges Moraine Conservation Act, 2001,

(d) a development plan approved under the Ontario Planning and
Development Act, 1994,

A decision of the council of a municipality, a local board, a planning board, a minister of the Crown and a ministry, board, commission or agency of the government, including the Municipal Board, in respect of the exercise of any authority that affects a planning matter, (a) shall be consistent with the policy statements issued under subsection (1) that are in effect on the date of the decision; and

(e) a growth plan approved under the Places to Grow Act, 2005

The Greenbelt Plan addresses the preservation of rural and agriculture lands in Ontario by restricting development in designated areas. In order to conform to the Greenbelt Plan, municipalities must amend their official plan designations for
'prime agricultural areas' and 'rural areas'. The Plan provides general guidelines for the restriction of development, but allows for official plans to be more restrictive (Government of Ontario, 2005a). Over one million acres (400, 000 Ha) of farm and rural land have been designated for protection as a result of the Greenbelt Plan (Caldwell and Hilts, 2005), suggesting the importance of
addressing such protection in municipal official plans.

(b) shall conform with the provincial plans that are in effect on that date, or shall not conflict with them, as the case may be. 2006, c. 23, s. 5. Thus, broadly speaking, the Planning Act (RSO, 1990) provides municipalities

with the flexibility to create policies that address environmental issues within their
jurisdiction, the guidance as to the areas deemed critically important by the
Province and a regular schedule of review that ensures the continued relevance

of their plans. However, there is vagueness in the legislation that suggests the
thoroughness of official plan reviews may not be comprehensive. As a result,

22

23

The Niagara Escarpment Plan and the Oak Ridges Moraine Conservation Plan

Also within the boundaries of the Greenbelt Plan, the Oak Ridges Moraine

areas both lie within the boundaries of the Greenbelt Plan (Government of
Ontario, 2005b). Thus, these plans serve as more detailed policies for the protection of specific areas within the Greenbelt. Originally approved in 1985, the Niagara Escarpment Plan encompasses a range of geological and ecological
features extending from Queenston, Ontario to the Bruce Peninsula (Government

Conservation Plan has a mandate similar to the Niagara Escarpment Plan. Its
stated purpose is:

to provide land use and resource management planning direction to

provincial ministers, ministries, and agencies, municipalities, municipal planning authorities, landowners and other stakeholders on how to protect the Moraine's ecological and hydrological functions (Government of Ontario, 2002, p. 3).

of Ontario, 2005b). Explicitly, the purpose of the Niagara Escarpment Plan is 'to
provide for the maintenance of the Niagara Escarpment and land in its vicinity
Hanna et al. (2007) note that the plan is a response to conflicts in the 1990s over
housing development proposals within the 160 kilometre stretch of environmentally sensitive moraine located just north of the City of Toronto. They conclude that the comprehensive attention paid to the relationship between

substantially as a continuous natural environment, and to ensure only such
development occurs as is compatible with that natural environment'.

Implicitly, the Plan's purpose with regard to ecosystem functions is to serve as a

human action, ecological function and land-use planning policy make the Plan unique in the North American context. However, most relevant to this discussion is the realization that under the current tier system in Ontario, where municipalities of any tier are the approving authority for development proposals within their own jurisdiction, placing 'ecologically based planning' decisions into the hands of municipalities requires them to have a certain capacity to

counterweight to natural resource development pressures, particularly quarrying.
However, as the boundaries of ecosystems like that of the Niagara Escarpment

are difficult to define and can be seen as somewhat open (Moss and Milne, 1998), it cannot be said that the Plan itself is fully encompassing and effective.
That is not to say that the escarpment and moraine plans and the green belt are

not beneficial, as they do serve to protect an area far larger than any single

understand the fundamentals of such planning (Hanna et al., 2007, p. 347).
Determining the level of understanding is critical to the current study of municipally-based environmental policy creation. However, the literature does not directly address how such a determination can or should be made.

municipality. Additionally, the conflict between the contrasting goals of natural
resource protection and natural resource development poses an interesting

dichotomy. However, the literature does not sufficiently detail the role of
municipalities in creating policy that balances such conflicting goals.

24

.

25

In contrast to the Greenbelt, Niagara Escarpment and Oak Ridges Moraine

Conservation Plans, development plans created under the Ontario Planning and Development Act, 1994 (OPDA, 1994) and the Places to Grow initiative launched
under the Places to Grow Act, 2005 focus more directly on development.

The focus of the Act and the initiative is on development, but in a way which aims
to concentrate development into locations that are deemed suitable. This does
not suggest that there are not critics to approaches such as this. Wekerle et al

However, the intensions of both the later acts are still related to environmental conservation policy. For example, development plans are similar to official plans
(OMMAH, 2007a), particularly in that they are intended to guide growth

(2007) take exception to collective use of the seemingly antithetical practices of
conservation and growth. In particular they suggest that the structure of the

Greenbelt Plan, which essentially allows for urban expansion around Toronto to continue for up to three decades before reaching the greenbelt, and the implicit call for population growth in the Greater Golden Horseshoe region in the Places to Grow plan act as facilitators to the type of growth which compromises sensitive
ecosystem function. What this suggests for the current study is that the level of

responsibly. The first development plan created under the OPDA, 1994, the Central Pickering Development Plan, utilized a lands exchange process in order

to protect lands within the Oak Ridges Moraine (OMMAH, 2008a). Similarly, the
overarching goal of the Places to Grow initiative is 'to manage growth and
development in Ontario in a way that supports economic prosperity, protects the environment and helps communities achieve a high quality of life' (Ontario

attention that municipalities are required to pay to the environment in their official plans could be minimal, thereby justifying the need for more research into the de
facto standard being adopted by municipalities in the province.

Ministry of Public Infrastructure Renewal (OMPIR), 2008). More precisely,
Section 1 of the Places to Grow Act, 2005 states that:

The purposes of the Act are,

2.6. Ontario Tier Structure

(a) to enable decisions about growth to be made in ways that sustain a robust economy, build strong communities and promote a healthy
environment and a culture of conservation;

In any broad study of municipal planning in Ontario, it is critical to understand the
structure of the tiered system that municipalities fall into. This allows for a more

(b) to promote a rational and balanced approach to decisions about growth that builds on community priorities, strengths and opportunities
and makes efficient use of infrastructure;

fully developed command of the interactions between municipalities and the
range of their authority. Sancton (2002) notes that the 'two-tier system' (there are actually three tiers) utilized by Ontario represents the compromise between
two schools of thought on municipal and regional governance. The consolidationist approach strives for highly accountable and efficient municipal

(c) to enable planning for growth in a manner that reflects a broad geographical perspective and is integrated across natural and
municipal boundaries;

(d) to ensure that a long-term vision and long-term goals guide decision-making about growth and provide for the co-ordination of growth policies among all levels of government. 2005, c. 13, s. 1.

26

27

governments through one level of governance, while the 'public choice' approach
suggests financial efficiency is achieved through multiple levels of governance

and the line between these two types of services is often a contentious matter
(Sancton, 2002). Ontario's Municipal Act, 2001 (RSO, 2001, C. 25, s. 17) clarifies the matter to some extent by providing a clear structure to the system.
The Act removes all but the aesthetic value of municipal titles such as 'city',
'town', 'village', etc, and qualifies how each municipality is categorized. As a

(Sancton, 2002). The two-tier approach draws from both approaches, permitting
lower-tier municipalities the authority to address environmental issues through

official plans while requiring them to conform to upper-tier regional municipalities'
official plans. The benefit of this approach is found in the system's ability to
detect and address environmental issues quickly at the local level without hindering smaller municipalities with the technical and program management

result, little question remains as to which services a municipality is to provide, as
lower-tier municipalities are required to conform to the official plans of their
upper-tier municipality.

responsibilities for which larger, regional municipalities are better suited. The
water management and protection program established by the Regional
Municipality of Waterloo (RMOW) provides an excellent example of this system
The reasons for differentiation between tier levels go beyond simple institutional management. Socio-demographic values and concerns across the geographic spectrum also exist and are addressed to varying levels through the tier system. By allowing lower-tier municipalities to address local concerns within the

at work. The program allows lower-tier municipalities to highlight potential

hazards to local source water while the RMOW is empowered to direct growth

away from sensitive water sources (Ivey et al, 2006)1. Through this interaction,
the RMOW and lower municipalities within its boundaries develop a thorough
municipal knowledge of where and how to address source water protection that

framework constructed by its upper-tier counterpart, rural issues that might be
otherwise overlooked can be addressed (Sancton, 2002). In addition, issues

arising between the major interests of an area, as are seen in Marsden et al.'s (1993) discussion of conflicts between farmers, developers and residents in the
rural, can be addressed formally and directly through local policy documents.

can be subsequently incorporated into municipal official plans (Ivey et al, 2006).

Ontario's two-tier system was established in 1954, prior to which cities in Ontario
were organized into a one-tier municipal system (Sancton, 2002). Since 1954,

Thus, while it is yet to be explicitly examined, it can be expected that multiple
municipal tier levels facilitate attention to local environmental issues which are uniquely reflected in municipalities' individual official plans.

upper-tier municipalities have been responsible for regional or inter-municipal
services while lower-tier municipalities have provided more localized services;
1 The passing of Ontario's Clean Water Act, 2006 resulted in a shift of responsibility for source water protection to Conservation Authorities (or the Province in the absence of a CA). However, the underlying value of the two-tier system is still demonstrated in this example.

28

29

A final point of consideration regarding Ontario's tier structure is the third tier

authority to raise taxes in a variety of ways, with only a few limited areas of restriction (OMMAH, 2007b). While these powers may be interpreted in different
ways and their importance debated, the critical issue for the current study is the City of Toronto's legislated differentiation from other Ontario municipalities and

alluded to above. In addition to upper- and lower-tiers, the Municipal Act, 2001
also creates a 'single-tier' category. Single-tier municipalities are:

municipalities that are geographically located within a county but are not part of the county for the municipal purposes. Single-tier municipalities also include all northern municipalities where there is no upper-tier governance at the District level. Finally single-tier municipalities include those former county or regional municipalities that have recently been amalgamated into single-tier municipality
(Government of Ontario, 2005).

what that means for its role in the study, a point that will be further addressed in
the next chapter.

2.7. Indices of Environmental Content

There are currently 174 single-tier municipalities in Ontario, representing over a

Commonly addressed throughout the urban policy and environmental literature is the need develop usable indices (Webster, 1998; Niemeijer, 2002; Hecht, 2003;
Ebert and Welsch, 2004; Roberts, 2006). The development of an indicator set

third of all municipalities in the province (based on information from OMMAH,
2008b). Single-tier municipalities are responsible for the provision of all local
services to their residents, as there is no upper-tier municipality in place to

allows for a uniform method of analysis. Ebert and Welsh (2004) highlight the
importance of uniformity in environmental indicators with regard to their

support them (Government of Ontario, 2005c). For this same reason, single-tier

municipalities' official plans go through the same approval process as upper-tier
municipalities.

measurements as a method of indicator definition. Development of such
measurements within the context of the current study benefit from both the

unifprmity of measurements within Ontario and to the method of measurement

The City of Toronto provides a unique situation within the single-tier municipal category. In addition to the traditionally unique role that the City plays regarding
business and the reflection of Canada's image internationally/Toronto also has

proposed in the next chapter.

Webster (1998) suggests that public goods (water, waste management, etc) are a valuable set of indicators, as municipalities exercise a reasonably high level of control over them. As public goods are generally uniform in nature from one municipality to the next and relate in general to provincial interests, their use initially appears appropriate for the current study. However, Roberts (2006)

certain powers delegated to it that separate it from other municipalities in Ontario and the rest of the country. Specifically, the city has 'broad powers to pass by laws regarding matters that range from public safety to the city's economic, social
and environmental well being' (OMMAH, 2007b). In particular, the City has the

30

31

suggests that evaluation tools, such as indicators, should contain sufficient

the policy objectives of the EU's Resource Strategy' (Best et al, 2008, p. 76). In
addition, as tool for highlighting awareness of environmental concerns, little dissent in EF's value exists (Moore et al, 2007). It is in this capacity which ecological footprint analysis is of use to this study. For example, the Federation
of Canadian Municipalities notes that "Canadians' energy demands make up the

flexibility to allow for the evaluation to be contextualized to the individual location. At first the seemingly contradictory suggestions that indicators must allow for uniform analysis but also be flexible in nature appear irreconcilable. However, in the context of official plans, the structure created by broadly-stated provincial
interests allows for the integration of these ideas. Wheeler (2000) states that

largest portion of our footprint" (2005, p. 7). In this way, EF analysis highlights
energy-related environmental concerns. The natural linkage between this

good indices should be proxies for broad areas of concern that focus on the

future and are easily understandable. The provincial interests previously outlined
are easily understandable and sufficiently broad. Still, they are not sufficient for
creating specific indicators alone, as they lack a collaborative or participatory
approach in their development.

component of EF analysis and the provincial interest in energy supply, use and
conservation is overtly clear. In addition, the EF analysis components of

transportation, consumption of crop land, built area, sea space, forest land, and the combined residential and commercial/business (FCM, 2005) can be seen to
relate to the respective provincial interests of supporting public transit, the

To rectify this concern, the provincial interests can be converted to indicators by
examining ecological footprint (EF) analysis and finding common ground. An
ecological footprint is a calculated area measurement that represents the
terrestrial and aquatic area needed to sustain a population's (in this case a

protection of the province's agricultural resources, locating growth appropriately,
supporting adequate water supply and conservation, the conservation of natural resources and mineral base and the reduction of municipally-produced waste.

Finally, both the provincial interests and EF analysis have an overarching goal of
protecting ecological systems and functions in the environment.

municipality's) natural resource consumption levels (Rees and Wackernagel, 1996). Ecological footprint analysis is a 'widely advocated' policy tool for measuring sustainability and is popular at global, national and local levels (Moore
et al, 2007, p.1). However, despite its flexibility as an analysis tool, the methodological strength of EF analysis continues to be debated (Ibid). This has
not dramatically diminished its overall use though, and was seen to be a

Eight indicators have been created by drawing connections between Ontario's

provincial interests and components of EF analysis. These will be referred to as
categories forthwith in this study in order to differentiate them from the indicator used to determine the level of attention given to each category. Eight categories

potentially 'effective indicator for assessing and communicating progress toward

may appear to be too small a number to form a comprehensive measurement

32

33

system. However, as Niemeijer (2002, p. 95) notes, 'the power of an index does not increase with the number of indicators and variables it covers but with the elimination of superfluous variables'. Thus, the value of the system should be
viewed from the broad range of environmental sub-topics covered by the
categories, rather than the number of them.

used in implementation phrasing of development policy concerning the moraine
suggested, but did not require municipalities to adhere to provincial policy
statements. However, by subsequently replacing the phrase 'shall have regard to' with 'shall be consistent with' in provincial policy statements, the provincial
government removed ambiguity and required municipalities to adhere to its policy

(Hanna et al., 2002, p. 341). What this suggests for the current study is the

Soroka (2002) noted policy measures are prone to change with governing
institutions, as well as with time and location. As such, the ability to measure

importance that language plays in policy analysis. As a result, the strength of

language used in municipal official plans will be addressed in the analysis section
of the methodology in the next chapter.

attention levels and their variations is of critical importance to policy analysis. Newig (2004) supports this assertion by differentiating attention from opinion. In
particular it is stated that in 'contrast to public opinion, public attention does not

In summary the Canadian approach to environmental policy creation has been discussed at the federal, provincial and municipal levels. Components of the

indicate what people think, but what they think about...and it expresses the
extent to which they dedicate their resources to a given subject' (Newig, 2004, p.

federal and provincial approaches have revealed that municipalities are playing
an increasingly important role in this type of policymaking as a result of structural
and political realities. In addition, societal encouragement for this increased role

154). This same concept can be applied to policy creation at the municipal level,
with the amount of attention being paid to an environmental topic reflecting the
dedication of resources to that topic.

was also discussed and previous municipal successes in specific environmental
sectors support the notion that, through their official plan, municipalities are well

In addition to attention levels, language strength also plays a critical role in policy analysis. The delicate language used in policy means that subtle variation in
phrasing can have a dramatic impact on how a policy is to be interpreted. Hanna et al. (2007) illustrate this in their study of integrated ecological and regional
planning in the Oak Ridges Moraine. They note that when development pressure

suited to serve as environmental policymakers. Subsequently the legislative empowerment of municipalities in Ontario and the structure that they work within has been detailed. And finally, previous research was examined in order to highlight key approaches and techniques that policy researchers have used and
that may prove useful in the current study. In the next chapter these ideas are integrated to a larger methodology which, within the context created in this

increased in the moraine during the 1990s, the weaker advisory-styled language

34

35

chapter, is used to further examine how municipalities integrate environmental
policy into their official plans and what, if any, socio-demographic factors
influence that process.

Chapter 3: Methodology
3.1. Greening of official plans In the early development of the research methodology several key questions emerged that required answers in order to allow a logical and defendable

sampling procedure to be created. First and foremost was the question of how
large the sample should be? Determining the sample size required a balancing

of three key factors: the total number of municipalities in Ontario, the
approximate size of an official plan and the time limitations which the research was to be undertaken within. According to Ontario's Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing, there are 445 municipalities in the Province of Ontario (MAH, 2008). With regard to the size of official plans, a basic random sample found that Ontario municipalities' official plans can easily exceed 100 pages and can often
approach 200 pages. As a result, alternative approaches were subsequently examined in order to determine the number of plans required to represent the spectrum of communities. It was determined that a sample of one-fifth of the

official plans would be utilized for the research. A quintile of Ontario's
municipalities, eighty-nine in total, represents a statistically significant portion of

the total population as it more than eliminates concerns of small sample
populations (<30) and the resulting statistical adjustments that would have to be

made during data analysis. With this fundamental question answered, the rest of the study's methodology could be developed (for an outline, see Figure 3.1).

36

37

3.2. Sampling

Figure 3.1: Outline of Methodology
Random Sampling
Systematic sampling choose as most representative

Based on the structural guidelines developed in the preliminary discussions, the
sampling process required a list of every municipality in Ontario. This list was obtained from the Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing's website and
represents the entire population from with the sample was drawn (OMMAH,

Systematic Sampling

2008b). To ensure accuracy and to facilitate later analysis, the list was also
Online OP
collection

Phone/email
OP collection

Mail OP
collection

compared to the 2006 Statistics Canada list of municipalities (StatsCan, 2006).

The lists reflected the exact same municipalities, thus satisfying the question of
OP collection

results compiled

completeness. The City of Toronto was removed from consideration, as it is uniquely empowered through unique legislative powers granted to the City by the Province through the City of Toronto Act, 2006. It is suggested here that the designation of such unique powers differentiates the City of Toronto from other Ontario municipalities to the point which the comparison of its official plan to
others in the Province would not reflect the variation of efforts or desires to include environmental content as much as it would reflect the variations resulting

Statistics Canada

Final OP sample population
OP's analysed using indicator table & OP scores recorded

Municipal demographic data gathered

Quantitative comparison/grouping

and correlation analysis testing

Quantitative findings and indications
Qualitative language

from the devolution of different powers to different municipalities. As a result of
the City of Toronto's removal from the population, the new population size
became 444.

analysis

Qualitative support/ counter-indications for/against quantitative indications and separate qualitative findings
Qualitative spatial analysis

Spatial trends/patterns identified
Results compiled

It was decided that two scenarios for selecting municipalities would be
considered: random and systematic sampling. For the random sampling

technique the list of municipalities was alphabetically organized in descending
Final conclusions drawn

order according to municipality name. Using a random number table

38

39

municipalities were chosen according to the row number associated with the municipality name in the Excel file. If a number was chosen which did not correspond to one in the table with a municipality (any number over 444), it was discarded and a new number was chosen. This process continued until 89
municipalities were chosen. The random sampling technique resulted in a range

one and ten was drawn in order to determine the first sample, per standard procedure for systematic sampling (Babbie, 2004). The number five was drawn, so beginning with the municipality in the fifth row of the Excel table, every fifth
municipality was taken. With a sample interval of 5, 88 sample municipalities
were drawn. In order to obtain the final sample, a random draw was taken to

of 13.2% between the highest and lowest percent of tier representation and
18.8% between the highest and lowest percentage of regional representation
(Table 3.1).

determine if the municipality with the smallest or largest population would be
included. The result of the draw determined that the smallest municipality would be used. The systematic sampling technique resulted in a range of 4.8% between the highest and lowest percent of tier representation and 7.3% between the highest and lowest percent of regional representation (Table 3.2).

Table 3.1: Random Sampling Results
Total
Tier
Upper Lower

Samples 6 35

Per cent of Total
20.0%
14.5% 27.7%

30

Table 3.2: Systematic Sampling Results
Total
Tier

241
173 444

Sinqle

48 89
Percentage Range

Total
Region

20.0%
13.2% 19.5% 15.8%
24.4%

Samples
7

Per cent of Total 23.3% 20.7%

Upper
Lower

30 241

Central
Eastern
Northeastern

77 114

15

50
32

18
29

Single
Total
Region

173
444

18.5% 20.0% 4.8%

119
26 108
444

89

Northwestern

9
18 89 Percentage Range

34.6%
16.7%

Percentage Range Central
Eastern Northeastern Northwestern Southwest Total
77

Southwest Total

20.0% 18.8%

16 18 25 6
24

20.8% 15.8% 21.0%
23.1% 22.2%

114

119 26 108
444

In the systematic sampling technique the total population was organized
according to municipal population size, from smallest to largest. Correlation

89 Percentage Range

20.0% 7.3%

analyses determined that there was no relationship between population size and either tier-level or region. In addition, this ordering provided a sample containing
an even distribution of municipalities by population, though this was not an
Based on the results of the two sampling techniques, the systematic sampling
population was found to be the more evenly representative and thus, the more suitable (See Appendix A for the Initial Sample Population List). In addition,

explicit goal of the sampling. In order to prevent bias, a random number between

40

41

fundamental research concepts suggested that the systemic sampling technique

3.4. Analysis

and thus their derived sample populations were better suited for this research.
For example, it was previously mentioned that various correlation analyses
revealed no meaningful relationships based on populations, tier levels, names or

The analysis process began with an examination of the individual samples using

an indicator table. The indicator table was created using categories derived from
the common components of Ontario's 'Provincial Interests' and more advanced
ecological footprint research discussed previously detailed in Chapter 2 (see

regions; thus suggesting a lack of known characteristics. Systematic sampling is
considered well suited for large populations with no known characteristics
(Walliman, 2001).

Appendix C for the indicator table). Eight categories were used: Environment, Built Environment, Transportation, Energy, Waste, Water, Natural Resources,
and Agriculture.

3.3. Collections & Limitations

While it was initially hoped that a collection of updated and approved official plans would exist and be readily accessible, the possibility that this would not be
case was considered and certain limitations were therefore placed on the

Official plans were first reviewed to determine whether their content addressed
each category as they pertained to the Provincial Interests outlined in Ontario's Planning Act (RSO, 1990). This indicator is referred to as Legislative Prerequisites for the purposes of this research. For each of the Legislative Prerequisites addressed in a plan, the plan was given one point, with a maximum
possible score of eight.

collection of official plans. One of these is based on the broad physical scope of
the research. Given that the municipalities in the sample population were located
across the Province and that physically visiting each municipality would not be

feasible, it was decided that no official plan would be obtained through travel. In addition, it was decided that no official plan would be paid for as the research is
voluntary in nature and payment would be considered non-voluntary. Under
these limitations, official plans were requested from the sample municipalities.
Next the plans were reviewed for environmental content that addressed the categories in a manner that fit with current ecological footprint recommendations.
This indicator is referred to as Advanced Policy. For each of the categories

The results of the data collection process resulted in a sample size of 56. A
complete breakdown of the final sample population breakdown is available in
Appendix B.

addressed by an Advanced Policy, a plan was given five points, with a maximum
possible score of 40. In addition the strength of language was measured for

each category. The level of strength was rated as either not present and given a

42

43

score of zero, weak and given a score of one, or strong and given a score of five.
Here again the maximum possible score was 40.

The final indicator used was the age of the official plan. Here 2008 was subtracted from the year the official plan was approved to arrive at a negative
number. In instances where amendments were available and were approved

The next indicator utilized was the frequency of environmental references,

after the official plan, 2008 was also subtracted from the year the last
amendment was approved. Then an average of the two numbers was derived and used for the remainder of the research. Once this number was found, a final
score for the Plan was created by adding the results of the Legislative

specifically references to each of the categories. Frequency output is a basic
quantitative output measurement tool used in content analysis (Neuendorf, 2002). The output measurement was slightly modified to count only references used in context. The frequency output measurement allowed the study to examine the
dedication of resources to a given environmental category, as discussed in
Chapter 2.

Prerequisites, the Advanced Policy, the overall strength of language and the total
average environmental references per page and then subtracting the age of the
official plan.

In order to allow for this indicator to be easily reproducible, key words were
drawn from relevant literature as discussed in Chapter 2. The official plans were

Once the entire sample population had been reviewed and individual scores were given, the results were compiled and analyzed using a variety of techniques,
both quantitative and qualitative. Initially the results were aggregated into

reviewed to record the number of times these words appeared in the documents

and were directly related to the category. Thus 'nature', as a key word for the
'Natural Resources' category, was counted if used in relation to natural resources;
but was not counted in instances where the word was used in another manner

fundamental statistical measures, specifically: range, mode, median, mean, and
standard deviation. These aggregations allowed for a broad overview of the data
and provided a starting point for further analysis.

(i.e.: 'the nature of the proposal'). Once a total count of references was found for
each of the categories, the category totals were summed and then divided by the
total page count in order to arrive at a final average number of environmental
references per page.

Previous research suggests that few demographic characteristics are correlated

with 'cities' level of seriousness about sustainability' (Portney, 2002, 377). This is
not the same as determining which, if any, characteristics are correlated with the addressing of specific environmental categories in official plans. However, it does

44

45

provide useful initial indications and support for the validity of the method used in
this study.

Taken collectively, the demographic data drawn from the census create a

framework of municipal characteristics which allowed for a variety of conclusions
to be drawn from correlation tests regarding the presence of relationships

In order to determine whether a relationship existed between the demographic
characteristics of municipalities and the environmental content of their official plans, several correlation analyses were conducted. This required several types

between municipal official plans and community characteristics.

After completing the quantitative analysis of the data, a more qualitative
approach to the analysis followed. This included both language and spatial

of municipal data to be utilized. Municipal tier levels were taken from the Ministry
of Municipal Affairs and Housing website. Additionally, municipal size, population, immigration, education, employment and industry data were used. These data

analysis. In the language analysis, the official plans were analyzed for
categorically-relevant material. The language was then organized based on the policy and strength indicators into one of four groups, those being: the absence

were gathered from the Census of Canada (Statistics Canada, 2006). A list of
the specific Statistics Canada Census headings and sub-headings of the data
used in the correlation analyses is provided in Appendix D.

of related policy (0), the presence of basic policy (1), the presence of advanced policy (2) and advanced policy that utilizes high levels of language strength (3). This allowed for theories that were suggested but not fully supported by the

In choosing the sub-headings to use, those sub-headings expected to have the
most direct or most inverse relationship to the categories found in the indicator

quantitative data to be examined in further detail and for general conclusions
concerning the relative levels of categorical content present in official plans to be drawn. In addition, it also provided useful categories for the visual analysis
conducted using ArcMap geographic information systems (GIS).

table were chosen. For example, under the Industry heading the 'Agriculture and
other resource based industries' and the 'Construction industry' were chosen.

The former was chosen as it was hypothesized that a greater concern for the

agricultural and natural resource components would be reflected in the official
plans of municipalities with higher percentages of residents working within these

Using ArcMap a variety of visual analyses were conducted. The visual analysis
began by first mapping the sample municipalities used for the study. This was done by obtaining the most up-to-date maps of Ontario municipalities from DMTI via the Ryerson University Library. As the maps were divided by tier level, it was
necessary to merge the map files into a single file for analysis. It was

industries. Conversely, it was expected that the lower score would be found in
those municipalities with a higher economic dependence on the development industry as is reflected in the percentage of residents employed in construction.

46

47

acknowledged that, as the files were not created at the same time by the same

3.5. Reproducibility

programmer or data compiler, some inconsistencies in the boundary lines and

The final methodological issue that requires attention is the reproducibility of the
overall research. There was nothing unique or complicated in the sourcing of the data and materials used. The sampling and collection techniques were also developed using fundamental social science research techniques. With regard to the analysis though, there was a need for the verification of the process. The
mapping analysis again was basic and easily reproducible; however, the method

metadata could exist. However, given that the quantitative analysis done on the

relationship between municipality area and the environmental content score of
the official plan was completed using data solely from Statistics Canada, any

visual inconsistencies were unlikely to be significant enough to compromise the
resulting analysis.

of scoring the official plans was somewhat distinctive in its development. This

Once the files were merged into one map and the sample municipalities identified the first set of maps produced for analysis cross-tabulated municipal density with official plan age and overall official plan score with official plan age. Each variable (dependant and independent) had three possible classes: low, medium
and high. This resulted in nine possible classifications for an official plan. An

and the central role that the resulting scores played in the research led to determination that the reproducibility of the process must be verified.

As such, a municipality (Seguin) was chosen at random and used for the verification process. Seguin's official plan was scored using the method discussed above three times during the course of the study, with two month

additional classification (0) was added to represent the absence of an official plan
in a given municipality. The second set of maps focused on level of

intervals between scorings. The results revealed a high level of reproducibility in
the method. Between the first and second tests the scores differed by twelve
points; however this was the result of a change in the point system made during

environmental content found in official plans. The measurement system changed
in these maps to reflect the four content-level based groups developed in the
language analysis. Collectively, the maps allowed a visual inspection for
clustering to be conducted. Thus, if clusters were identified for a particular

the period between the tests. Once the individual point values were adjusted on
the results of the first test to mirror the point value designations of the

category, additional investigation could occur or be recommended in order to
identify a physical occurrence that would explain the cluster.

subsequent tests, the scores were identical. Between the second and third tests, there was a minor variation of less than one point that resulted from a slightly
different count in the frequency of environmental references. However, the

48

49

PROPERTY OF RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

variation did not affect the final score of the official plan as the final scores of all
the official plans were rounded and the rounding was not affected by the variation.

Chapter 4: Results and Interpretation
4.1. Results and Interpretation As stated in the previous chapter, the results of the study and their interpretation

The results of the reproducibility test suggest that, given adequate attention to

can be divided into quantitative and qualitative analyses. The following two chapters examine both analyses in order to begin addressing the fundamental research objectives posed at the beginning of this paper, those being to
determine:

the official plans, the scoring system used in the indicator table will reliably

provide reproducible scores. It should be noted that this does not suggest that
exact score will be reproduced by every researcher who uses this table if his/her
interpretation of the indicators is uniquely different from another researcher, nor
will any score be exactly reproducible as official plans age, Provincial Interests

change and/or ecological-footprint theory matures. However, outside these

1. If there is a significant difference in the environmental content found in official plans and, if there is, what relationship exists between the level of environmental content of Ontario municipalities' official plans and socio-economic or physical characteristics of their respective communities? 2. Which components of municipal governance may be given greater attention or more authority through the use of language when environmental policy is developed at the municipal level? This chapter begins with a breakdown of the quantitative analyses performed on the results of the official plan scores. First the scores are described and
evaluated using fundamental statistical techniques including range, mean, median, mode and standard deviation. Next, the results of the correlation analyses conducted on the scores and various socio-economic factors are detailed. These results suggest something about the levels of attention paid to a

notable exceptions, the methodology suggested here does provide a useable
and reproducible way to fully analyze the environmental content of official plans and the relationship between the content and demographic and physical

characteristics of the communities that produce them. In the next chapter the
results and implications of these analyses are detailed.

range of environmental topics covered in the official plans. They also reveal
whether a statistically significant relationship exists between the level of environmental content (including individual topics) in official plans and the socioeconomic characteristics of their communities.

50

51

In Chapter 5 the discussion shifts to the results of the qualitative analysis. This
chapter begins with the analysis of language used in Ontario municipal official
plans. The results from this stage of the analysis process suggest how language is used in the development of topic-focused environmental policy by segregating

4.2. Quantitative Analysis

In order to give the official plan scores a full quantitative analysis, the discussion
begins with the eight individual categories detailed in the previous chapters.

After the individual categories have been fully analyzed, the overall official plan
scores are then examined.

official plans by category and highlighting the category-specific language used in
those plans. In addition to language analysis, the qualitative analysis section

also discusses the results in terms of spatial significance. The spatial analysis
examines the results using maps created with ArcMap software. The maps

4.2.1. Category-Based Analysis

Categorical scores represent the sum of the points an individual official plan
received based in a category for the following indicators: Basic Policy, Advanced
Policy, Average References per Page, and Language Strength. This type of analysis is necessary, as no previous study has examined municipal official plans in this manner (thus providing no baseline) and the average category references per page indicator creates an infinite number of possible scores. Therefore,
category ranges, means, medians, and modes are compared to one another and

create images of the quantitative and categorical data previously discussed. The
results of these images are discussed in terms of the visual patterns that are

displayed and how they relate to one another and/or to the major physical features of Ontario. The results of the qualitative analysis supplement the

previous analysis and allow for a more comprehensive interpretation of the data.

Upon completion of the analyses, a final, comprehensive interpretation of the
results is presented in Chapter 6. The final interpretation will integrate all three

individual category scores for municipal official plans are compared to one another with reference to categorical ranges, means, medians and modes.

analysis components and highlight the ways in which the results complement
each other as well as anomalies in the results of the differing analysis techniques.
In examining the means and medians of the categorical scores, a trend appears

The comprehensive interpretation allows for final conclusions to be drawn and
presented in Chapter 6.

with infrastructure-related categories received generally lower scores than those
that are more directly agricultural or environmental in nature (Table 4.1). For
example, the mean scores of the Built Environment, Energy, Waste and

Transportation categories represent the lowest categorical averages, respectively,
with Transportation at the bottom. However, while the Built Environment mean is

52

53

the fourth lowest, it is actually closer in value to the top four means and thus more representative of the higher-value means. This suggestion is repeated by the median scores for each category, where the Built Environment category has the third highest score. However, here again, the Transport, Energy and Waste
categories have the three lowest median scores.

(Energy) to 2.31 (Environment), creating a bottom score range of 2.31. Within
individual categories, the wider ranges imply differentiation among municipal
approaches to a category within their official plans while narrower ranges suggest a more consistent approach from one official plan to the next. When

considered in relation to the overall official plan score range of 69, even the

largest of these ranges (4.67) represents less than 7 per cent of the overall score

Thus, in contrast to the previous hypothesis of urban municipal inattention to

range (0 to 69).

agricultural issues suggested in Chapter 3, the initial indications arriving from range, mean and median score data suggest that rural municipalities are paying
more attention to agricultural and ecological-based issues in their official plans
than to those related to urban infrastructure.

These results provide two important preliminary indications regarding the current
study. First, it supports the category selection process discussed in chapters 2

and 3, as all of the categories are represented with ranges similar in nature. In
addition, it supports the overall scoring method used, as no single category's
scores are seen as significantly higher that the others, based on a +/- 3 standard

Table 4.1: Categorical Score Means and Medians
Mean Environment 9.75 7.74 3.76 4.83
Median

deviation range of 13.57 to 23.36 for the Maximum category scores and -1.21 to
8.46

2.66 for the Minimum category scores.

Built Environment
Transportation

7.36
2.57

Energy Waste
Water

2.09 0.43 4.77

4.21
8.02

Natural Resources Agriculture

9.1 8.53

8.13 3.29

Table 4.2: Categorical Score Maximums, Minimums & Ranges
Maximum
Minimum 2.31

Range
18.66 19.23 19.88 19.02 17.58
16.94

Environment

20.97 19.94

With regard to ranges, the difference between the maximum and minimum

Built Environment
Transportation
Energy

0.71 0.03 0.11
0.11

19.91

19.13
17.69 17.13 16.66 16.3

scores vary from 16.30 (Energy) to 19.88 (Agriculture) points, creating a difference range of 3.58 (see Table 4.2). The highest scores across the categories range from 16.30 (Energy) to 20.97 (Environment), creating a top score range of 4.67. The lowest scores across the categories range from 0

Waste Water

0.19 0.03
0

Natural Resources
Agriculture

16.63
16.3

54

55

The Environment category has the highest maximum and minimum scores,

scores but narrower ranges. In contrast, the Natural Resource and Water categories had wider ranges and higher top scores, indicating more variation in the amount of attention paid to these categories and that a higher level of detail
was included when these issues were addressed. It should be noted at this point, that the current discussion excludes the four municipalities that self-reported 'no
planning'within their jurisdiction.

however it does not have the widest range. This suggests that municipalities tend to provide more attention to or discussion of overall ecosystem-based environmental concern in their official plans than to other individual factors that
may influence ecosystem protection or enhancement. In contrast, the Energy category has the lowest top and bottom range scores, and has the narrowest

overall range. Thus, it can be inferred that municipalities tend to pay less

attention to energy concerns in their official plans than they do to any of the other
categories considered in this study; but that when they do address energy issues,
they address the issues with similar levels of attention.

In the initial quantitative examination of specific categorical scores, information derived from the analysis of ranges, means, and medians of the scores led to five
indications:

1. Municipalities in Ontario provide more overall attention to the Environment

In something of a contrast to the Environment and Energy categories, Agriculture

category than to other categories.

has the widest range of all the categories. While this may be generally expected
due to the traditionally rural nature of agriculture and the strong association some municipalities have with it, the range seen in the Agricultural category also

2. Municipalities provide the least attention to the Energy category; but when addressed, municipalities provide a similar level of attention to category-specific details. 3. The wide range of scores in the Agricultural category would suggest a potential lack of attention by some larger, more urban municipalities to agricultural issues and concepts. 4. The lower mean and median scores in Transportation, Built Environment, Waste and Energy categories suggest less attention is being paid to infrastructure-based issues by many municipalities; in particular more rural municipalities may pay less attention to these issues due to the lower intensity usage experienced on their infrastructure. 5. The increased range in the Water and Natural Resource scores, in combination with their higher mean and median scores, indicate greater variation in the amount of attention paid to these categories, but that a higher level of detail was included when these issues were addressed.

provides initial suggestions that highly urbanized municipalities may not perceive
agricultural issues as relevant to their areas. More specifically, it appears that many municipalities have not begun to examine the role that concepts such as urban agriculture can play within their municipalities and within the province's
wider agricultural agenda.

With regard to the other categories, those categories most associated with urban

Of these indications, the third and fourth would seem to require further testing
using correlation analysis and spatial analysis using GIS to assess the validity of

infrastructure (Transportation, Built Environment, and Waste) had lower top

56

57

the explanations. It was hypothesized that the degree of urban development, as

highest values only revealed a moderate relationship. The correlation analysis
between transportation and the number of persons employed in management
occupations resulted in an r-score of 0.41. For the test between transportation and the number of persons holding a university certificate, diploma or degree, the
score rose to 0.44. Finally, the test between transportation and the percentage

reflected in population size, would be critical to the attention paid to some issues.
A correlation analysis between official plan agricultural scores and the

corresponding municipal population size, drawn from the 2006 census data,
produces a result of 0.12. This suggests a very limited correlation between

municipal population size and the agricultural scores of official plans. Correlation
analyses addressing the fourth indication, regarding infrastructure-based issues,

of persons categorized as low income nearly surpassed the moderate
classification (+/-0.31 to +/-0.50) with a score of 0.48. However, while a relationship is suggested by the result, it should be noted that the relationship does not appear to be linear as can be seen in Figure 4.1. These results are also interesting for two interrelated reasons. First, in combination with the lower mean and median scores previously discussed, the higher r-scores suggest that less attention is being paid to transportation-related environmental issues in
some municipal official plans. The subsequent consideration that should be

produces similar results, with non-significant (0 < +/-0.1) correlation coefficients
of 0.007 between population size and waste scores and -0.08 between population size and energy scores. The results for the analyses between

population size and transportation and built environment scores are slightly

higher, but still reveal only a moderate (+/-0.31 to +/-0.50) to weak (+/-0.10 to +/0.30) correlation at 0.32 and 0.28, respectively. These results suggest that initial
indications relating urban population levels to agricultural and infrastructure

noted as a result of these findings is the possibility that the high r-scores for the Transportation category reveal a more fiscal, less principal-based approach used in addressing transportation-related environmental issues. This assertion

attention levels in official plans are not statistically defendable.

Despite the lack of evidence linking population size to official plan attention to infrastructure as a whole, the results did suggest that official plan attention to

requires future research in order to make a defendable determination.

transportation-related environmental issues was more directly linked to municipal
characteristics than any other category tested. The Transportation category

From the results of the correlation analyses, it can be stated that population size

does not directly influence municipal attention to agricultural-related
environmental issues, nor to those related to overall municipal infrastructure. In
contrast, municipal characteristics have a more significant impact on transportation-related environmental issues than on any other individual category.

contained the highest r-values in over half of the analyses run for municipal characteristics when compared to the other categories' results for the same

characteristics. It also had the three highest overall r-values, though even the

58

59

Thus, the indications carried forward into the next phase of the quantitative
portion of this study are that:

addressed in the Qualitative Analysis section of this chapter. However prior to
this, the results of quantitative analysis on the overall official plans scores still
require discussion.

1. Municipalities in Ontario provide more overall attention to the components of
the Environment category than to those in the other categories.

2. Municipalities provide the least attention to the components of the Energy category; but when addressed, municipalities provide a similar level of attention
to category-specific details.

4.2.2. Overall Score Analysis

Fundamental statistical measures such as mean, median and range are
somewhat less useful when examining the overall official plan scores, as there is no previous benchmark that can be used for comparison. Yet, if the mean score and score range are used with standard deviation these measures reveal that the scores approximate a normal distribution. The scores range from 0 to 69 with a

3. The increased range in the Water and Natural Resource scores, in combination with their higher mean and median scores, indicate greater variation in the amount of attention paid to these categories, but that a higher level of detail was included when these issues were addressed. 4. Municipal characteristics have a more significant impact on transportationrelated environmental issues than on any other individual category.

Figure 4.1: Low Income Percentage to Transportation Score

mean score of 27. The standard deviation of the sample is 15.06, meaning that
approximately 68 per cent of the samples should lie between 11.6 and 41.7, 95 per cent between -3.4 and 56.7, and 99.7 per cent between -18.5 and 71.8. No
outliers exist within the sample population.

Observations

Linear (Observations)

Figure 4.2: R-score Frequencies

10

12

14

Persons categorized as low income {%)

The assertions that the issues directly related to the Environment category

Frequency

receive the most attention and that those influencing the Energy category receive
the least are adequately supported with the data detailed above. With regard to the assertions of variations in the level of detail given to the various categories, these are best addressed through qualitative content analysis, and will be further
60
-03

-0.1S

0.15

0.3

0.4a

0.6

More

R-score Groupings

61

By contrast, the r-value results from correlation analyses provide a great deal of insight into the potential relationships between the overall scores and a variety of
demographic characteristics. A similar distribution pattern to that of the overall official plan scores emerges in the distribution of the r-values. Figure 4.2 shows the distribution for all of the 207 correlation analyses run in the study. With
regard to the overall official plan scores, 13 correlation analyses were run

Education, however, appears to have more influence over the type and strength of content. While the percentage of residents 15 years or older having major educational studies in agriculture, natural resources and conservation has only a
weak correlation to the environmental content score (0.24), the broad influence of
education was more significant. The percentage of residents 15 years or older

with a university degree, diploma or certificate has a moderate influence over the level of environmental content with a correlation coefficient of 0.32. Interestingly,
this influence decreases when the focus shifts from overall scores association
with education to overall scores association with employment.

between the scores and various socio-economic variables (See Appendix E for a complete list of all correlation analysis tests and scores). The variables, drawn
from the 2006 census, included data on population size, income, employment

type, education and migration as described in Chapter 3. Similar to the previous correlation analyses, the results show only weak or moderate relationships
(Appendix E).

None of the employment variables has a moderate association with the

environmental content score, with the percentages of residents 15 years or older
working in natural or applied science fields having the highest coefficient value

Beginning with population size, the correlation analysis resulted in a coefficient of
0.16, suggesting only a weak correlation between the level of environmental content in a municipality's official plan and that municipality's population size. Similarly, the amount of migration into a municipality appears to have little impact on the level of environmental content present either, as the correlation coefficient between score and in migration during the past year was not significant at 0.02 and only slightly significant after five years with a coefficient of -0.18. Thus, there is little evidence to suggest that population size or migration levels are significant
factors to consider when examining the level of environmental content in
municipal official plans.

(0.26). The remainder of the employment variables have either a weak influence
or non-significant coefficient values (see Table 4.3). Interestingly, despite the

weak influence of employment-related variables, the median income of residents

Table 4.3: Employment Variable Correlations

Employment Variables

Correlation to Official Plan Score
0.19 0.00 0.01
-0.07

Employed in management role as % labour force 15+
Employed in business as % labour force 15+

% of labour force working in agricultural & natural
resource industries

% of labour force working in construction industry
ratio agricultural/natural resource employment to construction employment

0.15

62

63

15 years or older has a moderate influence (0.36) on environmental content.

5. Little evidence exists to suggest that municipal population size or in migration levels impact the level of environmental content found in official plans.
6. Education appears to have a weak to moderate direct influence on environmental content levels. 7. The distribution of employment sectors in a municipality has no meaningful association with environmental content levels.

However, the same cannot be said for the percentage of all residents classified
as low income after taxes, as the coefficient value was non-significant (0.01).

Finally, correlation analyses were run between the overall scores of official plans and the size (land area) of municipalities. The result of the first test indicates that size has no impact on the level of environmental content, with a coefficient of 0.04.

8. Despite the lack of influence that the type of employment has, overall income levels do have a moderate direct influence on the level of environmental content found in municipal official plans. 9. The level of environmental content is not influenced by the physical size (area) of a municipality.

The final four statements are well supported quantitative indications. However,

Based on the categorically-based and the overall-score-based quantitative

as previously mentioned, the first three statements require qualitative analysis in order to define the type of attention being paid to the specific environmental
categories previously discussed. Through this analysis, an enhanced

analyses, there are nine indications that directly relate to the research objectives cited at the beginning of this chapter. From the categorically-based analyses it
appears that:

understanding of the variations in the type and level of attention being paid to the environment, as well as the strength of language being used in official plan
environmental content can be achieved.

1. Municipalities provide more overall attention to the components of the Environment category than to those in the other categories.
2. Municipalities provide the least attention to the components of the Energy category; but when addressed, municipalities provide a similar level of attention
to category specific details.

3. The increased range in the Water and Natural Resource scores, in combination with their higher mean and median scores, indicate more variation in the amount of attention paid to these categories, but that a higher level of detail
was included by certain municipalities.

4. While population size is not related to the attention given to overall municipal infrastructure-related environmental issues in official plans, municipal characteristics appear to have the greatest influence on transportation-related
issues.

And from the overall score-based analyses it appears that:

64

65

Chapter 5: Qualitative Results and Interpretations
5.1. Qualitative Analysis

5.1.1.1. Environmental Language

With regard to the Environment category, those plans with only basic policy

This chapter details the variations in the type of attention given to environmental
categories in official plans and the levels to which various categories are

features acknowledge a desire to protect the local ecosystem, but fail to address
how that ecosystem could be protected, or qualify protection with weak language
and the prioritization of another goal of the municipality. For instance, the Rideau Lake Official Plan states that The Township seeks to preserve the function of

addressed. The chapter begins by addressing the type and strength of language

used in all eight of the categories of official plan environmental content. This is followed by a discussion of the spatial analyses performed on both the qualitative and quantitative data. Finally, a summary of the research findings is presented.

significant wildlife habitat without unduly restricting development' (2004, p. 47).
Here the municipality states a desire to protect the ecosystem, but prioritizes development over such protection. In another example, the Town of Prescott

5.1.1. Categorical Analysis

'Recognize[s] the natural environment as a community resource that must be
preserved and considered in all land use planning decisions' (2005, p. 30). In

When examining the language strength found in official plans, the results are

best organized into four groups according to the indicators used in the scoring
process: the absence of related policy, the presence of basic policy, the

this instance the environment is a tool for use by the municipality with no inherent rights of its own. While the municipality states that the environment is to be
preserved, it lacks detailed guidance as to how this preservation is to be
achieved.

presence of advanced policy and high levels of language strength. Using these categories, language used in each of the eight categories can be fully analyzed.
This analysis provides needed augmentation to the quantitative analysis
discussed previously. It illustrates how variations in quantitative range

Such official plans do lack prescriptive language though, and generally 'encourage' or 'support' these protection methods rather than requiring them. The Brooke-Alvinston Official Plan goes beyond simple acknowledgement and
states that it 'will encourage landowners to employ farm management practices

correspond to the variations in the topics covered in each category and the level
to which they are emphasized. This analysis also provides context useful in
understanding the spatial analysis that follows.

that are sensitive to the natural environment' (2000, p. 4). Here key land use
practices are encouraged; however, the language is not demanding of

66

61

landowners and additional details on specific types of 'encouraged' practice

eagles from habitat destruction or disturbance and it is a policy of
this plan that:

would be beneficial. The Wellesely Official Plan goes even further, noting that:

The Township will attempt to adhere to the following principles
when practicing environmental management: ...

i) no road or pipeline construction, logging, blasting or other similar heavy development activities should take place within 200 metres of a heronry during the sensitive breeding season (between April 1 and August 15).
ii) no development that would result in activities of any kind, including pedestrian traffic, all terrain vehicles, etc., will be permitted within 400 metres of a heronry during the sensitive breeding season (2006, p. 17).

2) Environmental standards for development must be established not only to prevent or minimize negative environmental impacts, but also where feasible, to enhance environmental features and
functions.

3) Watershed and subwatershed planning is an effective tool for establishing policies in advance of urban development to protect the environmental features and functions of a watershed. 4) The rich native biodiversity of the Township must actively be
conserved and enhanced (2003, p. 52).

The Tay Valley Official Plan provides a similar example regarding local fish habitats, noting that '[w]here such fish habitat is identified, no development or site
alteration shall be permitted within 30 metres of the habitat, unless it can be

demonstrated that there will be no negative impacts' (2001, p. 25). Here the

The development of standards, the acknowledgement of ecosystem-based planning and the stated desire to conserve and enhance biodiversity suggest that
the municipality has a true interest in protecting its local environment. However, the use of the word 'attempt' serves to weaken the municipality's commitment.

municipalities acknowledge the importance of the local ecosystem to specific members of the natural environment and require set guidelines for its protection

to be followed. Where variations are allowed, the onus is placed on the
developer to prove why the exception is warranted. The various types of
ecosystems appear to allow for this category to be addressed in a multitude of

This is the difference between municipalities with official plans that have basic and advanced policy and those that maximize the environmental policy potential

ways, allowing for a wide range of policies to be developed. As a result, it is suggested that variation in the level of attention given to this category is based on how municipalities value their local ecosystems. Thus, this category provides a useful benchmark for measuring the value placed on the environment by
municipalities and provides a potential for supplemental research.

of their official plans by also making firm commitments through the use of more
stringent language. For example, the City of Kenora forgoes any potential development goals in lieu of the protection of local osprey and bald eagle
environments:

The locations of heronries, nests of ospreys and nests of bald eagles are shown on Schedule "A". Council recognizes the importance of shielding the heronries and nests of osprey and bald

68

69

5.1.1.2. Built Environment Language

lacked significant attention to transit issues, particularly in relation to the environment. Ironically, it was expected that municipal population size would be the preferred blame avoidance technique used to address such critiques.
However, as with broad ecosystem issues, the varying nature and composition of municipalities do allow municipalities of any size to address transit issues within its borders with locally-created solutions. Unfortunately this was found to be the
exception and not the rule when examining how transportation-related environmental issues were addressed in municipal official plans.

In the Built Environment category, official plans with only basic policy tended to
address growth issues in a broad sense, often with policies that 'manage[d]
growth by directing it to appropriate locations' (Seguin, 2006, p. 1). These

municipalities may state that the desire to explore more sustainable development methods such as infilling, however in contrast to municipalities like Aylmer, their
official plans do not fully establish guidelines for such development practices. They also do not explicitly attempt to prevent inappropriate development

placement, as is done by Galway, Cavendish and Harvey, whose official plan intends 'to prevent urban development on lands designated as Rural, particularly on lands suitable for forestry and specialized forms of agriculture (2000, p. 30). Without this type of language, municipalities cannot meet standards set by official plans such as the Regional Municipality of Durham and the municipality of Owen
Sound, which provide detailed restrictions on the location of development, set Generally, the language used is weak and focused on movement through neighbourhoods rather than through the city. Broad encouragement of cycling and walking as alternatives is often present, but this encouragement does not
include details on how these alternatives should be supported or what types of

vehicular trips they should replace. These findings are somewhat ironic, given the intensity of language used in the calls for a national transit strategy and other
transit related matters discussed previously (see: FCM, 2008).

targets levels for intensification and have begun acknowledging and encouraging so called 'green' building design and construction practices (Durham, 2004;
Owen Sound, 2006).

However, examples of more advanced policy are present in some official plans.
5.1.1.3. Transportation Language

The Official Plan of Whitby (2005) encourages urban development that supports
transit systems but also fits transport routes to existing development, aiming to

In the previous chapter it was determined that no statistically significant link exists between the size of municipalities and the level of attention given to

minimize the walking distance from door to transit stop to 400 metres. Collingwood's (2004) official plan provides a similar goal, aiming to integrate
public transportation facilities into development proposals. While the nature of

transportation issues in their official plans. The results of the language analysis
support this finding, as it was suggested that municipal official plans as a whole

70

71

development and public transit makes the use of stringent language difficult, this language can be utilized, particularly when it is supported with links connecting

residents and local governments, as can be seen in Owen Sound's Official Plan
which states that:

public transit goals to those related to climate change, as can be occasionally
seen in official plans such as Oakville's (2006).

The City shall encourage the reduction of energy consumption and reliance on carbon-based fuels for energy, and support and encourage innovative energy producing options, green industry and green building designs and construction practices (2006, p. 92).

5.1.1.4. Energy Language

In addition, the types of language used in official plans with advanced policy such as this tend to support alternative energy production methods. Thus, the shift

In sub-section 4.2.1. it was suggested that the Energy category received the
least attention based on numeric scores, yet when energy-related content was

from basic to advanced policy is more subtle than is seen in some other
categories. In addition, the uses of more stringent, definitive statements are

present, municipalities addressed these issues to a similar level; an assertion

supported by the language analysis. In addition to a number of official plans with no reference to energy issues, those plans that did address the issues tended to
do so in a limited manner. The methods used to address these issues were

more limited in this category, with only rare exceptions. For example, only one

official plan reviewed stated that a comprehensive policy for wind turbine farms
would be integrated into the plan (North Stormont, 2005).

generally limited to: encouraging development that supports passive solar gain,
encouraging residential and governmental energy conservation measures, and
recognizing and permitting alternative energy use and creation.

Having developed sufficient support for the assertion reiterated at the beginning

of this sub-section, an explanation for this trend should be sought. It is possible
that energy concerns have begun to emerge more recently than those related to

At the most basic level, municipalities such as Whitby limited their policies to '[encouraging] development of passive and active solar energy opportunities

other categories. However, exact replication of language in multiple official plans
suggests other potential reasons. Specifically, the official plans for Wellesley,

through the orientation of streets, exterior architectural design and location of
buildings and responsive landscape' (2005, p. 207). Those municipalities with
slightly more advanced policy addressed conservation more aggressively,

Georgina, and Strong, Ontario all state that: The development of electric power facilities shall occur in an orderly manner to facilitate the efficient and reliable
provision of adequate electric power' (Wellesley, 2003, p. 77; Georgina, 2002, p.
14; Strong, 2004, p. 4). In addition, the Strong Official Plan was prepared by a consulting firm. While it is unclear if the same, or any, consulting firm was

encouraging the integration of conservation practices into the daily activities of

72

73

involved in the preparation of Wellesley's or Georgina's plans, it does suggest

how the process will be facilitated, what materials are covered, who will manage
the process, and the length of time the current plan will be in place.

that consultancies could influence the type of language and attention that is paid
to environmental or other topics in official plans. This question extends beyond
the mandate of this study; however, it does pose a potentially interesting
question for future research.

5.1.1.6. Water Language

In contrast to the Energy and Waste categories, water policy is approached from
a wide variety of angles. At the basic level, municipalities generally aimed to:

5.1.1.5. Waste Language

The Waste category is similar to the Energy category, in that it is frequently
addressed in a similar manner by various municipalities. It is also the most

polarized of the categories with regard to the number of municipalities at the
extremes of policy attention levels. However, recycling and waste management practices are less dependent on local environments in contrast to alternative

protect and enhance the natural attributes and functions of watercourses in the County in order to maintain and improve wildlife habitat and water quality. To protect headwater areas and groundwater resources from land uses that have the potential to degrade downstream watercourses and groundwater aquifers (Lambton County, 1998, p. 8.6-8.7).

Here the policy goal is multifaceted and shows a respect for the inherent value of
local water resources. The statements at this level are unrefined though, lacking
explanation of protection methods and prescriptive measurements such as the
size of buffer areas.

energy development. As such, this polarization can be logically expected. When

policy is present, waste issues are initially addressed in a manner focused on the
extension of landfill lifecycles. For example, Meaford's Official Plan states that it 'is a policy of Council to encourage the reduction, reuse and recycling of solid
waste to ensure that the amount of waste required to be stored in landfills in
minimized' (2005, p. 106). As municipal waste policy matures, it begins to

More advanced policy statements frequently address water policy issues through
voluntary development or education programs. For example Lambton Shores'

Official Plan encourages 'processes such as man-made wetlands and permeable surfaces to absorb and distribute stormwater and recharge groundwater' (2001, p.
103). Mississippi Mills (2006, p. 50) provides a different approach: 'The Town
may institute a program of public education aimed at enhancing public

incorporate additional methods like composting, which bring with it additional environmental benefits. These official plans do not, however, provide details on
how the municipality will assist residents in the reduction and recycling process.

In contrast, municipalities like Edwardsburgh-Cardinal (2003) provide details on

understanding of voluntary initiative and regulatory measures designed to protect
and enhance the quality of groundwater', for example 'the installation and use of

74

75

water-saving plumbing fixtures'.

In both instances, the municipalities provide

continuity of these areas and normal ecological function, as can be seen in the

specific methods to encourage the protection of water quality and quantity.

official plans of Adelaide-Metcalfe (2005) and Leeds and the Thousand Islands
(2006).

However, in both instances, the policies are based on voluntary or potential, rather than the required actions. Meanwhile, municipalities like Meaford utilized more stringent language, stating, for instance, that 'all major applications for development shall be supported by a Water Resources Management (WRM)
Report' (2005, p. 97). The subtle shift of language from 'may' to 'shall' enhances the enforceability, and possibly the effectiveness, of municipal water policy.

Finally, those municipalities with the most stringent natural resource policy go beyond the understanding of this relationship, to planning for its maintenance and expansion. For example, the New Tecumseth Official Plan states that when
a woodlot is partially or completely cut, '100% of the trees removed shall be

replaced and shall be of comparable number, size (to the extent possible) and
5.1.1.7. Natural Resource Language

natural diversity to those being removed' (1999, p.5-4). Additional details also

The municipal approaches to Natural Resource policy are similar to that of the
water policy approaches. Here again municipalities approach policy from a wide
variety of angles, partially due to the differential distribution of natural resources

include the species and form of the replanting, as well as the extent to which the

replacements can take place in urban environments. Morris-Turnberry's official
plan goes beyond maintenance and aims to increase forestry coverage in the municipality from 20 to 25% (Morris-Turnberry, 2006). In this way, the previous
assertion that certain municipalities provide significantly more detail in their natural resource policies is supported though this qualitative analysis.

among municipalities. Basic policies in this category are generally limited to
broad statements regarding 'the protection of natural resources, such as

agricultural lands, forests... mineral aggregates and minerals' (Tay Valley, 2001,
p. 5). Municipalities also refer to protection based on 'best practices' related to a
given resource; however their official plans fail to provide guidance on what
constitutes such practices.

5.1.1.8. Agriculture Language

Finally, the Agricultural category provides an interesting study of how the language used in municipal official plan policy can suggest the types of

In more advanced policy, municipalities provide this additional detail, encouraging the replacement of removed trees in a new location. They also recognize the link between the protection of natural resource areas, the

pressures being felt by municipalities with regard to their agricultural resources. For instance, the unspecific language used in some municipal official plans is often seen to hint at pressures coming from industrial farming or resource

76

77

industry firms or those who seek to remove land from agricultural production.

Those municipalities that most stringently address agricultural issues in their
official plans restrict industry and tend to quantify development limits. New
Tecumseth (1999, p. 7-3) takes this approach, stating that '[no] new nonagricultural use shall be permitted that would interfere with or hinder existing or

The Innisfil Official Plan strives to maintain the agricultural base, but with broad
statements suggesting that 'the minimum lot size for new agricultural parcels
shall be maintained', the potential for new family farms is marginalized in favour

of larger, industrial farms (Innisfil, 2002). In a similar manner, Lambton County's
official plan prioritizes aggregate extraction over agriculture, stating that:
The intent of this Plan is to protect the aggregate resources in the County for possible future extraction, to ensure the compatibility of land uses and to ensure the appropriate rehabilitation of extraction areas. Extraction is permitted in agricultural areas as an interim use, provided that the lands are rehabilitated to a similar agricultural
capability (Lambton, 1998, p. 9.1).

future agricultural operations'. Through the use of restrictive language which

focuses on the future of the municipality, New Tecumseth effectively protects the
farmland, and related ecosystems, from aggregate extraction and other invasive industries. With regard to development restriction, Prescott and Russell's official plan highlights its shift from 10% to 0% growth distribution in agricultural areas,
thus preventing any urban growth on agricultural lands, and notes the influence

In contrast, municipalities with more advanced policies tend to qualify alternate

of provincial policy on this decision (2006). Thus, as increased attention is paid to agricultural issues in municipal official plans, there appears to be a related shift
in where municipalities draw their influence, away from industry and increasingly
from the Province.

uses of agricultural lands with conditions. In its official plan, Central Huron (2006,
p. 67) requires prime agricultural lands used for mineral aggregate extraction to be rehabilitated fto their former use in prime agricultural land', providing for very
few exceptions.

5.1.2. Spatial Analysis

Such plans also tend to address the potential environmental impacts of farm

The spatial component of the qualitative analysis provides the ability to reveal any physical clusters or trends relevant to the study. These can reveal regional
disparities that warrant further research. Due to the limited number of

practice, as is seen in Rideau Lakes' (2004, p. 69) official plan, which in addition
to stating an intent to protect prime agricultural land also 'encourages the
preparation and practice of nutrient management planning and best management

municipalities in northern Ontario and the resultant lack of ability for clusters to form this portion of the Province, the analysis is focused solely on the southern
Ontario municipalities (Figure 5.1).

practice by all nutrient generators and users'. However, these municipalities still
tend to utilize language that focuses on voluntary initiative actions.

78

79

Figure 5.1: Study Sample Distribution

Figure 5.2: Municipal Density to OP Age Relationship

Legend

Level of Relationship

|
I
Kilo meters
0 75 150 300 450 600

III Bm-lHh-l
I L-M jj§

LZ1L+l WM M-H Hi H-H

=:

Kilometers

ma

I

0

125 250

500

750

1,000

Figure 5.3: Overall OP Score to OP Age Relationship

Beginning with the age of official plans, the analyses focused primarily on

potential clusters of municipalities with official plans of the same (approximate) age in relation to density levels or the overall score of the official plan. Figure 5.2 reveals no noticeable clusters. Instead it suggests that the majority of
municipalities in southern Ontario have current or expiring official plans,
Legend Level of Relationship

regardless of density levels. Figure 5.3 reveals some clustering, particularly in
Ki o meters

the eastern and western-most portions of southern Ontario. These clusters indicate mid-range overall official plan scores that are beginning to require

0

75

150

300

450

600

bi^y



^h

In shifting to category-specific spatial analysis, Figure 5.4 provides an example of how the visual representation of category-specific content levels reveals spatial trends in the data. In particular, higher levels of Environmental-related content are found in the urbanized areas along Highway 401; more specifically around

updates. However, as the clusters are in opposite regions of the Province, and
similar measures are found as isolated cases throughout southern Ontario, no
regional trends appear to be present.

Ottawa, Sarnia, Kitchener-Waterloo and the GTA. It also highlights irregularities in these trends. The small cluster of level 2 (Advanced Policy) municipal official

80

81

plans found north of Toronto, by Georgian Bay, does not fit neatly with the trend of higher level policy in more urbanized communities along Highway 401 though.
This variation could represent a similar trend along Highway 400, though there
are fewer data in this area to substantiate such an assertion.
Figure 5,4: Environmental Content Levels

have weaker policy, and if so what are the reasons for this trend? Somewhat
ironically, the spatial analysis of the Transportation category (Figure 5.5) is far
less definitive in its support of this trend. This could be related to the previous discussion of how municipalities may be addressing Transportation-related
environmental issues.

With regard to the other categories, few discernible trends are present. There
were no notable clusters or patterns in the Waste category and no clusters in the

Water category, though there was a high frequency of municipalities using
advanced policy, with or without stringent language. In the Energy category

there were no clusters and few instances of municipal official plans containing

advanced policy with or without strong language; instead, basic policy was found
uniformly throughout the Province. Finally, there was a wide range of policy levels and language strengths found in the Natural Resources category. No

0

75

150

Interestingly, the trend of higher levels of policy being located in more urbanized
municipalities along the 401, and possibly the 400, corridors is not limited to

major clusters were found, though an unsurprising trend towards stronger language was found in municipalities outside of major urban areas.

Environmental content only. In the Built Environment category, many of the
instances of advanced policy and all but one instance of advanced policy using stringent language formed a similar pattern. Agriculture content also followed this pattern, though there were increased instances of advanced policy using stringent language in the less urbanized regions of the corridor. While this
apparent spatial trend does not permit any broader, more definitive statements
5.2. Interpretive Summary

In concluding the analyses, a summary of the results and interpretations serves
as a useful transition into the concluding chapter of this report. These

interpretations are the basis from which the conclusions, recommendations and
suggestions for future research are developed. Beginning with the analysis of

itself, it does suggest a pattern that leads to further questions that need
answering. For example, do municipalities outside of major highway corridors

the overall scores of official plans, it was noted that:

82

83

7. Municipalities provide more overall attention to the components of the Environment category than to those in the other categories.
Figure 5.5: Transportation Content Levels

8. Municipalities provide the least attention to the components of the Energy category; but when addressed, municipalities provide a similar level of attention to category specific details. In addition, even when addressed, the relevant content was limited and generally utilized weak language. These trends were supported through spatial analysis, which noted that basic policy was found uniformly throughout the Province.
9. The increased range in the Water and Natural Resource scores, in combination with their higher mean and median scores, indicate more variation in the amount of attention paid to these categories, but that a higher level of detail was included by certain municipalities. This indication is supported by the language analysis, which finds that water policy is approached from a wide variety of angles. Support is also found in the spatial analysis, which reveals a wide range of policy approaches distributed in a manner that suggested no clusters or physical trends.

10. Significant variations exist in the level and strength of language used in the environmental content of official plans, and those variations can broadly be organized according to the absence of relevant policy, basic policy, advanced policy and advanced policy utilizing stringent language.

1. Based on correlation analysis, little evidence exists to suggest that municipal population size or in-migration levels impact the level of general environmental
content found in municipalities' official plans.

11. While population size is not related to the attention given to overall municipal infrastructure-related environmental issues in official plans, municipal characteristics appear to have the greatest influence on transportation-related
issues.

2. R-scores suggest that education has a weak to moderate direct influence on
general environmental content levels.

3. The distribution of employment sectors in a municipality has no meaningful association with general environmental content levels, as determined through
correlation analysis.

12. The spatial analysis of the Transportation category revealed only weak support for the assertion that stronger policy is potentially found in more urban municipalities located along major highway corridors.

4. Despite the lack of influence that the type of employment has, r-scores

suggest that overall income levels do have a moderate direct influence on the level of general environmental content found in municipal official plans.

5. Correlation analysis reveals that the level of general environmental content is
not influenced by the physical size (area) of a municipality.

6. No spatial patterns clusters or trends exist between overall official plan scores,
density and the age of official plans.

Subsequently, the various analyses of the categorical analyses found that:

84

85

Chapter 6: Conclusions and Recommendations
6.1. Study Review

study findings are discussed in terms of their ability to address the research

objectives. Following this, the research is discussed in terms of its impact on the
literature gap discussed in Chapter 2, with regard to its explicit findings and its
creation new questions. Finally, the chapter and study will conclude with recommendations for future research, as well as recommendations on how the environmental policy development process can be improved at the municipal
level.

Municipal planning is a unique environmental management tool. It is the framework through which society addresses the development associated with meeting its physical needs, and through which it strives to sustain and enhance

the natural environment from which it meets its needs. With this knowledge, the
study began with two key research objectives. One, to determine if a significant

difference exists in the environmental content found in official plans; and if it did,
to try and determine what relationship exists between the level of environmental
content of Ontario municipalities' official plans and demographic or physical
characteristics of their respective communities. The other objective was to determine which components of municipal governance are being given greater
6.2. Addressing the Research Objectives

Several key findings are critical in determining whether a significant difference
exists in the environmental content found in official plans. The range of overall

official plan scores and category-based scores reveal that there is indeed a

attention or more authority through the use of language when environmental policy is developed at the municipal level. By addressing these questions, the

quantifiable difference in the amount of content. The quantitative data in
combination with results from the language analysis illustrate that there is also a

study provides insights that may also be useful for municipalities outside of Ontario. More importantly, it contributes to the larger discussion of the role of official plans within municipal governance, examining the current roles of official
plans and how closely they match the Ideal' role.

notable difference in the type of content found in various official plans, both in
terms of subject matter and in terms of strength of language. With regard to
attempts at determining the nature of the relationship between the level of

environmental content in official plans and the demographic and/or physical

characteristics of their respective communities, the results were less definitive,

Having reviewed the literature, developed a research method and analyzed the

but still noteworthy. Most notable among these is the realization that population density is not a strong indicator of a municipalities environmental values. The
results of the other correlation analysis also suggest that the demographic

results of that research, those questions have been more than answered. Indeed
the information gathered and the knowledge created through this research far outstrips the initial objectives and expectations of this study. In this chapter, the

characteristics of a community only have a weak to moderate impact on the

86

87

inclusion of environmental content in official plans. However, the spatial analyses reveal that an, as yet, undefined spatial relationship may well exist between the strength of the environmental content and the physical location of
municipalities, particularly at the categorical level.

unequal nature of how these components are addressed from one municipality to the next. The research has integrated research methodology literature with
urban planning and environmental concepts, creating an analysis tool which
researchers can measure environmental content in official plans and compare the results categorically or holistically. In doing this, the study provides future

In addressing the question of which components of environmental content

researchers with the ability to examine the environmental content of official plans with other potential influences. Additionally, while highlighting the weak to moderate influence that these demographic characteristics have on environmental content, the research also provided other possible influences that

received greater attention, results from the quantitative and qualitative analyses

both highlight the increased attention received by the broad Environment, Water and Natural Resource categories. While the level of strength devoted to these categories often varies widely between municipalities; they are seen to receive
significantly more attention. By contrast, the Waste and Energy categories

future researchers may want to consider, such as those of government as seen
in related legislation and those of consultants paid to develop official plans. In
essence, the study has brought needed light to the lack of literature that aims to

received notably less attention by municipalities and are generally found to be
addressed using weaker language. The weakness in these categories may

rigorously analyze municipal environmental policy by first providing an example

reflect the relative newness in broader concern over the issues that surround
waste management and energy supply and creation, though these suggestions
are not directly addressed through the current research.

of how such analysis can be done, and then by highlighting related questions
which the current research does not fully answer.

6.4. Recommendations

6.3. Developed Knowledge

With regard to new questions developed in the process of addressing the
research objectives, there are three areas that clearly need to be addressed

In addition to addressing the research objectives, the information gathered

through this research serves in the development of knowledge which is the first
step in fill the literature gap noted in Chapter 2. The study has built on literature that discusses the integration of individual components of environmental content

further. The broadest of these questions related to this study's finding that the
demographic characteristics of a municipality have only a weak to moderate relationship with the level of environmental content found in official plans. This finding means that there are obviously other influences on environmental content

into official plans and has taken the subject a step further and revealed the

89

levels. What are these influences and how strong are they? In order to fully understand how environmental policy is developed, all of the influences need to
be known, as do their relative strengths.

In making recommendations regarding the future development of environmental
policy at the municipal level it must be stated that, based on the study, municipal

policymakers are well-placed and (for the most part) prepared to develop such

The next area relates to the language used in official plans. While certain passages closely reflect provincial interests and may frequently be seen in multiple official plans, what about language that is repeated in various official
plans but does not reflect required legislative language or concepts? Do private consultancies impact the language used in official plans in a way that serves to

policy. That said, any support for encouraging policy development at the municipal level is balanced with the acknowledgement that the continued
oversight of the resulting policy must continue in order to ensure regional

sustainability and consistency of temporal relevance. To this end, the initial
recommendation is for increased guidance and training for municipal

make the end plans generic and less responsive to their respective communities?
If so, what are the subsequent impacts of this trend? Additionally, does and

policymakers, particularly in small municipalities with a reduced ability to recruit
professional policy analysts and developers.

should the repetition of language from one plan to the next make those plans
more 'acceptable to planners and municipal leaders?

The next recommendation is for increased funding to municipalities for policy development, implementation and review. The development of policy is of little

The final area for future research that emerges from this study relates to spatial
trends in municipal environmental policy. Primarily, is there a relationship

use, if that policy can not be implemented and reviewed for success or failure.

between a municipality's proximity to major highway corridors and the strength of

The final recommendation is that municipalities strive to develop their own official
plans, rather than rely on private consultants. Early indications from this study indicate that private consultant development of official plans may have a negative impact on the responsiveness of the policy in those plans to the environmental
concerns of a municipality. Until this topic can be further studied and a

the language used for the environmental policy in its official plan? Additionally, if
a relationship is present, have the communities along these corridors developed
a societal recognition for environmental concerns that is lacking in communities outside these corridors? However, there is a wide range of research that needs to be undertaken in the area of spatial trends in municipal policy, and this
question represents only one of any number of possible foci.

determination made, municipalities are encouraged to look to neighbouring and
upper-tier municipalities for assistance in developing official plans with

90

91

environmental policy that directly addresses the range of environmental concerns
in the area.

Appendices
Appendix A: Initial Ontario Municipal Sample List
Municipality
Population

Tier Level
Lower Tier

Region

Official plans are intended to address a wide variety of public needs and demands on the physical space within municipalities. The plans serve to balance
these needs and demands while also respecting the inherent rights of the

Adelaide-Metcalfe, Township of Ajax, Town of
Armstrong, Township of

3117

SW

90167

Lower Tier

Central
NE

1-155
3293 47629
7069

Single Tier

Atikokan, Township of
Aurora, Town of
Aylmer, Town of

Single Tier
Lower Tier

NW

Central
SW SW

Lower Tier Lower Tier
Lower Tier Single Tier
Lower Tier Lower Tier

environment and its non-human components. To this end, the plans provide the
goals and standards to which development within the municipality must adhere.
Increasingly, these goals and standards need to encompass sustainable

Blandford-Blenheim, Township of Brooke-Alvinston, Municipality of
Calvin, Township of

7149

2661
608

SW
NE

Central Elgin, Municipality of
Central Frontenac, Township of

12723
4665 7641 1944
8683 5487

SW Eastern

Central Huron, Municipality of Central Manitoulin, Township of
Champlain, Township of

Lower Tier

SW
NE
Eastern NE

concepts throughout land-use categories from built environment to natural resources. The inclusion of sustainability in official plans must be responsive to
local environmental concerns. However, those trusted with its integration must

Single Tier
Lower Tier

Cochrane, Town of Cockburn Island, Township of Collingwood, Town of Conmee, Township of
Dufferin, County of

Single Tier

10 17290 740
54436

SingleTier
Lower Tier

NE

Central
NW

Single Tier Upper Tier Upper Tier Lower Tier
Lower Tier Lower Tier

Central

also have regard for their neighbouring municipalities and remember that the

Durham, Regional Municipality of
Dutton/Dunwich, Municipality of

561258
3821 6689 5284

Central
SW Eastern
Eastern

actions within on community have impacts that echo throughout a local, regional
and global ecosystem.

Edwardsburgh/Cardinal, Township of Galway-Cavendish and Harvey, Township of Gauthier, Township of

133 42346 12066
551

Single Tier l_
Lower Tier Lower Tier

NE
Central
SW
NE

Georgina, Town of
Guelph/Eramosa, Township of
Harley, Township of

Single Tier

Hilton, Township of Hudson, Township of
Huron Shores, Municipality of Innisfil, Town of

243 305 1696
31175 15177 20908 8248 1078

Single Tier Single Tier Single Tier
Lower Tier Single Tier
Lower Tier

NE NE NE

Central
NW SW
NE

Kenora, City of Kingsville, Town of Kirkland Lake, Town of
Laird, Township of

Single Tier Single Tier
Lower Tier Upper Tier

NE

Lambton Shores, Municipality of

11150
128204 446

SW

Lambton, County of
Latchford, Town of Laurentian Hills, Town of

SW
NE Eastern Eastern
Eastern
Eastern

SingleTier
Lower Tier

2789

Leeds and Grenville, United Counties of
Leeds and the Thousand Islands, Township of
Limerick, Township of

99206
9435
364

Upper Tier
Lower Tier Lower Tier

92

93

Appendix A: Initial Ontario Municipal Sample List (Continued)
Municipality Population
1550 2300
261573

Appendix A: Initial Ontario Municipal Sample List (Continued)
Tier Level Single Tier
Single Tier
Lower Tier Single Tier

Region

Municipality -Whitestone, Municipality of
Woolwich, Township of

Population
1030 19658

Tier Level
SingleTier
Lower Tier

Region
NE SW

Macdonald, Meredith and Aberdeen Additional, Township of
Manitouwadge, Township of
Markham. Town of

NE
NW
Central

Markstay-Warren, Municipality of

2475

NE

Marmora and Lake, Municipality of
Meaford, Municipality of

3912
10948
2867

Lower Tier
Lower Tier

Eastern
SW Eastern
NE SW Central
NE

Merrickville-Wolford, Village of Mississippi Mills/Town of
Morris-Turnberry, Municipality of

Lower Tier
Lower Tier

11734
3403 6467 493 27701 427421 62563 9063 5015 6769 165613
717

Lower Tier

Muskoka Lakes, Township of
Nairn and Hvman, Township of

Lower Tier
Single Tier

NewTecumseth, Town of

Lower Tier Upper Tier Single Tier Lower Tier

Central

Niagara, Regional Municipality of
Norfolk County

Central
SW SW

North Dumfries, Township of

North Huron, Township of

Lower Tier

SW
Eastern

North Stormont, Township of
Oakville, Town of

Lower Tier
Lower Tier

Central
SW

Oil Sprinqs, Village of Oshawa, City of
Owen Sound, City of Pelham. Town of Perry, Township of Perth, Countvof

Lower Tier Lower Tier

141590

Central SW
Central
NE

21753
16155 2010 74344 7506
80184

Lower Tier
Lower Tier

Single Tier Upper Tier Lower Tier
Upper Tier

SW SW
Eastern

Plympton-Wyominq, Town of

Prescott and Russell, United Counties of
Prescott. Town of
Rainy River, Town of

4180
909
10350

Single Tier
Single Tier

Eastern NW
Eastern

Rideau Lakes, Township of Russell, Township of Seguin, Township of
Sioux Narrows-Nestor Falls, Township of

Lower Tier Lower Tier Single Tier

13883 4276 672
1253
5939 18227

Eastern

NE

Single Tier
Single Tier
Lower Tier Lower Tier

NW
NE
SW
Eastern

South Algonquin, Township of South Bruce, Municipality of South Frontenac, Township of St. Clair, Township of Strong, Township of
Sundridqe, Village of
Tarbutt and Tarbutt Additional, Township of

14649
1327
942 388

Lower Tier Single Tier
Single Tier
Single Tier

SW
NE NE
NE
Eastern
Eastern

Tay Valley, Township of
The Nation. Municipality of Wellesley. Township of Whitby, Town of

5634 10643 9789

Lower Tier
Lower Tier

Lower Tier
Lower Tier

SW Central

1-111.84.
24390 841

Whitchurch-Stouffville, Town of
White River, Township of

Lower Tier

Central

SingleTier

NEJ

94

95

Appendix B: Final Sample List

Appendix B: Final Sample List
Municipality
Population 80184
4180

Tier Level Upper Tier
Single Tier

Region Eastern
Eastern

Municipality

Population
3117

Tier Level Lower Tier Lower Tier Lower Tier Lower Tier

Region

Prescott and Russell, United Counties of
Prescott, Town of

Adelaide-Metcalfe, Township of

SW Central Central
SW

Rideau Lakes, Township of
Seguin, Township of

10350
4276

Ajax, Town of
Aurora, Town of Aylmer, Town of Blandford-Blenheim, Township of
Brooke-Alvinston, Municipality of

90167 47629
7069

Lower Tier
Single Tier Single Tier Lower Tier

Eastern
NE NE

South Algonquin, Township of South Frontenac, Township of Strong, Township of

1253
18227

7149 2661
7641 8683

Lower Tier Lower Tier
Lower Tier Lower Tier

SW SW SW
Eastern

Eastern

1327
5634 9789 111184

Single Tier
Lower Tier
Lower Tier
Lower Tier

NE
Eastern
SW

Tay Valley, Township of
Wellesley, Township of
Whitby, Town of

Central Huron, Municipality of
Champlain,Township of

Collingwood, Town of

17290

Lower Tier Single Tier
Upper Tier
Upper Tier Lower Tier

Central
NW

Central
NE

Whitestone, Municipality of
Woolwich, Township of

1030 19658

Single Tier
Lower Tier

Conmee, Township of
Dufferin, County of
Durham, Regional Municipality of

740
54436 561258 6689
5284

Central Central
Eastern

SW

Edwardsburgh/Cardinal, Township of

Galway-Cavendish and Harvey, Township of Gauthier, Township of
Georgina, Town of Guelph/Eramosa, Township of

Lower Tier

Eastern

133
42346 12066 1696
31175

Single Tier
Lower Tier

NE
Central SW NE
Central NW

Lower Tier Single Tier
Lower Tier

Huron Shores, Municipality of
Innisfil, Town of

Kenora, City of
Kingsville, Town of

15177 20908

Single Tier
Lower Tier

SW NE SW
SW
Eastern Eastern

Kirkland Lake, Town of
Lambton Shores, Municipality of
Lambton, County of

8248
11150
128204

Single Tier Lower Tier
Upper Tier Lower Tier

Laurentian Hills, Town of

2789 9435 2475 10948 2867 11734
3403 6467

Leeds and the Thousand Islands, Township of
Markstay-Warren, Municipality of
Meaford, Municipality of Merrickville-Wolford, Village of

Lower Tier Single Tier Lower Tier Lower Tier Lower Tier Lower Tier
Lower Tier

NE
SW
Eastern

Mississippi Mills, Town of

NE
SW

Morris-Tumberry, Municipality of
Muskoka Lakes, Township of

Central NE

Nairn and Hyman, Township of
New Tecumseth, Town of

493
27701 9063 5015

Single Tier
Lower Tier Lower Tier

Central SW SW
Eastern

North Dumfries, Township of
North Huron, Township of
North Stormont, Township of

Lower Tier

6769
165613
717

Lower Tier
Lower Tier Lower Tier Lower Tier

Oakville, Town of
Oil Springs, Villaqe of
Oshawa, City of

Central SW

141590

Central

Owen Sound, City of
Perry, Township of Perth, County of
Plympton-Wyoming, Town of

21753 2010
74344

Lower Tier
Single Tier Upper Tier Lower Tier

SW
NE

SW SW

7506

96

97

m

DDfnmm

m

fill
£
o

g 8 8 3 9
3 a

g

is

si
I
x

CD

c? 3 - ©
** o

i
1

*

o

o
Q.

o"

0)

03

0 3 CD

O

03

lll
(0

0)

(D

G)>
03 CQ

S. o"

vo
00

I o"
D"
o

00

Q.

E
m

§§

I

3 3>
0

I
g
rCZ C

m

m

m

m

u 3

!

5.

a

li

8 8

en

"0 H H H

8 3 3.3

ifii
73
&)
C/)

s

a

h ~n ^

a
SL

z

§3 a

1 = 1

0

o

o
c
a si

Appendix D: Statistics Canada Headings and Sub-headings
Heading; 'opulation and dwelling counts
Mobility status

Educational attainment/Major field of Study
Lived within the same province or territory 1 year ago, but changed addresses from another census subdivision (municipality) within the same
Population in 2006 province or territory

Labour force activity/Occupation/lndustry

Incor 200i Income status of all persons in private

University certificate, diploma or degree

households

Total population 15 years and over
Land area (square km)

(count

% in low income
Agriculture, natural resources and Lived in a different province or territory 1 year age conservation
Sub-Headings
after tax-All

Management occupations

persons

Lived in a different country 1 year ago

Business, finance and administration
occupations _^

Lived within the same province or territory 5 years ago, but changed addresses from another census subdivision (municipality) within the same
province or territory

Natural and applied sciences and related
occupations

Lived in a different province or territory 5 years

Agriculture and other resource-based
ndustries

vo

Lived in a different country 5 years ago

Construction industries

Appendix E: Correlation Analysis Results
Lived outside municipality Lived outside As % of "06 Pop municipality 5 yrs ago As % of 06 Pop University

References
certificate, diploma
or degree

Land Area (sq km)

2006 Population

one yr ago

As % of Pop 15+
Overall Score

Adamowicz, W (2007). Reflections on Environmental Policy in Canada. Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 55: 1-33. Adelaide Metcalfe (2005). Official Plan for the Township of Adelaide Metcalfe.
=ves&ID=109&Direct=1. Accessed: December 20, 2007.

-0.04

0.16

0.17

0.02

0.17

-0.18

0.22

0.32

Total Environment Score
Total Built Environment Score Total Transportation Score Total Energy Score Total Waste Score Total Water Score Total Natural Resource Score
Total Agriculture Score

0.00*
0.02 -0.15

0.33
0.29

0,33 0.30 0.34
-0.07

-0.06
0.09 0.15 0.03

0.32
0.31

-0.17
0.13

0.33 0,30

0.16 0.25

0.33
-0.07

0.35
-0.08

0.07
-0.12 -0.06 -0.27 -0.04 -0.09

0,44
-0.05 0.11 0.28
0.11

0.38
0.08 0.24 0.20
0.12

0.01
-0.10

0.02
0.24 0.06
0.13

0.02 0.25

0.09 -0.21 0.11
-0.04

0.02 0.24
0.07
0.14

http://adeiaidemetcalfeiileprositexom/contentengine/document.asp?

0.01 -0.06
0.14

0.07
0.13

0.10

0.05

Major Field of

Study

Occupation
Natural and

Antweiler, W and Harrison, K (2007). Canada's voluntary ARET program: Limited success despite industrial cosponsorship. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 26: 755-773.

Agriculture, natural resources and
conservation
Overall Score

applied science and
As % of Pop 15+ related

As % of Total
exper. Labour force 15+
0.26 0.06
Management occupations

As % of Total
exper. Labour

Business, finance
and administrative

As % of Total
exper. Labour
force 15+

force 15+

occupations

0.20

0.25

0.19

0.20 0.33 0.30
0.41

0.19
0.01 0.20 0.33
0.13 0.15

0.17

0.00
0.01

Babbie, E (2004). The Practice of Social Research, 10th ed. Toronto: ThomsonWadsworth.

Total Environment Score Total Built Environment Score
Total Transportation Score Total Energy Score Total Waste Score

0.33 0.24
0.24 0.02 0.03
0.23
0.02

-0.05 -0.12
-0.12 0.07 0.15 0.20
0.23

0.32 0.32
0.37 -0.07 0.05
0.26
0.08 0.13

0.33 0.3D 0.34
-0.07

0.40
0.27 0.07

0.02
0.27 0.02 -0.03 -0.03 -0.04 -0.15

-0.06 0.07

0.27 0.25 -0.04 0.00

0.02

Total Water Score

0.27

-0.03 0.19 0.10

0.25
0.07

Total Natural Resource Score
Total Agriculture Score

0.09
0.12

0.20

0.27

0.14

Agriculture and

Industry

As % of Total

As % of Total

Ratio Employed in

Median

% in low income-

other resource
based industries
Overall Score

exper. Labour

Construction
industries

exper. Labour
force 15+

Agri/Resource to
Construction industries

income($)

after tax - all

Best, A; Giljum, S; Simmons, C; Blobel, D; Lewis, K; Hammer, M; Cavalieri, S; Lutter, S and Maguire, S (2008). Potential of the Ecological footprint for monitoring environmental impacts from natural resource use: Analysis of the potential of the ecological footprint and related assessment tools for use in the EU's Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Natural Resources. Report to the European Commission, DG Environment.
Broadbent, A (2000). The Autonomy of Cities in Canada'. In: Rowe, M (ed) (2000). Toronto: considering self-government. Owen Sound, On: The Ginger Press, Inc. pp. 1-6. Reprinted in: Thomlinson, N & MacLellan, D
University, pp. 51-54.

Total Environment Score

Total Built Environment Score
Total Transportation Score Total Energy Score
Total Waste Score
Total Water Score

0,32 0.25

0.15

force 15+

-old

0,17

0.00 -0.21

0.01

0.14

-0.24

0.30 0.28

-0.07
-0.28 -0.17
-0.15

-0.02

-0.02

Total Natural Resource Score Total Agriculture Score

-0.01

0^22
017

-0.03

-0.08
-0.01

0.28

0.10 -0.02
-0.07

0.15

persons 15+

6.36

persons

0.3© 0.26
0.26

0.01

0.09 0.10

0.10
0.04
0.04

0.04

0.22
0.14

-0.15

0.06

0.04
0.19
0.11

-0.08

0.14

0.19

0.06

0.03

0.48

0.16

0.04
0.11

0.32

0.10

0.12
0.17

-0.15

0.20

-0.17

(2005). Readings in Urban Governments. 3rd ed., Toronto, On: Ryerson

Brandford, N (2002). Why cities matter: Policy research perspectives for Canada. Canadian Policy Research Networks, Inc. http://www.cprn.com/documents 712567 en.pdf. Accessed: March 12. 2008. Brooke Alvinston (2000). Brook Alvinston Official Plan. Lambton County Planning and Development Department.
Bruntland, G (ed.). (1987). Our common future: The World Commission on Environment and Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Burke, PR and Conroy, MM (2000). Are we planning for sustainable development? An evaluation of 30 comprehensive plans. Journal of the American
Planning Association, Vol. 66:21-33.

Caldwell, W and Hilts, S (2005). Farmland preservation: Innovative approaches in Ontario. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, Vol. 60: 66A-69A.

100

101

Cautillo, C (2008). 'Cemetery project starts with clearance'. Leaside-Rosedale
Town Crier. January 2008: p. 1.

----- (2008). Developing a national transit strategy.http://www.fcm.ca /english/ View.asp?mp=444&x=599. Accessed: February 15, 2008.
Ferrara, I and Missios, P (2005). Recycling and waste diversion effectiveness: Evidence from Canada. Environmental and Resource Economics, 30:
221-238.

Central Huron (2006). Central Huron Official Plan, http://www.centralhuron.com /huron official plan.pdf. Accessed: December 20, 2007.

City of Toronto (2000). Clean, Green and Healthy: A Plan for an Environmentally
Sustainable Toronto, http://www.toronto.ca/council/pdf/etfepfin.pdf.
Accessed: July 05, 2007.

Florida, R (2008). Megaregions: The importance of place. Harvard Business
Review, Vol.86: 18-19.

City of Toronto (2007). The Toronto Green Development Standard. http://www. toronto .ca/planning/pdf/gds standardianO7 03.pdf. Accessed: July 23,
2007.

Fowler, EP, and Hartmann, F (2002). 'City Environmental Policy: Connecting the Dots'. In Fowler, EP., and Siegel, D, eds. Urban Policy Issues: Canadian Perspectives. 2nd ed. Toronto: Oxford, pp. 155-171.
Fowler, Edmund P., and David Siegel, eds. (2002). Urban Policy Issues: Canadian Perspectives. 2nd ed. Toronto: Oxford.

Collingwood (2004). The Town of Collingwood Official Plan. http://www. coHingwood.ca/officialplan/official plan text.pdf. Accessed: December 20,
2007.

Copeland, B (1998). Economics and the environment: The recent Canadian experience and prospects for the future. Industry Canada Research
Publication #8, Ottawa.

Galway-Cavendish and Harvey (2000). The Official Plan of the Township of Galway-Cavendish and Harvey. The Township of Galway-Cavendish and
Harvey.

Council of Canadians (CoC) (2008). Day of action: Demand for a Canadian Energy Strategy, http://www.canadians.org/energy/action/index.html.
Accessed: March 2, 2008.

Getzels, J and Thurow, C (1979). Rural and small town planning. Chicago:
Planners Press.

Dietz, T and Vine, E (1982). Energy impacts of a municipal conservation policy.
Energy, Vol. 7: 755-758.

Georgina (2002). Official Plan of the Town of Georgina. http://www.town.georgina. on.ca/PDF/OP/nov-02-optext.pdf. Accessed: December 20, 2007.
Greenbaum, A & Wellington, A (2002). 'Editor's Notes'. In: Greenbaum, A et al (2002). Environmental Land in Social Context: A Canadian Perspective. Concord, On: Captus Press, Inc, pp. 98-127.

Dryzek, JS (2005). The politics of the earth: environmental discourses (2nd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press.

Durham (2004). The Regional Municipality of Durham Official Plan.
http://www.region.durham.onca/departments/planning/dr official plan/pla

Gombu, P (2007). 'Ruling paves way for 'green' Seaton'. Toronto Star. Friday,
February 16,2007: p. B1+.

nMaps/droplanpdf. Accessed: December 20, 2007.

Government of Ontario (2002). Oak Ridges Moraine Conservation Plan.

Ebert, U and Welsch, H (2004). Meaningful environmental indices: a social choice approach. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
Vol. 47: 270-283.

http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/AssetFactorv.aspx?did=1779. Accessed:
February 20, 2008.

Edwardsburgh-Cardinal (2003). Township of Edwardsburgh-Cardinal Official
Plan. The Township of Edwardsburgh-Cardinal.

Government of Ontario (2005a). Protecting the Greenbelt: The Greenbelt Plan. http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/Asset1277.aspx. Accessed: February 20, 2008.

^Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM) (2005). Ecological footprints of Canadian municipalities and reaions.http://www.fcm.ca/CMFiles/ eco20051vdi-3272008-5573.pdf. Accessed: February15,2008.

---- (2005b). The Niagara Escarpment Plan, http://www.escarpment.org/ Publications/NEP June 2005.pdf. Accessed: February 20, 2008.

102

103

(2005c). About Ontario: Government: Municipal Government in Ontario.

http://www.qov.on.ca/ont/portal/!ut/p/.cmd/cs/.ce/7 0 A/.s/7 0 252/ s.7 0 A/7 0 252/ l/en?docid=004615. Accessed: March 2, 2008.

Kenora (2006). Official Plan for the City of Kenora. http://www.kenora.ca/portal /uploadedFiles/Citv Government/City Administration/Bvlaws and Amend
ments/Planninq and Development/official plan draft nov-02 odf Accessed: December 20, 2007.

Haila, Y (1999a). Biodiversity and the divide between culture and nature. Biodiversity and Conservation, Vol. 8: 165-181. Haila, Y (1999b). Socioecologies. Ecography, Vol. 22: 337-348. Hanna, KS (2005). Planning for sustainability, two contrasting communities. Journal of the American Planning Association, Vol. 71(1): 27-40.

Krajnc, A (2000). Wither Ontario's environment? Neo-Conservatism and the decline of the Environment Ministry, Canadian Public Policy-Analyse de
Politiques, Vol. 26: 111-127.

Lambton Shores (2001). Municipality of Lambton Shores Official Plan. http://www.lambtonshores.ca/Docs/LS OP MarO8.pdf. Ann^^HDecember 20, 2007.

Hanna, KS; Webber, SM; and Slocombe, DS (2007). Integrated ecological and regional planning in a rapid-growth setting. Environmental Management,
Vol. 40: 339-348.

Lambton (1998). County of Lambton Official Plan, http://www.lambtononline.com/
uploads/945/Official Plan County of Lambton.pdf. Accessed: December
20, 2007.

Harrison, K (1996). Passing the Buck: Federalism and Canadian Environmental
Policy. Vancouver: UBC Press.

_,- (1999). Talking with the donkey: Cooperative approaches to environmental
protection. Journal of Industrial Ecology, Vol. 2: 51-72.

Leeds and the Thousand Islands (2006). Official Plan of the Township of Leeds and the Thousand Islands, http://www.townshipleeds.on.ca /Services/Buildingand Planning/Planning/OfficialPlan/tabid/1211/ Defaultaspx. Accessed: December 20, 2007.

-_--. (2007). The road not taken: Climate change policy in Canada and the United States. Global Environmental Politics, Vol. 7: 92-117.

Leo, C (2002). 'Urban Development: Planning Aspirations and Political Realities'. In Fowler, EP., and Siegel, D, eds. Urban Policy Issues: Canadian
Perspectives. 2nd ed. Toronto: Oxford, pp. 215-236.

Hecht, JE (2003). Sustainability indicators on the web. Environment, Vol. 45: 3. Henriques, I and Sadorsky, P (2008). Voluntary environmental programs: A Canadian Perspective. Policy Studies Journal, Vol. 36: 143-166.
Innisfil (2002). Official Plan Town of Innisfil. http://www.innisfil.ca/Business/text/ innisfil official plan.pdf. Accessed: December 20, 2007.
Ivey, JL; de Loe, RC and Kreutzwiser, RD (2006). Planning for source water protection in Ontario. Applied Geography, Vol. 26: 192-209.

Marsden, T; Flynn, A; Lowe, P; Munton, R; and Murdoch, J (1993). Constructing

the Countryside. Boulder: Westview Press.
Marsden, T; Murdoch, J; and Morgan, K (1999). Sustainable agriculture, food

supply chains, and regional development: Editorial introduction. International Planning Studies, Vol. 4: 295-301. Meaford (2005). Municipality of Meaford Official Plan, http://www.meaford.ca/

intranet/files/documents/Official%20Plan%20January%2020061.pdf.
Accessed: December 20, 2007.

Jacobs, J (1992). The death and life of great American cities. Toronto: Random
House.

Mississippi Mills (2006). Town of Mississippi Mills Community Official Plan.

Jenerette, DG; Marussich, WA; and Newell, JP (2006). Linking ecological footprints with ecosystem valuation in the provision of urban freshwater.
Ecological Economics, Vol. 59:38-47.

http://www.mississippimills.ca/Documents/163/Sept%2026%20as%20App roved%20bv%20MMAH.pdf?CFID=534263&CFTOKEN=61779921.
Accessed: December 20, 2007.

"Jones, P (2008). Personal communication. July 9, 2008. Diversion Planning Officer, Solid Waste Resources, Halifax Regional Municipality.

Moore, S; Nye, M and Rydin, Y (2007). Using ecological footprints as a policy driver: The case of sustainable construction planning policy in London.
Local Environment, Vol. 12: 1-15.

104

105

Morris-Turnberry (2006). Morris-Tumberry Official Plan. The Municipality of
Morris-Turnberry.

- (2008a). Central Pickering Development Plan, http://www.mah.aov.on.ca
/Page329.aspx. Accessed: May 2, 2008.

Moss, MR and Milne, RJ (1998). Biophysical processes and bioregional planning: The Niagara Escarpment of Southern Ontario, Canada. Landscape and
Urban Planning, 40: 251-268.

- (2008b). Ontario Municipalities. http://mah.gov.on.ca/Page1591.aspx.
Accessed: June 30, 2007.

Newig, J (2004). Public attention, political action: the example of environmental regulation. Rationality and Society, Vol. 16: 149-190.
New Tecumseth (1999). Official Plan for the Town of New Tecumseth.
http://calendar.county.simcoe.on.ca/partners/ newtecumseth/

Ontario Ministry of Public Infrastructure Renewal (OMPIR) (2008). Places to Grow: Better Choices. Brighter Future, http://www.placestogrow.ca/
index.php? lang=eng. Accessed: May 2, 2008.

Owen Sound (2006). Owen Sound Official Plan, http://www.owensound.ca/

planning/officialplan/Official Plan.pdf. Accessed: December 20, 2007.

media/files/OfficalPlan.pdf. Accessed: December 20, 2007.

Niemeijer, D (2002). Developing indicators for environmental policy: data-driven and theory-driven approaches examined by example. Environmental
Science & Policy, Vol 5: 91-103.

Parkinson, S and Roseland, M (2002). Leaders of the pack: an analysis of the Canadian 'Sustainable Communities' 2000 municipal competition. Local
Environment, Vol. 7: 411-429.

North Stormont (2005). Official Plan for the United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glenaarrv. http://www.sdgcounties.ca/Librarv/OFFICIAL PLAN.pdf.
Accessed: December 20, 2007.

Portney, KE (2002). Taking sustainable cities seriously: a comparative analysis of twenty-four US cities. Local Environment, Vol. 7: 363-380.

Prescott (2005). Official Plan of the Town of Prescott. http://www.prescott.ca/ localgovernment/OfficialPlanUrbanDesign.htm. Accessed: December 20
2007.

Neuendorf, KA (2002). The Content Analysis Guidebook. London: Sage
Publications Ltd.

Prescott and Russell (2006). Prescott and Russell Official Plan.
Accessed: December 20, 2007.

Oakville (2006). Town of Oakville Official Plan, http://www.oakville.ca/ Media Files/Offical Plan 2006 consolidation.pdf. Accessed: December
20,2007.

http://www.prescott-russell.on.ca/data/documents/doc62771.pdf.

Ontario Ministry of the Environment (OMOE) (2007). Ministry of the Environment -The Estimates, 2007-2008 Summary, http://www.fin.gov.on.ca/ english/budget/estimates/2007-08/volume1/MOE.html Accessed: April 30,
2008.

Price, T (2002). 'Sustainable Cities'. In Fowler, EP, and Siegel, D, eds. Urban Policy Issues: Canadian Perspectives. 2nd ed. Toronto: Oxford, pp 139154.

Prudham, S (2004). Poisoning the well: neoliberalism and the contamination of municipal water in Walkerton, Ontario. Geoforum, Vol. 35: 343-359.
Regional Municipality of Halifax (2006). '10% Challenge', http://www.halifax.ca/
wrms/wasteless.html. Accessed: February 20, 2008.

(2008). Ministry of the Environment - The Estimates, 2008-2009 Summary.
http://www.fin.gov.on.ca/english/budget/estimates/2008-09/volume1

/MOE.html. Accessed: April 30, 2008.

Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing (OMMAH) (2007a). Ontario
Planning and Development Act.http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page1723.aspx.
Accessed: May 2, 2008.

Rees, W and Wackernagel, M (1996). Urban ecological footprints: Why cities cannot be sustainable - and why they are a key to sustainability. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, Vol. 16:223-248.

i

(2007b). City of Toronto Legislation Proclaimed, http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/
Page691.aspx. Accessed: May 2, 2008.

Rideau Lake (2004). Official Plan of the Township of Rideau Lakes.
Accessed: December 20,2007.

http://www.twprideaulakes.on.ca/plan/RideauLakesOPApril2004.pdf.

106

107

Roberts, P (2006). Evaluating: Regional sustainable development: Approaches, methods and the politics of analysis. Journal of environmental Planning
and Management, Vol. 49: 515-532.

Tay Valley (20.01).-. Official Plan of Tay Valley Township. http://www.tavvallevtwp.ca/. Accessed: December 20, 2007.
Walliman, N (2001). Your Research Project. London: Sage Publications.

Roberts, W (2007). 'Let's not blow this'. NOW. February 8-14, 2007: p. 17.
Robinson, PJ (2006). Canadian municipal response to climate change: Measurable progress and persistent challenges for planners. Planning
Theory and Practice, Vol. 7: 218-223.

Webster, CJ (1998). Sustainability and public choice: a theorectical essay on
Design, Vol. 25: 709-729.

urban performance indicators. Environment and Planning B: Planning and

Wellesely (2003). Township of Wellesey Official Plan. http://www.township. welleslev.on.ca/plan/welleslev%20OP-final.pdf. Accessed: December 20
2007.

Robinson, PJ and Gore, CD (2005). Barriers to Canadian municipal response to climate change. Canadian Journal of Urban Research, Vol. 14: 102-120.

Wekerle, G; Sandberg, L; Gilbert, L; and Binstock, M (2007). Nature as the
cornerstone of growth: Regional and ecosystem planning in the Greater

Sancton, A (2002). 'Metropolitan and Regional Governance'. In Fowler, EP, and Siegel, D, eds. Urban Policy Issues: Canadian Perspectives. 2nd ed.
Toronto: Oxford, pp. 55-68.

Golden Horseshoe. Canadian Journal of Urban Research, Vol. 16: 20-38.

Wheeler, SM (2000). Planning for metropolitan sustainability. Journal of Planning
Education and Research, Vol. 20: 133-145.

Scott, A (2003). Assessing public perception of landscape: From practice to

policy. Journal of Environmental Policy and Planning, Vol. 5: 123-144.

Seguin (2006). Township of Seguin Official Plan, http://www.twp.sequin.on.ca /docs/Official Plan /OP.pdf. Accessed: December 20, 2007.

Whitby (2005). The Whitby Official Plan, http://www.whitby.ca/asset/plcommunitv officialplanreviewtext.pdf. Accessed: December 20, 2007.
Wilbanks, TJ and Kates, RW (1999). Global change in local places: How scale
matters. Climate Change, Vol. 43: 601-628.

Simon, CA and Dobra, J (2003). Local government perspectives of federal land
management in Nevada. Land Use Policy, Vol. 20: 275-290.

Soroka, SN (2002). Issue attributes and agenda-setting by the media, the public,
and policymakers in Canada. International Journal of Public Opinion
Research, Vol. 14: 264-285.

Sneddon, C; Howarth, RB and Norgaard, RB (2006). Sustainable development in a post-Brundtland world. Ecological Economics, Vol. 57: 253-268.
Statistics Canada (StatsCan) (2001). 'Population urban and rural, by province and territory'. Census Population, 1851-2001. http://www40.statcan.ca/
I01/cst01/riemo62a.htm?sdi=urban. Accessed: March 12, 2008.

(2006). 2006 Community Profiles. http://www12.statcan.ca/
&GeoCode=35. Accessed: June 30, 2007.

enqlish/census06/data/profiles/communitv/Search/List/Paae.cfm?Lang=E

Strong (2004). Township of Strong Official Plan, http://www.stronqtownship.com /files/strong 20official 2Qplan consolidated 20nov 2004.pdf. Accessed:
December 20, 2007.

108

109

