Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2012

Examining the Influence of Efficacy Beliefs on Participation in a Residential Curbside Recycling Scheme: Implications for the Use of Persuasive Messaging to Promote Sustainable Behaviours
Jocelyn Seifferth Molyneux
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Environmental Sciences Commons Recommended Citation
Molyneux, Jocelyn Seifferth, "Examining the Influence of Efficacy Beliefs on Participation in a Residential Curbside Recycling Scheme: Implications for the Use of Persuasive Messaging to Promote Sustainable Behaviours" (2012). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1401.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

    EXAMINING THE INFLUENCE OF EFFICACY BELIEFS   ON PARTICIPATION IN A RESIDENTIAL CURBSIDE RECYCLING SCHEME:   IMPLICATIONS FOR THE USE OF PERSUASIVE MESSAGING   TO PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE BEHAVIOURS      by  Jocelyn Patricia Seifferth Molyneux  Bachelor of Science (Psychology), Bishop's University 2008  Bachelor of Business Administration (Management), Bishop's University 2008      A thesis   presented to Ryerson University    in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of  Master of Applied Science  in the program of  Environmental Applied Science and Management    Toronto, Ontario, Canada  © Jocelyn Patricia Seifferth Molyneux 2012

  AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A THESIS    I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis,  including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners.  I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the  purpose of scholarly research  I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by  other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the  purpose of scholarly research.  I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.   

ii

  Examining the Influence of Efficacy Beliefs on Participation in a Residential Curbside  Recycling Scheme: Implications for the Use of Persuasive Messaging to Promote  Sustainable Behaviours  Master of Applied Science, 2012, Jocelyn Patricia Seifferth Molyneux, Environmental  Applied Science and Management, Ryerson University    Abstract    This thesis examines participation in a household curbside recycling scheme and the  influence that beliefs around the consequences of this behaviour have on participation.   Using the Fishbein and Ajzen's (2010) Reasoned Action Approach to create a model of the  factors influencing behaviour, quantitative data are collected examining a variety of beliefs  around the advantages and disadvantages of participation.  Economic beliefs negatively  correlate with behaviour while beliefs about reducing waste to landfill and preserving  natural resources positively correlate with behaviour.  A discussion of Ontario's current  recycling framework is also included and suggestions on areas for improvement are put  forward.   

iii

  Acknowledgements    First and foremost I would like to thank my parents for forcing me to complete this thesis  and having faith in my capability to do so, even when I was not equally convinced.  By  supporting me both financially and emotionally through the latter stages of this work they  recognized the challenge this thesis provided, and respected the time and effort required to  complete it, (with only the occasional prod to deliver results!)  Thank you Mom and Dad!   My Grandma Ilene also deserves recognition for the continuing high value she has places  on postsecondary education and the resources she has provided me in pursuit of my  educational career.    I would also like to thank my supervisor Dr. Paul Missios for funding some of the  research that went into this work, and Dr. Michal Bardecki for allocating departmental  funds towards administering my questionnaire.    I absolutely must thank Anton Svendrovski for his assistance with the statistical  calculations, as well as Susan de la Plante, Giulia Reinhardt, and Emma Wardle for their  advanced review of my questionnaire and suggestions on ways to improve the wording.  I  would also like to acknowledge the patience and guidance provided by Michael Skinner at  Lightspeed Research in administering my questionnaire.    Finally, I consider it only appropriate to acknowledge myself for initially selecting,  and evidently persevering with, a thesis topic that required a fair amount of selfdirection.   The frustration and challenge associated with this decision makes the completion and  submission of this thesis that much sweeter, and a true point of personal pride.    

iv

  Table of Contents    CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION  1.1  Do Recycling Efficacy Beliefs Influence Curbside Recycling Participation?    1.2  Objectives of this Thesis  1.3  Structure of this Thesis                                                                                                                                                    1  5  5  6  6  16  20  22  37  37  38  49  52  52  53  60  71  75  79  88  88  93  97  96 

CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW 

2.1 ­ The Antecedents of Sustainable Behaviour    2.3  The KnowledgeAction Gap             

2.2 ­ Traditional Methods of Promoting Sustainable Behaviours 

2.4 ­ Cognitive Psychology Models that Explain Behavioural Decisions   CHAPTER THREE: MATERIALS AND METHOD  3.1  The Test Area: City of Toronto   3.3 ­ Data Analysis Methodology       

3.2  Questionnaire Design and Administration    CHAPTER FOUR: DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS   4.2 ­ Analysis of Model Construct Data              Construct                 

4.1 ­ Analysis of Data from Introductory and Demographic Data 

4.3 ­ A Test of the Power of the Experimental Model to Explain the Behaviour  4.4 ­ A Test of the Power of the Experimental Model to Explain the Behavioural   Intention Construct    4.5 ­ A Test of the Power of the Experimental Model to Explain the Behaviour  Construct Having Removed the Past Behaviour Construct                                                                4.6 ­ Analysis of Results Based on Belief Selection  CHAPTER FIVE: DISCUSSION  5.2 ­ Summary of Findings    5.4 ­ Conclusion      5.1 ­ Discussion of Statistical Results  5.3 ­ Suggestions for Future Research 

v

  Appendix 1: Pepsi plant bottles picture                                                  96  97  97  98  98  101  102  121  127  141 

Appendix 2: Sunchip biodegradable bag picture    Appendix 3: Cascades toilet paper packaging 

Appendix 4:City of Toronto Recycling is magic pamphlet  

Appendix 5: White et al., (2011) Calgary recycling pamphlet (part 1)    Appendix 6: White et al., (2011) Calgary recycling pamphlet (part 2)    Appendix 7: Study Questionnaire    Appendix 8: Construal Level Theory  References  Glossary                                                         

vi

  List of Tables    1. Behavioural outcomes presented to respondents  2. List of questionnaire items and sources   4. Results from demographic questions  6. Factor analysis of DM Attitude                                                          42  45  52  54  55  55  56  57  57  58  59  62  62  63  65  65  66  69  69  70  71  71  72  73  74  74 

3. Data collected pertaining to curbside waste management knowledge  5. Descriptive statistics for model constructs 

7. Descriptive statistics for EVM calculation scores of each advantage belief    8. Descriptive statistics for EVM calculation scores of each disadvantage belief  9. Percentage of respondents who selected each advantage beliefs as one of       his/her top three most (personally) significant    of his/her top three most (personally) significant                                                                                                                                                   10. Percentage of respondents who selected each disadvantage beliefs as one   11. Model construct correlations coefficients  13. Experimental Model One ANOVA results 

12. Experimental Model One regression summary  14. Experimental Model One regression coefficients  15. Experimental Model Two regression summary  16. Experimental Model Two ANOVA results    17. Experimental Model Two regression coefficients  18. Experimental Model Three regression summary  19. Experimental Model Three ANOVA results    20. Experimental Model Three regression coefficients  21. Experimental Model Four regression summary  22. Experimental Model Four ANOVA results    23. Experimental Model Four regression coefficients  24. Experimental Model Five regression summary  25. Experimental Model Five ANOVA results    26. Experimental Model Five regression coefficients 

vii

  27. Experimental Model Six regression summary    28. Experimental Model Six ANOVA results    29. Experimental Model Six regression coefficients                                    recyclers                                            76  76  77  80 

30. Significant differences in salient belief selection between good and poor   31. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for those who   selected the belief "reduce amount of waste that goes into landfill" as salient   against those who did not                  80  80 

32. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural     intention for those who selected the belief "reduce the amount   of waste that goes into landfill" against  those who did not 

33. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention    for those who selected the belief "save my household energy"   as salient against those who did not 

 

81 

34. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural     intention for those who selected the belief "save my household   energy" against  those who did not 

 

81 

35. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention    for those who selected the belief "waste my money" as salient   against those who did not 

 

81 

36. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural     intention for those who selected the belief "waste my money"  against  those who did not 

 

82 

37. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention    for those who selected the belief "waste city money" as salient   against those who did not 

 

82 

38. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural     intention for those who selected the belief "waste city money"  against  those who did not 

 

82 

39. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention   

 

83 

viii

                                        for those who selected the belief "help to preserve natural   resources" as salient against those who did not    83  intention for those who selected the belief "help to preserve   natural resources" against  those who did not    84  for those who selected the belief "save my city money" as salient   against those who did not    84  intention for those who selected the belief "save my city money   against  those who did not    85  for those who selected the belief "save my household energy" as   salient against those who did not    85  intention for those who selected the belief "save my household   energy against  those who did not      86  86  and behavioural intention constructs    against low advantage scorers as behaviour and behavioural   intention      86  87  and behavioural intention constructs  against low advantage scorers as behaviour and behavioural   intention 

40. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural    

41. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention   

42. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural    

43. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention   

44. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural    

45. Group statistics for low and high advantage scorers for behaviour     46. Independent samples test comparing high advantage scorers  

47. Group statistics for low and high disadvantage scorers for behaviour   48. Independent samples test comparing high disadvantage scorers    

ix

  List of Figures    1. The theory of planned behaviour (adapted from Ajzen, 1985)      the author                25  26  31  36        3  24  2. The theory of reasoned action (adapted from Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980)  3. The theory of planned behaviour (adapted from Ajzen, 1985)   5. Model of altruistic behaviour (adapted from Schwartz, 1977)   6. Proposed model of participation in Toronto's blue bin curbside     recycling scheme (author's own)         

4. The reasoned action approach (adapted from Fishbein and Ajzen, 2010) 

x

  List of Equations    1. Behaviour equation  3. Attitude equation                                                                                        26  27  27  27   28  60  68  76  2. Behavioural intention equation    4. Subjective norm equation  

5. Perceived behavioural control equation  

6. Structural equation model for Behaviour construct 

7. Structural equation model for Behavioural Intention construct      Behaviour Construct            

8. Structural equation model for Behaviour construct having removed the Past  

xi

  CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION  1.1  Do Recycling Efficacy Beliefs Influence Curbside Recycling Participation?  The excuse most often cited when I ask someone why s/he does not put his/her waste  material into a recycling bin is that s/he does not believe that it "makes a difference": that  materials placed into a recycling container will end up at the landfill regardless.  The media  perpetuates this belief, highlighting the recycling and organics scams (Welsh, 2009).    Having worked at a materials recycling facility (MRF), I know that recycling  household waste materials is a profitable, sustainable business venture that contributes to  minimizing the environmental effects of our consumptionbased society.  My hypothesis is  that individuals who truly believe and understand the inherent sustainability benefits of  participating in recycling schemes are themselves better recyclers: they recycle more  materials, more often.  This thesis investigates if belief in the efficacy and sustainability  benefits of a household curbside recycling system has a positive effect on participation in  that system.    Research on the determinants of recycling behaviour began in the early 1970s,  coinciding with the rise of the first environmental movement.  This early literature  examines citizens' participation in material depoit schemes.  Curbside recycling schemes,  one of the earliest of which was the Ontario blue box program, became popular in the  1980s, and led an explosion in studies investigating curbside recycling and other pro environmental behaviours in subsequent decades.    Proenvironmental actions such as recycling are often grouped in with other  behaviours that require immediate personal costs but provide only global, indirect benefits  are labeled social dilemmas: "a choice situation in which short term rationality impels  people to act for their own benefit at the expense of the collective" (Harland, Staats, &  Wilke, 1999, 2517).  Social dilemmas generally display a knowledgeaction gap (KAG):  when individuals an issue but do not carry out the personal actions that would contribute  to alleviating the problem (Knussen, Yule, Makenzie and Wells, 2004).  The KAG appears to  be a result of inherent cognitive biases and limits to human rationality, which have recently  caught attention with the advent of behavioural economics.  The influence of morality or  altruism is an area of great interest around these dilemmas. 

1

    Consumer behaviour, social marketing literature and the efficacy of persuasive 

messaging provide insight into the types of interventions that can effectively influence pro social behaviour.  "Social marketing is the application of commercial marketing concepts  and tools to influence the voluntary behaviour of target audiences to improve their lives or  the society of which they are a part" (Andreasen, 1994, 109).  Transformational Consumer  Research (TCR) is the new moniker for consumer behaviour research with the lofty goal of  moving society towards sustainability and reflecting "the new social conscience of  marketing" (Andreasen, Goldberg and Sirgy, 2012, 25).   Construal Level Theory (CLT), a  relatively recent development in the field of cognitive psychology, postulates that  behavioural evaluations are informed by the construal level of the decision alternatives,  and that increasing an individual's psychological distance from an object increases his/her  tendency to construe the object in highlevel terms (Liberman, Trope and Stephan, 2007).   CLT corroborates cognitive biases as a root cause of the KAG and offers direction on how to  bridge the KAG in persuasive messaging (White et al., 2011; Fujita et al., 2008).      Andreasen et al. (2012) suggest that interventions to transform consumers need to  be guided by theorybased research.   A psychological paradigm is well suited for analyzing  beliefs associated with recycling efficacy.  Ajzen's Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB)  models have been applied to a wide variety of behavioural choices, social dilemmas and  otherwise and a number of studies employ the TPB to test the influence of beliefs around  recycling.  Ajzen's (1985) Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB) (Figure 1) postulates that  performance of a behaviour is directly influenced by the intention to perform that  behaviour, which in turn is influenced by three main variables: attitudes, subjective norms,  and perceived behavioural control.  Other models applied to prosocial behaviour and  substantiated in the literature include Schwartz's altruism model and Stern's (1999) ABC  theory, both of which show validity in predicting behaviour.  They are applied where  appropriate in this thesis in an attempt to create a robust behavioural model. A modified  TPB is used to test the influence of Torontonians beliefs around participating in the  municipal household blue box recycling system on participation in that system.     

2

                          Figure 1. The Theory of Planned Behaviour (adopted from Ajzen, 1985)      Employing the TPB model requires operationally defining the behaviour in question,  which in this case is a surprisingly difficult task.  The verb to recycle is defined in the  dictionary as "to pass through a system again for further treatment or use" and also "to  reclaim for further use" (Collins English Dictionary).    While reviewing the history of the Toronto blue box program, what quickly becomes  evident is the interdependency of this cycle among the citizen, the city's civic services, and  the recycling industry itself.  Recycling inherently represents a continuous loop with no set  start or finish; the mobius loop is used to symbolize recycling and is indicative of the  interdependence among participants in a closed system.  The individual Torontonian is  responsible for placing his/her waste materials curbside for recycling collection, the  municipal government is responsible for collecting, transporting, and aggregating the  materials so that they can be appropriately sorted and private industry acquires these  materials and repurposes new goods available for purchase by companies and private  citizens.  Ideally the cycle loops back on its self as the individual citizen consumes goods  made from recycled materials.    The Blue Box Program was built upon an uneasy and  unusual public/private partnership that almost saw the acclaimed system discontinued in  Perceived  Behavioural  Control Social Norms 

DM Attitude    Behavioural  Intention 

Behaviour

3

  until industry partners agreed to a new funding scheme for the program (Canadian  Institute for Environmental Law and Policy, 2008).    Consequently, the research question was operationalized through an examination of  respondents' beliefs around the consequences of their participation in a Toronto's curbside  household recycling scheme.  Due to the inherent cycling nature of the recycling system,  the influence of efficacy beliefs on participation must be examined with regards to how it  relates to the three participatory stakeholder groups (i.e. citizens, municipal services, and  private industry).  Indeed, consumers are becoming accustomed to hearing about the  recycling benefits associated with consuming various products: e.g., Pepsi highlighting that  their plastic bottle made of 15% plant material (Appendix 1); Sun Chips advertising their  new biodegradable chip bag (Appendix 2); and Cascades paper company promoting their  100% recycled paper towels as saving seven litres of water (Appendix 3).  Reorienteering  consumers' consumption behaviours towards effective recycling could decrease the  severity of many of humanity's most detrimental environmental affects.    Using attitude assessment techniques to measure respondents' beliefs around the  consequences of their participation, and correlating these measurements to behaviour  offers empirical insight into the influence of beliefs on participation.    The results indicate that beliefs around the consequences of participation in the  recycling scheme are one of many factors that influence recycling behaviour.  Salient beliefs  around the ability of recycling to reduce the amount of waste that goes into landfill and to  help preserve natural resources correlate with increased levels of participation in the  Toronto blue box program, while salient beliefs around the economic consequences of  participation correlate with reduced participation levels.  Interestingly, the way in which  global, indirect benefits are communicated to the public appears to play an important role  in the efficacy of persuasive messaging.  The current funding structure of the recycling  public/private partnership unfortunately serves to undermine the efficacy of recycling and  in the province of Ontario.    A better understanding of the beliefs that positively influence recycling behaviour  can be useful in tailoring persuasive advertising and behaviour change campaigns that 

4

  promote recycling and the interdependent relationships of the players, as a sustainable  solution in our consumptionbased society.    1.2  Objectives of this Thesis  Building on the work of Tonglet, Phillips and Read (2004) that examines the influence of  attitude and knowledge of consequences on recycling behaviour, the purpose of this thesis  is to investigate the relationship between beliefs around the consequences of participation  in a curbside recycling program and actual household recycling behaviours.    1.3  Structure of this Thesis  Chapter one has introduced the overarching themes of this thesis, while chapter two  summarizes the established literature relevant to promoting sustainable behaviours.   Chapter three outlines the methodology that was used to establish a research question and  gather data.  Chapter four highlights the analysis and results derived from these data.   Chapter five provides a discussion on the application of these results and suggests topics  for further investigation.  

5

  CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW  Chapter two examines the scientific literature relevant to this thesis, including the general  common antecedents of all behaviour, traditional methods employed to promote  sustainable behaviours and the associated challenge of affecting prosocial behaviour  provided by the knowledgeaction gap, and finally the cognitive psychological models that  serve as the foundation for behavioural experiments.  2.1 ­ The Antecedents of Sustainable Behaviours  While there is a seemingly infinite number of variables that influence behavioural  performance, the antecedents of recycling behaviour can be grouped into three broad  categories: psychological factors, contextual variables, and capability factors (Hines,  Hungerford and Tomera, 1986).  There is a great deal of overlap (Barr, Gilg, and Ford,  2001) and interaction (Stern, 2000; Fishbein and Middlestadt, 2012) both within and  among these categories.  Ecologically responsible actions must be examined on a specific behaviour basis in order to effectively apply behavioural models (Lindsay and Strathman,  1997): no general underlying factor links proenvironmental behaviours together (Tracy  and Oskamp, 1983/4).  In fact, Oskamp et al. (1991) show a negative correlation between  participation in a recycling scheme and other environmental behaviours.      Behavioural research can be classified into two categories: interventionist studies,  which manipulate independent variables to evaluate their impact on the dependent  variable of behaviour, and correlational research, which correlates variance between  observed independent and dependent behavioural variables.  Correlational research will be  employed in this thesis.  Behavioural Intention versus Behaviour as the Dependent Variable  In studying the antecedents of behaviour, debate exists around the use of behavioural  intention as a proxy for behaviour as the dependent variable.  Sometimes the two correlate  quite closely (Fishbein et al., 2010), while other studies find little to no correlation (Webb  and Sheeran, 2006).  Research using both is reviewed in this thesis because behavioural  intention can serve as a useful proxy when measuring behaviour is not possible; however,  the degree to which the intention is well formed needs to be considered because well  formed intentions mediate the influence of attitude on behaviour, whereas poorly formed 

6

  intentions may not (Bagozzi and Yi, 1989).  While Boldero (1995), Barr et al. (2001) and  Cheung et al. (1999) find that measurements of behavioural intention significantly and  positively correlate with objective measures of recycling behaviour, Davies et al. (2002, 37)  cautions that "only under the most grueling conditions of situational consistency can the  required correlation correspondence between measures of intention and measures of  behaviour be demonstrated."  Formative Recycling Research  The relevance of early recycling research as it relates to this thesis is questionable as it  examines recycling dropoff deposits where the behavioural costs of participation are  much greater and participants often receive monetary rewards; indeed, previous recycling  for monetary rewards does not predict participation in curbside recycling (Oskamp et al.,  1991).  Nonetheless, in one of the earliest studies on recycling behaviour, Arbuthnot (1977)  contrasts frequenters of a recycling deposit against rural Ohio church members on  measurements of environmental knowledge, attitudes, and personality orientations.  He  finds the best predictors of recycling deposit use are education level, environmental  knowledge, general conservatism, and lack of personal control  the latter two exhibiting a  negative correlation with behaviour  and concludes that recyclers are younger and have  higher socioeconomic standing.  Interestingly, both populations hold equal proecological  attitudes, but recyclers have more concern for future environmental consequences and feel  greater ecological responsibility.  Frequenting a recycling depot positively correlates  positively to personal satisfaction in being frugal, being selfsufficient, and participating in  a program where one's actions make a difference (Arbuthnot, 1977); depositusers state  that helping to conserve natural resources is their most important motive for participation  (DeYoung, 1986).  Introduction of Psychological and Personal Factors  Psychological and personality factors encompass the influence of attitudes, of innate  personality dimensions such as orientations towards conservatism and individualism, and  of value orientations, including moral values.  Perceived convenience, space, or time to  perform behaviour can also be considered psychological variables because they are  measured subjectively and relate to personality dimensions such as selfefficacy.  

7

  Persuasive messaging often aims to influence beliefs, which form the basis of attitudes  (Fishbein et al., 2010) and so the role of attitudes in behavioural decisionmaking is of  specific interest for this thesis.  Motivations for Recycling Behaviour  Motivation is an overarching psychological factor.  Many studies have investigated the  motives distinguishing recyclers from nonrecyclers.  Recyclers demonstrate greater  intrinsic motivation for the behaviour than nonrecyclers (Oskamp et al., 1991).   Motivation for participation in a curbside recycling scheme loads on five factors:  environmental concerns, nuisance, social reasons, household consequences and economic  motives (Vining et Ebreo, 1990); similarly, when asked his/her primary motivation for  recycling, 40% of respondents say general environmental concern, 33% say saving landfill  space; 8% say economic concerns, and 6% cite social pressure (Scott, 1999).  Recyclers and  nonrecyclers rate environmental concerns as equally important and social concerns as  least important (Vining et al., 1990).   Examination of the Influence of Attitudes  There is general agreement in the psychology field that attitudes are "a latent disposition  or tendency to respond with some degree of favourableness to a psychological object"  (Fishbein et al., 2010, 76).  While the concept of attitude was established in the 1920s, by  the 1960s "fewer than 50 studies had been published in which investigators tried to use  measures of attitude to predict actual behaviour" (Fishbein et al., 2010, 256).  The research  continues to remain inconclusive on the exact effect of attitudes on behaviour.  Wicker  (1969), in one of the earliest studies on the antecedents of behaviour, concludes that  attitudes do not exert a strong influence, while Balderjohn (1988) finds that specific  environmental attitudes do predict conservation behaviours.  Stern (1999) suggests that  the predictive value of attitude variables is dependent on situational factors, while Barr et  al. (2001) suggest that environmental values, situational variables, and psychological  variables moderate the link between environmental attitudes and actions.  The Difference Between Instrumental and Experiential Attitudes  Some researchers distinguish between the cognitive and affective aspects of attitude (Ajzen  and Driver, 1992; East, 1993), asserting that cognitive (also known as instrumental) 

8

  attitudes evaluate the positive or negative consequences associated with an object,  whereas affective (also known as experiential) attitudes evaluate the positive or negative  subjective experience associated with an object.  In the first study to examine these two  types separately, Ajzen and Driver (1992, 222) suggest that "people seem to evaluate  leisure behaviour in terms of its instrumental costs and benefits as well as in terms of the  positive or negative feelings it engenders."  Attitudes are perhaps best considered  hierarchical "in which the instrumental and experiential components constitute firstorder  factors and the overall evaluative attitude is a secondorder factor" (Fishbein et al., 2010,  85), which is predicated on high internal consistency and correlational results between  measurements of instrumental and experiential attitudes evaluating the same object  (Bagozzi, Lee and Van Loo, 2001; Hagger and Chatzisarantis, 2005).  The Role of Moral Values   Understandably the influence of altruism and morality values figures prominently into  research on behaviours such as recycling that have global, indirect benefits.  Research is  inconclusive on the ability of values to guide people's behaviour (Eyal and Liberman,  2010).  Energy conservation (Black, 1978; Heberlein, 1975; Stern et al. 1985), littering  (Heberlein, 1975), purchasing leadfree gas (Heberlein, 1975), and yardburning (Van Liere  and Dunlop, 1978) all show influence from an underlying moral norm (also known as  personal norm) component.  Behavioural models (Schwartz, 1977) have successfully tested  the morality construct associated with ethical behaviour choice questions.  Some  researchers have shown that global moral principles underlie moral decisions (Lammers  and Stepel, 2009; Tanner et al. 2008).  Thogersen (1996) suggests that individuals evaluate  environmental behaviours as moral decisions (i.e. right versus wrong) rather than  economic (i.e. cost versus benefit) analysis.  Valle et al. (2005) assume altruistic motives  are required for recycling behaviour because of the social dilemma involved.  In their test  on five proenvironmental behaviours, Harland et al. (1999) find that variance in behaviour  attributed to attitude decreased when personal norm was added as a predictor variable.    Individuals will compromise personal values when harm is relative to magnitude of  benefit, implying some type of cost/benefit analysis (Eyal and Liberman, 2010).  Moral  rules are applied immediately and spontaneously and only if reflective reasoning is 

9

  invoked will contextual factors be taken into account (Haidt, 2001).  Stern (2000) found  that personal norm was the only psychological variable of fourteen to correlate with three  types of nonactivist environmentalism.  Hopper and Nielsen (1991) show that personal  norm measurements positively correlate with recycling behaviour but only when  knowledge of behavioural consequences is high.    The General Influence of Attitudes on Curbside Recycling Behaviour  Measurements of attitude positively predict recycling behaviour (Terry et al., 1999;  Tonglet, 2002; Valle et al., 2004) and behavioural intention to recycle (Terry et al., 1999;  Knussen et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2010) though Gamba et al., (1994) find that attitudes exert  less influence on recycling behaviour than other variables.  The strength of influence is  stronger for participants who had not performed the behaviour regularly in the past (Terry  et al., 1999), while the Knussen and Wells (2004) results contradict this and find the  relationship stronger for those who had recycled all or most of their household waste in  the past.  Belief in the Efficacy of Participation in a Curbside Recycling Scheme  Perceived efficacy of behaviour is important in influencing behavioural choice (Berger and  Corbin, 1992).  Relative advantage, a construct that measures perceived cost/benefit of  recycling behaviour, strongly influences attitude (Taylor and Todd, 1995).  Recycling  positively correlates to the belief that it is effective in preserving the environment (Gamba  and Oskamp, 1994); belief in the benefits of recycling positively correlates with intention to  recycle (Boldero, 1995).  Recyclers do hold stronger beliefs that newspaper recycling  conserves natural resources and increases the number of recycled products made  (Boldero, 1995).  Boldero (1995) finds that when participants rate a list of recycling's  disadvantages, they load on two general factors: inconvenience and lack of conviction in  the efficacy of recycling.  The benefits of recycling do not predict recycling behaviour but  the evaluation of the recycling program does predict behaviour (Boldero, 1995).  Similarly,  Tonglet et al. (2002) find that a construct based on the outcomes of recycling behaviour is a  significant predictor of behavioural intention but not behaviour.    Barr et al. (2001) finds that recyclers and nonrecyclers do not differ in terms of  their beliefs in the value of recycling behaviour, nor do they differ in terms of awareness of 

10

  recycling benefits (Valle et al., 2004).  The only significant attitudes beliefs found by Gamba  et al. (1994) being perceived seriousness of the household waste problem and intrinsic  motivation to recycle.  Mediators of the AttitudeBehaviour Link  A variety of factors may influence the attitudebehaviour relationship, including "such  aspects as confidence in one's attitudes, involvement with the attitude object, it's centrality  or importance, attitudinal ambivalence, the attitude's accessibility in memory and its  temporal stability" (Fishbein et al., 2010, 118).  Those authors suggest that attitude  strength is an important moderating factor, and that strong attitudes do predict behaviour  better than weak attitudes, although this may not always be the case.    Attitudinal ambivalencethe coexistence of both positive and negative reactions to  an objectmay also moderate the influence of attitudes on behaviour and can also be  conceived by examining both the positively and negatively evaluated beliefs associated  with the object.  Health behaviour beliefs often display attitudinal ambivalence with a  positive instrumental attitude but negative experiential attitude.  Attitudinal ambivalence  has important implications for behavioural interventions as Armitage and Conner (2000)  find that while ambivalent attitudes are both more likely to change over time and are more  susceptible to persuasive appeals, overall they are less likely to guide behaviour than non ambivalent attitudes.  Other Psychological Factors Influencing Behaviour  Emotions are also considered psychological factors and have been shown to play a role in  determining behaviour; the stronger an individual is emotionally involved with an  environmental problem, the more likely s/he is to engage in proenvironmental  behaviours.    Locus of control and selfefficacy beliefs are personality factors that influence the  performance of environmental behaviours.  Stern (2000) mentions that egotistic values  and traditional conservative values (e.g., obedience, selfdiscipline, family security)  negatively correlate with proenvironmental behaviours. Stern (2000) finds that  individuals with prosocial value orientations, rather than individualistic or competitive  orientations, demonstrate more environmental behaviour, and Kollmuss et al. (2002) note 

11

  that individuals who strongly believe in growth and the benefit of technology are less  willing to engage in proenvironmental behaviours that require lifestyle changes.  High self efficacy positively correlates to proenvironmental behaviours (Huebner and Lipsey, 1981;  Webster, 1975).  Introduction of Contextual Factors  Contextual factors are variables external to the individual that influence his or her  behaviour and include advertising, community norms, legal issues, physical aspects of  design, technology, public policy and economic factors (Stern, 2000).  A number of  demographic factors exhibit reliable influence on recycling behaviour across a wide variety  of studies, although Barr et al. (2002) find no demographic factors of significance in their  study on curbside recycling behaviour.    Sociodemographic variables serve as proxies of background factors that can  influence behaviour (Stern, 2000); however, there is minimal agreement on the role  demographics play in determining behaviour.  Some authors conclude that demographics  hold little explanatory value for proecological behaviours (Van Liere et al., 1980; Samdehl  and Robertson, 1989) while others suggest that gender (Kollmuss et al., 2002), education  level (Van Liere et al., 1980) and age (Mohai and Twight, 1987; Van Liere et al., 1980) show  demonstrate influence.  Household income positively correlates to recycling rates in a  variety of studies (Vining et al., 1990; Oskamp et al., 1991; Gamba et al., 1994), although  Valle et al. (2004) show no influence for this factor on household recycling.  Similarly, home  ownership positively correlates with recycling behaviour (Oskamp et al., 1999).  Level of  education also positively correlates with recycling behaviour (Davies et al., 2002), although  again Valle et al. (2004) do not replicate this finding.  Age shows a generally reliable  positive correlation with recycling behaviour (Vining et al., 1990; Scott, 1999; Knussen et  al., 2004), although an exception is Thogersen (1994), in examining a newly implemented  scheme, suggests that older participants find a newly implemented curbside recycling  scheme complicated.  Gamba et al. (1994) show that the number of individuals in a  household positively and significantly correlated to participation frequency; related, Davies  et al. (2002) find that married individuals are more likely to recycle than nonmarried  participants. 

12

    Social pressure is considered a contextual factor mediated by personality attributes 

such as collective values and susceptibility to social pressure.  Harland et al. (1999) suggest  that focus on attitudes tends to overshadow the tremendous power of perceived social  pressure.  The particular influence of social norms on recycling behaviour shows vast  discrepancies across studies, perhaps because it is a subjectivelymeasured contextual  factor.  While some find social norms to positively predict recycling behaviour (Barr et al.,  2001; Davies et al., 2002) and behavioural intention (Chen et al., 2010; Knussen et al.,  2004), other studies find social norms to be predictive in the negative direction for  behaviour (Scott, 1999) and behavioural intention (Taylor and Todd, 1995).  Still others  find no significance role whatsoever for social norms in predicting recycling behaviour  (Knussen et al., 2004; Boldero, 1995) or behavioral intention (Terry et al., 1999).    Economic factors can have a huge influence on behaviour: Thogerson (1996) cites  one municipality in Denmark that used monetary incentives for recycling and shows that   perceived costs/benefits differ significantly from other municipalities not using monetary  incentives.  He found that more emphasis is placed on personal costs, less on the public  benefit of behaviour, which negatively impacts intrinsic motivation, a finding supported by  Lee et al. (1995).  Economic influences confound with intrinsic motivation and moral  values.  The Moderating Influence of Habit  The habitual nature of many sustainable behaviours is an interesting contextual variable  that moderates the affect of other variables. Ouellette and Wood (1998) find a stronger  relationship between past behaviour and behavioural intention for habitual behaviours,  concluding that the relationship between attitudes and intention is weaker for habitual  behaviour than nonhabitual behaviour.  Terry et al. (1999) argue that habitual behaviour  should display greater influence from selfidentity factors than nonhabitual behaviours  because repetition indicates that a behaviour is important to one's selfidentity and Charng  et al. (1988) find this to be true when comparing first time versus repeat blood donors.    Macey and Brown (1983) report that past experience is found to be the best predictor of  conservation behaviour.  Novel behaviour may relay on social norms whereas habitual  behaviour may rely more on personal norms because action has been internalized (Davies 

13

  et al., 2002).  Past recycling behaviour shows the strongest and most definitive positive  affect of any construct (Boldero, 1995; Terry et al., 1999; Tonglet et al., 2002); in fact,  Cheung et al. (1999) find past behaviour predicts recycling behaviour even better than  behavioural intention.    Not surprisingly, having a recycling bin has a positive, significant affect on  behaviour (Guagnano, Stern, and Dietz, 1995).  Program design factors show a strong  reliable influence on recycling behaviour; a structured, institutionalized program is the  most significant determinant of recycling behaviour (Derksen and Gartrell, 1993).  A co mingled recycling program produces more behaviour than source separation programs  (Gamba et al., 1994).  Subjective design factors also show a positive correlation to recycling  behaviour and include availability of storage space (Boldero, 1995), and convenience of  containers (Reid et al., 1976; Luyben et al., 1979), while Valle et al. (2004) show that the  subjective rating of "difficulty" exhibits one of the strongest effects on recycling behaviour.   Boldero (1995) and Barr et al. (2001) show that beliefs around storage space required and  convenience are both significant predictors of behaviour in the expected directions.  Introduction of Capability and Control Factors  Capability and control factors are variables that either facilitate or impede the performance  of behaviour.  Knowledgein it's various formsis a capability factor because knowledge is  required to understand how to perform a behaviour, to determine responsibility for the  act, and to evaluate the behaviour's perceived effectiveness (Davies et al., 2002).    Control factors, often measured subjectively, will influence behaviour to some  extent based on how closely the perception match objective reality (Fishbein et al., 2010).   Control factors include access to the physical facilities required for behavioural  performance and autonomy over the question of performance.  Some studies show that  perceived behavioural control positively correlates with recycling behavioural intention  but not actual recycling behaviour (Terry et al., 1999; Knussen et al., 2004), while others  find no significance for perceived behavioural control (Chen et al., 2010; Boldero, 1995),  though this may be due to methodology difficulties in the way perceived behavioural  control is measured (Davies et al., 2002).  Perceived control and situational factors may be  better suited to explain nonrecyclers (Tonglet et al., 2002). 

14

    Knowledge of environmental issues has been investigated as an antecedent of 

environmental behaviours in a variety of studies and is most often found to poorly  correlate with behaviour, if at all (Shrum et al., 1994; Stern and Oskamp, 1987).  Kempton  et al. (1995) show that general environmental knowledge is the same between individuals  who consider themselves to be strong environmentalists and those who consider  themselves strong antienvironmentalists.  General ecological knowledge and associated  environmental awareness also positively correlate with recycling behaviour (Oskamp et al.,  1991) and recycling behavioural intention (Cheung et al., 1999).  Individuals with strongly  held environmental concerns recycle more types of material than those without (Derksen  et al., 1993) and recyclers are significantly more likely than nonrecyclers to acknowledge  environmental problems (Oskamp et al., 1991).  General environmental concern likely  influences consumer behaviour indirectly through mediating constructs (Alwitt and Pitts,  1996).    Knowledge of specific action strategies is another knowledgebased factor, and one  that is a prerequisite to environmental behaviours.  Procedural information alone is a  necessary but not sufficient factor in promoting lasting change around complex ecologically  responsible behaviours (McKenzieMohr and Smith, 1999).  Specific procedural knowledge  of the recycling scheme, such as the ability to correctly identify items accepted into the  program, and knowledge of services available, is well established as positively correlating  closely with increased recycling behaviour (Vining et al., 1990; Gamba et al., 1994; Scott,  1999; Barr et al., 2001; Lansana, 1993; Simmons and Widmar, 1990; DeYoung, 1989;  Tonglet et al., 2002), though Cheung et al. (1999) found that specific knowledge of waste  paper recycling did not increase waste paper recycling behaviour.  Summary of the Antecedents of Sustainable Behaviour  A huge variety of factors can influence recycling behaviour and, as can be seen from this  review, many ­ if not most ­ interact with each other.  This confluence of variables make it  difficult to separate out the influence of any one factor, never mind attempt to examine the  specific influence of particular beliefs.  Nonetheless, it is clear that any attempt to test the  influence of behavioural beliefs on sustainable behaviour will need to account for  psychological, contextual, and capability factors including attitudes, morality, social 

15

  influences, behavioural control, and past behaviour.  An examination of traditional methods  of promoting sustainable behaviours in the following section will shed further light on how  persuasive messaging and other variables can influence curbside recycling behaviours.    2.2  Traditional Methods of Promoting Sustainable Behaviours  Interventions effective at influencing the performance of environmental behaviours shed  light on the antecedents of these actions and again can be loosely gathered into three broad  groups: those that influence contextual factors, psychological factors, and  capability/control factors.  Gardner and Stern (1996) suggest that there are four unique  types of behavioural intervention: moral appeals to change behaviour for global benefit;  educational information appeals to change attitudes and awareness; interventions that add  a material incentive (or remove a disincentive); and community management of  institutional structures to foster shared values, expectations and norms.  The authors  conclude that the first two have poor track records and the last two are not effective on  their own, therefore intervention types should be combined to be most effective.  Stern  (1999) adds new technology implementation as a fifth type of intervention.    Manipulation of Psychological Variables  A variety of psychological variables have been manipulated in an attempt to influence  performance of prosocial behaviours.  The "failure of moral appeals for lasting societal  change are well established and may be because they relay on prohibition which is not  automatically or obviously selfbeneficial" (Burroughs and Rindleisch, 2012, 258).    Proenvironmental behaviours are positively affected by personal commitment  (Katzev and Johnson, 1987).  Pardini and Katzev (1983/4) show how soliciting a  commitment from an individual helps to ensure recycling behaviour continues when  incentives are removed.  They suggest that the commitment may have required people to  find their own reasons to recycle and they may have started enjoying it.   The Efficacy of Persuasive Messaging  Advertising and the use of persuasive messaging is a common intervention technique used  in attempt to influence a wide variety of consumer behaviours.  Advertising primarily aims 

16

  to improve the attitudes associated with the behaviour in question but may also have a  secondary effect of influencing social norms associated with the behaviour as well.      Hopper et al. (1991) conclude that more than reminders and information is needed  to influence attitudes around recycling.  Personality differences also influence the efficacy  of persuasive messages in that individuals with highself monitoring tendencies are more  easily persuaded by messages that speak to a product's image over product quality (Snyder  and Debono, 1985) and personality differences influence the weight assigned to the  consequences of behaviour, which in turn predicts attitude change in response to various  persuasive messages (Strathman et al., 1994).    Fugita et al. (2008) find that distant future purchases are influenced more by a  persuasive message highlighting a positive environmental feature, while a nearfuture  purchase is not influenced by the inclusion of that same positive environmental feature.   "Persuasive arguments appealing to idealistic values appear to be more persuasive for  temporally distant as opposed to near attitude objects." (Eyal et al., 2010, 15).  Manipulation of Contextual Factors  Legislation and extrinsic rewards (or punishments) are wellestablished as having a direct  and significant impact on behaviour though neither is a panacea.  Ferrara and Missios  (2005) report that mandatory (versus voluntary) recycling programs have a significant  positive affect on recycling rates.  While legislation is an apparently easy fix, governments  are hesitant to use these types of command and control tactics: when the Ontario  government of the 1980s chose not to legislate mandatory use of refillable soda containers,  a precedent was set "for a waste policy regime in Ontario that was based on voluntary  compliance rather than regulation"(Canadian Institute for Environmental Law and Policy,  2008, 1).    Ferrera et al. (2005) also show that microeconomic measures significantly affect  most waste management behaviours: user fees associated with garbage production  positively affected diversion rates for all materials except toxic chemicals.  Rewards are  effective at temporarily increasing sustainable behaviours but behaviour is extinguished  after the incentive is removed (Oskamp, et al., 1994; Witmer et al., 1976) because rewards  tends to lose their novelty, other factors grow to outweigh them, or they may not be 

17

  meaningful in the first place.  Geller et al. (1982) report that monetary incentives are the  primary reason individuals use a recycling collection centre and that the recycling stopped  when the incentive was removed.  Rewards are probably most effective for nonrecyclers  (Schultz et al. 1995) but recycling incented this way does not generalize to other materials.    Interestingly, providing incentives may actually serve to diminish pro environmental behaviours.  Frey (1993) suggests that if an incentive is perceived as a  token of approval, it will strengthen behaviour, but if perceived as payment, it weakens  intrinsic motivation and possibly behaviour (De Young, 1986).  Incentive schemes may  reduce the feeling of moral obligation and reframe the activity as economic, where means end analyses apply (Thogersen, 1996).    Schnelle (1980) finds that litter in the streets is reduced when a weekly report is  published in the local newspaper; this likely influenced community norms around littering  behaviour.  Manipulation of Capability and Control Factors  Historically communication campaigns promoting ecologically responsible behaviour have  been procedurallybased (McKenzieMohr et al., 1999); e.g., a flyer or advertisement is  delivered that outlines how, when, and where to perform the behaviour.  Many  environmental NGOs continue to base their communication campaigns around providing  procedural information (Kollmuss et al., 2002).  These campaigns have repeatedly failed to  be effective in influencing behaviour (McKenzieMohr et al., 1999).  Jacobs et al. (1984)  show success in promoting recycling behaviours with doortodoor brochures but other  studies (Pardini et al., 1983/4; Spaccarelli, Zolik and Jason, 1989/90) do not replicate this  success and cannot establish longterm behaviour change with information flyers.  While  procedural knowledge is important for recycling (Oskamp et al., 1991), explaining how to  perform a behaviour is simply not enough.  The decision around recycling, as with many  sustainable behaviours, is complex as the activity requires significant effort: waste must be  sorted, prepared, stored, and set out at the appropriate place and time (Boldero, 1995).  Combining Different Types of Interventions  Stern (1999) finds that information and incentives interact and can create a synergistic  effect on behaviour.  Offering prizes in combination with a informative flyer increases 

18

  newspaper recycling more than giving the flyer with a bin, but after the prize was removed,  recycling levels returned to the baseline (Luyben et al., 1979).  Stern (1999) suggests  certain interventions have diminishing returns, for example, once a monetary incentive is  large enough to demonstrate clear benefit, increasing the dollar value is less effective than  spending those extra dollars on an information component.     Expanding on a Nielsen and Ellington (1983) study that shows that block leaders  increase and sustain recycling behaviour (possibly through promotion of community  norms) Hopper et al. (1991) test the effect of a variety of interventions on participation in a  community recycling program, including prompting and providing information through  block leaders.  They find that block leaders have the greatest positive impact on recycling  behaviour, that prompts are effective but less so than block leaders, and that informational  flyers are the least effective behavioural intervention.    Providing individuals with behavioural feedback, a type of knowledge that can also  be classified as a control factor, has achieved energy and water consumption savings of 10 15% (Schultz et al., 1995); however, Seligman and Becker (1981) suggest two criteria for  feedback to be successful: people must be able to identify effect of own behaviour and  people must actually want to change.  Feedback can also be considered a type of  knowledge.    Many researchers also mention that interventions will not be effective until any  barriers to change are removed (McKenzieMohr et al., 1999).  While manipulating  contextual factors such as legislation or extrinsic rewards will influence sustainable  behaviours, the cost associated with this intervention, and poor level of continuation after  the incentive is extinguished, discount them as viable options.  Promoting social norms is a  viable option, and has seen some success, but the conflicting data on the influence of social  norms raises concerns.  While providing certain types of knowledge, such as feedback on  individual usage, can influence behaviour for individuals with a desire to change,  procedurallybased information alone does not influence behaviour.   

19

  2.3  The KnowledgeAction Gap  People do not recycle as often as they could (Schultz et al., 1995).  Though an individual  holds the values, skills, and ability required to perform a proenvironmental behaviour,  performance is not a forgone conclusion as "people do not always perform in a manner  consistent with their beliefs, values, attitudes, or intentions" (Kuhl and Beckmann, 1985,  117) and this discrepancy has become known as the KAG.  Why is it that individuals who  hold the knowledge and values associated with sustainability often do not behave  accordingly?  While methodological issues can exaggerate the discrepancy, inherent  cognitive biases appear to be the root cause of the gap.  The recent development of CLT  corroborates the cognitive mechanisms underpinning the KAG and offers insight into  possible ways that behaviour change campaigns can bridge the KAG (Appendix 8).  Methodological Inconsistencies Contribute to the KAG  Poor data collection methods can exacerbate the size of the difference between stated  intention and reported behaviour (Barr et al., 2001); time lags between the measurements  of attitude and behaviour, and antecedent variables that are measured generally while  dependent variables are measured specifically both contribute to differences between  stated intention and reported behaviour (Kollmus et al, 2002).  Respondent bias also  contributes to the KAG when investigating social dilemmas because participants will often  bias their subjective responses towards prosocial norms (Terry et al., 1999), which is  especially a problem when using subjective measurements of behaviour.    Yet even when accounting for methodological inconsistencies, the KAG continues to  be identified in research on social dilemmas.  In one of the first experiments that identified  the KAG within an environmental context, Maloney and Ward (1973) note that their  subjects scored substantially higher on reported affect for, and verbal commitment  towards, environmental behaviours than subjects scored on the objective performance of  those behaviours.  Participants' scores on a knowledge of ecology subscale did not  correlate to environmental affect, verbal commitment towards behaviour, or actual  behavioural performance (Maloney et al., 1973).  Similar results are found throughout the  literature on sustainable behaviours; undergraduates' stated commitment to recycling  compared to objective observations of the students' recycling behaviour, shows that the 

20

  students' stated value scores are two times greater than the true rate of their behaviour  (Chung et al., 2007).  Cognitive Limitations as the Root Cause of the KAG  The ability of general environmental beliefs (i.e. understanding the impact of human  behaviour on the planet) to positively influence behaviour is limited by both cognitive and  affective components (Kollmuss et al., 2002).  The root cause of the KAG is likely inherent  cognitive limitations (Kollmuss et al., 2002).  The role of cognitive heuristics, and the  associated biases that stem from these mental shortcuts, is wellestablished.  These  limitations are based on temporal discrepancy, data quantification, normative influences,  and oversimplification of environmental information (Kollmus et al., 2002).    Temporal discrepancy describes the nonimmediacy of global sustainability  problems.  The time lag between consumption behaviours and the environmental  consequences of that behaviour  and the generally glacial pace of environmental  destruction  make the consequences of behaviour hard to grasp on a humanlife timeline  and scale (Kollmuss et al., 2002).  Data quantification highlights how environmental  challenges are often communicated using quantified data and graphs that help to illustrate  evidence, but simultaneously remove emotional involvement with this information  (Preuss, 1991).  Normative influences encompass the socialpsychological maxim known as  the diffusion of responsibility effect: an individual's responsibility and desire to cooperate  in favour of the collective interest decreases as group size increases (Kollmuss et al., 2002).   Consequently environmental destruction, which is the result of collective action, mitigates  the responsibility felt by individuals.  An additional normative influence is the  susceptibility of most individuals to behave in the fashion of the dominant culture which, in  the developed world, is the continued promotion of profligate consumption.   Oversimplification acknowledges that simplifying complex environmental systems, and  abstract ecological chain reactions, for layperson understanding results in an  underestimation of issue severity, reducing the sense of urgency felt by that layperson  (Kollmuss et al., 2002).  These cognitive limitations in turn compromise emotional  engagement, which further reduces involvement.  Furthermore, when information about  environmental destruction, and education around ways to reduce this destruction, are 

21

  interpreted as contradicting quality of life and material desires, psychological defense  mechanisms such as denial and apathy occur naturally as a result of cognitive dissonance  and also prevent action (Harland et al., 1999).    Internal cognitive dissonance, created when behaviours are associated with both  positive instrumental attitudes and negative experiential attitudes (or vice versa), can also   prevent performance of behaviour (Ajzen, 1992).  This is the case with many health  behaviours, such as going to the dentist, where negative experiential attitudes associated  with the behaviour (pain and discomfort experienced while in the dentist's chair), conflict  with the positive instrumental attitudes (preventative oral hygiene and sparkling white  teeth).  A similar dissonance may often exist for environmental behaviours.  Moral Decisions Exhibit the KAG  "Altruism is characterized by widespread approval but often limited participation" (Hopper  et al., 1991, 196).  Social dilemmas are sometimes also called moral dilemmas.  When  describing moral behaviour, Schwartz (1970) suggests that while most individuals will  publicly endorse a given moral norm, not everyone will act in accordance with their  endorsement.  These descriptions of moral behaviour implicate a KAG.  Schwartz notes two  defense strategies employed, including denial of consequences and denial of personal  responsibility.  Summary of the Literature Pertaining to the KAG  CLT theory corroborates cognitive limitations as the underlying cause of the KAG and  offers some potential avenues by which to overcome the KAG.  Particularly this thesis is  interested in testing if certain types of beliefs, such as efficacy beliefs, are less susceptible  to the KAG?  To further understand and test the influence of various beliefs on curbside  recycling participation, a robust framework modeling the antecedents of behaviour must  be established.    2.4 Cognitive Psychology Models that Explain Behavioural Decisions  "More research is required in the development of marketing and communication  campaigns underpinned by psychological models" (Tonglet et al., 2004, 196).  Heeding  their advice and seeing that the root cause of the KAG appears to lay in cognitive 

22

  processing, this section examines cognitive psychology behavioural theories.  Investigating  how various models accommodate the various antecedents of behaviour offers insight into  how beliefs about the global, indirect benefits of behaviour may exert influence.    Looking Specifically at Curbside Recycling Schemes  This section reviews studies that specifically examine curbside recycling behaviour  through application of socialpsychological models.  "The most popular model in attitude  research on recycling has been the TRA" (Davies et al., 2002, 53) and includes recycling  studies by Boldero (1995), Cheung et al. (1999), Davies et al. (2002), Taylor and Todd  (1995), and Terry et al. (1999).  Schwartz's (1977) altruism model has also been used in a  variety of recycling studies (Hopper et al., 1991; Oskamp et al., 1991; Vining et al., 1992;  Guagnano et al., 1995; Lee et al., 1995).  Shrum, Lowrey and McCarty (1994) note that  many recycling studies only examine a few factors, and aside from those that use the TPB  or Schwartz's (1977) altruism models, many recycling studies use "single applications of  general or ad hoc models" making integration across studies is difficult (Thogersen, 1994,  151).    Behavioural models were generally developed in an ad hoc manner until Icek Ajzen  and Martin Fishbein set out to establish a super ordinate model: one that could be tested  empirically across all human behaviour and which would allow for comparison among  different behaviours (Fishbein et al., 2010).  While their TRA (and subsequent TPB and  RAA model revisions) are the most widely employed models, and employed in this thesis,  others including Schwartz's (1977) altruism model, a modified version of Rosenstocks'  (1974) health belief model (Lindsay and Strathman, 1997), and a number of other sub theories contribute additional variables and inform a robust understanding.  The Evolution of the Reasoned Action Approach  Before Ajzen and Fishbein paired up to develop a generally applicable model of behaviour,  Fishbein had already developed a model of attitude formation he called the Expectancy  Value Model (EVM): "attitude was assumed to be determined by beliefs about the likely  outcomes of performing the behaviour ...weighted by the evaluation of these outcomes"  (Fishbein et al., 2010, 18).  Citing Dulany's (1961) theory of propositional control as  inspiration, Fishbein (1967) published a model of behaviour stipulating that behavioral 

23

  intention (BI) is the direct antecedent of behaviour (B), and that BI is comprised of both  attitudes (constructed using the EVM) and social norms (SN).  Ajzen and Fishbein then  partnered and published a behavioural model that uses the EVM method to calculate both  attitudes (behavioural beliefs x likely outcomes) and social norms (SN) (referent beliefs x  motivation to comply).  This model was published as the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA)  (Figure 2) (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980).  In a solo 1985 publication Ajzen adds the perceived  behavioural control (PBC) construct into the model (which is again constructed based on  the EVM using control beliefs x power of control factors) to account for behaviours not  completely under volitional control (Figure 3) (Ajzen, 1985).  PBC distinguishes the TPB  from the TRA because it accounts for selfefficacy expectancies (Kraft et al., 2005).                  Figure 2. The Theory of Reasoned Action (adapted from Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980)    In 2010, the partners reunited to publish a further revision to the model, renaming it the  Reasoned Action Approach (RAA) (Fishbein et al., 2010), and allowing for the  incorporation of additional variables moderating intention or behaviour so long as they  significantly and independently contribute to predicting behaviour and incorporating the  attitude variable as having two separate facets: an affective (experiential) aspect and a  cognitive (instrumental) aspect (Figure 4).    Social Norms    DM Attitude    Behavioural  Intention 

Behaviour

24

                          Figure 3. The Theory of Planned Behaviour (adapted from Ajzen, 1985)      The TRA, and subsequent variations, are considered multiattribute, deliberate  processing models: they assume that people are rational in that they "make systematic use  of the information available to them " (Kollmuss et al., 2002, 244) and evaluate available  information in making behavioural decisions (Connor et al., 1998).  These models are based  on the knowledge of consequences and East (1993) highlights that TPB is applied to choice  behaviour, where an individual can give reasons for their choice.  Subjective expected  utility logic, "the assumption that action is motivated by desire to maximize private utility"  (Thogersen, 1996, 536) is an underlying assumption of the TPB models (Ajzen et al., 1992;  Boldero, 1995; East; 1993; Ajzen, 1991).  Essentially it presumes that individuals perform a  cost/benefit analysis when forming a behavioural intention, and implies that an  individual's attitude can be made more positive by increasing personal benefit while  holding all other things equal.    Perceived  Behavioural  Control Social Norms  DM Attitude    Behavioural  Intention 

Behaviour

25

    DM Instrumental Attitude   DM Attitude     DM Experiential Attitude     Subjective Norms   Descriptive Norms Perceived  Behavioural  Control          Figure 4. The Reasoned Action Approach (adapted from Fishbein et al., 2010)      The TPB models have been successfully applied to predict such diverse behaviours  as leisure choice (Ajzen et al., 1992), driving violations (Parker, Manstead, Stradling, and  Reason, 1992), investment decisions (East, 1993), dishonest actions (Beck and Ajzen,  1991), addictions (Godin, Valois, Lepage, and Desharnais, 1992), blood donation (Giles and  Cairns, 1995), collective action (Kelly and Breinlinger, 1995), and green consumerism  (Sparks and Shepherd, 1992; Sparks, Shepherd, and Frewer, 1995).  RAA Constructs, the EVM, and Associated Equations  One of the reasons why the TPB models are so popular is that the model can be written in  terms of equations that allow for ease of variable manipulation.  Behaviour is modeled by            B  wiBI + wiPBC          (1)  where B is behavioural performance defined in terms of target, action, context, and time  elements (which are held constant across all constructs) (Ajzen, 1991); BI is a summation  Social Norms        Behavioural  Intention  Behaviour  

26

  of the various influence factors attributable to attitudes, social norms, and perceived  behavioral control, individual's total level of motivation to perform the behaviour in  question (Ajzen, 1991); PBC is the individual's perception of control over performance of  the behaviour (Ajzen, 1991); and wi is a weight factor (Staats, 2003).  Behavioural intention  is modeled by               BI  wiA + wiSN + wiPBC          (2)  where A is the individual's favourable or unfavourable evaluation of performing the  behaviour in question (Ajzen, 1991) and SN is the individual's evaluation of how important  others expect him/her to behave.    "An attitude's essential characteristic is its bipolar evaluative dimension" (Fishbein  et al., 2010, 76) operationalized using the EVM: a multiplicative sum of a respondent's  strength of belief that an object (or behaviour) holds specific attributes, and the  respondent's positive or negative evaluation of those attributes.              A = biei 
       

(3) 

where bi is the individual's strength of belief that the object in question holds attribute i  and ei  is the individual's positive or negative evaluation of attribute i.  Subjective Norm  (SN) is defined as the individual's perception of social pressure to perform or not perform  the behaviour in question (Ajzen, 1991) and can be deconstructed into two subcategories:  Social Injunctive Norm is an individual's perceived social pressure from important others,  while Descriptive Norm is the individual's perception of behavioral performance by  important others.  A multiplicative sum of two components, the SN captures the extent to  which a person believes a specific referent group wants him/her to perform the behaviour  in question and the degree of influence exerted by that referent.              SN = nbjmcj 
         

(4) 

where nbj is the normative belief of referent j and mcj is the individual's motivation to  comply with referent j.    Perceived Behavioural Control (PBC) is a measure of the individual's perception of  his/her ability to perform the behaviour in question (Ajzen, 1991).  PBC should capture the  respondent's confidence that s/he is capable of performing the behaviour under  investigation, in terms of both personal capability and external controllability factors 

27

  (Ajzen, 2006).  PBC is calculated using a multiplicative sum of two subcomponents: control  beliefs, (subjective measurements of the likelihood that a specific factor will facilitate or  impede performance of the behaviour in question) (Staats, 2003) and perceived power (the  subjective degree of help or hindrance that each specific control belief presents).  PBC  displays an influence on behaviour independent of its influence on BI to the extent that PBC  reflects objective control over an individual's ability to perform behaviour.  Ajzen (2002)  suggests that PBC is a higher order construct of selfefficacy (also known as perceived  difficulty) and controllability (also known as perceived control).                  PBC = cbkpfk 
       

(5) 

where cbk is control belief k and pfk is  perceived facilitation of belief k.   The EVM was refined by Fishbein (1963) but had already been established in the  literature by Peak (1955), Carlson (1956), and Rosenberg (1956).  Feather (1959) states  that it is the most popular model of attitude formation.  Fishbein et al. (2010, 221) define  belief as "a subjective probability."  During belief formation, an individual assigns attributes  (which hold inherent evaluations) to the object in question.  Attribute evaluations are  summed to produce an overall evaluative response know as the attitude.  Each attribute  evaluation contributes to the overall attitude in direct proportion to the strength of belief  in the subjective probability that the object in question holds that attribute (a more  strongly held belief, or a more polarized attribute evaluation contributes more to the  overall attitude than a weakly held belief, or a neutrallyevaluated attribute).  From then  on, the object will automatically elicit the evaluative meaning, "much the same as the  denotative meaning of a concept is automatically available to an individual familiar with  that concept" (Fishbein et al., 2010, 224).  Attribute importance ratings are not necessary  as the multiplicative EVM already takes this into account because "outcomes judged to be  most important are typically evaluated more positively or negatively" (Fishbein et al., 2010  111) than less important outcomes which are typically evaluated more neutrally.   Individuals hold more information around beliefs that are important to them, and  consequently hold these beliefs more strongly (Fishbein et al., 2010).  An important note  about the TPB's EVM formation of the various constructs is that only the salient beliefs  pertaining to the behaviour in question are to be factored in.  Conceptualized as 

28

  accessibility in memory, this is rooted in the finding that an individual can only hold seven  to nine separate cognitions at any time (Miller, 1956).     Metaanalysis by Armitage et al. (2001) report mean correlations of 0.53 and 0.50  respectively between the EVM index and direct measures of attitude.  While the EVM is not  necessarily how the brain itself functions, the EVM does serve as a reliable model of  cognition that can be experimentally tested (Fishbein et al., 2010).  The EVM accounts for  irrational beliefs in that subjective probability does not necessarily reflect objective  probability; attitudes are rationally formed but can be based on irrational beliefs.  Criticisms of the TPB Models  A widely applied model such as TPB variants draws wide variety of criticism.  Terry et al.  (1999) believe that there is an explicit role for selfidentity in the TPB.  They define self identity as the "extent to which performing the behaviour is an important component of a  person's selfconcept" (Terry et al., 1999, 240).  Individuals desire to perform behaviours  that validate the roles that construct one's self, and an individual is more likely to perform  a behaviour if it is in accord with the norms of an important group membership, especially  if an individual bases his/her selfdefinition around that membership (Terry et al., 1999).   The personal norm is considered different than the social norm because violating or  upholding it is tied to one's self concept (Hopper et al., 1991).    Another criticism of the TPB is that past experience should be a variable that  directly influences behavioural intention.  In rebuttle, Ajzen (1991) argues that past  behaviour contributes indirectly to behavioural intention through attitudes, SN and PBC  but not as a separate variable.  Fredericks and Dossett (1983) find a direct affect of past  behaviour on the behavioural intention variable that is not mediated by PBC.  Boldero  (1995), Cheung et al. (1999) and Terry et al. (1994) all indicate that past experience is an  important variable to measure and include when predicting behaviour.    Some authors also critique the TPB for not specifically accounting for the role of  habit in behavioural performance (Thorgersen, 1994).  They argue that habitual  behaviours do not fall within the TPB framework because the individual components are  not considered each time (Staats, 2003).  The Role of Morality in TPB Models 

29

  Another criticism of the TPB is that moral norms are not effectively represented (Manstead  et al., 1995) and that the TPB "approach is rooted in EVM of attitude decision making... such  an approach does not easily embrace beliefs that are not directly related to the immediate  costs and benefits of behaviour" (Manstead et al., 1995, 85).  Ajzen believes it is  synonymous with intention but Harland et al. (1999) conclude that adding a personal norm  construct to the TPB improved explanation of intention significantly, further supporting  their stance that the standard TPB concepts do not capture the total influence of moral  values.  Stern (1999) further suggests that the rational utility calculus inherent to  subjective expected utility models including the TPB bypasses the intrinsic value of  adhering to moral principles; "actions in accordance with attitudes and values lead to an  intrinsic utility" (Best and Kneip, 2011, 919) and opposed to cognitive dissonance.    Davies et al. (2002, 9899) conclude that "internalized moral rules guide behaviour  and, in its current formulation, the TPB does not take account of this" and also suggest that  "not allowing for the choice between alternatives is a serious omission of the TRA/TPB".  Schwartz's (1977) Altruism Model  While the RAA attempts to serve as a superordinate model applicable to all behaviours,  other models are designed to explain specific behaviours.  Shalom H. Schwartz's (1977)  altruism model (also known as the norm activation model) is one such example well  established in the socialpsychology literature.  This theory rests on the assumption that  individuals internalize behavioural social norms as personal moral norms anchored in  oneself (Harland et al., 1999) (Figure 5).  The model proposes that when considering  performance of a moral behaviour, an individual must be aware of negative consequences  for others (AC) stemming from performance of that behaviour, and ascribe responsibility  (AR) to him/herself for preventing those consequences, for one's personal norm to be  activated.  An activated person norm results in an internal sense of obligation that  motivates performance of the moral behaviour.  Therefore, for moral behaviour to occur,  an individual must be aware of other's wellbeing depending on the act and feel that s/he is  responsible for the act and its consequences. Schwartz (1977) suggests that the ability of  personal norms to predict behaviour is better when the individual is more aware of  behavioural consequences. 

30

    Social Norm                Figure 5. Model of Altruistic Behaviour (adapted from Schwartz, 1977)    Social norm is defined as expectations of moral behaviour generally accepted by the  predominant culture or social group (Harland et al., 1999).  Personal norm is defined as  evaluations of the behaviour in terms of moral worth to self (Harland et al., 1999).   Awareness of consequences is defined as an understanding of the impact of behavioural  performance on others.  Ascription of responsibility is defined as the assignment of  responsibility to oneself for the prevention of said consequences.  "The consequences that  matter in activating personal norms are adverse consequences to whatever the individual  values" (Stern, 2000, 414).  Behaviour is the moral behaviour in question (Schwartz, 1977).    Schwartz (1970, 128) outlines three distinct attributes that characterize moral  decisions: The behaviour leads to "interpersonal actions having consequences for the  welfare of others", is "classified as moral only when the decision maker is considered a  responsible agent" (i.e. the behaviour is chosen willingly), and the resulting behaviour and  agent "are evaluated as good and bad according to the consequences the actions have [on]  other's welfare."  While household recycling participation may not necessarily fall into this  categorization, a variety of studies have applied the altruism to curbside recycling  behaviours (Guagnano et al., 1995; Hopper et al., 1991; Lee et al. 1995; Vining and Ebreo,  1992; Oskamp et al., 1991).  Awareness   of  Consequences  for Others   Ascription   of  Responsibility  to Self  Personal Norm  Behaviour

31

    A subjective measure of the personal norm has been shown to significantly correlate 

with a variety of prosocial behaviours, including cannabis use (Connor and McMillian,  1999), dishonest actions (Beck et al., 1991), driving violations (Parker et al., 1992), and  shoplifting (Tonglet, 2000; 2002).  In terms of environmental behaviours, Schwartz's  (1977) model has been applied to yard burning (Van Liere et al., 1978), energy use (Black  et al., 1985) and support for environmental protection (Stern, Aronson, Darley, Hill, Hirst,  Kempton, and Wilbanks, 1986).    Schwartz' (1977) model states that internalization of norms requires adopting  values and learning when to apply them, therefore internalization depends on both social  norms and behavioural frequency.  Although "following one's moral impulses has value to  most people, it usually does not have infinite value" (Thogersen, 1996, 550)    One criticism of the altruism model suggested by Stern (2000) is that both it and the  TPB model over emphasize the role of attitudinal variables in environmental behaviours.   Another criticism is that it does not allow for the influence of any contextual factors (Davies  et al., 2002).  The Modified Health Belief Model  A third cognitivepsychology model of interest due to the similarity among behaviours  performed to maintain good health and environmental behaviours, is the modified health  belief model based on Rosenstock's (1974) health belief model that purposes for health  behaviours to be performed, both a high likelihood of achieving a positive outcome, and a  low likelihood of personal barriers will lead to a high probability of action.  Both health  behaviours and environmental behaviour are under an individual's volitional control to  moderate the severity of negative outcomes, which are often far removed in time.  Both  types of behaviour also often require inconvenient or unpleasant immediate consequences  and health behaviours are subject to the KAG (Lindsay et al., 1997).  The difficulty in  applying this model for environmental behaviours is that, unlike health behaviours, which  result in direct personal benefit or consequence, sustainability behaviours are social  dilemmas that have only indirect, global consequences (Lindsay et al., 1997).  As this thesis  examines the affect of beliefs around the global, indirect consequences of recycling, the 

32

  MHB model is inappropriate, especially as there are not enough published examples in  support the use of this model.   ABC Theory and the LowCost Hypothesis  The ABC theory offers insight into the variable influence of attitudes on behaviour: it  suggests an interaction effect between attitudes and the associated cost of behavioural  performance (Best et al., 2011) and in doing so differs from rational choice theories.  It  proposes that attitudebased theories should have external boundary parameters for their  applicability (Guagnano et al., 1995) and essentially predicts that the more difficult, the  more timeconsuming, and the more expensive a prosocial behaviour, the less  performance will depend on attitudinal factors (Stern, 1999).  The influence of behavioural  attitudes is strongest when contextual factors are neutral and weakest when contextual  factors either strongly facilitate or impede behavioural performance.  The critical element  is the relative difference between the attitudinal and contextual values; a strongly negative  attitudinal or contextual value will result in a rare behaviour whereas strongly positive  attitudinal or contextual value will result in a high incident of behaviour.      The low cost hypothesis, put forward by Diekmann and Preisendorfer (2003)  specifically applies the ABC Theory to environmental behaviours.  It suggests that attitudes  influence sustainability behaviour in lowcost situations but that when the associated costs  of performance are high these behavioural decisions are based only on tangible utility  factors.  Derksen et al. (1993) find support for this assertion but Schultz et al. (1996) do  not.  Comparison of the Role of Beliefs in the Altruism and RAA Models  While the RAA is a more robust model and the altruism model is specifically applicable to  moral behaviour, both models could be used to explain and predict participation in a  curbside recycling scheme.  While both account for the importance of social norms, the RAA  incorporates contextual factors using the PCB, and explicitly includes the influence of  attitudes whereas the altruism model emphasizes the importance of a sense of  responsibility and knowledge of consequences in activating a personal norm that motivates  behaviour.  While the TPB models employ rational utility calculus, the altruism model  accounts for the intrinsic utility of adherence to one's altruistic values. 

33

    As the purpose of this thesis is to investigate the beliefs that influence participation 

in a curbside recycling scheme, these models need to be examined in terms of how  behavioural beliefs are included.  In the TPB models, behavioural beliefs are accounted for  in the attitude construct, through Ajzen is quite clear that only salient beliefs are involved.   Salient beliefs have to be both likely to occur and evaluated as positive or negative to exert  influence on overall attitude formation.    In applying the altruism model, beliefs about social norms, behavioural  consequences, and personal responsibility all factor into the decision on behavioural  performance.  In as much, the altruism model is more restrictive in terms of prescribing  which types of beliefs will influence behaviour.  Furthermore, the TPB models offer clear  guidelines on how to test the influences of specific behavioural beliefs, whereas the  altruism model does not offer the luxury of quantitative analysis around the influence of  particular beliefs.  The altruism model has strict requirements for the morality of  behaviour and therefore the applicability of the model, while the TPB models appear to be  better suited to behaviour that may not necessarily fit into the rigid requirements of the  altruism model.    Interestingly, the RAA and altruism models are actually at odds in terms of  predicting how to change behaviour: to increase moral behaviour among nonperformers,  the TPB models would suggest that increasing benefits derived from behaviour would  increase behavioural performance, while the altruism model would suggest that increasing  personal benefits would actually serve to reduce behaviour.  Model Formation and Hypothesis  Using the RAA as a basis for modeling participation in Toronto's curbside recycling scheme,  this thesis examines which specific behavioural beliefs influence curbside recycling  participation, by way of investigating the role played by psychological, capability and  control factors.  In addition to the usual RAA constructs, there is sufficient evidence to  justify adding a moral norm construct and a past behaviour construct into the behavioural  model of curbside recycling behaviour (Figure 7).    Regression of the behavioural model inherently illustrates how well the included  variables account for variance in curbside recycling behaviour.  This behavioural model is 

34

  regressed using three different formulations of the attitude variable: DMA, BBA3, and  BBAALL.  The Direct Measure of Attitude (DMA) is the standard method advocated by  Fishbein et al. (2010) for measuring latent attitude towards behaviour.  BBA3 and BBAALL  are constructs that also measure latent attitude towards behaviour but do so by employing  the EVM methodology (Equation 3).  By testing the behavioural model with three different  types of attitude measurement (rather than just a direct measure of attitude), a more  nuanced understanding of the influence of attitudes on behaviour can be acquired.   Furthermore, use of the EVM methodology allows for a latent attitude measurement that is  directly tied to participants' behavioural beliefs; BBA3 is constructed with EVM  methodology using salient behavioural beliefs, whereas BBAALL is constructed with EVM  methodology using all associated behavioural beliefs.  Therefore, use of the EVM  methodology to create attitude constructs that are regressed within the behavioural model  introduces an opportunity to examine the influence of particular behavioural beliefs on the  dependent variable of behaviour.  It is this opportunity to examine the influence of  particular behavioural beliefs on curbside recycling behaviour that will form the basis of  discovery for the remainder of this thesis.  As such, the central hypothesis of this work is  that salient beliefs around the efficacy of recycling will positively correlate with curbside  recycling behaviour.                     

35

    DM Attitude       Behavioural  Intention  Behaviour

DM Instrumental Attitude     DM Experiential Attitude

Social Norms 

Morality                  Past Behaviour  Perceived  Behavioural  Control 

 

Figure 7. Proposed Model of Participation in Toronto's Blue Bin Curbside Recycling Service  (author's own)   

36

  CHAPTER THREE: MATERIALS AND METHOD  This thesis investigates if a significant relationship exists between participation rates in the  Toronto blue box program recycling scheme and participants' salient beliefs about the  consequences of that behaviour.  To gather empirical data for this investigation, a model of  participation in a curbside recycling program is created based on the literature, followed  by developing a survey to test the model, using Fishbein et al. (2010) as a primary guide.   Individuals from 304 singlefamily Toronto households completed an online survey about  their household's curbside recycling practices, their beliefs about the advantages,  disadvantages and moderating variables around curbside recycling participation, and  associated sociodemographic characteristics.  A variety of statistical analyses are applied  to test the power of the model and to investigate beliefs which beliefs are significant in  predicting high levels of recycling participation.    3.1  The Test Area: City of Toronto  Situated on Lake Ontario, Toronto is a cosmopolitan city home to 2.5 million residents  (Statistics Canada, 2007).  As Canada's largest city and Ontario's capital, Toronto is a key  financial hub, home to the Toronto Stock Exchange.  The city's GDP was $144 billion in  2011, contributing 11% of Canada's total GDP (City of Toronto  2012).    Waste Management Services in Toronto  Toronto Solid Waste Management Services operates seven waste transfer stations, one  material recycling facility, one organic waste facility and manages 161 closed landfill sites  (City of Toronto, 2011).  Since January 1, 2011, most city garbage is sent to the cityowned  Green Land Landfill Site, located 200km from downtown Toronto in London, Ontario.     Toronto's household curbside collection service operates using three containers:  blue bins collect all comingled recyclable material, green bins collect organic waste, and  black bins collect the remaining nontoxic household waste.  Electronic waste is also  collected curbside.  Organic bins are emptied weekly, while household blue and black bins  alternate biweekly (City of Toronto, 2011).  Residents are permitted to put out extra  recyclable materials in clear bags, but additional garbage bags require bag tags, which must  be purchased.  The provincial Waste Diversion Act states that Ontario curbside recycling 

37

  programs must accept all paper, steel FBC (food and beverage containers), glass FBC,  aluminum FBC, polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastic FBC, and two additional items  from a list of twelve.  Toronto's blue bin program additionally accepts cardboard,  boxboard, aluminum pans and trays, aerosol cans, metal paint cans with lids removed,  foam polystyrene, and plastic retail shopping bags.    Once a year residents receive a collection calendar that includes the curbside  collection schedule for their neighbourhood, explicit instructions on which materials are  accepted in each bin, and additional procedural information about how to properly  participate.  A section of the city's website is also dedicated to providing residents with  waste management information including participation instructions in a variety of  languages, a search tool allowing residents to find disposal locations for materials  specifically not accepted in the curbside program, collection schedule information, and an  online form for requesting a new bin, an extra bin, or a bin size change.  The website also  warns against material contamination in the recycling and organic streams, noting that  bioplastics are not accepted because endmarket buyers will not purchase aggregated  plastics contaminated with bioplastic (City of Toronto, 2011).    In 2007 Toronto City Council adopted a 70% waste diversion goal for the city; yet in  2011 only 49% of residential waste (393,438 MT) was diverted from landfill.  Singlefamily  homes have a diversion rate of 64% (189,539 MT) compared to 20% for multiresidential  buildings (City of Toronto, 2011).  According to city officials, if the 70% diversion target is  met, the Green Land Landfill will accept waste until 2033; however, at current diversion  rates capacity will be exhausted in 2025 (Ontario Waste Managment Association, 2006).   City Council has made a few progressive steps towards waste minimization, including  banning the sale of water bottles by City facilities, and implementing a bylaw mandating a  five cent tax for plastic bags distributed by city retailers.  Most recently City Council moved  to ban the distribution of plastic bags altogether.    3.2  Questionnaire Design and Administration  Following instructions laid out by Fishbein et al. (2010), the first step in applying the RAA  model to investigate the antecedents of a behaviour is to define the behaviour under 

38

  investigation in terms of its target, action, context, and time elements.  As such, the  behaviour in question was defined as: placing curbside; all household recyclable waste; for  municipal recycling collection; over the next six months.  Selection of the Research Population  The second step requires specifying the research population (Fishbein et al., 2010) which  was defined as Torontonians, aged 18 and older, who do not live in a multiresidential unit  (i.e., condominium or apartment).  The waste diversion practices in multiunit residences  vary greatly from household pickup practices (City of Toronto, 2011).    Selection of the Method of Survey Administration  Lightspeed Research, an online data collection firm, was contracted to administer the  questionnaire to 300 participants for this project at a cost of $3,470 for data collection  Mailin surveys were deemed impractical and telephone surveys too expensive, so an  online survey company by the name of Lightspeed Research was contracted to administer  the questionnaire for this investigation.  Participants who fit the population criteria were  drawn from a pool of willing research participants maintained by Lightspeed Research.  To  ensure applicability, potential participants were first presented with three questions  ensuring that: they did not live in a multistory building; their household had access to a  curbside blue bin recycling program; and they were of 18 years of age or older.  Any  respondents that did not fit these criteria were thanked for their time and told that they  were not eligible to participate.  Eligible respondents were told that participation was  voluntary, that their input was important and strictly confidential, that answers would not  be linked to them, and then asked if they would consent to participate in the study which  would take approximately 15 minutes (Appendix 7).  If the respondent selected yes, than  they were then directed to the official consent agreement (Appendix 7).  In exchange for  completing the survey, participants were awarded reward points from Lightspeed  Research that participants can put towards redemption gifts.  Formulation of Model Constructs  The third step recommended by Fishbein et al. (2010) requires formulating "three to six  items formulated to assess each of the major constructs...attitude, perceived norm,  perceived behavioural control, and intention.  Sevenpoint bipolar adjective scales are 

39

  typically employed" with "items formulated to be exactly compatible with the behavioural  criterion and to be selfdirected" (Fishbein et al., 2010, 449450).  The standard of  compatibility was closely observed throughout construct creation.  Fishbein et al. (2010)  give direction on the types of instructions to include for participants in the questionnaire.  Creation of the Direct Attitude Measure  A direct measure of attitude (DMA) was assessed using sevenpoint semantic differential  adjective scales as recommended by Fishbein et al. (2010).  Both instrumental and  experiential adjectives were included as well as the generic good/bad and positive and  negative endpoints were calculated (Table 2).    The questions typically used in a pilot to elicit salient beliefs were instead inserted  at the beginning of the questionnaire, before any of the questions that assessed theoretical  constructs, so as to replicate a pilot study format by preventing respondent prompting.   Respondents were asked to consider the possibility of "Over the next six months, placing all  your household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection?"    Creation of the Subjective Norm Construct  Based on the literature, questions were formulated to encompass both the injunctive norm  and subjective perceived norm to give an overall direct measure of subjective norm.  Creation of the Perceived Behavioural Control Construct  A direct measure of PBC was created based on Fishbein et al. (2010).  Creation of the Past Behaviour Construct  Two questions assessing past behaviour construct were developed based on Fishbein et al.,  (2010).  Creation of the Perceived Difficulty Construct  A measure of perceived difficulty was also included as recommended by (Chen & Tung,  2010).  Creation of the Morality Construct  An index of morality was also calculated based on five questions from the literature.  Creation of the EVMBased Attitude Construct  To investigate the specific behavioural beliefs that influence curbside recycling  participation, in hopes of improving social marketing of sustainable behaviours, a second 

40

  type of attitude measurementbased on the Fishbein et al., (2010) EVM model of attitude  formationwas also included in the questionnaire design.   Creation of a Test of the Respondent's Salient Behavioural Beliefs  When behavioural beliefs are presented as outcomes to behaviour and selected in terms of  importance, salient beliefs are rated as most important (Fishbein et al., 2010).  To test  which behavioural beliefs were salient for each respondent, a list of behavioural outcomes  (17 advantages and 18 disadvantages) were provided and the participant was required to  select the three most significant advantages, (and disadvantages respectively) for a total of  six salient behavioural beliefs.  Individuals can generally hold five to eight items  comfortably in their mind at one time (Miller, 1956) and three advantages and three  disadvantages was deemed appropriate for testing.  The item was worded  "From your  perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages (disadvantages) if you  were to, over the next six months, place all household recyclable waste at the curbside for  municipal recycling collection?"  The list of behavioural advantages (disadvantages) were  presented to the respondent and three had to be selected by the respondent before s/he  could move to the next screen in the survey.  The beliefs were randomized.  Selection of Behavioural Beliefs Included  While Fishbein et al. (2010) suggest the next step is to administer a pilot questionnaire  eliciting salient behavioural beliefs from the test population this was deemed infeasible due  to resource restraints, so instead a wide range of recycling behavioural beliefs were mined  from the literature with an additional few based on the researcher's intuition (Table 1),  similar to the methodology employed by Chen et al. (2010).  Participants selected their  three most important.  Formulation of Behavioural Belief Strength and Outcome Evaluation Items  "With respect to each salient behavioural outcome, items are formulated to assess the  strength of the behavioural belief and the evaluation of the outcome" (Fishbein et al., 2010,  453).  All items were formulated based on examples in Fishbein et al. (2010).    The item formulated to test behavioural belief strength was the preface "If, over the  next six months, I place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal  recycling collection, I will..." followed by the question "i) save my city money:" and the 

41

  Likerttype sevenpoint rating scale Unlikely/Likely.  The behavioural beliefs were split into  two groups and placed as questions 12 and 16.     Table 1. Behavioural beliefs selected to test   Advantages  Reduce my property taxes   Save my city money  Save my household energy  Save electrical energy generally  Create a better environment for future  generations  Help to protect the environment  Help to preserve natural resources  Reduce the amount of waste that goes  into landfill  Create jobs  Stimulate the economy  Contribute to manufacturing goods  made from recycled materials  Experience satisfaction  Help to solve a global problem  Feel good  Feel hopeful  Feel reduced guilt  Feel like I'm doing my part        Disadvantages  Help eliminate jobs  Need extra space in my house  Waste my money  Waste city money  Have to put in extra time  Have to put in extra physical effort  Have to put in extra mental effort  Create unpleasant odours  Create a mess  Attract pests  Increase waste collection costs  Does not give me money for waste  materials  Make me feel overwhelmed  Make me feel tired  Make me feel confused  Make me feel stressed  Does not make a difference  Neighbours see what I put out 

The item formulated to test outcome evaluation was: "My saving my city money is:" 

followed by the Likerttype sevenpoint rating scale "Bad/Good".  All the outcome  evaluations tested were split into two groupings and placed as questions 20 and 23.  Each  grouping was prefaced with the "Instructions: Please rate the following general outcomes  from your perspective."  Development of the Dependent Variable of Behaviour  As a twostage questionnaire was deemed infeasible, the dependent variable of behaviour  was measure historically.  Ajzen (2006) suggests using more than one measure of  behaviour to create an index. Based on Ferrara and Missios (2005) and Terry et al. (1999), 

42

  an index of behaviour was calculated summing the results from ten questions assessing the  participant's household subjective diversion rate of ten recyclable materials.  An eleventh  question assessed the amount of nonrecyclable material that was put into the blue bin was  reverse scored. A variety of items were included because "when the behavioural criterion is  broadly representative of the behavioural domain, rather than a single arbitrarily selected  action strong relations between attitudes and behaviour are seen" (Fishbein et al., 2010,  258).  These questions were categorical, respondents chose from 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%  and 100%.   The instructions for this section specified that the respondent was to consider  his/her household's use of the curbside recycling collection service (i.e. the blue bin  program), over the last six months "[type of recyclable waste} answer with what percentage  of that total x waste actually ends up in the recycling blue bin rather than the amount that  ends up in the trash bin" and not to include items returned to a retailer for recycling.   Participants were also reminded to consider all waste in their household, not just that  produced in the kitchen area.  The instructions clarified that the participant was to  (Appendix 7).  Creation of the Behavioural Intention Construct  A direct measure of intention was created by summing the results of three questions based  on examples from Fishbein et al. (2010) (Table 2).  Demographic Variables Measured  Sociodemographic questions testing age, education level, house ownership, income level,  number of individuals in the household, relationship status were modeled on the waste  diversion survey administered by Ferrara and Missios (2005).    The first survey questions assessed the participant's knowledge of his/her curbside  collection service (Table 2).  These questions served to warm up the respondent and  establish recycling as blue bin and trash as black bin, in addition to providing information  about the respondent's knowledge of waste management procedures and assessing their  responsibility level.  Introduction and Conclusion Text for Survey  Participants were then informed that they had reached the end of the study, were thanked  for their participation, provided with contact information should they wish further 

43

  information, and a note that their participation "will help in the effort to take better care of  the environment." (Appendix 7)  Ethics Approval and Participant Consent  The Ryerson Research Ethics Board initially approved the use of human subjects in this  research on December 15, 2010 and renewed approval on December 18, 2011 after an  updated methodology was submitted.  Risks in administering the survey were considered  negligible because there were no special populations surveyed.  Risk management was  employed in terms of protecting respondent data, which are stored on the investigator's  password encrypted computer during use, then transferred onto a USB drive for secure  keeping once the project was complete.    Participant consent was acquired through an online process.  The REBapproved  consent form (Appendix 7) was presented on the screen and the time and date were  automatically provided so the participant just had to type in their name and check a box  stating that they had read the form.  The participant clicked through to the next page as  acceptance of the research consent terms.     The official questionnaire then began with a brief introduction highlighting the  general purpose of the study as investigating reasoning for participation in the city's blue  bin program, that there were not right or wrong answers, and that respondents' honest  opinions would generate valuable feedback.  This was an attempt to mitigate social  desirability bias.  Participants were then instructed to read all questions carefully and  answer them from a personal perspective.  MicroPiloting for Clarity  A few colleagues who fit the research population criteria completed the online survey in  advance of distribution to make note of any confusion or grammatical errors they  experienced.  A number of small edits to the survey to remedy areas of confusion that were  noted by these individuals.  Data Collection  The survey was released to the Lightspeed Database on March 1, 2012 and the contracted  300 surveys were completed and the survey closed with 304 respondents on March 5,  2012.   

44

  Table 2. List of Questionnaire Items and Sources  Construct  Indicators    Behaviour  Approximately what percentage or your total household...    BEH1  recyclable glass bottles and container    BEH2  recyclable plastic bottles and other plastic container    BEH3  recyclable metal can and container    BEH4  recyclable paper, newspaper and magazine    BEH5  recyclable cardboard    BEH6  recyclable styrofoam/polystyrene    BEH7  recyclable plastic bag    BEH8  recyclable milk/juice carton (also known as boxboard)    BEH9  recyclable rigid aluminium trays/pans    BEH10  recyclable aerosol cans    BEH11  waste that's not supposed to go into the blue bin (ie.    trash)  ...do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection?  Behavioural  Over the next six months...  BI1  I intend to place all my household recyclable waste    Intention  BI2  I plan to place    BI3  I will try to place    BI4  I will place    BI5  I want to place      ...all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling  collection.  Subjective  With regards to placing all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for  Norm  municipal recycling collection, over the next 6 months:  SN1  most people who are important to me think that I    should do so.  SN2  most people whose opinions I value would approve of    me doing so.    With regards to others placing all their household    recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling  collection, over the next 6 months:  SN3  most people I respect and admire will do so.    SN4  most people who are like me will do so.    Moral    Over the next six months...    MOR1  it would be wrong of me not to place all my household  Norms  recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling  collection.  MOR2  I would feel guilty if I did not place all my household  recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling  collection.  MOR3  not placing all my household recyclable waste at the  curbside for municipal recycling collection goes against  my principles. 

45

  ...I do not need to place all my household recyclable  waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection  as enough is being down by others to clean up the  environment.  MOR5  ...everybody should share the responsibility of placing  all household recyclable waste at the curbside for  municipal recycling collection.  Perceived  Over the next six months...  ...I am confident that I am able to place...    Behavioural  PBC1  PBC2  ...if I really wanted to, I could place...    Control  PBC3  ...it is under my control to place...        ...all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for    municipal recycling collection.  Perceived  PD1  Over the next six months, placing all my household    Difficulty  recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling  collection is...  Easy/Difficult  PD2  Over the next six month, placing all my household    recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling  collection is... Complicated/Simple  PD3  If I want to, I can easily place all my household recyclable    waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection  over the next six months...  Disagree/Agree  Direct  My placing all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal  Measure of  recycling collection over the next six months is...  Attitude  DMA1  Enjoyable/Not enjoyable    DMA2  Harmful/Helpful  DMA3  Pleasant/Unpleasant  DMA4  Wise/Foolish  DMA5  Immoral/Moral  DMA6  Good/Bad    DMA7  Messy/Clean    DMA8  Quick/Timeconsuming    DMA9  Smelly/Odourless    DMA10  Complicated/Straightforward    DMA11  Useful/Useless    DMA12  Sensible/Sensless    DMA13  Confusing/Clear    DMA14  Efficient/Inefficient    DMA15  Rewarding/Not rewarding    DMA16  Responsible/Not responsible  DMA17  Hygienic/Not hygienic    DMA18  Difficult/Easy    MOR4 

46

  Past  Behaviour    PB1  How often have I placed all my household recyclable  waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection  over the last six months?  Rarely/Often  Over the last six month I have placed all my household  recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling  collection.  False/True  If, over the next six months, I place all my household  recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling  collection, I will...  .save my city money  ...save electrical energy generally  ...help create a better environment for future  generations  ...preserve natural resources  ...reduce the amount of waste that goes into landfill  ...help stimulate the economy  ...contribute to manufacturing goods made from  recycled materials  ...help protect the environment.  ...help create jobs.  ...help solve a global problem.  ...help reduce my property taxes  ...experience satisfaction  ...feel good  ...feel hopeful  ...feel reduced guilt  ...feel like I'm doing my part  ...waste my money  ...waste city money  ...create unpleasant odours  ...create a mess  ...attract pests  ...increase waste collection costs  ...not make a difference  ...need extra space in my house  ...have to put in extra time  ...have to put in extra physical effort  ...have to put in extra mental effort  ...help to eliminate jobs  ...not be given money for waste materials  ...feel overwhelmed  ...feel tired   

PB2 

 

Behavioural  Belief  Strength                                                               

  BB1  BB2  BB3  BB4  BB5  BB6  BB7  BB8  BB9  BB10  BB11  BB12  BB13  BB14  BB15  BB16  BB17  BB18  BB19  BB20  BB21  BB22  BB23  BB24  BB25  BB26  BB27  BB28  BB29  BB30  BB31 

 

                         

47

      Outcomes      ...feel confused  ...feel stressed  My saving my city money is...  My saving electrical energy generally is...  My helping create a better environment for future  generations is...    OUT4  My preserving natural resources is...    OUT5  My reducing the amount of waste that goes into landfill  is...    OUT6  My helping stimulate the economy is...    OUT7  My contributing to manufacturing goods made from  recycled materials is...    OUT8  My helping protect the environment is...    OUT9  My wasting my money is...    OUT10  My having to put in extra mental effort is...    OUT11  My helping eliminate jobs is...    OUT12  My not being given money for waste materials is...    OUT13  My feeling overwhelmed is...    OUT14  My feeling tired is...    OUT15  My feeling confused is...    OUT16  My feeling stressed is...    OUT17  My wasting city money...    OUT18  My creating unpleasant odours is...    OUT19  My creating a mess is...    OUT20  My attracting pests is...    OUT21  My increasing waste collection costs...    OUT22  My not making a difference is...    OUT23  My needing extra space in my house...    OUT24  My having to put in extra time is...    OUT25  My having to put in extra physical energy is...    OUT26  My helping create jobs is...    OUT27  My helping solve a global problem is...    OUT28  My helping reduce my property taxes is...    OUT29  My experiencing satisfaction is...    OUT30  My feeling good is...    OUT31  My feeling helpful is...    OUT32  My feeling reduced guilt is...    OUT33  My feeling like I'm doing my part is...    OUT34  Bad/Good  Note: (R) denotes items requiring reverse scoring.    BB32  BB33  OUT1  OUT2  OUT3                                                                         

48

  3.3 ­ Data Analysis Methodology  A variety of methodology was employed to analysis the data collected, including the  creation of certain constructs, model regressions, and an examination of beliefbased  results.  Formulation of the EVM Attitude Constructs and Advantage/Disadvantage Scores  Two beliefbased attitude (BBA) constructs were created using the EVM formula.  BBA3  employed the EVM calculation method and was based on only the respondent's salient  beliefs using the behavioural belief strength and outcomes measures of the top three  advantages and top three disadvantages the respondent selected as most important in  question eight.  This method adheres to the requirement that only salient beliefs be used in  the TPB models (Fishbein et al., 2010).  A second attitude construct, BBAALL, was  calculated, summing the EVM calculation of the behavioural belief strength and outcomes  measures of all the advantages and disadvantages tested.  This was done to test if belief  salience is important in modeling curbside recycling behaviour.    An advantage score (AS) was calculated by summing the EVM calculations for each  advantage and, in the same fashion, a disadvantage score (DS) was calculated using the  EVM calculation for all disadvantage beliefs.    Feel hopeful", "save my household energy" were two advantages, and "neighbours  see what I put out" was one disadvantage, that could not be used in the beliefbased  attitude calculation because of human error in survey design: respondents were not asked  to rate their behavioural belief strengths or evaluate outcomes for these beliefs.  These  beliefs, however, were still included in the examination of variance in belief selection  between high recyclers and low recyclers.  Analysis of Model Constructs  Using SPSS version 17, direct measure constructs were tested for reliability and validity by  ensuring constructs had a high degree of internal consistency and questions measuring  different constructs exhibit discriminant validity "Each set of items designed to directly  assess a given construct should have a high degree of internal consistency (e.g. a high alpha  coefficient), and the measures of the different constructs should exhibit discriminant  validity... confirmatory factory analysis is one means of evaluating the quality of the scales 

49

  to be included." (Fishbein et al., 2010, 452).  A Cronbach's coefficient alpha of 0.75 or  higher is considered sufficient (Fishbein et al., 2010).  Construct Descriptive Statistics  Descriptive statistics including the mean, range, standard deviation, median, and  Cronbach's alpha were calculated for all constructs.  Likert's (1932) method of summated  ratings adjective scales require an internal consistency criterion to prove that all adjective  pairings measure the same underlying continuum.   Model Regressions  The theoretical constructs of the RAA are latent variables not directly observable and  therefore are inferred by performing multiple regression analysis from observable  responses (Ajzen, 2006).  Regression analysis was performed to test the ability of  constructs at each level of the model to predict constructs at subsequent levels, using both  the continuous variables of behaviour and behavioural intention as dependent variables.   Model regressions were tested using the three different attitude constructions (DMA,  BBA3, and BBAALL) to assess which is most effective at predicting behavioural intention  and to ensure the beliefbased attitude constructs correlated with the direct measure  method of attitude measurement.  Examination of Differences in Salient Belief Selection Between Good Recyclers and  Bad Recyclers  To investigate the difference in salient beliefs between individuals who demonstrate a high  level of curbside recycling participation and those who demonstrate a low level of curbside  recycling participation chisquare tests were performed comparing the top 10% (labeled  Good Recyclers) against the bottom 10% of respondents (labeled Bad Recyclers) using the  dependent variable behaviour construct.  Evaluation of the DMA for Instrumental and Experiential Components  Direct measures of instrumental attitudes (DMIA) and experiential attitudes (DMEA) were  established based on the confirmatory factor analysis of DMA to test if one of other was  more predictive of recycling behaviour. 

50

  Analysis of Introductory Questions and Demographic Data  Participants that indicated that they were not at all responsible for household waste  management were removed from the data pool, because degree of involvement moderates  the correlation between attitudes and behaviour (Ajzen et al., 1992).    Household income was not included in further analysis or the model regressions  because 13.2% of respondents selected "not sure" as their answer; these forty respondents  would have had to have been removed from the sample altogether ­ resulting in reduced  statistical power ­ if household income were to be included.    The sociodemographic variable of the number of individuals in the household was  also removed from analysis and model regressions due to human error in survey design  (i.e. the question measuring this variable was not clearly worded in the survey).  Comparison of the Respondent Population to the General Toronto Population  Chisquare tests were performed between the Toronto census data and respondent  population on the sociodemographics of gender, marital status, and home ownership.   Income, age, and education level could not be statistically analyzed because the survey  questions gave the answer options in the form of ranges.  Comparison of High Advantage/Disadvantage Scores to Advantage/Disadvantage  Scores  Independent sample Ttests were conducted measuring the difference between  participants with advantage scores (AS) above the median against participants with an AS  below the median.  The same was done for participant Disadvantage Scores (DS).  This test  was carried out to examine if participants with overall stronger beliefbased attitudes  towards curbside recycling participation display greater levels of behaviour than  participants with less strong beliefbased attitudes towards curbside recycling  participation (and vice versa). 

51

  CHAPTER FOUR: DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS  In this chapter results from the analysis of various data are presented and discussed, based  on the methodology outlined in chapter 3.  Included is an analysis of the respondent  population's demographic characteristics, an examination of descriptive statistics for all  constructs, regression of the behavioural model and significance tests on the influence of  behavioural beliefs and attitudes on participation in a curbside recycling scheme.    4.1 ­ Analysis of Data from Introductory and Demographic Questions  Analysis of Participant Responses to Introductory Questions  As laid out in Table 3, a majority of the sample (61.2%) correctly stated that household  trash is collected biweekly in the city of Toronto; however, only 38.2% correctly stated  that household recycling is collected biweekly.  A majority (59.5%) of respondents thought  recycling is collected weekly, which is not the case.  While this finding could indicate a lack  of procedural knowledge, it is also possible that the wording of the question was unclear or  that certain respondents live above commercial storefronts, in which case their household  recycling would be collected on a weekly basis.    Table 3. Data collected pertaining to curbside waste management knowledge  Variable  Curbside recycling collection  frequency  Values  Twice a week  Once a week  Every two weeks Not sure  Recycling is not  collected  Twice a week  Once a week  Every two weeks Not sure  Yes, completely  Yes, in part  No  Mandatory  Voluntary  Not Sure  Percentage of Respondents  (n = 304)  2.00  59.50  38.20  0.30  0.00  2.00  32.60  61.20  4.30  36.50  59.90  3.60  50.70  25.70  23.70 

Curbside trash collection frequency 

Responsible for dealing with trash  and recycling in household  Curbside recycling mandatory or  voluntary? 

52

    In terms of household waste management responsibility, 59.9% of respondents 

indicated they are partially responsible for dealing with household trash and recycling,  while 36.5% indicated that they are totally responsible for coordinating household waste  management.  The results from the 11 respondents who indicated that s/he was not at all  responsible for household waste management were removed from further data analysis,  bringing the group size down to 293 from 304.    While 50.7% correctly identify household recycling in Toronto to be mandatory,  25.7% believe it to be voluntary and another 23.7% of respondents are not sure.  Analysis of Demographic Data  The test population's demographics were compared against Toronto 2006 Census data,  although it must be noted that this Census data ­ unlike the experimental population   includes adults living in multiresidential buildings.    The Toronto 2006 Census data shows a gender balance of 48% males and 52%  females (Statistics Canada, 2007).  The population sample is significantly skewed towards  females, who comprise 60.6% of respondents ² (1) = 8.69, p = .003.    Toronto 2006 Census data recorded that 46.8% of residents were married, 36.7%  were single, and 16.5% were separated, divorced or widowed (Statistics Canada, 2007).   The test population included a significantly higher than average rate of married persons  (58.0%), compared to the census data ² (2) = 14.84, p = .001.      The test population owned their homes at a significantly higher rate than the  The city of Toronto median household income is $52,833 and median age is 38.4.   general Toronto population ² (1) = 127.68, p = .000.    The median income in the test population was higher than the Toronto average, with the  median landing in the $80,000  $100,000 range.  The median test population age is located  in the 4857 age band, demonstrating a population skewed towards older individuals.      4.2 Analysis of Model Construct Data  Assessment of the Reliability and Validity of Model Constructs  Calculations of Cronbach's alpha and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was applied to  assess the reliability and validity of the model's constructs (Table 2).  The Cronbach's alpha 

53

  for all constructs was greater than the 0.75 threshold except the perceived difficulty  construct, which was not included in further analysis.     Table 4. Results from demographic questions  Variable  Values  Percentage of  Respondents  (n = 304)  39.54  60.60  58.09  13.30  28.70  11.20  18.10  24.70  31.60  14.50  15.10  17.80  13.80  18.80  23.40  11.20  12.60  87.40  14.80  15.10  18.10  12.80  26.00  13.20  Significance of  Difference  from Census  Data  .003  .001 

Gender 

Male  Female  Marital Status  Married  Divorced, Widowed or  Separated  Unmarried  Education  High school graduate or less  Some university/college  College diploma  University degree  Postgraduate degree  Age  18 ­ 27  28 ­ 37  38  47  48 ­ 57  58 ­ 67  68+  Household Ownership  Rent  Own  Household Income  < $39, 000  $40,000 ­ $59,000  $60,000 ­ $79, 000  $80, 000 ­ $100,000  > $100,000  Not Sure   

n/a 

n/a 

.000  n/a 

CFA conducted on DMA without restriction on loading number (Table 6) clearly confirms  two underlying factors; factor one ( = 0.87) is comprised of experiential adjective scales  such as enjoyable/not enjoyable, messy/clean, and complicated/straightforward, while  factor two ( = 0.86) is comprised of instrumental adjective scales (e.g. harmful/helpful, 

54

  wise/foolish) (Table 7).  The DMIA mean (5.87) is slightly higher than the DMEA mean  (5.14).    Table 5. Descriptive statistics for model constructs   
Behaviour
N Valid Missing

Behaviour Intention

Past Behaviour

Subjective norms

Perceived behavioral control

Moral Norm

DMA

Belief based attitude based on salient beliefs (BBA3)

Belief based attitude based on all beliefs (BBAALL)

Advantage Score

Disadvantage Score

Mean Median Std. Deviation Range Minimum Maximum

293 0 4.9 5.1 1.1 4.5 1.6 6.0

293 0 6.4 7.0 .94 5.2 1.8 7.0

293 0 6.4 7.0 .99 6.0 1.0 7.0

293 0 6.1 6.3 1.1 6.0 1.0 7.0

293 0 6.3 7.0 1.1 6.0 1.0 7.0

293 0 6.0 6.4 1.1 5.4 1.6 7.0

293 0 5.5 5.5 1.0 5.2 1.8 7.0

251 42 157 158 32. 253 41 294

293 0 682 679 159 1345 223 1568

280 13 118 126 29 135 12 147

262 31 40 40 23 144 3 147

  Table 6. Factor analysis of the Direct Measure of Attitude (DMA)  Semantic Adjective Scale  Factor 1  Factor 2  (Experiential)  (Instrumental)  Enjoyable/ Not enjoyable  0.46    Harmful/ Helpful    0.78  Pleasant/ Unpleasant    0.48  Wise/ Foolish    0.86  Immoral/ Moral    0.72  Good/ Bad    0.86  Messy/ Clean  0.70    Quick/ Timeconsuming  0.67    Smelly/ Odourless  0.60    Complicated/  0.77    Straightforward  Useful/ Useless    0.65  Sensible/ Senseless    0.60  Confusing/ Clear  0.76    Efficient/ Inefficient  0.60    Rewarding/ Not  0.46    Rewarding  Responsible/ Not    0.47  Responsible  Hygienic/ Not Hygienic  0.59    Difficult/Easy  0.79    TOTAL  0.87  0.86   

55

  Examination of EVM Calculation for Advantage and Disadvantage Beliefs  The EVM (equation 3) was utilized to create a score for each belief tested; the respondent's  rating of belief strength (an integer value between one and seven), and outcome evaluation  for each belief (an integer value between one and seven), were multiplied to form the  respondent's EVM score for that particular belief.    Table 7. Descriptive statistics for EVM calculation scores of each advantage belief 
Create a better environment for future generations Feel that I'm doing my part 293 0 37 12 4 49 Stimulate the economy Contribute to manufacturing goods from recycled material Reduce my property taxes Reduce the amount of waste that goes to landfill Help to preserve natural resources Experience satisfaction Save electrical energy generally Help to solve a global problem Save my city money Help to protect the environment

 

N

Valid Missing

293 0 21 13 1 49

293 0 27 13 1 49

293 0 28 13 1 49

293 0 39 11 4 49

293 0 38 11 4 49

293 0 37 11 2 49

293 0 41 11 4 49

293 0 29 12 3 49

293 0 29 12 4 49

293 0 35 12 4 49

293 0 34 12 1 49

293 0 34 13 1 49

293 0 36 12 3 49

293 0 29 13 1 49

Mean Std. Deviation Minimum Maximum

  Salient Belief Selection Results  As a measure of belief salience, participants selected the three advantages (and  disadvantages respectively) from the full list that s/he deemed most (personally)  significant if s/he were to place all household recyclable waste at the curbside for  municipal recycling collection.  Advantage beliefs (Table 9) and disadvantage beliefs (Table  10) were selected as most (personally) significant at a variety of rates, the highest  incidence being 73% for "reduce the amount of waste that goes to landfill" and the lowest  being "make me feel overwhelmed" at 1%.   

56

Feel reduced guilt

Create jobs

Feel good

  Table 8. Descriptive statistics for EVM calculation scores of each disadvantage belief 
Increase waste collection costs Does not give me money for waste materials Have to put in extra time Need extra space in my house Requires extra mental effort Have to put in extra physical effort Feel overwhelmed Create unpleasant odours Waste city money Waste my money Does not make a difference 293 0 9.4 8.7 1 49

Create a mess

Feel confused 293 0 9.1 8.9 1 49

  p

N Valid

293

293

293

293

293

293

293

293

293

293

293

293

293

293

Missing Mean

0 13

0 7.4

0 8.8

0 15

0 15

0 13

0 10

0 8.7

0 10

0 12

0 17

0 9.6

0 9.4

0 8.7

Std. Deviation

9.5

8.3

7.5

9.5

9.2

9.4

7.8

8.0

8.7

8.4

11

9.5

8.7

8.6

Minimum Maximum

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

1 49

  Table 9. Percentage of respondents who selected each advantage belief as one of his/her  top three most (personally) significant  Percentage of respondents (n = 293)  Advantage Belief  Who Selected Belief as Top Three Most  (Personally) Significant Advantage  Reduce the amount of waste that goes into  .73  landfill   Help to protect the environment   .51  Create a better environment for future   .38  Feel like I'm doing my part  .27  Contribute to manufacturing goods made  .27  from recycled materials   Help to preserve natural resources  .22  Help to solve a global problem   .18  Create jobs  .10  Save my city money  .09  Reduce my property taxes  .04  Experience satisfaction   .04  Stimulate the economy   .04  Feel good  .04 

57

Feel stressed

Attract pests

j

Feel tired

  Feel reduced guilt  Feel hopeful   Save electrical energy generally  Save my household energy    his/her top three most (personally) significant  Disadvantage Belief  Attract pests  Increase waste collection costs   Create unpleasant odours   Have to put in extra time   Does not make a difference  Need extra space in my house   Create a mess   Have to put in extra physical effort   Does not give me money for waste  materials   Neighbours see what I put out  Have to put in extra mental effort   Make me feel confused   Waste city money  Help eliminate jobs  Make me feel tired   Waste my money  Make me feel stressed   Make me feel overwhelmed    Percentage of respondents (n = 293)  Who Selected Belief as Top Three Most  (Personally) Significant Disadvantage  .43  .38  .33  .24  .24  .22  .22  .18  .17  .11  .11  .11  .10  .06  .05  .03  .03  .01  .03  .02  .02  .02 

Table 10. Percentage of respondents who selected each disadvantage belief as one of 

Correlation Coefficients for Model Constructs  Person product correlation coefficients were computed for all model constructs.  All  correlations were significant at p>0.01. 

58

  Table 11. Model construct correlation coefficients 
  Behaviour Intention Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N Past Behaviour Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N Subjective norms Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N Perceived behavioral control Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N Moral Norm Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N Behaviour Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N DM Attitude Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N DM Instrumental Attitude Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N DM Experiential Attitude Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N Belief based attitude based on top 3 Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N Belief based attitude based on all Pearson Correlation Sig. (2-tailed) N Behaviour Intention Past Behaviour Subjective norms Perceived behavioral control Moral Norm Behaviour DMA DMIA DMEA BBA3 BBAALL

1   293 .52
**

.52

**

.56

**

.54

**

.57

**

.25

**

.44

**

.45

**

.34

**

.44

**

.45

**

.00 293 1   293 .36
**

.00 293 .36
**

.00 293 .40
**

.00 293 .45
**

.00 293 .27
**

.00 293 .43
**

.00 293 .40
**

.00 293 .38
**

.00 251 .35
**

.00 293 .42
**

.00 293 .56
**

.00 293 1   293 .45
**

.00 293 .41
**

.00 293 .56
**

.00 293 .22
**

.00 293 .41
**

.00 293 .42
**

.00 293 .32
**

.00 251 .49
**

.00 293 .50
**

.00 293 .54
**

.00 293 .40
**

.00 293 1   293 .48
**

.00 293 .48
**

.00 293 .25
**

.00 293 .35
**

.00 293 .33
**

.00 293 .30
**

.00 251 .38
**

.00 293 .44
**

.00 293 .57
**

.00 293 .45
**

.00 293 .56
**

.00 293 1   293 .22
**

.00 293 .21
**

.00 293 .61
**

.00 293 .60
**

.00 293 .51
**

.00 251 .54
**

.00 293 .60
**

.00 293 .25
**

.00 293 .27
**

.00 293 .22
**

.00 293 .25
**

.00 293 1   293 .16
**

.00 293 .16
**

.00 293 .13
*

.00 293 .14
*

.00 251 .17
**

.00 293 .21
**

.00 293 .44
**

.00 293 .43
**

.00 293 .41
**

.00 293 .35
**

.00 293 .61
**

.008 293 1   293 .86
**

.022 293 .86
**

.015 293 .92
**

.009 251 .60
**

.00 293 .67
**

.00 293 .45
**

.00 293 .40
**

.00 293 .42
**

.00 293 .33
**

.00 293 .60
**

.008 293 .13
*

.00 293 1   293 .59
**

.00 293 .59
**

.00 251 .58
**

.00 293 .61
**

.00 293 .34
**

.00 293 .38
**

.00 293 .32
**

.00 293 .30
**

.00 293 .51
**

.022 293 .14
*

.00 293 .92
**

.00 293 1   293 .50
**

.00 251 .50
**

.00 293 .59
**

.00 293 .44
**

.00 293 .35
**

.00 293 .49
**

.00 293 .38
**

.00 293 .54
**

.015 293 .17
**

.00 293 .60
**

.00 293 .58
**

.00 251 1   251 .88
**

.00 293 .88
**

.00 251 .45
**

.00 251 .41
**

.00 251 .50
**

.00 251 .44
**

.00 251 .60
**

.009 251 .21
**

.00 251 .70
**

.00 251 .61
**

.00 251 .59
**

.00 251 1   293

.00 293

.00 293

.00 293

.00 293

.00 293

.00 293

.00 293

.00 293

.00 293

.00 251

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). *. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

59

  4.3  A Test of the Power of the Experimental Models to Explain the Behaviour  Construct  In Experimental Models One and Two the following structural equation was tested in an  attempt to explain variance in the behaviour construct (B):    Behaviour =  + 1*gender + 2*home ownership + 3*age2837 + 4*age3847   + 5*age4857 + 6*age5867 + 7*age68plus + 8*some post secondary education   + 9*college education + 10*university education + 11*post graduate education        (6)   + 12*married + 13*unmarried + 14*past behaviour construct   + 15*subjective norm construct + 16*perceived behavioural control construct   + 17*moral norm construct + 18*attitude construct   + 19*behavioural intention construct 

 

Regression coding for the demographic variables for all models was such that for gender,  male respondents were coded as zero and female respondents were coded as one.  For  home ownership, respondents who own his/her home were coded as zero and non homeowners were coded as one.  For the remaining demographic variables of age,  education and marital status, nonapplicability of the category was coded as zero whereas  category applicability of the category was coded as one.  The reference group for the age  variables was 1827 year olds, for education it was no postsecondary education, and for  marital status it was single.  Expectations for  Values in Experimental Models  As discussed in chapter two, the review of literature on recycling behaviour creates the  expectation that certain variable  values will be observed.    In terms of demographic variables, there are substantiated findings around the  influence of age, education and owning one's home.  While there is no reliable finding on  the influence of gender, home ownership is expected to have a positive  value as per  findings by Oskamp et al. (1999).  Vining et al. (1990), Scott (1999), and Knussen et al.  (2004) all display an increase in recycling behaviour that correlates with age, so the age  variable s are expected to be both positive and increase in value with each increasing age  bracket.  Increased education levels also have shown a reliable positive effect on recycling  behaviour (Van Liere et al., 1980; Davies et al., 2002), so it is assumed that the education 

60

  variable s will be positive and increase with each subsequent education bracket.  In terms  of marital status, it is expected that the married  will be positive and the unmarried  will  be negative, based on the finding by Davies et al. (2002) that married individuals recycle  more than nonmarried individuals in tandem with the Gamba et al. (1994) studying  showing that the number of individuals in a household correlated positively to recycling  participation.    In terms of model constructs, there are also expectations for the  values derived  from the literature.  The  value for PBC is expected to be positive and be one of the largest  construct s because the findings around the importance of control and capability aspects  for recycling behaviour is well established (Derksen and Gartrell, 1993; Guagnano et al.,  1995).  The expected  for Past Behaviour is also expected to be positive and relatively larg  value based on findings indicating that past recycling behaviour is a strong predictor of  future recycling behaviour (Cheung et al., 1999).  The  for SN is expected to be slightly  positive, as those who hold a higher level of subjective norm around recycling behaviour  often show higher behaviour levels (Barr et al., 2001; Davies et al, 2002).  The  for MN is  also expected to be positive, as those who hold a higher subjective level of moral norm can  be expected to display greater levels of recycling behaviour (Valle et al., 2005; Hopper and  Neilsen, 1991).  While three different attitude constructs (DMA, BBA3, BBAALL) will be  tested in the experimental model, the general expectation for these constructs is such that  their  values will be positive but small.  This is based on findings that positive attitude  towards recycling positively affects recycling behaviour but that this relationship is often  confounded by other variables (Stern, 1999; Barr et al., 2001).  Finally, it is also expected  that the  value for the behavioural intention construct will be positive, based on Fishbein  et al. (2010)'s RAA model and findings by Armitage and Conner (2001).  Regression of Experimental Model One (Test of DMA)    Experimental Model One applies equation six using the Direct Measure of Attitude  (DMA) as the attitude construct.  The first regression of Experimental Model One saw  factors as the lowest level entered, including Past Behaviour, Age, Education Level, Gender  and Marital Status.  These five variables accounted for 14.5% of variance R2 = 0.15, F (14,  277) = 3.35, p< .001 with Past Behaviour as a significant predictor of Behaviour b = 0.25, t 

61

  (277) = 4.22, p<.001 and the age bracket 5867 was also significant b = 0.20, t (277) = 2.01,  p<.05 while university education approached significance b = 0.17, t (277) = 1.88, p=.062.      The second regression of Experimental Model One saw the remaining independent  constructs of SN, PB, MN, and DMA added.  The addition of these four variables increased  explained variance to 17% but this increase only approached significance R2 = 0.17, F (4,  273) = 2.03, p= .091.  Past Behaviour was significant at this second step as well, at b = 0.17,  t (273) = 2.47, p<.05.     The third regression of Experimental Model One added BI to predict the dependent  variable Behaviour.  This third step did not change variance explained R2 = 0.17, F (1, 272)  = 0.23, p= .63.  Past Behaviour was still significant b = 0.16, t (272) = 2.22, p<.05.      Table 12. Experimental Model One regression summary 
Model R a 0.38 b 0.41 c 0.41 R Square 0.15 0.17 0.17 Adjusted R Square 0.10 0.12 0.11 Std. Error of the Estimate 1.0 1.0 1.0 R Square Change 0.15 0.03 0.001 Change Statistics F Change 3.4 2.0 0.23 df1 14 4 1 df2 277 273 272 Sig. F Change 0.00 0.091 0.63

1 2 3

a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Subjective norms, DM Attitude, Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm c. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Subjective norms, DM Attitude, Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm, Behaviour Intention  

Table 13. Experimental Model One ANOVA results 
Sum of Squares df Mean Square F Sig. a Regression 50.18 14 3.58 3.35 0.000 Residual 296.18 277 1.07     Total 346.36 291       b 2 Regression 58.72 18 3.26 3.10 0.000 Residual 287.63 273 1.05     Total 346.36 291       c 3 Regression 58.97 19 3.10 2.94 0.000 Residual 287.39 272 1.06     Total 346.36 291       a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Subjective norms, DM Attitude, Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm Model 1

62

 
c. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Subjective norms, DM Attitude, Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm, Behaviour Intention d. Dependent Variable: Behaviour  

Table 14. Experimental Model One regression coefficients 
 

Model Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error 2.672 .540 .148 .131 -.187 .189 .043 .317 .084 .498 .455 -.055 .010 .403 -.045 .058 .063 .271 1.909 .167 -.168 .040 .313 .131 .482 .395 -.064 .001 .398 -.004 .038 .040 .184 .097 .121 -.006 .005 1.839 .164 -.162 .047 .327 .131 .491 .405 -.054 .009 .398 .002 .042 .237 .264 .248 .248 .292 .235 .220 .215 .247 .198 .241 .064 .613 .130 .187 .236 .263 .247 .249 .293 .236 .220 .214 .251 .197 .240 .074 .073 .070 .081 .078 .631 .131 .188 .236 .265 .247 .250 .294 .237 .221 .215 .252 .198

1

2

3

(Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour (Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour Subjective norms Percieved behavioral control Moral Norm DM Attitude (Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married

Standardized Coefficients Beta   .066 -.057 .015 .100 .030 .195 .134 -.019 .004 .172 -.014 .026 .026 .245   .075 -.051 .014 .099 .048 .189 .116 -.023 .000 .170 -.001 .017 .017 .166 .094 .119 -.007 .005   .073 -.049 .017 .103 .048 .192 .119 -.019 .003 .170 .001 .019

t 4.951 1.134 -.994 .181 1.200 .338 2.011 1.557 -.233 .043 1.877 -.181 .294 .262 4.220 3.116 1.282 -.897 .170 1.191 .531 1.941 1.350 -.271 .003 1.854 -.014 .191 .167 2.471 1.326 1.740 -.079 .062 2.916 1.251 -.859 .200 1.233 .531 1.967 1.379 -.227 .039 1.855 .008 .214

Sig. .000 .258 .321 .856 .231 .736 .045 .121 .816 .966 .062 .856 .769 .794 .000 .002 .201 .370 .865 .235 .596 .053 .178 .787 .997 .065 .989 .849 .868 .014 .186 .083 .937 .950 .004 .212 .391 .841 .219 .596 .050 .169 .821 .969 .065 .993 .830

63

 
q31_unmarried Past Behaviour Subjective norms Perceived behavioral control Moral Norm DM Attitude Behaviour Intention a. Dependent Variable: Behaviour .047 .173 .087 .111 -.014 .004 .046 .241 .078 .076 .072 .082 .078 .095 .020 .156 .085 .109 -.014 .004 .039 .195 2.222 1.146 1.539 -.169 .053 .481 .846 .027 .253 .125 .866 .957 .631

  The regression using Experimental Model One indicates that women display a greater level  of recycling behaviour than men and that home ownership correlated with increased  recycling behaviour, although neither finding was statistically significant.  As a whole, the  age bracket  values indicated increased levels of behaviour over the reference group: the  age 5867 bracket displayed the largest  ( = .491) and is the only age bracket that  achieved statistical significance (p = .05).  The some college/university education bracket  showed a negative , although this finding was not significant.  The other three education  brackets have positive s as was expected, but only the university education bracket was  considered significant (p = .065).  The married and unmarried brackets are both positive  but not significant.  Past Behaviour shows a significant (p = .027), positive  of .173 as was  to be expected.  SN, PBC, DMA, and BI displayed a positive  as assumed, though none were  significant.  Interestingly, against expectations the MN construct has a negative , although  this too is not at a significant level.  Regression of Experimental Model Two (Test of BBA3)  Experimental Model Two applies equation six with the attitude construct BBA3, which is  based on the EVM calculation of each respondent's top three salient advantage and  disadvantage beliefs.  The first regression of Experimental Model Two saw factors at the  lowest level entered, including Past Behaviour, Age, Education Level, Gender and Marital  Status.  These five variables accounted for 14.8% of variance R2 = 0.15, F (14, 235) = 2.91,  p< .001 with only Past Behaviour as a significant predictor of Behaviour b = 0.25, t (235) =  3.92, p<.01 and the university education was also significant b = 0.22, t (235) = 2.19, p<.05.    On the second regression of Experimental Model Two, the remaining independent  constructs of SN, PBC, MN, and BBA3 were added.  The addition of these four variables  increased explained variance to 16.9% but this increase was not significance R2 = 0.17, F (4, 

64

  231) = 1.50, p= .20.  Past Behaviour was significant at this second step as well, at b = 0.17, t  (234) = 2.02, p<.05 as was university education b = 0.20, t (234) = 2.28, p<.05.    The third regression of Experimental Model Two added BI to predict the dependent  variable Behaviour.  This third step did not significantly increase variance explained R2 =  0.17, F (1, 230) = 0.56, p= .46.  At this third model only university education is significant b  = 0.20, t (232) = 2.00, p=.046.    Table 15. Experimental Model Two regression summary 
Change Statistics Adjusted R Std. Error of R Square Sig. F R R Square Square the Estimate Change F Change df1 df2 Change a 1 0.38 0.15 0.097 1.01 .15 2.91 14 235 0.00 b 2 0.41 0.17 0.11 1.01 .022 1.50 4 231 0.20 c 3 0.41 0.17 0.10 1.01 .002 0.56 1 230 0.46 a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Belief based attitude based on top 3 (summation), Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm, Subjective norms c. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Belief based attitude based on top 3 (summation), Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm, Subjective norms, Behaviour Intention Model

  Table 16. Experimental Model Two ANOVA results 
Model 1 Regression Residual Total 2 Regression Residual Total 3 Regression Residual Total Sum of Squares 41.98 242.07 284.04 48.11 235.93 284.04 48.68 235.36 284.04 df 14 235 249 18 231 249 19 230 249 Mean Square 3.00 1.03 F 2.91 Sig. 0.00a

 
2.67 1.02

   
2.62

   
0.001b

 
2.56 1.02

   
2.50

   
0.001c

 

   

   

a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Belief based attitude based on top 3 (summation), Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm, Subjective norms c. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Belief based attitude based on top 3 (summation), Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm, Subjective norms, Behaviour Intention d. Dependent Variable: Behaviour

 

65

  Table 17. Experimental Model Two regression coefficients 
Model Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error 2.631 .571 .122 -.172 .141 .192 Standardized Coefficients Beta t 4.606 .859 -.893 Sig. .000 .391 .373

1

(Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour (Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour Subjective norms Percieved behavioral control Moral Norm Belief based attitude based on top 3 (summation) (Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus

 
.056 -.056

2

-.041 .256 .022 .463 .454 .127 .099 .500 .186 .025 .032 .274 2.148 .135 -.143

.255 .272 .258 .262 .314 .250 .232 .228 .264 .208 .255 .070 .681 .144 .193

-.014 .086 .009 .186 .130 .046 .041 .217 .059 .012 .014 .248

 
.062 -.047

-.162 .944 .086 1.769 1.445 .507 .426 2.191 .704 .119 .124 3.919 3.154 .936 -.744

.871 .346 .932 .078 .150 .612 .670 .029 .482 .905 .901 .000 .002 .350 .458

-.068 .240 .048 .425 .378 .097 .068 .462 .154 -.012 .007 .183 .049 .133 .043 -.002 2.068 .120 -.132

.256 .271 .258 .263 .315 .253 .233 .229 .272 .213 .257 .080 .084 .072 .081 .002 .690 .145 .193

-.022 .081 .019 .171 .108 .035 .028 .201 .049 -.005 .003 .165 .048 .135 .044 -.050

-.266 .885 .188 1.618 1.199 .382 .290 2.017 .568 -.055 .026 2.282 .580 1.828 .538 -.671 2.996 .828 -.685

.790 .377 .851 .107 .232 .703 .772 .045 .570 .956 .980 .023 .563 .069 .591 .503 .003 .408 .494

3

 
.055 -.043

-.062 .260 .043 .431 .397

.257 .273 .258 .263 .317

-.020 .088 .016 .174 .114

-.241 .953 .166 1.640 1.253

.810 .342 .868 .102 .212

66

 
edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour Subjective norms Perceived behavioral control Moral Norm BBA3 Behaviour Intention a. Dependent Variable: Behaviour .115 .077 .460 .156 -.007 .010 .159 .038 .119 .028 -.002 .080 .254 .233 .229 .272 .214 .258 .087 .086 .075 .084 .002 .108 .042 .031 .200 .050 -.003 .004 .144 .037 .121 .028 -.058 .069 .450 .328 2.003 .575 -.031 .040 1.835 .438 1.598 .329 -.776 .746 .653 .743 .046 .566 .975 .968 .068 .662 .111 .742 .439 .456

  Similar to Experimental Model One, Experimental Model Two indicated a positive  for  gender and negative  for home ownership, although neither were at a significant level.   Unlike Experimental Model One, the 2837 age bracket has a negative , although this  finding was not significant.  The 5867 age bracket displays the highest  of the age  brackets, and finding approached significance (p = .102).  All the education bracket s in  Experimental Model Two were positive, which was different than Experimental Model One;  the university education bracket had the biggest  value and was found to be significant (p  = .046).  Unexpectedly, the married bracket has a small negative , but the significance of  this was very weak (p = .975).  Past Behaviour had a  value of .159, which was significant  (p = .068).  PBC, with a  value of .129, approached significance (p = .111).  Similar to  Experimental Model One, the SN, MN, and BI constructs all had positive  values, but none  of these were at a significant level.  Unexpectedly, the BBA3 construct displayed a negative   value, although this finding was also not at a significant level.    4.4 ­ A Test of the Power of the Experimental Models to Explain the Behavioural  Intention Construct   In Experimental Models Three, Four, and Five the following structural equation was tested  in an attempt to explain variance in the behavioural intention construct (BI): 

67

  Behavioural Intention =  + 1*gender + 2*home ownership + 3*age2837   + 4*age3847 + 5*age4857 + 6*age5867 + 7*age68plus   + 8*some post secondary education + 9*college education   + 10*university education + 11*post graduate education + 12*married                        (7)   + 13*unmarried + 14*past behaviour construct + 15*subjective norm construct   + 16*perceived behavioural control construct + 17*moral norm construct   + 18*attitude construct 

 

Experimental Model Three applies equation seven using the BBAALL attitude construct,  which is based on the EVM calculation for all a respondent's advantage and disadvantage  beliefs, while Experimental Model Four applies equation seven using the BBA3 attitude  construct based on EVM calculation of a respondent's top three salient advantage and  disadvantage beliefs.  Experimental Model Five employs the Direct Measure of Attitude  (DMA) as the attitude construct in regressing equation seven.  Regression of Experimental Model Three (Test of BBAALL)  The first regression in Experimental Model Three saw factors at the lowest level entered,  including Past Behaviour, Age, Education Level, Gender and Marital Status.  Variance in BI  explained on this first step was 31% R2 = 0.310, F (14, 277) = 8.879, p<.001.  Past  Behaviour was the only significant variable on this step b = 0.523, t (277) = 10.026, p<.001.    The second regression of Experimental Model Three entered the remaining  variables including BBAALL.  Variance in BI explained by this second step was 53.7% R2 =  0.537, F (4, 273) = 33.499, p<.001.  Significant at the p<.001 level on this second step were  Past Behaviour b = 0.258, t (273) = 5.190, p<.001, Subjective Norm b = 0.252, t (273) =  4.658, p<.001, Perceived Behavioural Control b = 0.245, t (273) = 4.760, p<.001 and Moral  Norm b = 0.217, t (273) = 3.660, p<.001.  The age bracket of 3847 was negative and  approached significance b = 0.110, t (273) = 1.767, p=.078.      BBAALL was not significant but was negative b = 0.031, t (273) = 0.559, p=.577. 

68

  Table 18. Experimental Model Three regression summary 
Change Statistics Adjusted R Std. Error of R Square Sig. F R R Square Square the Estimate Change F Change df1 df2 Change a 1 0.56 0.31 0.28 0.79 0.31 8.88 14 277 0.00 b 2 0.73 0.54 0.51 0.65 0.23 33.50 4 273 0.00 a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Subjective norms, Percieved behavioral control, belief_based_attitude_new, Moral Norm Model

  Table 19. Experimental Model Three ANOVA summary 
Model 1 Regression Residual Total 2 Regression Residual Total Sum of Squares 78.11 174.07 252.18 135.42 116.76 252.18 df 14 277 291 18 273 291 Mean Square 5.58 0.63 F 8.88 Sig. 0.00a

 
7.52 0.43

   
17.59

   
0.00b

 

   

   

a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Subjective norms, Percieved behavioral control, BBALL, Moral Norm c. Dependent Variable: Behaviour Intention

  Regression of Experimental Model Three indicated a positive  value for gender and a  negative  value for home ownership, although neither are significant.  All the age bracket   values were negative, with the 3847 age bracket significantly so (p = .078), which showed  that the reference group of 1827 year olds displayed the highest level of recycling  intention.  All the education brackets had negative  values, which indicated that the  reference group of no postsecondary education exhibited the highest levels of BI.  Both  marital status  values were negative, a result that showed that singletons intend to recycle  more than those who are coupled, or used to be coupled, though this finding was not at a  significant level.  The PB, SN, PBC, and MN constructs were all positive and strongly  significant (p = .000), which showed that these constructs correlated closely with the  variance in BI.  The BBAALL  value was neutral, although not significant, which means that  this attitude construct did not contribute to explaining variance in BI.   

69

  Table 20. Experimental Model Three regression coefficients 
Model Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error 3.565 .414 .012 -.204 .100 .145 Standardized Coefficients Beta

1

(Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour (Constant)

 
.006 -.073

t 8.615 .117 -1.412

Sig. .000 .907 .159

2

-.125 -.267 -.088 -.077 -.041 -.278 -.200 -.026 -.295 -.063 -.080 .494 1.479 .079 -.140

.182 .203 .190 .190 .224 .180 .169 .165 .190 .152 .185 .049 .410 .083 .120

-.051 -.099 -.038 -.035 -.014 -.115 -.093 -.013 -.110 -.033 -.039 .523

 
.042 -.050

-.687 -1.318 -.464 -.406 -.182 -1.542 -1.185 -.157 -1.554 -.414 -.430 10.026 3.610 .951 -1.168

.493 .188 .643 .685 .856 .124 .237 .875 .121 .679 .667 .000 .000 .342 .244

What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour Subjective norms Perceived behavioral control Moral Norm BBAALL a. Dependent Variable: Behaviour Intention

-.168 -.296 -.005 -.197 -.227 -.226 -.171 -.024 -.134 -.109 -.159 .243 .220 .213 .182 .000

.150 .168 .157 .159 .186 .150 .140 .136 .159 .125 .153 .047 .047 .045 .050 .000

-.069 -.110 -.002 -.090 -.078 -.094 -.080 -.012 -.050 -.058 -.078 .258 .252 .245 .217 -.031

-1.119 -1.767 -.030 -1.239 -1.215 -1.504 -1.222 -.174 -.840 -.870 -1.041 5.190 4.658 4.760 3.660 -.559

.264 .078 .976 .216 .225 .134 .223 .862 .402 .385 .299 .000 .000 .000 .000 .577

  Regression of Experimental Model Four (Test of BBA3)  The first regression of Experimental Model Four saw factors at the lowest level entered,  including Past Behaviour, Age, Education Level, Gender and Marital Status.  Variance in BI 

70

  explained by this first model was 36.7% R2 = 0.367, F (14, 235) = 9.73, p<.01.  Past  Behaviour was the only significant variable on this step b = 0.57, t (235) = 10.44, p<.01.    The second regression of Experimental Model Four entered the remaining variables  including BBA3.  Variance in BI explained by this second step was 57.8% R2 = 0.58, F (4,  231) = 28.84, p<.001.  Significant at the p<.001 level on this second step were Past  Behaviour b = 0.317, t (231) = 6.14, p<.001, Subjective Norm b = 0.162, t (231) = 2.74,  p<.01, Perceived Behavioural Control b = 0.19, t (231) = 3.69, p<.01, Moral Norm b = 0.24, t  (231) = 4.01, p<.001 and BBA3 b = 0.12, t (231) = 2.33, p>.05.    Table 21. Experimental Model Four regression summary 
Change Statistics Adjusted R Std. Error of R Square Sig. F R R Square Square the Estimate Change F Change df1 df2 Change a 1 0.61 0.37 0.33 0.75 0.37 9.73 14 235 0.00 b 2 0.76 0.58 0.55 0.62 0.21 28.84 4 231 0.00 a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Belief based attitude based on top 3 (summation), Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm, Subjective norms Model

  Table 22. Experimental Model Four ANOVA results 
Model Sum of Squares 1 Regression Residual Total 2 Regression Residual Total 76.39 131.75 208.14 120.28 87.87 208.14 df 14 235 249 18 231 249 Mean Square 5.46 0.56 F 9.73 Sig. 0.00a

 
6.68 0.38

   
17.57

   
0.00b

 

   

   

a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, edu_some_college_univ, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_28_37, q31_married, edu_college, age_48_57, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, BBA3, Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm, Subjective norms c. Dependent Variable: Behaviour Intention

 

71

    Table 23. Experimental Model Four regression results 
Model Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error 3.171 .421 .058 -.231 .104 .142 Standardized Coefficients Beta t 7.526 .557 -1.631 Sig. .000 .578 .104

1

(Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour (Constant)

 
.031 -.088

2

-.039 -.243 .024 .029 -.029 -.313 -.140 .037 -.183 -.104 -.079 .538 .998 .178 -.135

.188 .200 .190 .193 .232 .184 .171 .168 .195 .154 .188 .052 .416 .088 .118

-.015 -.095 .011 .014 -.010 -.133 -.067 .019 -.068 -.057 -.039 .568

 
.095 -.051

-.205 -1.211 .125 .150 -.126 -1.701 -.818 .219 -.940 -.679 -.419 10.442 2.402 2.026 -1.147

.838 .227 .900 .881 .900 .090 .414 .827 .348 .498 .676 .000 .017 .044 .253

What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour Subjective norms Percieved behavioral control Moral Norm BBA3 a. Dependent Variable: Behaviour Intention

-.080 -.249 .067 -.082 -.229 -.222 -.111 .031 -.024 -.063 -.048 .300 .141 .163 .198 .003

.157 .165 .157 .160 .192 .154 .142 .140 .166 .130 .157 .049 .051 .044 .049 .001

-.031 -.098 .030 -.039 -.077 -.094 -.053 .016 -.009 -.034 -.024 .317 .162 .194 .235 .123

-.514 -1.505 .428 -.512 -1.188 -1.435 -.781 .224 -.144 -.480 -.303 6.137 2.738 3.694 4.009 2.327

.608 .134 .669 .609 .236 .153 .435 .823 .886 .632 .762 .000 .007 .000 .000 .021

    Regression of Experimental Model Four indicated that females displayed a higher  level of recycling behaviour with a positive  value for gender, which was observed at a  significant level (p = .044).  The  value for home ownership indicated that those who own 

72

  their home recycle more than those who do not own their home, though this finding was  not at a significant level.  Most of the age bracket  values were negative, although the 48 57 age bracket  had a small positive value, though not at a significant level.  The education  brackets'  values were all negative, save for the university education bracket which had a  small positive  though not at a significant level.  The  values for the PB, PBC, and MN  constructs were all positive and strongly significant (p = .000).  The  value for the SN  construct was also positive and found at a significant level (p = .007).  The BBA3 attitude  construct  was significant (p = .021) at a very slightly positive value.  Regression of Experimental Model Five (Test of DMA)  The first regression of Experimental Model Five saw factors at the lowest level entered,  including Past Behaviour, Age, Education Level, Gender and Marital Status.  Variance in BI  explained on this first step was 31% R2 = 0.31, F (14, 277) = 8.88, p<.001.  Past Behaviour  was the only significant variable on this step b = 0.52, t (277) = 10.03, p<.001.     The second regression of Experimental Model Five entered the remaining variables.   Variance in BI explained by this second model was 54% R2 = 0.54, F (4, 273) = 33.54,  p<.001.  Significant at the p<.001 level on this second step were Past Behaviour b = 0.26, t  (272) = 5.20, p<.001, Subjective Norm b = 0.23, t (272) = 4.17, p<.001, Perceived  Behavioural Control b = 0.26, t (272) = 5.20, p<.001, and Moral Norm b = 0.20, t (272) =  3.601, p<.001.    Table 24. Experimental Model Five regression summary 
Change Statistics Adjusted R Std. Error of R Square Sig. F R R Square Square the Estimate Change F Change df1 df2 Change a 1 0.56 0.31 .28 .79 0.31 8.88 14 277 0.00 b 2 0.73 0.54 .51 .66 0.23 33.42 4 273 0.00 a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Subjective norms, DM Attitude, Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm Model

 

73

    Table 25. Experimental Model Five ANOVA results 
Model 1 Regression Residual Total 2 Regression Residual Total Sum of Squares 78.11 174.07 252.18 135.33 116.86 252.18 df 14 277 291 18 273 291 Mean Square 5.58 0.63 F 8.88 Sig. 0.00a

 
7.52 0.43

   
17.56

   
0.00b

 

   

   

a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Subjective norms, DM Attitude, Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm c. Dependent Variable: Behaviour Intention

  Table 26. Experimental Model Five regression coefficients 
Model Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error 3.565 .414 .012 -.204 .100 .145 Standardized Coefficients Beta t 8.615 .117 -1.412 Sig. .000 .907 .159

1

(Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour (Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university

 
.006 -.073

2

-.125 -.267 -.088 -.077 -.041 -.278 -.200 -.026 -.295 -.063 -.080 .494 1.538 .077 -.142

.182 .203 .190 .190 .224 .180 .169 .165 .190 .152 .185 .049 .391 .083 .119

-.051 -.099 -.038 -.035 -.014 -.115 -.093 -.013 -.110 -.033 -.039 .523

 
.040 -.051

-.687 -1.318 -.464 -.406 -.182 -1.542 -1.185 -.157 -1.554 -.414 -.430 10.026 3.938 .925 -1.186

.493 .188 .643 .685 .856 .124 .237 .875 .121 .679 .667 .000 .000 .356 .237

-.161 -.287 -.006 -.183 -.221 -.221 -.171 -.015

.150 .168 .157 .158 .187 .150 .140 .137

-.066 -.106 -.002 -.084 -.076 -.092 -.080 -.008

-1.074 -1.713 -.036 -1.155 -1.186 -1.471 -1.220 -.110

.284 .088 .971 .249 .237 .143 .223 .913

74

 
edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Past Behaviour Subjective norms Perceived behavioral control Moral Norm DM Attitude a. Dependent Variable: Behaviour Intention -.124 -.102 -.150 .237 .214 .209 .165 .015 .160 .126 .153 .047 .046 .044 .051 .049 -.046 -.054 -.073 .251 .245 .240 .197 .016 -.773 -.813 -.981 4.998 4.611 4.716 3.206 .297 .440 .417 .327 .000 .000 .000 .002 .767

    Regression of Experimental Model Five indicated that females displayed a higher  level of recycling behaviour with a positive  value for gender, though not at a significant  level.  The  value for home ownership indicated that those who own their home recycle  more than those who do not own their home, though again this finding was not at a  significant level.  All of the age bracket  values were negative, with the 3847 age bracket  being significantly so (p = .088).  The education brackets'  values were all negative, though  none were significant.  The  values for the PB, SN, PBC, and MN constructs were all  positive and strongly significant (p = .000).  The DMA attitude construct  was positive but  not significant.    4.5 ­ A Test of the Power of the Experimental Model to Explain the Behaviour  Construct Having Removed the Past Behaviour Construct   Fishbein et al. (2010) indicate that a measure of past behaviour (PB) is an important  construct to include when modeling behaviour where there has been a time lapse between  the measurements of behavioral intention (BI) and behaviour (B) itself.  In this study all the  constructs were measured at the same time point, so PB and B both measure past curbside  recycling behaviour.  The consequence of this overlap in measurement is that in  Experimental Models One through Five the PB construct consistently and significantly  explains variance in the dependent variable, possibly crowding out the opportunity for  other constructs to reach significance.  As such, in Experimental Model Six, the PB construct  was removed from the behavioural model to test the ability of model's other constructs to  explain variance in behaviour (B).  The structural equation for Experimental Model Six is  shown in equation eight.   

75

  Behaviour =  + 1*gender + 2*home ownership + 3*age2837   + 4*age3847 + 5*age4857 + 6*age5867 + 7*age68plus   + 8*some post secondary education + 9*college education                                               (8)   + 10*university education + 11*post graduate education + 12*married   + 13*unmarried + 14*subjective norm construct   + 15*perceived behavioural control construct + 16*moral norm construct   + 17*attitude construct 

 

Experimental Model Six applies equation eight using the BBA3 attitude construct, which is  based on EVM calculation of a respondent's top three salient advantage and disadvantage  beliefs.    Table 27. Experimental Model Six regression summary 
Model R 1 2 3 R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the Estimate R Square Change Change Statistics F Change df1 df2 Sig. F Change

0.30a 0.39b 0.40c

0.09 0.15 0.16

0.04 0.09 0.09

1.05 1.02 1.02

.092 .059 .009

1.841 3.998 2.364

13 4 1

236 232 231

.038 .004 .126

a. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried b. Predictors: (Constant), Past Behaviour, age_38_47, edu_some_college_univ, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_68plus, What is your gender?, edu_postgrad, q31_married, age_48_57, edu_college, age_28_37, age_58_67, edu_university, q31_unmarried, Subjective norms, BBA3, Percieved behavioral control, Moral Norm

Table 28. Experimental Model Six ANOVA results 
Model 1 Regression Residual Total 2 Regression Residual Total 3 Regression Residual Total Sum of Squares 26.16 257.89 284.04 42.79 241.25 284.04 45.23 238.81 284.04 df 13 236 249 17 232 249 18 231 249 2.51 1.03 2.43 .001c 2.52 1.04 2.42 .002b Mean Square 2.01 1.09 F 1.84 Sig. .038a

a. Predictors: (Constant), q31_unmarried, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_28_37, edu_college, age_68plus, edu_some_college_univ, age_48_57, q31_married, edu_university, age_58_67 b. Predictors: (Constant), q31_unmarried, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_28_37, edu_college, age_68plus, edu_some_college_univ, age_48_57, q31_married, edu_university, age_58_67, Subjective norms, Percieved behavioral control, Belief based attitude based on top 3 (summation), Moral Norm c. Predictors: (Constant), q31_unmarried, edu_postgrad, What is your gender?, age_38_47, Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence?, age_28_37, edu_college, age_68plus, edu_some_college_univ, age_48_57, q31_married, edu_university, age_58_67, Subjective norms, Percieved behavioral control, BBA3, Moral Norm, Behaviour Intention d. Dependent Variable: Behaviour

76

    Table 29. Experimental Model Six regression coefficients
Model 1 Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error 4.359 .374 .037 -.203 .144 .198 Standardized Coefficients Beta .017 -.066 t 11.654 .259 -1.026 Sig. .000 .796 .306

(Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried (Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Subjective norms Perceived behavioral control Moral Norm BBA3 (Constant) What is your gender? Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? age_28_37 age_38_47 age_48_57 age_58_67 age_68plus edu_some_college_univ

2

-.072 .307 .096 .563 .592 .156 .139 .502 .183 .053 -.008 2.745 .106 -.142

.262 .279 .265 .268 .322 .257 .239 .235 .272 .214 .262 .635 .145 .195

-.024 .104 .037 .227 .169 .057 .057 .218 .058 .024 -.003 .048 -.046

-.273 1.101 .364 2.098 1.838 .606 .581 2.136 .672 .246 -.029 4.324 .730 -.732

.785 .272 .716 .037 .067 .545 .561 .034 .502 .806 .977 .000 .466 .465

3

-.101 .257 .093 .449 .408 .111 .083 .451 .156 -.009 -.021 .071 .173 .088 -.002 2.439 .085 -.122

.258 .273 .260 .265 .318 .255 .235 .231 .274 .215 .259 .084 .071 .079 .002 .663 .145 .194

-.033 .087 .036 .181 .117 .040 .034 .196 .049 -.004 -.009 .070 .176 .089 -.064 .039 -.040

-.390 .940 .357 1.696 1.285 .434 .352 1.950 .567 -.040 -.083 .839 2.446 1.108 -.857 3.677 .590 -.626

.697 .348 .722 .091 .200 .665 .725 .052 .571 .968 .934 .402 .015 .269 .392 .000 .556 .532

-.080 .291 .071 .456 .436 .141

.258 .274 .259 .264 .318 .255

-.026 .098 .027 .184 .125 .051

-.310 1.064 .274 1.726 1.374 .554

.756 .288 .784 .086 .171 .580

77

 
edu_college edu_university edu_postgrad q31_married q31_unmarried Subjective norms Perceived behavioral control Moral Norm BBA3 Behaviour Intention a. Dependent Variable: Behaviour .096 .449 .159 .000 -.007 .043 .138 .046 -.003 .155 .234 .231 .273 .215 .259 .086 .074 .083 .002 .101 .039 .195 .050 .000 -.003 .043 .140 .047 -.077 .132 .409 1.947 .581 .002 -.027 .505 1.851 .550 -1.024 1.538 .683 .053 .562 .999 .978 .614 .065 .583 .307 .126

    The  values in Experimental Model Six did not differ greatly from those found in  Experimental Model Two, which regressed the same variables with the exception of PB; all  the Experimental Model Six  values were of the same sign as those from Experimental  Model Two.  The age bracket of 5867 was significant (p = .086) and the PBC construct was  also found at a significant level (p = .065).  The  value for BI was closer to being significant  in Experimental Model Six (p = .126) than it was in Experimental Model Two (p = .456).   Removing the PB construct strengthened the ability of the BI construct to explain variance  in Behaviour and allowed the 5867 age bracket and PBC construct  values to recorded at  a significant level.  Summary of Experimental Model Regression Findings  Across all Experimental Models gender had a positive , indicating that females  participated in curbside recycle behaviour more than males, which supports a similar  finding by Kollmuss et al. (2002).  Also consistent across all models was the finding that  homeowners participate in curbside recycling behaviour at a higher rate than non homeowners, supporting this same conclusion by Oskamp et al. (1999).  Generally there  seemed to be a trend whereby the referent age group of 1827 displayed the highest level  of behavioural intention but displayed the lowest level of actual curbside recycling  behaviour compared to the other age brackets.  University education was the only  education bracket that stood out with a significant positive  value in explaining variance  in behaviour in the regression of Experimental Model Two.  Otherwise the findings around  education level were conflicting and inconclusive.  Similarly, the findings around marital  status displayed no general trend. 

78

    Generally the construct models of SN, PBC and MN correlated positively and 

significantly with variance in behavioural intention but the significance of these construct's  positive  values was lost when they were correlated with behaviour for all but PBC.  In  terms of explaining variance in behaviour, the BBA3 is the attitude construct that comes  closest to displaying significance as a negative  value in Experimental Model Six.    Also important to note is that use of the experimental variables to examine variance  in the Behavioural Intention construct generates  values that were quite different from  those generated in Experimental Models One and Two examining variance in Behaviour,  which highlights the fundamental difference between behaviour and behavioural intention.    4.6 ­ Analysis of Results Based on Belief Selection  Analysis of Differences in Advantage/Disadvantage Selection  Chisquare tests are performed to analyze the difference in advantage beliefs and  disadvantage belief selection between the top 10% of participant behaviour (good) (n =  61) and bottom 10% of behaviour (poor) recyclers (n = 61).  A number of significant  differences are found at the p>0.05 level.      In terms of advantages, there is a significant difference in terms of which  participants selected the "Create jobs" belief: 21.4% of poor recyclers versus only 3.00% of  good recyclers selected this as a significant advantage ²(1, N = 61) = 5.047, p = 0.025.  The  advantage belief "Feel like I'm doing my part" also shows a significant different, with 39.3%  of poor recyclers selecting this but only 15.2% of good recyclers choosing it as a significant  belief.  ²(1, N = 61) = 4.560, p = 0.033.    In terms of disadvantage beliefs, 25% of poor recyclers chose "Need extra space in  my house" as significant to them while only 3% of good recyclers selected it ²1, N = 61) =  6.416, p = 0.011.  As well, only 3.6% of poor recyclers chose "Does not give me money for  waste materials" as a disadvantage belief but 21.2% of good recyclers selected it ²(1, N =  61) = 4.137, p = 0.042.   

79

  Table 30. Significant differences in belief selection between good and poor recyclers  Belief  Create jobs  Feel like I'm doing my part  Need extra space in my house  Does not give me money for waste  materials    Good Recyclers  3.00%  15.2%  3.00%  21.2%  Poor Recyclers  21.4%  39.3%  25.0%  3.60%  Significance  of ²  0.025  0.033  0.011  0.042 

Behavioural Beliefs Selected as Salient that Significantly Predict Behaviour  The following behavioural beliefs, calculated using the EVM and selected as salient, were  statistically significant in predicting behaviour and/or behavioural intention.  "Reduce amount of waste that goes into landfill"  Table 31. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for those who  select the belief "reduce amount of waste that goes into landfill" as salient against those  who do not  Reduce the amount of waste that Std. Error  
goes into landfill Behaviour 0 Reduce the amount of waste that goes into landfill (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant Behaviour 0 Intention Reduce the amount of waste that goes into landfill (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant N 80 213 Mean 4.60 4.94 Std. Deviation 1.27 0.999 Mean 0.142 0.0684

80 213

6.27 6.45

1.047 0.894

0.117 0.061

  Table 32. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for  those who select the belief "reduce amount of waste that goes into landfill" as salient  against those who do not 
Levene's Test for Equality of Variances   Sig. (2tailed) 0.017 0.033 0.16 0.19 Mean Std. Error Difference Difference -0.34 0.14 -0.34 -0.17 -0.17 0.16 0.12 0.13 t-test for Equality of Means 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper -0.62 -0.062 -0.65 -0.42 -0.44 -0.028 0.068 0.087

Behaviour

Behaviour Intention  

Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed

F 13.65   4.58  

Sig. 0.00   0.033  

t -2.40 -2.15 -1.42 -1.32

df 291 117.37 291 124.77

80

  "Save my household energy"  Table 33. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for those who  select the belief "save my household energy" as salient against those who do not  Save my household Std. Error  
Behaviour energy 0 Save my household energy (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages if you were to 0 Save my household energy (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages if you were to N 287 6 Mean 4.878 3.621 Std. Deviation 1.069 1.421 Mean 0.0631 0.580

Behaviour Intention

287 6

6.4174 5.5333

0.924 1.343

0.0546 0.548

  Table 34. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for  those who select the belief "save my household energy" as salient against those who do not 
Levene's Test for Equality of Variances   Sig. (2tailed) 0.0050 0.083 0.022 0.17 Mean Differenc e 1.26 1.26 0.88 0.88 Std. Error Difference .044 0.58 0.38 0.55 t-test for Equality of Means 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper 0.38 2.13 -0.23 0.13 -0.52 2.75 1.64 2.29

Behaviour

Behaviour Intention

Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed

F 0.84   3.16  

Sig. 0.36   0.076  

t 2.83 2.15 2.30 1.61

df 291 5.12 291 5.10

  "Waste my money"  Table 35. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for those who  select the belief "waste my money" as salient against those who do not  Waste my money Std. Error  
Behaviour 0 Waste my money (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant disadvantages if you were to, over 0 Waste my money (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant disadvantages if you were to, over N 285 8 Mean 4.89 3.35 Std. Deviation 1.064 0.97 Mean 0.063 0.34

Behaviour Intention

285 8

6.4161 5.8000

0.93 1.20

0.055 0.43

 

81

  Table 36. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for  those who select the belief "waste my money" as salient against those who do not 
Levene's Test for Equality of Variances   Sig. (2tailed) 0.00 0.0030 0.067 0.19 Mean Difference 1.54 1.54 0.62 0.62 Std. Error Difference 0.38 0.35 0.336 0.43 t-test for Equality of Means 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper 0.79 2.29 0.73 -0.044 -0.39 2.36 1.28 1.63

Behaviour

Behaviour Intention

Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed

F 0.036   1.49  

Sig. 0.85   0.22  

t 4.05 4.41 1.84 1.44

df 291 7.48 291 7.24

  "Waste city money"  Table 37. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for those who  select the belief "waste city money" as salient against those who do not  Waste city money Std. Error  
Behaviour 0 Waste city money (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant disadvantages if you were to, ove 0 Waste city money (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant disadvantages if you were to, ove N 264 29 Mean 4.90 4.46 Std. Deviation 1.05 1.34 Mean 0.065 0.249

Behaviour Intention

264 29

6.43 6.10

0.92 1.066

0.057 0.20

  Table 38. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for  those who select the belief "waste city money" as salient against those who do not 
Levene's Test for Equality of Variances   Sig. (2tailed) 0.041 0.10 0.068 0.11 Mean Difference 0.43 0.43 0.34 0.34 Std. Error Difference 0.21 0.26 0.18 0.21 t-test for Equality of Means 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper 0.017 0.85 -0.090 -0.024 -0.083 0.96 0.70 0.76

Behaviour

Behaviour Intention

Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed

F 3.73   2.48  

Sig. .055   0.12  

t 2.049 1.69 1.84 1.63

df 291 31.91 291 32.76

 

82

  Behavioural Beliefs Selected as Salient that Significantly Predict Behavioural  Intention  "Help to preserve natural resources"    Table 39. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for those who  select the belief "help to preserve natural resources" as salient against those who do not  Help to preserve natural Std. Error  
Behaviour resources 0 Help to preserve natural resources (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages if y 0 Help to preserve natural resources (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages if y N 229 64 Mean 4.82 4.95 Std. Deviation 1.09 1.08 Mean 0.072 0.14

Behaviour Intention

229 64

6.33 6.66

1.01 0.60

0.066 0.074

  Table 40. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for   those who select the belief "help to preserve natural resources" as salient against those  who do not   
Levene's Test for Equality of Variances

 

t-test for Equality of Means 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper -0.43 0.18 -0.43 -0.58 -0.52 0.18 -0.065 -0.13

Behaviour

Behaviour Intention

Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed

F 0.098   12.67  

Sig. 0.76   0.00  

t -0.82 -0.82 -2.47 -3.26

df 291 101.71 291 172.97

Sig. (2tailed) 0.42 0.41 0.014 0.0010

Mean Difference -0.13 -0.13 -0.32 -0.32

Std. Error Difference 0.15 0.15 0.13 0.10

 

83

  "Save my city money"  Table 41. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for those who  select the belief "save my city money" as salient against those who do not     
Behaviour Save my city money 0 Save my city money (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages if you were to, over 0 Save my city money (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages if you were to, over N 266 27 Mean 4.88 4.60 Std. Deviation 1.06 1.31 Std. Error Mean 0.065 0.25

Behaviour Intention

266 27

6.4474 5.9259

0.91 1.10

0.056 0.21

  Table 42. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for  those who select the belief "save my city money" as salient against those who do not   
Levene's Test for Equality of Variances

 

t-test for Equality of Means 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper -0.15 0.71 -0.25 0.15 0.075 0.81 0.89 0.97

Behaviour

Behaviour Intention

Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed

F 1.69   1.34  

Sig. 0.20   0.25  

t 1.27 1.07 2.78 2.39

df 291 29.62 291 29.74

Sig. (2tailed) 0.21 0.29 0.0060 0.024

Mean Difference 0.28 0.28 0.52 0.52

Std. Error Difference 0.22 0.26 0.19 0.22

 

84

  "Save my household energy"    Table 43. Group statistics comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for those who  select the belief "save my household energy" as salient against those who do not  Save my household Std. Error  
Behaviour energy 0 Save my household energy (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages if you were to 0 Save my household energy (From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages if you were to N 287 6 Mean 4.88 3.62 Std. Deviation 1.07 1.42 Mean 0.063 0.58

Behaviour Intention

287 6

6.42 5.53

0.92 1.34

0.055 0.55

  Table 44. Independent samples test comparing behaviour and behavioural intention for  those who select the belief "save my household energy" as salient against those who do not   
Levene's Test for Equality of Variances

 

t-test for Equality of Means 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper 0.38 2.13 -0.23 0.13 -0.52 2.75 1.64 2.29

Behaviour

Behaviour Intention

Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed

F 0.84   3.16  

Sig. 0.36   0.076  

t 2.83 2.15 2.30 1.61

df 291 5.12 291 5.10

Sig. (2tailed) 0.0050 0.0083 0.022 0.17

Mean Difference 1.26 1.26 0.88 0.88

Std. Error Difference 0.44 0.58 0.38 0.55

  A Comparison of High Advantage Scores Against Low Advantage Scores  The Advantage Scores were divided at the mean into two groups.  It was found that the  behaviour and behavioural intention of respondents with high Advantage Scores is  significantly different than respondents with low Advantage Scores.   

85

  Table 45. Group statistics for low and high advantage scorers for behaviour and  behavioural intention constructs  Advantage Score (Binned) Std. Error  
Behaviour
dimension1

Behaviour Intention
dimension1

low (<127) high (127) low (<127) high (127)

N 156 124 156 124

Mean 4.74 5.02 6.13 6.77

Std. Deviation 1.09 1.04 1.01 0.65

Mean 0.087 0.094 0.081 0.058

  Table 46. Independent samples test comparing high advantage scorers against low  advantages scorers on behaviour and behavioural intention 
Levene's Test for Equality of Variances

 

t-test for Equality of Means 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper -0.54 -0.030 -0.54 -0.85 -0.84 -0.032 -0.43 -0.44

Behaviour

Behaviour Intention

Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed

F 1.74   26.29  

Sig. 0.19   0.00  

t -2.21 -2.22 -6.11 -6.41

df 278 269.03 278 266.70

Sig. (2tailed) 0.028 0.027 0.00 0.00

Mean Difference -0.28 -0.28 -0.64 -0.064

Std. Error Difference 0.13 0.13 0.10 0.10

  A Comparison of High Disadvantage Scores Against Low Disadvantage Scores  The Disadvantage Scores were divided at the mean into two groups.  There was no  significant difference in behaviour or behavioural intention between these two groups.    Table 47. Group statistics for low and high disadvantage scorers for behaviour and  behavioural constructs  Disadvantage Score Std. Error  
(Binned)
dimension1

Behaviour Behaviour Intention
dimension1

low (<41) high(41) low (<41) high(41)

N 131 131 131 131

Mean 4.97 4.75 6.50 6.29

Std. Deviation 1.10 1.05 0.86 0.99

Mean 0.096 0.092 0.075 0.087

 

86

  Table 48. Independent samples test comparing high disadvantage scorers against low  disadvantages scorers on behaviour and behavioural intention 
Independent Samples Test

Levene's Test for Equality of Variances  

t-test for Equality of Means 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper -0.045 0.48 -0.045 -0.013 -0.013 0.478 0.44 0.44

Behaviour

Behaviour Intention

Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed Equal variances assumed Equal variances not assumed

F 0.022   3.47  

Sig. 0.88   0.064  

t 1.63 1.63 1.85 1.85

df 260 259.49 260 254.66

Sig. (2tailed) 0.10 0.10 0.065 0.065

Mean Difference 0.22 0.22 0.21 0.21

Std. Error Difference 0.13 0.13 0.11 0.11

 

87

  CHAPTER FIVE: DISCUSSION OF RESULTS  While a variety of significant results were presented in chapter four, here in chapter five  these results are elaborated on and discussed within context.  This includes an overview of  methodological difficulties encountered, possible applications of findings and areas for  further investigation.    5.1 ­ Discussion of Statistical Results  Discussion of Introductory and Demographic Results  Only 38.2% of the sample correctly stated that Toronto's household recycling is collected  biweekly; that almost twothirds of the sample did not know this recycling schedule  indicates a lack of awareness around recycling practices.  Furthermore, almost half the  sample population did not know that household recycling in Toronto is mandatory.  Clearly  there is an opportunity for increased citizen education around recycling practices.    The demographic results indicate the sample population is skewed towards married  females, with higherthanaverage levels of home ownership and income.  This finding may  be because of the requirements associated with study participation: individuals in multi family dwellings were not allowed to participate and the online nature of survey  administration inherently required computerliterate individuals with access to an internet  connection.  These two factors likely reduced the number of lowincome individuals in the  sample.  Discussion of Model Construct Reliability and Validity  Perceived difficulty was the only construct not to surpass the 0.75 Cronback's alpha  threshold for discriminant validity.  This is not entirely surprising because the PD construct  is not particularly wellestablished in the literature and only two questions were included  to test this variable.  This finding does not support the use of this PD methodology in  further recycling studies.    Confirmatory factor analysis of DMA clearly indicates two underlying components:  one which measures instrumentality and one which measures experientiality.  The DMIA  has a higher mean value than the DMEA, which is reflective of the social dilemma aspect of  the curbside recycling behaviour: participants have a more positive attitude for the 

88

  purpose of the behaviour than they do for the actual experience of behavioural  performance.  Discussion of Salient Advantage/Disadvantage Selection  The three salient advantages selected at the highest rate are "reduce the amount of waste  that goes to landfill" (73%), "help to protect the environment" (51%), and "create a better  environment for future generations" (38%).  All three of these are instrumental efficacy  beliefs, indicating that efficacy beliefs are topofmind for recycling behavioural decisions.   "Makes me feel like I'm doing my part" was an instrumental advantage that was selected by  33% of the sample population.  "Contribute to manufacturing goods made from recycled  materials" is an additional efficacy belief that was selected as salient by 27% of the test  population.    The statistical distribution of salient disadvantage selection is much flatter than that  of advantage selection, indicating less general agreement among participants around the  important disadvantages of curbside recycling behaviour.  The three salient disadvantages  selected at the highest rate are "attract pests" (43%), "increase waste collection costs"  (38%), and "create unpleasant odours" (33%); the first and third of these are experiential  in nature while the second is an instrumental disadvantage.  The selection of generally  instrumental advantages and experiential disadvantages further reinforces the social  dilemma aspect of curbside recycling participation.  Discussion of Construct Descriptive Statistics  Overall, the level of behaviour recorded is quite high, with a median of 5.09 out of six.  Even  higher is the level of behavioural intention, with a median of 7.00 out of seven and a mean  of 6.40.  Past behaviour also exhibits a high level, with a median of 7.00 our of seven and a  mean of 6.43.  These results are skewed towards unreasonably high levels of recycling  behaviour and intentiontorecycle.  This was to be expected: the prosocial nature of the  behaviour promotes respondent social desirability bias (Terry et al., 1999).  Rathje and  Murphy (1992) go so far as to say that people are unreliable sources of quantitative  information on their own behaviour.  CorralVerdugo et al. (1995) find substantial bias in  selfreported versus objectively measured recycling behaviour.  Knussen et al. (2004)  suggest that response consistency efforts also contribute to this type of finding in that a 

89

  respondent may assume that s/he intended to do his/her past behaviour, therefore s/he  uses past behaviour to guide his/her answers on behavioural intention questions.      PBC also exhibits an exceptionally high level, again displaying a median of 7.00 out  of seven with a mean of 6.29.  This result indicates that respondents feel almost complete  control over the behaviour in question; respondents have the required skills and abilities  to perform the behaviour and are not hampered by contextual factors.  This is an  encouraging finding as it indicates that behavioural nonperformance is due to factors  other than control or selfefficacy issues, which is a prerequisite for attitude and  normativebased behavioural interventions.    Although SN, MN, and DMA are also in the upper range of their possible levels, they  display less exceptional levels than the measurements of behaviour and control.  MN  displays the largest standard deviation of any construct, suggesting that respondents hold  varying levels of morality and altruistic inclination.    Comparing BBA3 and BBAALL on descriptive statistics is difficult because of the  different associated group sizes.  The same situation applies to AS and DS, which also have  different group sizes.  As is to be expected, AS with a mean of 118.21, reflects a generally  positive rating of advantage outcomes, while the DS aggregate score, with a mean of 39.96,  reflects a generally negative rating of disadvantage outcomes.  Discussion of Construct Correlation Results  All the model construct correlations are significant at the p>0.01 level, which is an  encouraging sign for model reliability.  A low correlation between behaviour and  behavioural intention exemplifies the debate discussed in chapter two around the use of BI  as a dependent variable and its ability to predict behaviour.    Interestingly, of the three attitude constructs, BBAALL correlates most closely with  behaviour at 0.21, while DMA correlates least closely at 0.16, suggesting that beliefbased  measures of attitude are more predictive of behaviour than a direct method of attitude  measurement.  Discussion of Model Regressions with Behaviour as the Dependent Variable  DMA and BBA3 did not differ very much in the amount of behavioural variance the model is  able to explain.  The only difference between the model regressions that use these two 

90

  constructs is that the regression using DMA indicates past behaviour is the only construct  significantly able to explain variance in behaviour, whereas the regression that uses BBA3  indicates only university education is significant.  This author is not sure why this  difference is observed but regardless, support for neither model is established.  What must  be noted is that the significance of past behaviour in explaining variance in behaviour  should be viewed cautiously as both measure the same variable, albeit in different ways: PB  measures behaviour very generally while B measures behaviour more specifically.  The  ability of PB to predict B could also be due to the temporal stability of behaviour (Fishbein  et al., 2010).  Discussion of Model Regressions with Behavioural Intention as the Dependent  Variable  All three attitude constructs are applied in model regression to test their ability to explain  variance in BI.  Model four, using the BBA3 construct, accounts for the greatest amount of  variance in BI at 57.8%.  In the regression of model four, PB, SN, PBC, MN and BBA3 are all  significant, supporting use of the model itself to predict BI.  This result further supports the  finding that an attitude construct based on a measurement of salient beliefs is most  effective when modeling curbside recycling behaviours and that the inclusion of PB and MN  are valuable additions to the model.    While the next sections discuss results associated with belief selection, it must first  be noted that the applicability of these beliefbased results is questionable as neither BBA3  nor BBAALL significantly explain variance in the dependent variable of behaviour.   Nonetheless, the beliefbased results contribute valuable information and do stand on their  own as statistically significant values.  Discussion of Results Based on Salient BeliefSelection that Distinguish Good  Recyclers from Bad  The significant result that bad recyclers select "feel like I'm doing my part" as a salient  advantage of behavioural participation more than good recyclers is perplexing in that it  highlights the intrinsic value stemming from behavioural performance, which one would  assume would be stronger in good recyclers. 

91

    This author is unsure why bad recyclers select the instrumental advantage "create 

jobs" as a salient advantage significantly more often than good recyclers.  One possibility is  that bad recyclers perhaps do not believe in some of the other instrumental advantages of  recycling (i.e. efficacy beliefs) and "create jobs" is an instrumental behavioural belief not  related to the efficacy of participation in the recycling scheme.    "Need extra space" is an experiential disadvantage that also distinguishes good from  bad recyclers.  The high PBC construct value indicates that contextual factors such as this  one do not account for behavioural nonperformance, so perhaps bad recyclers select this  belief as justification for their low level of behaviour.     Most unexpectedly, significantly more good recyclers than bad recyclers select "does  not give me money for waste materials" as a salient disadvantage of behaviour.  Bad  recyclers could be expected to select this instrumental disadvantage as a justification for  not recycling, but this selection by good recyclers is peculiar.  This finding also contradicts  the findings cited in chapter two suggesting that individuals who view sustainable  behaviours in terms of personal economic costs versus benefits are less motivated to  perform behaviours with indirect, global benefits.  Another option is that good recyclers  find very few disadvantages to their participation in the curbside recycling scheme and this  belief allows them to lament the amount of money they could receive for all the materials  they contribute to the curbside recycling scheme?    Discussion of BehaviouralBeliefs Selected as Salient that Significantly Predict  Behaviour  "Reduce the amount of waste that goes into landfill" is the only behavioural belief that,  when selected as salient, displays a significant, positive correlation with behaviour.  The  significance of this advantage in predicting behaviour provides strong support for the  conclusion that at least certain types of efficacy beliefs influence curbside recycling  behaviour.    "Save household electrical energy" is an advantage, while "waste my money" and  "waste my city's money" are disadvantages the three behavioural beliefs that exhibit a  negative correlation with behaviour.  These three behavioural beliefs each encompass an  economic angle, supporting the conclusion that individuals who view curbside recycling 

92

  participation in terms of economic costs versus benefit demonstrate less behaviour than  those who do not view the behaviour in economic terms.  Discussion of BehaviouralBeliefs Selected as Salient that Significantly Predict  Behavioural Intention  "Help to preserve natural resources" is the only behavioural belief that, when selected as  salient, positively correlates with behavioural intention, further supporting the finding that  advantage efficacy beliefs influence sustainable behaviour.  Again, the economicrelated  beliefs of "save my city money" and "save my household electrical energy" negatively  correlate with the dependent variable of behavioural intention.  Discussion of the Test of High Versus Low Advantage and Disadvantage Scores  The aggregate AS differentiates between high and low levels of recycling behaviour and  behavioural intention, whereas DS does not display this same finding.  What this means is  that individuals with strong beliefs in the combined likelihood and value of the behavioural  advantages participate more in curbside recycling schemes than those with weak beliefs in  the combined likelihood and value of those advantages.  The same discrimination is not  observed between those with high and low disadvantage scores.  This difference between  AS and DS could be because the AS has a larger standard deviation, making it easier to  show statistical significance.  Another possibility is that beliefs around the advantages of  participation in curbside recycling schemes influences behaviour more strongly than  disadvantage beliefs.  If that were to be the case, such a finding would suggest that  persuasive messaging around behaviours with indirect, global consequences should focus  on promoting associated advantages rather than downplaying associated disadvantages.    5.2 ­ Summary of Findings  When viewed in completion, the overarching results of this thesis highlight a number of  important issues associated with curbside recycling behaviour, including the importance of  certain efficacy beliefs and the generally negative affect of framing curbside recycling  behaviour in terms of economic cost versus benefit.    It was hypothesized that selection of the efficacy belief "contribute to manufacturing  goods made from recycled materials" as salient would discriminate between good and bad 

93

  recyclers.  This was not the case: the 27% of individuals who did select this belief as salient  did not significantly differ, in terms of behaviour or behavioural intention, from those who  did not.  The question that remains is why did other similar efficacy beliefs demonstrate a  positive correlation with behaviour but this one did not?    This author suggests that the inability of the behavioural efficacy belief "contribute  to manufacturing goods made from recycled materials" to positively correlate with  behaviour, or discriminate good recyclers from bad, is indicative of the larger, systemic  efficacy challenge within Ontario's current recycling scheme.  Ontario Municipal Recycling: A Broken System  In researching this thesis, the most glaringly obvious policy challenge surrounding the  promotion of recycling as a sustainable consumption loop is that there is no incentive for  manufacturers to innovate and use easily recyclable packaging and product materials in  their goods.  In fact, producers are effectively discouraged from the promotion of consumer  recycling.  This is because producers are only required to cover the costs associated with  their products that enter the recycling stream; they do not pay for any of their products  that are sent to landfill.  Furthermore, the Ontario stewardship scheme does not take into  account differences in the recyclability of various producer's products: overall costs  associated with each industry are calculated and then distributed among all producers  based on market share.  Extended producer responsibility needs to be implemented on the  front end so that producers are made responsible for all the waste they produce, not just  the waste that is properly diverted from landfill.      Furthermore, growth in the Canadian recycling industry is currently stymied by  volatile commodity markets and a lack of endmarkets for recyclable goods (Ontario Waste  Managment Association, 2006).  Manufacturers of consumer goods need to be encouraged  to use recycled content in their products to better establish these endmarkets.  If more  goods were made from recycled materials, and properly advertised as such, perhaps the  associated efficacy belief would significantly correlate with recycling behaviour.  Valle et al.  (2004, 533) suggest something similar: "it might also be of great value to explore the idea  of... how packaging residues, through the recycling process, give rise to a new set of useful  goods that everyone recognizes."  Encouragingly, the city of Toronto has recently begun 

94

  promotion of recycling in this way, with the introduction of their Recycling is Magic  pamphlet (appendix 4).    It is also important that corporations are held accountable for the sustainability  claims they make.  The plant bottle distributed by Pepsi (appendix 1) is a perfect example  of persuasive messaging that promotes a global, indirect advantage: the problem is that  bioplastic is not accepted in recycling streams!  The efficacy belief that would moderate  the connection between persuasive messaging and behaviour here does not hold up under  scrutiny, therefore likely rendering the persuasive message ineffective.    It must also be noted that the concept of waste diversion from landfill and diversion  percentages, such as those used as a measures of behaviour in this study and to chart the  progress of the city of Toronto, can be misleading and do not alone illustrate the entire  waste picture.  Diversion percentages use total waste produced as the reciprocal, will  increase if both recycling and total waste produced increases, which is not automatically a  good thing.  Conversely, if total waste produced decreases, but recycling levels hold steady,  the diversion percentage would decrease but again this could be a good thing because total  waste to landfill has actually decreased.  As such, this investigator recommends that waste  diversion percentages not be the only metric employed to track and motivate waste  diversion behaviours.    Many papers cite the importance of increasing residential recycling (Scott, 1999).   This is only one part of the solution: recycling is relatively low on the waste diversion  hierarchy.  Other diversion activities such as reuse and waste minimization must also be  pursued to effectively mitigate society's waste challenge.  Scott (1999) argues that  emphasizing recycling promotes consumption, instead of conservation.  However, as  discussed, when integrated properly, recycling is an overarching solution that  accommodates consumption as one stage of a sustainable cycle.  Instead of viewing  consumption as an inherently unsustainable behaviour that must be changed, recycling  offers an opportunity to allow consumption of goods made from recycled materials as one  step in a larger, sustainable recycling framework.   

95

  5.3  Suggestions for Future Research  One interesting demographic factor absent from this paper is the influence of ethnicity on  recycling behaviour and intention.  Toronto has a very ethnically diverse population and it  would be interesting to test this affect on recycling participation.    Another methodological issue that was not controlled for was different levels of  need for affect/cognition in the population.  This is an interesting psychological variable  that could be a mediating factor in how individuals are influenced by instrumental and  experiential attitudes.    No objective observations were made, which mitigates the applicability of these  findings, however all constructs are measured subjectively, which helps maintain  consistency across the behavioural model.    5.4 ­ Conclusion  Burroughs et al. (2012, 257) describe the modern incarnation of Hardin's (1968) tragedy of  the commons inherent to many of today's sustainable behaviours: "...the shortterm  payoffs of consumption undermine the longer term personal and societal benefits of  moderation and restraint."  Indeed, Burroughs and Rindfleish (2012, 258) suggest there are  some capacities for escaping the material trap: "aligning individual and collective interests,  narrowing the conceptual distance between micromotives and macroconsequences,  framing behaviours to raise saliency of their impact."  The results from this thesis can  certainly stand as evidence that efficacy beliefs about the global, indirect benefits of  behaviour do have a positive impact on consumers' decisions.  Hopefully this finding, in  addition to similar others, will encourage manufacturers, consumers, and the government  to adopt recycling as a sustainable consumption loop and that persuasive messaging  around sustainable behaviours will serve to drive society towards a sustainable future. 

96

  APPENDIX 1 

    Advertisement for Pepsi's plant bottle    APPENDIX 2 

  Sunchip bag promoting compostable packaging 

97

  APPENDIX 3                                                          Cascades toilet paper packaging 

98

  APPENDIX 4                                                          Pamphlet promoting efficacy beliefs from the city of Toronto website 

99

  APPENDIX 5                                                        White et al., (2011) loss frame paired with feasibility information (low level construal) 

100

  APPENDIX 6                                                          White et al., (2011) gain frame paired with desirability information (high level construal) 

101

  APPENDIX 7  STUDY QUESTIONNAIRE  Welcome to Opinion Survey #XXXXX! This survey will take you about 15 minutes. As always, your individual survey responses are protected by our Privacy Policy. Rewards If you qualify for and complete this survey, you will earn 5 Lightspeed Points, and earn one entry into the $3,000 Lightspeed Sweepstakes. After answering the first few questions, some of you will not qualify to complete this survey. Although you will not earn any points, you will earn one entry into the $3,000 Lightspeed Sweepstakes. Please Keep In Mind... Please do not use your Back or Forward browser buttons while you are taking this survey. Once you answer a question, you will not be able to go back and change your answer. Click on the button below to begin this survey. a) Do you currently live in a multi-story apartment building or condo building? If Yes > Thank you but you are not eligible for this survey. If No > Great, proceed to next question.

b) Does your household have access to a curbside blue bin recycling program? If Yes > Great, proceed to next question. If No > Sorry, you are not eligible for this study.

c) Are you 18 years of age or older? If Yes > Great, proceed to next question. If No > Sorry, you are not eligible for this study.

d) Participation in the study is purely voluntary. Your input IS important and strictly confidential. Your answers cannot be linked to you. Your participation supports the study of sustainability. Would you consent to participate in the study? It will take about 15 minutes to do the study?

102

  If Yes > Thank you. Please read over the following consent form and agree to the terms. If No > Thank you but you are not eligible for this survey. Consent Agreement Evaluating the Effect of Waste Diversion Attitudes on Household Waste Diversion Behaviours in Canada You are being asked to participate in a research study. By completing the enclosed survey, you are giving your consent to use the information provided by you for the purposes of this study. Investigators: Jocelyn Molyneux, B.B.A, B.Sc. and Paul Missios, B.COM, M.A., Ph.D. Purpose of the Study: The purpose of this study is to gather information on the waste diversion habits of Canadians, in order to identify programs and policies that will be effective in reducing the amount of residential garbage disposed in landfills. We expect that individuals would respond differently for various recycling items (such as glass and plastics), to differing access to recycling programs (yard waste, blue box, etc.), and to alternative recycled-content purchasing opportunities. However, there are costs and benefits to each recycling issue. With the information collected from your questionnaire and the others we have sent, we can try to determine which programs and policies serve the interests of the public best. You have been selected randomly as one of 300 potential participants in this study. Description of the Study: This study involves only the following questionnaire. None of the questionnaires used in this study are experimental in nature. The only experimental aspect of this study is the gathering of information for the purpose of analysis. A graduate student in fulfilment of her thesis work is carrying out this study. Benefits of the Study: More effective recycling programs could potentially lead to a cleaner environment, lower product prices, and lower taxes. There is no guarantee, however, that you will receive any direct benefits from participating in this study. Confidentiality: The questionnaires used in this survey are not connected to you in any way. Personal information not requested on the questionnaire (such as your name or address), should not be included to ensure that you remain anonymous. Lightspeed secures data through data encryption and password protection. Incentives to Participate: Participants will be compensated in line with their standing agreement with Lightspeed Research. Voluntary Nature of Participation: Participation in this study is voluntary. Your choice of whether or not to participate will not influence your future relations with Ryerson University. If you decide to participate, fill out the following survey. If you do not wish to participate, simply do not complete the survey.  

103

  Questions about the Study: If you have a question about this research, please make an inquiry. You may contact:

Paul Missios, PhD. or Jocelyn Molyneux (c/o Paul Missios) Ryerson University 350 Victoria Street Toronto, ON M5B 2K3 416-979-5000 x 6186

If you have questions regarding your rights as a human subject and participant in this study, you may contact the Ryerson University Research Ethics Board for information. Research Ethics Board c/o Office of Research Services Ryerson University 350 Victoria Street Toronto, ON M5B 2K3 Agreement: By clicking this button, you indicate that you have read the information in this agreement. Your button click also indicates that you agree to be in the study and have been told that you can change your mind and withdraw your consent to participate at any time. You have been given an opportunity to print this agreement. You have been told that by accepting this consent agreement you are not giving up any of your legal rights.

____________________________________ Name of Participant (please type)

____________________________ Date

104

  Introduction Household rates of recycling and use of the City of Toronto's Blue Bin program vary widely. The present survey is part of an investigation that tries to discover some of the reasons that individuals do or do not engage in Blue Bin recycling. We are interested in your personal opinions about waste (garbage and recycling) in your home and how you dispose of it through curbside collection, known as the Blue and Black Bin programs. Your honest opinions will generate valuable feedback to help make recycling easier and more efficient. There are no right or wrong answers. Instructions: Please read each question carefully and answer it to the best of your ability. Please answer all questions from your personal perspective. 1. How frequently is recycling (Blue Bin) collected curbside in your community? Twice a week Once a week Every two weeks Not sure Recycling is not collected in my community

2. How frequently is trash (Black Bin) collected curbside in your community? Twice a week Once a week Every two weeks Not sure

3. Are you, in whole or in part, responsible for dealing with trash and recycling within your household? Yes, completely Yes, in part No 4. Is curbside recycling mandatory or voluntary in your community? Mandatory Voluntary Not sure

Instructions: When answering the next questions, consider your behaviour around use of your community's curbside recycling collection service, (ie. the Blue Bin program), over the last six months. Only answer questions in terms of items recycled through your curbside recycling

105

  program, not items that you returned to a retailer for recycling. While the majority of household waste material is often produced in the kitchen area, please consider ALL the waste produced in your household, including waste from the kitchen, living areas, bedrooms and bathrooms. 5. Material Rates Instructions: The following questions ask about how much of each type of material you place in the blue bin for curbside municipal recycling collection. For example, if the question asks about your total household recyclable METAL CAN and CONTAINER waste, please consider the total METAL CAN and CONTAINER waste regularly generated in your household and then answer with what percentage of that total METAL CAN and CONTAINER waste actually ends up in the recycling bin rather than the amount that ends up in the trash bin. i) Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable GLASS BOTTLES and CONTAINER waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? ii). Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable PLASTIC BOTTLES and OTHER PLASTIC CONTAINER waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? iii). Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable PAPER, NEWSPAPER and MAGAZINE waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? iv). Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable METAL CAN and CONTAINER waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? v). Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable CARDBOARD waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? vi). Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable STYROFOAM/ POLYSTYRENE waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? vii). Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable PLASTIC BAG waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? viii). Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable MILK/JUICE CARTON (also known as boxboard) waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? ix). Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable RIGID ALUMINUM TRAYS/PANS waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? x). Approximately what percentage of your total household recyclable AEROSOL CAN waste do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection?

106

  xi) Approximately what percentage of your total household WASTE THAT'S NOT SUPPOSED TO GO INTO THE BLUE BIN (ie. trash) do you place at the curbside for municipal recycling collection (accidently or otherwise)? None 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%     Instructions: Please take a few minutes to tell us what you think about the possibility of, placing all your household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection over the next six months. There are no right or wrong responses; we are merely interested in your personal opinions. While the majority of household waste material is often produced in the kitchen area, please consider waste produced in all areas of your household, including kitchens, living areas, bedrooms and bathrooms. In response to the three questions that follow, please list the thoughts that come immediately to mind in response to each question. Write each thought on a separate line. 6. i) What do you see as the advantages to, over the next six months, placing all your household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? (List the first few thoughts that come to mind.) 1.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 2.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 3.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 4.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 5.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________

ii) What do you see as the disadvantages to, over the next six months, placing all your household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? (List the first few thoughts that come to mind.) 1.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 2____________________________________________________________________________ ____________________________________________________________________________ 3.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________

107

  4.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 5.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________

iii) What else comes to mind when you think about placing all your household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection over the next six months? (List the first few thoughts that come to mind. If nothing comes to mind, type the word "nothing".) 1.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 2____________________________________________________________________________ ____________________________________________________________________________ 3.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 4.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________ 5.____________________________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________   7. Advantage Selection From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant advantages if you were to, over the next six months, place all your household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? i) Reduce my property taxes ii) Save my city money iii) Save my household energy iv) Save electrical energy generally v) Create a better environment for future generations vi) Help to protect the environment vii) Help to preserve natural resources viii) Reduce the amount of waste that goes into landfill ix) Create jobs x) Stimulate the economy xi) Contribute to manufacturing goods made from recycled materials xii) Experience satisfaction xiii) Help to solve a global problem xiv) Feel good xv) Feel hopeful xvi) Feel reduced guilt xvii) Feel like I'm doing my part

108

 

8. Disadvantage Selection From your perspective, what do you see as the three most significant disadvantages if you were to, over the next six months, place all your household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection? i) Help eliminate jobs ii) Need extra space in my house iii) Waste my money iv) Waste city money v) Have to put in extra time vi) Have to put in extra physical effort vii) Have to put in extra mental effort viii) Create unpleasant odours ix) Create a mess x) Attract pests xi) Increase waste collection costs xii) Does not give me money for waste materials xiii) Make me feel overwhelmed xiv) Make me feel tired xv) Make me feel confused xvi) Make me feel stressed xvii) Does not make a difference xviii) Neighbours see what I put out

Instructions: The next questions in this survey make use of rating scales with seven numbers; you are to circle the number that best describes your opinion. For example, if you were asked to rate about "Watching a newscast most days" on such a scale, the seven places should be interpreted as follows: My watching a newscast most days is:

 
Unlikely: _1_ extremely :_2_ quite :_3_ :_4_ :_5_ :_6_ :_7_ slightly neither slightly quite extremely : Likely

If you think that your watching a newscast most days is extremely unlikely, then you would select the number 1. My watching a newscast most days is: Unlikely _1_:_2__:_3__:_4__:_5__:_6__:_7__:Likely If you think that your watching a newscast most days is quite likely, then you would circle the number 6. My watching a newscast most days is: Unlikely _1_:_2__:_3__:_4__:_5__:_6__:_7__:Likely

109

  If you think that your watching a newscast most days is slightly unlikely, then you would circle the number 3. My watching a newscast most days is: Unlikely _1_:_2__:_3__:_4__:_5__:_6__:_7__:Likely If you think that your watching a newscast most days is neither likely nor unlikely, then you would circle the number 4. My watching a newscast most days is: Unlikely _1_:_2__:_3__:_4__:_5__:_6__:_7__:Likely Please answer each of the following questions by circling the number that best describes your opinion. Some of the questions may appear to be similar, but they do address somewhat different issue, so please read each question carefully.

9. Direct Measure of Intention (part 1) Over the next six months... i) I intend to place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. False ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:True

ii) I plan to place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. Not at all ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Definitely iii) I will try to place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. False ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:True

10. Direct Measure of Norm With regards to placing all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection, over the next 6 months: i) Most people who are important to me think that I should do so. Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely ii) Most people whose opinions I value would approve of me doing so. Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely With regards to others placing all their household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection, over the next 6 months: iii) Most people I respect and admire will do so. Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely

110

 

iv) Most people who are like me will do so. Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely

11. Direct Measure of Morality (part 1) Over the next six months... i) It would be wrong of me not to place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. Disagree:___:___:___:___:___:___:Agree ii) I would feel guilty if I did not place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. Disagree:___:___:___:___:___:___:Agree iii) Not placing all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection goes against my principles. Disagree:___:___:___:___:___:___:Agree

12. Behavioral Belief Strength (part 1) If, over the next six months, I place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection, I will... i) save my city money: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely ii) save electrical energy generally: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely iii) help create a better environment for future generations: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely iv) preserve natural resources: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely v) reduce the amount of waste that goes into landfill: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely vi) help stimulate the economy: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely vii) contribute to manufacturing goods made from recycled materials: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely

111

  viii) help protect the environment: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely ix) help create jobs: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely x) help solve a global problem: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xi) help reduce my property taxes: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xii) experience satisfaction: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xiii) feel good: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xiv) feel hopeful: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xv) feel reduced guilt: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xvi) feel like I'm doing my part: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely

13. Direct Measure of PBC Over the next six months... i) I am confident that I am able to place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. False ___:___:___:___:___:___:___: True ii) if I really wanted to, I could place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. False ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:True iii) It is under my control to place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. False___:___:___:___:___:___:___:True

14. Direct Measure of Attitude (part 1) My placing all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection over the next six months is

112

 

Enjoyable ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Not enjoyable Harmful ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Helpful Pleasant ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Unpleasant Wise ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Foolish Immoral ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Moral Good:___:___:___:___:___:___:___: Bad 15. Direct Measure of Perceived Difficulty Over the next six months... i) Placing all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection is: Easy ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Difficult Complicated ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Simple ii) If I want to, I can easily place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection over the next six months. Disagree ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Agree

16. Behavioral Belief Strength (part 2) If, over the next six months, I place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection, I will... i) waste my money: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely ii) waste city money: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely iii) create unpleasant odours: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely iv) create a mess: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely v) attract pests: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely vi) increase waste collection costs: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely vii) not make a difference: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely

113

  viii) need extra space in my house: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely ix) have to put in extra time: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely x) have to put in extra physical effort: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xi) have to put in extra mental effort: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xii) help eliminate jobs: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xiii) not be given money for waste materials: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xiv) feel overwhelmed: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xv) feel tired: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xvi) feel confused: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely xvii) feel stressed: Unlikely ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Likely

17. Direct Measure of Intention (part 2) Over the next six months... i) I will place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. Improbable ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Probable ii) I want to place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. False ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:True

114

  18. Direct Measure of Attitude (part 2) My placing all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection over the next six months is Messy ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Clean Quick ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Time-consuming Smelly ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Odourless Complicated ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Straightforward Useful ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Useless Sensible___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Senseless

19. Direct Measure of Morality (part 2) Over the next six months... i) I do not need to place all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection as enough is being done by others to clean up the environment. Disagree:___:___:___:___:___:___:Agree ii) Everybody should share the responsibility of placing all household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. Disagree:___:___:___:___:___:___:Agree

20. Outcome Evaluation (part 1) Instructions: Please rate the following general outcomes from your perspective. i) My saving my city money is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good ii) My saving electrical energy generally is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good iii) My helping create a better environment for future generations is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good iv) My preserving natural resources Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good v) My reducing the amount of waste that goes into landfill is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good vi) My helping stimulate the economy is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good

115

  vii) My contributing to manufacturing goods made from recycled materials is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good viii) My helping protect the environment is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good ix) My wasting my money is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good x) My having to put in extra mental effort is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xi) My helping eliminate jobs is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xii) My not being given money for waste materials is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xiii) My feeling overwhelmed is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xiv) My feeling tired is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xv) My feeling confused is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xvi) My feeling stressed is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good

21. Direct Measure of Attitude (part 3) My placing all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection over the next six months is Confusing ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Clear Efficient ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Inefficient Rewarding ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Not Rewarding Responsible ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Not Responsible Hygienic ___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Not Hygienic Difficult___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Easy

116

  22. Past Behaviour Direct Measure i) How often have I placed all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection over the last six months? Rarely:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Often ii) Over the last six months I have placed all my household recyclable waste at the curbside for municipal recycling collection. False___:___:___:___:___:___:___:True

23. Outcome Evaluation (part 2) Instructions: Please rate the following general outcomes from your perspective. i) My wasting city money is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good ii) My creating unpleasant odours is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good iii) My creating a mess is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good iv) My attracting pests is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good v) My increasing waste collection costs is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good vi) My not making a difference is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good vii) My needing extra space in my house: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good viii) My having to put in extra time is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good ix) My having to put in extra physical energy is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good x) My helping create jobs is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xi) My helping solve a global problem is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good

117

  xii) My helping reduce my property taxes is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xiii) My experiencing satisfaction is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xiv) My feeling good is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xv) My feeling helpful is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xvi) My feeling reduced guilt is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good xvii) My feeling like I'm doing my part is: Bad:___:___:___:___:___:___:___:Good

DEMOGRAPHICS In answering the next questions, please remember that these answers are confidential and will not be linked to you or your family. 24. Do you (or does your family) rent or own your current residence? Rent Own

25. What is your age? Under 20 - ___ 20-34 - ___ 35-49 - ___ 50-65 - ___ Over 65- ___

26. How many individuals in your household are in each of the following age groups? ENTER A NUMBER FOR EACH CATEGORY INCLUDING ZERO WHERE APPLICABLE 18 ­ 27 28 ­ 37 38 ­ 47 48 ­ 57 58 ­ 67 ___ ___ ___ ___ ___

118

  68 ­ 77 - ___ 79+ - ___

27. What is the highest level of formal education achieved by someone in your household? Less than high school Some high school High school graduate Some college/university College diploma University undergraduate degree Post-graduate degree

28. What is your total household income per year? Less than $20,000 $20,000 to $39,000 $40,000 to $59,000 $60,000 to $79,000 $80,000 to $100,000 Over $100,000 Not sure

29. What are the first three characters of your postal mailbox? ___ ___ ___

30. What is your gender? Male Female Rather not say

31. What is your marital status? Married Divorced Widowed Separated Never been married A member of an unmarried couple

119

 

We've reached the end of the study. Thank you for participating in it. Dr. Paul Missios of Ryerson University is the principal investigator for the study. For any questions, please contact him at this email: pmissios@ryerson.ca Once again, thank you for your participation. The information that you and others have provided is important and will be of help in the effort to take better care of the environment.  

120

  Appendix 8: Construal Level Theory    The Importance of Construal Level Matching in Persuasive Messaging  Framing persuasive messaging positively (as in a gain promotion frame) or negatively (as  in a loss prevention frame) influences persuasion efficacy.  Negatively framed messages  from personal acquaintances increase actual recycling behaviours, but positively framed  messages results in more favourable attitudes towards curbside recycling (Obermiller,  1995).  While it is unclear when a positive versus negative frame is more effective,  construal level may be moderating factor (White et al., 2011).    White et al. (2011), in a series of studies manipulating the construal level of a  persuasive municipal recycling pamphlet, show that pamphlets with congruent messaging  (pairing loss prevention framing with feasibility concerns, or gain promotion framing with  desirability concerns) are more effective in increasing objective recycling behaviour than  messaging mismatched on construal level (e.g., a loss prevention frame paired with why  desirability concerns).  The authors demonstrate a significant increase in recycling  intention when matching timeframe construal level (proximal is low, distal is high) with  message frame construal level.  In their third study, White et al. (2011) again test the  influence of matched versus mismatched construal level recycling pamphlets on recycling  intention, but also include measurements of processing fluency and perceived efficacy and  again find that messaging paired on construal level is more effective at influencing  behavioural intention and find greater processing fluency of matched messaging.  They  suggest that ease of processing the persuasive messaging is interpreted as ease of doing the  behaviour, which may increase selfefficacy and motivation to perform the behaviour in  question.    The information included in persuasive messaging is dependent on time: persuasive  messaging including feasibility information has a greater influence on purchase choice in  the near future whereas desirability information has greater influence on distant future  purchase intentions (Thomas et al., 2007).  Agrawal et al. (2007) find that participants are  willing to pay more for a psychologically distant option when the choice is framed by  desirability factors rather than feasibility factors.  Fujita et al. (2008) demonstrate that a 

121

  valuerelated argument highlighting the greater environmental sensitivity of a product  enhances persuasion for distant future purchase decisions, but not for near future  purchase decisions.    Lee et al. (2010) find that a match between regulatory focus and construal level  leads to more positive attitudes, driven by "processing fluency as a result of perceived  engagement" (White et al., 2011, 480).  The ability to process information can influence  consumer evaluations (Lee and Aaker 2004; Lee and Labroo, 2004), purchase intentions  (Lee et al., 2004) and choices (Novemsky, Dhar and Schwarz, 2007).    Global, indirect benefits can be considered highlevel construals because they are  physically, temporally, and often times socially, remote.  Subsequently, the CLTbased  findings around frame matching and the temporal effect on the influence of desirability  versus feasibility features offers great insight into how and when advertising global,  indirect benefits may influence consumer behaviour.  Insights into the KAG Offered by Construal Level Theory  A relatively new theory based on cognitive construal level offers insight into the causes of  the KAG and how the cognitive biases involved may be superseded.  CLT hinges on  evidence that an object can be mentally construed at different levels (Vallacher and  Wagner, 1987) and that "as a direct consequences of activating different mental construals,  preferences and decisions shift systematically" (Fujita et al., 2008, 563).  A lowlevel  construal is a detailed, contextualized representation of the object in mind that includes  minor details and a focus on the feasibility aspects of that object (i.e. the how).  Conversely,  a highlevel construal is a decontextualized representation of the object in mind that  conveys generalized gist from available information while omitting specific details and  focus on desirability aspects (i.e. the why).  CLT suggests that individuals use higher level  construals to represent more distant events, as a generalized heuristic, likely because distal  events are fluid and generally lack details.  "Lack of knowledge forces people to use more  abstract, highlevel construals to represent distant entities" (Fujita et al., 2008, 67) and  requires use of construals like memories, imagination and predictions.    The Influence of Psychological Distance 

122

  CLT proposes that psychological distance influences behaviour by changing the mental  representations of choice alternatives and that increased psychological distance  systematically influences people's evaluations and choices.  Psychologically distant objects  are construed at a higher level than psychologically close objects.  Psychologically close  concepts are experienced personally, while stimuli that are temporally removed, socially  distant (sensed by others), spatially distant, or are unlikely to occur are considered  psychologically distant.  Forster (2009) suggests that novelty has a similar affect as  psychological distance.  Psychological distance from an object increases tendency to  construe it in highlevel terms.    Psychologically distal events become connected with highlevel construals (and  viceversa) and this connection, as with most heuristics, becomes overgeneralized and  used even when other, additional information is available (Liberman, Trope and Stephan,  2007; Trope and Liberman, 2003).  "Even with equivalent information, construals of  objects or events are more highlevel when they are temporally distant versus near" (Fujita  et al., 2008, 563).  The relationship between psychological distance and level of construal is  bidirectional (Eyal et al., 2010): "as psychological distance increases, construals become  more abstract, and as level of abstraction increases, targets seem more psychologically  distant" (Eyal et al., 2009, 69).  How Construal Level Influences Object Value  CLT suggests that the attractiveness of an object is based on the value an individual places  on both highend and lowlevel construals of that object.  Psychological distance increases  the weight an individual assigns to an object's highlevel value (desirability) while  decreasing the weight of the lowlevel (feasibility) value.  Psychologically distancing an  object shifts the perception of attractiveness towards the object's highlevel value.  As  psychological distance increases, desirability concerns receive greater weight than  feasibility concerns (and vice versa) (Liberman et al., 1998; Tudorov et al., 2007).  If an  object's high level value is more attractive than its lowlevel value, as would be the case  with most environmental behaviours, the object is perceived as more attractive when it is  more remote.  

123

  Moral Decisions in Light of the CLT  "Personal values, ideologies, and moral principles are abstract, decontextualized, super  ordinate cognitive structures and as such constitute highlevel construals" (Eyal et al.,  2009, 79).  Central values are higher and will have a stronger affect on distant events  versus near future events.  Wakslak, Nussbaum, Liberman, and Trope (2008) find that  people anticipate exhibiting more consistent traits in distant future opposed to near future.   Eyal et al. (2009) show that intentions for further in the future better reflect values.  They  also show that benevolence values better predict committed volunteer hours for distant  future while feasibility concerns better predict committed volunteer hours in the near  future.  Eyal, Sagristano, Trope, Liberman and Chaiken (2009), using Schwartz's altruism  model show that "values were more strongly associated with behaviours planned for the  distant future than those planned for near future" (Eyal et al., 2009, 79).  They also find that  general attitudes are better predictors of intentions for the distant future.  "One's cherished  values are expressed in one's plans, but unless committed to in advance, they are not  necessarily expressed in one's daily conduct" (Eyal et al., 2009, 80).  Personal values  predict potential future behaviour but often those same values fail to be enacted at  implementation unless committed to beforehand.  Research shows that highconstrual  level promotes cooperation in moral judgments (Agerstrom and Bjorklund, 2009) and  negotiations ­ where high level construal increases the likelihood of reaching integrative  solution (Henderson et al., 2006).    Individuals are more likely to express prosocial behavioural intentions in the distant  future (Agerstrom et al., 2009).  Eyal et al. (2010) find that moral transgressions far in the  future are more likely to be described in moral terms than transgressions in the near future  and "moral transgressions were judged more severely when imagined in the distance  compared to the nearfuture" (Eyal et al., 2010, 9).  The same is found for social distance  (Eyal et al., 2008).  Insights into Persuasive Messaging Offered by CLT  Loss frames highlight negative consequences and negative consequences signal a threat or  problem demanding corrective action.  Lee et al. (2010) find that priming an individual  with a promotional focus led to more abstract thinking while priming with a prevention 

124

  focus led to more concrete thoughts.  Temporal orientation can activate concrete or  abstract mindsets (Forster et al., 2004; Wakslak et al., 2008)    Personal relevance is "the extent to which an issue has important personal  consequences" (Fujita et al., 2008, 562).  Petty et al. (1981) show that highpersonal  relevance leads to more sensitivity to strength of argument while lowpersonal relevance  leads to more sensitivity to source of argument.  This is assumed to work with dual processing model (systematic versus heuristic processing).  Discussion of Construal Level Theory and Areas for Further Research  While CLT has rapidly gained attention and research interest, it is this investigator's belief  that the influence of construal level has not yet been viewed in light of the KAG, nor  juxtaposed against the TPB model and methods. The importance of aligning construal level  with priming and messaging frame, as displayed by White et al., (2010), cannot be  overlooked.  The following section highlights some preliminary question and interesting  avenues for further research.    CLT suggests that people are naturally primed to pay attention to lowlevel,  feasibility actions at the time of behaviour so persuasive messaging close (temporally and  physically) to the behaviour need to highlight feasibility concerns.  For example, placing  procedural information on the recycling bins themselves.  Further away from the  behaviour, (physically or otherwise), higherlevel construals might be more effective.  The  efficacy belief of "contribute to manufacturing goods made from recycled materials" is a  consequences farremoved from the physical act of recycling, therefore it naturally is  construed at high level.    Experiential beliefs, by their nature, are experienced by the individual and are  psychologically quite close to the individual.  As such, they would lend themselves to low level construals.  Instrumental beliefs would, overall, be construed at a higher level because  they are not experienced firsthand and they require a cognitive inference.  Direct personal  benefits are construed at a low level while indirect, global benefits are construed at a  higher level.      The survey questions are posed in lowconstrual terms; most of the questions are  framed in terms of the first person, (with the exception of a couple moral norm and social 

125

  norm questions that refer to others).  Intention is also measured in terms of lowlevel  construal (e.g., "I intend", "I plan", "I will") and addresses the "how" questions of recycling.   Similarly, the behaviour construct is also lowlevel construal because it is both recent and  personal.  Since the dependent measures are lowlevel construals, it would follow based on  CLT that independent variables construed at the lowlevel would exert more influence than  highlevel construed independent variables because the respondent has been primed for  lowlevel construals.  Do the RAA survey questions prime the respondent to think in low level, feasibility terms?  Does the Schwartz model prime higherconstrual thinking?  Would  it be possible to create a RAA questionnaire that did not emphasize lowlevel construals?   

126

  REFERENCES  Agerstrom, J., & Bjorklund, F. (2009). Temporal distance and moral concerns: Future  morality questionable behavior is perceived as more wrong and evokes stronger prosocial  intentions. Basic and Applied Psychology, 45, 3543.    Agrawal, N., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2006). Value from highlighting time appropriate  outcomes. Kellogg School of Management. Northwestern University.    Ajzen, I. (2006 January). Constructing a TpB Questionnnaire: Conceptual and Methodogical  Considerations. Retrieved 2010 4November from Theory of Planned Behavior:  http://people.umass.edu/ajzen/pdf/tpb.measurement.pdf    Ajzen, I. (1985). From Intentions to Actions: A Theory of Planned Behavior. Heidelberg:  Springer.    Ajzen, I. (2002). Perceived behavioral control, selfefficacy, locus of control, the theory of  planned behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32, 665683.    Ajzen, I. (1992). Persusasive communication theory in social pscyhology: A historial  perspective. In M. Manfredo (Ed.), Influencing Human Behaviour (pp. 127). Champaign, Ill:  Sagamore.    Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organisational Behavior and Human  Decision Process, 50, 179211.    Ajzen, I., & Driver, B. (1992). Application of the theory of planned behaviour to leisure  choice. Journal of Leisure Research, 24 (3), 207224.    Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding Attitudes and Predicting Social Behavior.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.    Alwitt, L. F., & Pitts, R. E. (1996). Predicting purchase intentions for an environmentally  sensitive product. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 5 (1), 4964.    Andreasen, A. R. (1994). Social marketing: It's definition and domain. Journal of Public  Policy and Marketing, 13 (1), 108114.    Andreasen, A. R., Goldberg, M. E., & Sirgy, J. E. (2012). Foundational research on consumer  welfare. In D. G. Mick, S. Pettigrew, C. Pechmann, & O. J. L. (Eds.), Transformative Consumer  Research (pp. 2565). N.Y.: Taylor and Francis Group.    Arbuthnot, J. (1977). The roles of attitudinal and personality variables in the prediction of  environmental behavior and knowledge. Environment and Behavior , 9 (2), 217232.   

127

  Armitage, A. J., & Conner, M. (2001). Efficacy of the theory of planned behaviour: A meta analytic review. British Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 471499.    Armitage, C. J., & Conner, M. (2000). Attitudianl ambivalence: A test of three key  hypotheses. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26 (11), 14211432.    Association of Municipalities of Ontario. (2010 1November). Timeline: Ontario's Waste  Diversion History. Retrieved 2012 26January from Association of Municipalities of Ontario:  www.amo.on.ca/AM/Template.cfm?Section=News_Media&Template=/CM/ContentDisplay. cfm&ContentID=159575    Association of Municipalities of Ontario. (2010). Waste Diversion in Ontario. Retrieved 2010  2411 from Association of Municipalities of Ontario:  http://www.amo.on.ca/Content/NavigationMenu/PolicyIssues/WasteManagement/Heapo fTrouble/default.htm    Association of Ontario Municipalities. (2011 15September). Trash Talk: Who's really left  holding the bag? Retrieved 2011 27December from Association of Ontario Municipalities:  www.amo.on.ca/Trashtalk/Trashtalk.html    Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1989). On the use of structural equation models in experimental  designs. Jounral of Marketing Research, 26, 271284.    Bagozzi, R. P., Lee, K., & Van Loo, M. F. (2001). Decisions to donate bone marrow: The role  of attitudes and sbujective norms across cultures. Pscyhology and Health, 16, 2956.    Balderjahn, I. (1988). Personality variables and environmental attitudes as predictor of  ecologically responsible consumption patterns. Journal of Business Research, 17, 5156.    Barr, S. (2002). Household Waste in Social Perspective. Burlington: Ashgate.    Barr, S., Gilg, A. W., & Ford, N. J. (2001). A conceptual framework for understanding and  analysing attitudes towards householdwaste managment. Environmental Planning, 33  (11), 20252048.    Beck, L., & Ajzen, I. (1991). Predicting dishonest actions using the theory of planned  behavior. Journal of Research in Personality, 25 (3), 285301.    Berger, I. E., & Corbin, R. M. (1992). Perceived consumer effectiveness and faith in others as  moderators of environmentally responsible behaviors. Journal of Public Policy and  Marketing, 11 (2), 79100.    Best, H., & Kneip, T. (2011). The impact of attitudes and behavioral costs on environmental  behavior: A natural experiement on household waste recycling. Social Science Research, 40,  917930. 

128

    Black, J. S. (1978). Attitudinal, normative, and economic factors in early response to an  energyuse field experiment. Dissertation Abstractions International, 39 (436) . Unpublished  doctoral dissertation, Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin.    Black, J. S., Stern, P. C., & Elworth, J. T. (1985). Personal and contextual influences on  household energy adaptations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70 (1), 321.    Boldero, J. (1995). The prediciton of household recycling of newspaper: the role of  attitudes, intentions and situational factors. Journal of Applied Social Pschology, 25 (5), 440 462.    Burroughs, J. E., & Rindfleisch, A. (2012). What welfare? On the definition and domain of  transformative consumer research and the foundational role of materalism. In D. G. Mick, S.  Pettigrew, C. Pechmann, & O. J. L. (Eds.), Transformative Consumer Research for Personal  and Collective WellBeing (pp. 249266). New York, N.Y.: Routledge.    Canadian Institute for Environmental Law and Policy. (2008). A Brief History of Waste  Diversion in Ontario. Toronto: Canadian Institute for Environmental Law and Policy.    Charng, H. W., Piliavin, J. A., & Callero, P. (1988). Role identity and reasoned action in the  prediction of repeated behaviour. Social Psychology Quarterly, 51, 303321.    Chatzisarantis, N., & Hagger, M. S. (2005). Effects of a brief intervention based on the theory  of planned behaviour on leisuretime physical activity participation. Journal of Sport and  Exercise Psychology, 27, 270487.    Chen, M.F., & Tung, P.J. (2010). The moderating effect of perceived lack of facilities on  consumers' recycling intentions. Environment and Behavior, 42 (6), 824844.    Cheung, S. F., Chan, D. K.S., & Wong, Z. S.Y. (1999). Reexamining the theory of planned  behavior in understanding wastepaper recycling. Environment and Behavior, 31 (5), 587 612.    Chung, S.S., & Leung, M. (2007). The valueaction gap in waste recycling: The case of  undergraduates in Hong Kong. Environmental Management, 40 (4), 603612.    City of Toronto. (2012). Toronto Overview. Retrieved 2012 10March from City of Toronto:  www.toronto.ca/investinToronto/tor_overview.htm    City of Toronto. (2011 12July). Facts about Toronto's Trash. Retrieved 2012 10March  from City of Toronto: Solid Waste Management: www.toronto.ca/garbage/facts.htm    Conner, M., & Armitage, C. J. (1998). Extending the theory of planned behavior: A review  and avenues for further research. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28 (15), 14291464. 

129

    Conner, M., & McMillan, B. (1999). Interaction effects in the theory of planned behavior:  Studying cannabis use. British Journal of Social Psychology, 38, 195222.    Davies, J., Foxall, G. R., & Pallister, J. (2002). Beyond the intentionbehavior mythology: An  integrated model of recycling. Marketing Theory, 2 (1), 29113.    De Young, R. (1990). Exploring the difference between recyclers and nonrecyclers:  Toward a strategy for public education. Journal of Environmental Education, 27, 1318.    De Young, R. (1986). Some psychological aspects of recycling: The structure of  conservation satisfactions. Environment and Behavior, 18 (4), 435449.    Derksen, L., & Gartrell, J. (1993). The social context of recycling. American Sociological  Review, 58 (3), 434442.    Diekmann, A., & Preisendorfer. (2003). Green and greenback: The behavioral effects of  environmental attitudes in lowcost and highcost situations. Rationality and Society, 15 (4),  441472.    Dulany, D. E. (1961). Hypotheses and habits in verbal "operant conditioning". Journal of  Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63, 251263.    Dunlop, R. E., & Van Liere, K. D. (1978). The new environmental paradaigm: A proposed  instrument and preliminary results. The Journal of Environmental Education, 9, 1019.    East, R. (1993). Investment decisions and the theory of planned behavior. Journal of  Economic Psychology, 14 (2), 337375.    Eyal, T., & Liberman, N. (2010). Morality and psychological distance: A construal level  theory perspective. Herzliya Symposium on Personality and Social Psychology, (pp. 116).    Eyal, T., Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (2009). Psychological distance and consumer behavior: A  construal level theory perspective. In M. Wanke (Ed.), Social Psychology of Consumer  Behavior (pp. 6588). New York, New York: Pscyhology Press.    Eyal, T., Sagristano, M. D., Trope, Y., Liberman, N., & Chaiken, S. (2009). When values  matter: Expressing values in behavioral intentions for the near versus distance future.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 3543.    Feather, N. T. (1959). Subjective probability and decision under uncertainty. Psychological  Review, 66, 150164.    Ferrara, I., & Missios, P. (2005). Recycling and waste diversion effectiveness: Evidence from  Canada. Environmental & Resource Economics, 30, 221­238. 

130

    Fishbein, M. (1963). An investigation of relationships between beliefs about an object and  the attitude toward that objec. Human Relations, 16, 233240.    Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, Attitude, Intention and Behavior: An Introduction to  Theory and Research. MA: AddisionWesley.    Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (2010). Predicting and Changing Behaviour: The Reasoned Action  Approach. New York: Psychology Press.    Fishbein, M., & Middlestadt, S. E. (2012). Using behavioral theory to transform consumers  and their environments to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted infections. In  Transformative Consumer Research for Personal and Collective WellBeing (pp. 391410).  New York, N.Y.: Routledge.    Forster, J. (2009). Cognitive consequences of novelty and familiarity: How mere exposure  influences level of construal. Journal of Experimental Social Pscyhology, 45 (2), 444447.    Forster, J., Friedman, R., & Liberman, N. (2004). Temporal construal effects on abstract and  concrete thinking: Consequences for insight and creative cognition. Journal of Personality  and Social Pscyhology, 87, 177189.    Fredricks, A. J., & Dossett, D. J. (1983). Attitudebehavior relations: A comparison of the  FishbeinAjzen and the BentlerrSpeckart models. Journal of Personality and Social  Psychology, 45, 501512.    Frey, B. S. (1993). Motivation as a limit to pricing. Journal of Economic Psychology, 14 (4),  635664.    Fujita, K., Eyal, T., Chaiken, S., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2008). Influencing attitudes  toward near and distant objects. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 562572.    Gamba, & Oskamp, S. (1994). Factors influencing community residents' participating in  commingled curbside recycling programs. Environment and Behavior, 26 (5), 587612.    Geller, E. S., Winnet, R. A., & Everett, P. B. (1982). Environmental Preservation: New  Strategies for Behavior Change. New York, N.Y.: Pergammon Press.    Godin, G., Valois, P., Lepage, L., & Desharnais, R. (1992). Predictors of smoking behavior: An  application of Ajzen's theory of planned behaviour. British Journal of Addiction, 87, 1335 1343.    Guagnano, G. A., Stern, P. C., & Dietz, T. (1995). Influences on attitudebehavior  relationships: A natural experiment with curbside recycling. Environment and Behavior, 27  (5), 699718. 

131

    Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach to  moral judgment. Psychological Review, 108, 814834.    Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons. Science, 162, 12431248.    Harland, P., Staats, H., & Wilke, H. A. (1999). Explaining proenvironmental intention and  behavior by personal norms and the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Applied Social  Psychology, 29 (12), 25052528.    Heberlein, T. A. (1975). Social norms and enviornmental quality. American Association for  Advancement of Science Annual Meetings. New York.    Henderson, M. D., Trope, Y., & Carnevale, P. J. (2006). Negotiation from a near and distant  time perspective. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 721729.    Hines, M., J., Hungerford, H. R., & Tomera, A. N. (19861987). Analysis and synthesis of  research on responsible proenvironmental behaviour: a metaanalysis. The Journal of  Environmental Euducation, 18 (2), 18.    Hopper, J. R., & Nielsen, J. M. (1991). Recycling as altruistic behavior: Normative and  behavioral strategies to expand participation in a community recycling program.  Environment and Behavior, 23 (2), 195220.    Huebner, R., & Lipsey, M. (1981). The relationship of three measures of locus of control to  environment activism. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 2 (1), 4558.    Ipsos Public Affairs. (2009). City of Toronto MultiUnit Recycling Qualitative Research  Summary Presentation. Toronto: City of Toronto.    Jacobs, H. E., Bailey, J. S., & Crews, J. (1984). Development and analysis of a community based resource recovery program. Journal of Applied Behaviour Analysis, 17, 127145.    Katzev, R., & Johnson, T. (1987). Promoting Energy Conservation: An Analysis of Behavioural  Approaches. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.    Kelly, C., & Breinlinger, S. (1995). Attitudes, intentions, and behavior: A study of women's  participation in collection action. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 25, 14301445.    Kempton, W., Boster, J., & Hartley, J. A. (1995). Environmental values in american culture.  Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.   

132

  Kilbourne, W., & Mittelstaedt, J. (2012). From Profligacy to Sustainability: Can We Get  There From Here? Transforming the Ideology of Consumption. In D. G. Mick, S. Pettigrew, C.  Pechmann, & O. J. L. (Eds.), Transformative Consumer Research (pp. 283299). New York:  Taylor & Francis Group.    Knussen, Y., & Wells, M. (2004). An analysis of intentions to recycle household waste: The  roles of past behavior, perceived habit, and perceived lack of facilities. Journal of  Environmental Psychology, 24 (2), 237246.    Kollmuss, A., & Agyeman, J. (2002). Mind the gap: Whay do people act environmentally and  what are the barriers to proenvironmental behavior? Environmental Education Research, 8  (3), 239260.    Kraft, P., Rise, J., Sulton, S., & Roysamb, E. (2005). Perceived difficulty in the theory of  planned behavior: Perceived behavioral control or affective attitude? British Journal of  Social Psychology, 44, 479496.    Kuhl, J., & Beckmann, J. (1985). Action Control from Cognition to Behavior. New York, New  York: SpringerVerlag.    Lammers, J., & Stapel, D. A. (2009). How power influences moral thinking. Jounral of  Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 279289.    Lavine, H., & Snyder, M. (1996). Cognitive processing and the functional matching effect in  persuasion: The mediating role of subjective perceptions of message quality. Journal of  Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 580604.    Lee, A. Y., & Aaker, J. L. (2004). Bringing the frame into focus: The influence of regulatory fit  on processing fluency and persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86 (2),  205218.    Lee, A. Y., & Labroo, A. A. (2004). The effect of conceptual and perceptual influence on  brand evaluation. Journal of Marketing Research, 41 (2), 151165.    Lee, A. Y., Keller, P. A., & Sternthal, B. (2010). Value from regulatory fit: The persuasive  imparct of fit between consumer goals and message concreteness. Journal of Consumer  Research, 36, 73547.    Lee, Y. J., deYoung, R., & Marans, R. W. (1995). Factors influencing individual reycling  behavior in office settings: A study of office workers in Taiwan. Environment and Behavior,  27 (3), 380403.    Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasiblity and desirability considerations in  near and distant future decisions: A test of temporal construal theory. Journal of Personality  and Social Psychology, 75, 518. 

133

    Liberman, N., Trope, Y., & Stephan, E. (2007). Psychological distance. In Kruglanski, A. W.,  Higgins, & E. T. [Eds.], Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (Vol. 2, pp. 353383).  New York: Guilford Press.    Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitude. Archives of Psychology, 140,  155.    Lindsay, J. J., & Strathman, A. (1997). Predictors of recycling behavior: An application of a  modified health belief model. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 27 (20), 17991823.    Loughlin, D., & Barlaz, M. (2003). Strengthening Markets for Recyclables A Worldwide  Perspective. Raleigh, N.C.: North Carolina State University.    Luyben, P. D., & Bailey, J. (1979). Newspaper recycling: The effects of awards and proximity  of containers. Environment and Behavior, 11, 539557.    Maloney, M. P., & Ward, M. P. (1973). Ecology: Let's hear it from people. An objective scale  for measurement of ecological attitudes and knowledge. American Psychologist, 28, 583 586.    Manoj, T., Chandran, S., & Trope, Y. (2007). The effects of information type and temporal  distance on purchase intentions. Ithica, N.Y.: Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of  Management, Cornell University.    Manstead, A. S., & Parker, D. (1995). Evaluating and extending the theory of planned  behavior. European Review of Social Pscyhology, 6 (1), 6995.    McDonagh, P., Dobscha, S., & Prothero, A. (2012). Sustainable Consumption and Production:  Challenges for Transformative Consumer Research. In D. G. Mick, S. Pettigrew, C.  Pechmann, & O. J. L. (Eds.), Transformative Consumer Research. New York, N.Y.: Taylor &  Francis Group.    McDonald, S., & Oates, C. (2003). Reasons for nonparticipation in a kerbside recycling  scheme. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 39, 369385.    McKenzieMohr, D., & Smith, W. (1999). Fostering Sustainable Behaviour. Gabriola Island,  B.C.: New Society Publishers.    Mick, D. G., Pettigrew, S., Pechmann, C., & L., O. J. (2012). Origins, Qualities, and  Envisionments of Transformative Consumer Research. In D. G. Mick, S. Pettigrew, C.  Pechmann, & O. J. L., Transformative Consumer Research (pp. 324). New York, N.Y.: Taylor  & Francis Group.   

134

  Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our  capacity for processing information. Psychological Review, 63 (2), 8197.    Ministry of the Environment. (2008). Toward a Zero Waste Future: Review of Ontario's  Waste Diversion Act, 2002. Toronto: Government of Ontario.    Mohai, P., & Twight, B. W. (1987). Age and environmentalism: An elaboration of the buttel  model using national survey evidence. Social Science Quarterly, 68 (4), 798815.    Neo, H. (2010). The potential of largescale urban waste reycling: A case study of the  national recycling programme in Singapore. Society and Natural Resources, 23 (9), 872887.    Nielsen, J. M., & Ellington, B. L. (1983). Social processes and resource conservation. In N. R.  Feimer, & E. S. Geller (Eds.), Environmental Psycholgy: Directions and Perspectives (pp. 288 312). New York, N.Y.: Praeger.    Novemsky, N., Dhar, R., Schwarz, N., & Simonson, I. (2007). Preference fluency in choice.  Journal of Marketing Research, 44, 347356.    Obermiller, C. (1995). The baby is sick/the baby is well: A test of enviornmental  communication appeals. The Journal of Advertising, 24 (2), 5570.    Olander, F., & Thogersen, J. (1995). Understanding of consumer behavior as a prerequisite  for environmental protection. Journal of Consumer Policy, 18 (4), 345385.    Ontario Waste Managment Association. (2006). A Landfill Story: Capacity, Export & EA.  Retrieved 2010 10April from http://www.owma.org/db/db2file.asp?fileid=457    Oskamp, S. (1995). Resource conservation and recycling: Behavior and policy. Journal of  Social Issues, 51 (4), 157177.    Oskamp, S., Harrington, M. J., Edwards, T. C., Sherwood, D. L., Okuda, S. M., & Swanson, D. C.  (1991). Factors influencing household recycling behavior. Environment and Behavior, 23  (4), 494519.    Oskamp, S., Williams, R., Unipan, J., Steers, N., Mainier, T., & Kurland, G. (1994).  Psychological factors affecting paper recycling by businesses. Environment and Behavior,  26, 477503.    Ouellette, J. A., & Wood, W. (1998). Habit and intention in everyday life: The multiple  processes by which past behavior predicts future behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 124 (1),  5474.    Pardini, A., & Katzev, R. (198383). The effect of strength of commitment on newspaper  recycling. Journal of Environmental Systems, 13, 245245. 

135

    Parker, D., Manstead, A. S., Stradling, S. G., & Reason, J. T. (1992). Determinants of intention  to commit driving violations. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 24 (2), 117131.    Parker, D., Manstead, A. S., Stradling, S. G., Reason, J. T., & Baxter, J. S. (1992). Intention to  commit driving violations: An application of the theory of planned behavior. Journal of  Applied Pscyhology, 77 (1), 94101.    Peak, H. (1955). Attitude and motivation. In M. R. Jones (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on  Motivation. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.    Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Goldman, R. (1981). Personal involvement as a determinant of  argumentbased persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41 (5).    Pritchard, I., & Preuss, P. (1991). Data Handling Skills for Australian Science Students.  Melbourne, Victoria: Cambridge University Press.    Rathje, W., & Murphy, C. (2001). Rubbish!: The Archaeology of Garbage. Tucson, A.Z.: The  University of Arizona Press.    Collins English Dictionary ­ Complete & Unabridged, 10th Edition. 2009. Retrieved 2012 10 June from http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/recycle?s=t    Reid, D. H., Luyben, P. D., Rawers, R. J., & Bailey, J. S. (1976). Newspaper recycling behavior:  The effects of prompting and proximity of containers. Environment and Behavior, 8, 471 481.    Rosenstock, I. (1974). Historical origins of the Health Belief Model. Health Education  Monographs, 2 (4).    Rosenberg, M. J. (1956). Cognitive structure and attitudinal affect. Journal of Abnormal and  Social Psychology, 53, 367372.    Samdahl, D., & Robertson, R. (1989). Socail determinants of environmental concert:  Specification and test of the model. Environment and Behaviour, 21 (1), 5781.    Schnelle, J. F., McNees, M. P., Thomas, M. M., Grendich, J. G., & Beagle, G. P. (1980).  Prompting behavior change in the community: Use of mass media techniques. Environment  and Behavior, 12 (2), 157166.    Schultz, P. W., & Oskamp, S. (1996). Effort as a moderator of the attitudebehavior  relationship: General environmental concern and recycling. Social Psychology Quarterly, 59,  375386.   

136

  Schultz, P., Oskamp, S., & Mainieri, T. (1995). Who recycles and when? A review of personal  and situational factors. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 15, 105121.    Schwartz, S. H. (1970). Elicitation of moral obligation and selfsacrificing behavior: An  experimental study of volunteering to be a bone marrow donor. Journal of Personality and  Social Pscyhology, 15 (4), 283293.    Schwartz, S. H. (1977). Normative influences on altruism. Advances in Experimental Social  Psychology, 10, 221279.    Schwartz, S. (1970). Moral decision making and behaviour. In J. Macauley, & L. Berkovitz  (Eds.), Altruism and Helping Behavior (pp. 127141). New York, N.Y.: Academic Press.  Scott, D. (1999). Equal opportunity, unequal results. Environment and Behavior, 31 (2), 267 290.    Seligman, C., & Becker, L. D. (1981). Encouraging residential energy conservation through  feedback. In A. Baum, & J. Singer (Eds.), Advances in Environmental Psychology: Energy  Conservation: Psychological Perspectives (Vol. 3). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Eribaum  Associates.    Shrum, L. J., Lowrey, T. M., & McCarty, J. A. (1994). Recycling as a marketing problem: A  framework for strategy development. Psychology and Marketing, 11 (4), 393416.    Simmons, D., & Widman, R. (1990). Motivations and barriers to recycling; Toward a  strategy for public education. Journal of Environmental Education, 27, 1318.    Smith, S. M., Havgtvedt, C. P., & Petty, R. E. (1994). Attitudes and recycling: Does the  measurement of affect enhance behavioral prediction? Psychology and Marketing, 11 (4),  359374.    Snyder, M., & DeBono, K. (1985). Appeals to image and claims about quality: Understanding  the psychology of advertising. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 586597.    Spaccarelli, S., Zolik, E., & Johnson, L. A. (198990). Effects of verbal prompting and block  characteristics on participation in curbside newspaper recycling. Journal of Environmental  Systems, 19 (1), 4557.    Sparks, P., & Shepherd, R. (1992). Selfidentity and theory of planned behavior: Assessing  the role of identification with "green consumerism". Social Psychology Quarterly, 55, 388 399.    Sparks, P., Shepherd, R., & Frewer, L. J. (1995). Assessing and structuring attitudes towards  the use of gene technology in food production: The role of perceived ehtical obligation.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 16 (34), 267285.   

137

  Staats, H. (2003). Understanding proenvironmental attitudes and behavior: An analysis and  review of research based on the theory of planned behavior. In M. Bonnes, T. Lee, & M.   Bonaiuto, Psychological Theories for Environmental Issues (pp. 171201). Burlington, V.T.:  Ashgate Publishing Company.    Statistics Canada. (2007 13March). (code 3520005) (table). 2006 Community Profiles. 2006  Census. Retrieved 2012 10March from Statistics Canada: http://wwwl2.statcan.ca/census reconsement/2006/dppd/prof/92591/index.cfm?Lang=E    Stern, P. C. (1999). Information, ncentives and proenvironmental consumer behavior.  Journal of Consumer Policy, 461478.    Stern, P. C. (2000). Toward a coherent theory of environmentally significant behavior.  Journal of Social Issues, 5 (3), 407424.    Stern, P. C., & Oskamp, S. (1987) Managing scarce environmental resources. In D. Stokols, &  I. Altman (Eds.), Handbook of Environmental Psychology (pp. 10431088). New York, N.Y.:  Wiley.    Stern, P. C., Aronson, E., Darley, J. M., Hill, D. H., Hirst, E., & Kempton, W. (1986). The  effectiveness of incentives for residential energy conservation. Evaluation Review, 10 (2),  147176.    Strathman, A., Gleicher, R., Boninger, D. S., & Edwards, C. S. (1994). The consideration of  future consequences: Weighing immediate and distant outcomes of behavior. Journal of  Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 742752.    Tanner, C., Medin, D., & Iliev, R. (2008). Influence of deontological versus consequentialist  orientations on act choices and framing effects: When princples are more important than  consequences. European Journal of Social Psychology, 38 (5), 757769.    Taylor, S., & P., T. (1995). An integrated model of waste managment behavior: A test of  household recycling and composting intentions. Environmental Behavior, 27 (5), 603630.    Terry, D. J., Hogg, M. A., & White, K. M. (1999). The theory of planned behavior: Selfidentity,  social identity and group norms. British Journal of Social Psychology, 38, 225244.    Thogersen, J. (1994). A model of recycling behavior, with evidence from Danish source  seperation programmes. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 11 (2), 145163.    Thogersen, J. (1996). Recycling and morality: A critical review of the literature.  Environment and Behavior, 28 (4), 536558.    Todorov, A., Goren, A., & Trope, Y. (2007). Probability as a pscyhological distance: Construal  and preferences. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 473482. 

138

    Tonglet, M. (2002). Consumer misbehaviour: An exploratory study of shoplifting. Journal of  Consumer Behavior: An International Review, 336354.    Tonglet, M. (2000). Consumer misbehaviour: Consumers' perceptions of shoplifting and  retail security. Security Journal, 13 (4), 107122.    Tonglet, M., Phillips, P. S., & Read, A. D. (2004). Using the theory of planned behavior to  investigate the determinants of recycling behaviour: a case study from Brixworth, UK.  Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 41, 191214.    Tracy, A. P., & Oskamp, S. (1984). Relationships among ecologically responsible behaviors.  Journal of Environmental Systems, 113 (2), 115126.    Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological Review, 110, 403421.    Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1987). What do people think they're doing? Action  identification and human behaviour. Psychological Review, 94 (1), 315.    Valle, P. O., Reis, E., Menezes, J., & Rebelo, E. (2004). Behavioural determinants of household  recycling participation: The Portuguese case. Environment and Behaviour, 36 (4), 505540.    Valle, P., Rebelo, E., Reis, E., & Menezes, J. (2005). Combining behavioral theories to predict  recycling involvement. Environment and Behavior, 37 (3), 364396.    Van Liere, K. D., & Dunlop, R. E. (1980). The social bases of environmental concern: A  review of hypotheses, explainations and empirical evidence. Public Opinion Quarterly, 44  (2), 181197.    Vining, J., & Ebreo, A. (1992). Predicting recycling behavior from global and specific  environmental attitudes and changes in recycling opportunities. Journal of Applied Social  Psychology, 22 (20), 15801607.    Vining, J., & Ebreo, A. (1990). What makes a recycler? A comparison of recyclers and  nonrecyclers. Environment and Behavior, 22 (1), 5573.    Wakslak, C. J., Nussbaum, S., Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (2008). Representations of the self in  the near and distant future. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 757773.    Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. (2006). Does changing behavioural intentions engender behavior  change? A metaanalysis of the experimental evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 249268.    Webster, F. E. (1975). Determining the characteristics of the socially conscious consumer.  Journal of Consumer Research, 2, 188196.   

139

  Welsh, M. (2009 04July). Green bins: A wasted effort? The Toronto Star. Toronto, ON.    White, K., MacDonnell, R., & Dahl, D. W. (2011). It's the mindset that matters: The role of  construal level and message framing in influencing consumer efficacy and conservation  behaviors. Journal of Marketing Research, 48, 472485.    Witmer, J. F., & Geller, E. S. (1976). Facilitating paper recycling; Effects of prompts, raffles,  and contests. Journal of Applied Behavioural Analysis, 9, 315322.   

140

  GLOSSARY  ABC Theory: Stern's (1999) theory that depicts behavioural performance as a result of the    interaction among attitudinal and contextual variables  AS: Advantage score based on EVM calculation using all advantage beliefs  B: Behaviour construct  BBAALL: Attitude construct based on EVM calculation using all advantage and        disadvantage beliefs  disadvantage beliefs  performance  BBA3: Attitude construct based on EVM calculation using top three salient advantage and  Behavioural Belief: An individual's belief around a particular consequence of behavioural  BI: Behavioural intention construct  CLT: Construal level theory  DMA: Direct measure of attitude construct  DMEA: Direct measure of experiential attitudes construct  DMIA: Direct measure of instrumental attitudes construct  DS: Disadvantage score based on EVM calculation using all disadvantage beliefs  Efficacy beliefs: An individual's belief in how effective a particular behaviour is in    achieving the end result it aims to accomplish  EVM: Expectancyvalue model  Experiential attitudes: Attitudes that relate to the subjective experience of behavioural      performance  performance  Instrumental attitudes: Attitudes that relate to the objective value of behavioural  FBC: Food and beverage containers  GDP: Gross domestic product  KAG: Knowledgeaction gap  MHB Model: Modified health belief model  MN: Moral norm construct 

141

  Experimental Model One: Model tested that has the Behaviour (B) construct as the                dependent variable and uses DMA as the attitude construct  dependent variable and uses BBA3 as the attitude construct  construct as the dependent variable and uses BBAALL as the attitude construct  as the dependent variable and uses BBA3 as the attitude construct  as the dependent variable and uses DMA as the attitude construct  dependent variable, uses BBA3 as the attitude construct, and excludes the Past  Behaviour (PB) construct  Experimental Model Two: Model tested that has the Behaviour (B) construct as the  Experimental Model Three: Model tested that has the Behavioural Intention (BI)  Experimental Model Four: Model tested that has the Behavioural Intention (BI) construct  Experimental Model Five: Model tested that has the Behavioural Intention (BI) construct  Experimental Model Six: Model tested that has the Behaviour construct (B) as the 

MOE: Ministry of the environment  PB: Past behaviour construct  PBC: Perceived behavioural control construct  Persuasive messaging: The use of marketing communication techniques to persuade    consumers into performing of a particular behaviour  RAA:  Reasoned action approach  RCO: Recycling council of Ontario  REB: Research ethics board  Salient Outcomes: Consequences of behavioural performance that influence the actor's        decision to engage in the behaviour in question.  Fishbein et al. (2010) suggest that  there are a finite number of outcomes that will be considered and these are the ones  deemed salient 

SN: Social norm construct  Social dilemma: A behavioural choice situation where shortterm, personal benefits are at      the expense of longterm, community benefits  in terms environmental, economic, and social continuity and improvement  Sustainable behaviours: Behaviours performed for which the consequences are beneficial 

142

  TCR: Transformational consumer research  TPB: Theory of planned behaviour  TPB Models: The theory of reasoned action, theory of planned behaviour, and the    reasoned action approach  TRA: Theory of reasoned action  WDO: Waste Diversion Ontario 

143

