Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Librarian and Staff Presentations Library

7-1-2012

Analysis of the Summon Service at Ryerson University
May Yan
Ryerson University, may.yan@ryerson.ca

Kevin Manuel
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/library_pres Part of the Information and Library Science Commons Recommended Citation
Yan, May and Manuel, Kevin, "Analysis of the Summon Service at Ryerson University" (2012). Librarian and Staff Presentations. Paper 22. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/library_pres/22

This Conference Presentation is brought to you for free and open access by the Library at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Librarian and Staff Presentations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

A NA LYSIS OF T H E SU M MON SERV ICE AT RY E R SON U N I V E R SIT Y
Timeline of Summon @ Ryerson
2009 Г Begin investigation of Discovery services.  Researched different tools.  Set up vendor presentations.  Got feedback with different libraries about their systems etc. August 2010 ГSummon chosen as Ryerson's discovery service solution

Kevin Manuel May Yan

Project Overview
Investigators: Courtney Lundrigan, Kevin Manuel, May Yan
ии Our research study was initiated to assess Ryerson's discovery layer and explore how well the tool served our user needs. ии Feedback collected will be used evaluate investment in the tool ии Project began in the summer of 2011 ии Project approved by Ryerson Research Ethics ии Funding supported by the Ryerson Library

Survey Two
ии 6344 responses ии 424 students agreed to participate in focus groups ии 12 faculty members agreed to be interviewed

" It helped me f ind exac tly what I needed in a timely manner."

" There are an abundance of ar ticles, yet f inding relevant ar ticles remains dif f icult ."

Stu den ts th at i n dicated th at they h av e used Se a rch Ev ery thi ng

End of August 2010 Г Acquired Summon



Practical Implications and Value:

Demographics
ии Male40.2% ии Female59.2% " This tool makes searching for general information and topic s much easier." " I found it ver y eas y to use, fast and simple, will def initely be using it again for future assignments."

September 2010 Г Implementation team created

The study has given insight into the role of Summon in terms of undergraduate information-seeking behaviour. Participant feedback revealed potential improvements for Summon at Ryerson and will be useful to other institutions either using or considering the use of similar products. Overall, the results from the study will help to inform Ryerson Library practice surrounding future directions in reference, instruction, and service promotion.

October 2010 - January 2011Г Implementation of Summon ии Undergraduate Student 88.9% March 2011 Г Rebranded service as Search Everything.  Presentations to library community to prep for soft-launch.  Knowledgebase and catalogue loads shifted into maintenance mode. April 2011 Г soft launch to patrons as Search Everything.  Access to search made available on library home page. August 2011Г Integration of Search Everything into new library home page as default search box.

Design / Methodology / Approach
Mixed methods sequential explanatory strategy and applied an inductive analysis
Participant Pool:
Questionnaire participants were self selected from the Ryerson community, and did not have to have previous experience with Summon or to be active library users. Participants had the option to volunteer for qualitative interviews when completing the questionnaire.

ии Masters Student 8.3% ии PhD Student 1.5% ии Faculty0.2% ии Staff1.0% ии Research Assistant 0.2%

" This feature made my essay research ver y easy." " You feel like you have hit the lot ter y..."

Quantitative Phase
Questionnaires
ии Online survey; Used Survey Monkey as research tool ии Advertised on Library home page, posters, LCD screens ии For faculty, staff and students ии Open and closed ended questions

Qualitative phase
Focus Groups with Students
ии Small gift for participation ии Refreshments ии Circle discussion ии Moderator ии Note taker

" Too broad at times."

" It gave me results for things I did not ask for."

" It 's a per fec t tool for students and facult y, thank you! "

Questionnaire 1
ии 10 questions about awareness of `Search Everything' ии Incentive Г 10 X $50 Ryerson Book Store gift certificates

ии Whiteboard ии Audio recording ии 45 minute discussions ии Icebreakers "Pret t y rad."

Questionnaire 2
ии Sent out mass email to Ryerson community ии 15 questions about user experience of `Search Everything' September 2011Г Official launch of Search Everything to all users. ии Incentive Г 3 iPad2s (had to enter @ryerson.ca email)

ии Informal discussion ии Discussion Guide using themes from questionnaire feedback ии Separate session for graduate students

One on One Interviews with Faculty and Staff
ии Interviewer ии Note taker

Undergraduate Student Focus Group Feedback
Pros:
ии A good starting point for research ии Great resource for first year students

Graduate Student Focus Group Feedback
Pros:
ии Options to refine search are clear ии Very quick! ии Easy to use is you have no previous experience ии Accessible for all students (userfriendly)

Themes from focus grou ps
ии Faculty should encourage Summon for research, as students will use what is recommended to them by their instructors ии Library should market Summon at specific times of the academic year, as many students only use research tools on an `as needs' basis ии Quick tips should be provided in pop-up boxes on the Summon rather than creating video tutorials Г attention span is short! ии Promotion of Summon can be used through various methods, but best through faculty and mass email (students do read their messages!) ии Undergraduate students, especially first year, found that Summon introduced them to new resources

Cons:
ии A little too broad with so many search results ии Citations not always accurate ии Lack of data & reports ии Sometimes no full text articles ии Overwhelmed by the amount of information

Mid September 2011Г Phase One (2 weeks)

Cons:
ии Too many results Г but leaves a lot of info out ии Lack of data & reports ии If you search for a book, you get a ton of book reviews ии Advanced search option hard to see

November 2011Г Phase Two (2 weeks) ии 191 responses ии Undergraduate students 82% ии Graduate students 11% ии Faculty / staff 7% Students: ии Full time 88% May 2012+ Г Interviews ии Part time 5%

Survey One
Have you used Search Everything? ии Yes56% ии No  44% Having read about Search Everything, are you going to use Search Everything the next time you are looking for academic information? ии Yes 75% ии No10% ии Undecided15% ии 50% started research with Google ии 37% started research using Ryerson University Library ии 79% wanted FAQs for help using Summon

ии Provides the `Google' like search experience ии Different types of content all available in one place ии The ability to filter results, such as books or articles

December 2011Г End of first term with Search Everything

February & March 2012 Г Focus Groups

April 2012Г End of second term with Search Everything

Wh at's n ext: On e on On e In terv iews, Fu rther Qua n titati v e a n d Qua litati v e A na lysis, pu blication of r esu lts

