NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI
R e p r o d u c e d with pe rm issio n of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

]\4C)I)IÜLrI3/LS1i%)

/iffD

.AJSLAJuYlSIS

01^

IK IilSID S()Urf[) 8I(3}i/Llj8

By Faxhana Parveen

A PROJECT
SUBMITTED IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF ENGINEERING AT RYERSON UNIVERSITY 350 VICTORIA STREET, TORONTO, ONTARIO, CANADA JANUARY 2004

© Copyright by Farhana Parveen, 2004

PROPcf'lY Cf HY ERSGN UBRW

Reproduced with permission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

UMI Number: EC52945

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52945 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

R ep rod uced with permission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Tkfg/ jpoTTSTTwbs,

IV

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

T able o f C on ten ts
Table o f C ontents A bstract A cknow ledgem ents 1 Introdu ction 1.1 Anatomy of the Normal Knee J o i n t .......................................................... 1.2 Knee-Joint Pathology: O ste o a rth ritis ....................................................... 1.3 Review of Non-Invasive Diagnosis of O ste o a rth ritis:.............................. 1.4 An Introduction to Knee Sound S ignals.................................................... 1.5 Objective of this p r o j e c t ............................................................................. 1.6 Organization of the R e p o rt.......................................................................... R elated Works 2.1 Previous R esearch................... 2.2 S u m m a r y ...................................................................................................... Segm entation B ased A nalysis of VAG 3.1 Different Techniques of Adaptive Segrnentation ............................. 3.2 Initial Segmentation (Fixed W idth) . ! ................................................... 3.3 Model-Based Adaptive Segmentation of VAGS ig n a ls ............................ 3.4 Finding the Model O rd e r............................................................................. 3.5 LPG Modelling of the Signal ...................................................... P a ttern C lassification 4.1 Different Pattern Classification T echniques...................................... 4.1.1 Principal Component A nalysis...................................................... 4.1.2 Genetic A lg o rith m ............................................................... ^ jx
X

2
1

2 5 7 §
9

2

]^g

3

19

20 22 24 27 28
31

4

32 32 33

R e p ro du c ed with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.2 5

4.1.3 Logistic R eg ressio n .......................................................................... 4.1.4 Maximum Likelihood E s tim a tio n ................................................. 4.1.5' Decision T re e s.................................................................................... 4.1.6 Linear Discriminant Analysis ......................................................... P attern Analysis of V A G ...........................................................................

34 34 35 35 40 42 42 43 45 47 47 48 53 56

R esu lts and C onclusion 5.1 Motivation for Our s t r a t e g y ..................................................................... 5.2 Results of Localization of Pathology......................................................... 5.3 R e su lts.................................... 5.4 Conclusion..................................................................................................... 5.5 Possible Future Work D ire c tio n ...............................................................

A B B ibliography

VI

R e p ro du c ed with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

L ist o f T ables
5.1 5.2 5.3 Starting and End point of each segment after doing the adaptive segment 44 Classification results using L D A ................................................................ Classification using leave-one-out m e th o d ............................................ . 46 47

vu

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

L ist o f F igu res
1.1 Anatomy of the human knee joint [18] 1.2 Osteoarthritis on human knee joint [1 9 ].................................................... 2.1 the left one shows The arrow points to a click Heard at 20" extension 0" is the Fully extended position and the right one shows the Arrows point to clicks and grinding sounds heard during auscultation [4] . . . 3.1 VAG when a person moving his leg from 135° - 0° e x te n s io n ............. 3.2 Fixed segmentation of the signal shown in Figure 3 . 1 .......................... 3.3 Adaptive segmentation of the s ig n a l.......................................................... 3.4 Averaged signal for finding the number of p e a k s .................................... 4.1 Flowchart of VAG Analysis ....................................................................... 15 23 23 25 28 41 43 2 3

5.1 Adaptive segmentation of the signal showing the lo c a liz a tio n .............

vm

R e p ro d u c e d with p erm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

TITLE; MODEL BASED SEGMENTATION AND ANALYSIS OF KNEE SOUND SIGNAL

A bstract
The motivation of the work is to develop a signal processing methodology for noninvasive diagnosis of knee osteoarthritis in an early stage. The sound signal that is emitted from knee when it moves is called Vibroarthrographic (VAG) signal. Analysis of this sound signal will help in diagnosis of the knee joint problems. In this project a model based approach for segmenting the VAG signals, followed by feature extraction and classification is proposed. This could be used to get some indication whether the signal is from a normal knee or from an abnormal knee. The proposed scheme also has the capability for finding the depth of severity of the damage and it can also localize the angle range of the knee swing, where the damage has occurred. As a result, the project gave an accuracy of 70.4% with leave-one-out method. After doing the classification using the segments, finally it has been calculated how many segments from each signal has been correctly identified. A total of 30 knee sound signals from normal and abnormal knees has been used in this work and out of th at 26 signals has been classified properly (either normal or abnormal) and 4 signals got misclassified. with a successful classification accuracy of 86.7%.

IX

X

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

A ck n o w le d g e m e n ts
I would like to take the opportunity to thank th e people who have offered technical insight, inspiration towards the successful completion of this project. I want to give the m ajor credit to Dr. K rishnan, w ithout his cordial guidance it was impossible to finish this work. During m y whole period of doing this Masters program, his continuous help and inspiration was incomparable. I am grateful to my husband Monjur for giving me his sole support to finish this work. Also I want to thanks to all my classmates and associates of the graduate studies departm ent. Toronto, Ontario January 14, 2004 Farhana Parveen

R e p r o d u c e d with pe rm ission of t h e copyright ow ner. F urther reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

C h ap ter 1 In tr o d u ctio n

1.1

A n a to m y o f th e N o rm a l K n e e J o in t

Knee joint is th e most complex joint in human structure. Flexion and extension are the main knee movements although some rotation occurs when the knee is flexed. The sound emitted from the knee when it moves, called the Vibroarthrographic (VAG) signal. Here (Figure 1.1) is a brief description of the normal human knee joint for both flexion and extension position. The knee is a "hinge type" joint, which is formed by two bones held together by flexible ligaments. The bones are the femur (thigh bone) and the tibia (shin bone). The knee cap (patella) also forms part of the knee joint. It glides over the end of the femur as the knee bends. The moving parts of a normal knee are covered w ith a layer of articular cartilage, which is a white smooth substance about 1/4 of an inch thick on the patella and 1/8 of an inch thick on the femur and tibia. An x-ray of the knee normally shows space (the "joint space" ) between the femur and the tibia as well as between the femur and the patella. This is not empty space but represents the cartilage (which does not show up on x-rays). The smooth, cartilage-covered surfaces 1

R e p ro d u c e d with p e rm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

î
Kmemscüs übn tkag^bw Figure 1.1: Anatomy of the human knee joint [18]

of the knee move on each other with very little friction in the normal joint. In the normal knee the "joint space" is approximately 1/4 of an inch wide and fairly even in outline.

1.2

K n e e -J o in t P a th o lo g y : O s te o a r th r itis

There are several knee-joint pathologies and the osteoarthritis is the most common one. The term "arthritis" literally means inflammation of a joint, but is generally used to describe any condition in which there is damage to the cartilage. Inflammation, if present, is in the synovium. The proportion of cartilage damage and synovial

inflammation varies with the type and stage of arthritis. Usually the pain early on is due to inflammation. In the later stages, when the cartilage is worn away, most of the pain comes from the mechanical friction of raw bones rubbing on each other. Knee cartilage, can be compared to the tread of an automobile tire, very durable but susceptible to wear over time. Osteoarthritis is a degenerative process, which

R e p ro d u c e d with pe rm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

A
I &/ C 'h iiîl»

A rl3 in E iN `
1 /

(k r iT O Ç S p i

I V i I c I lî i

Figure 1.2: Osteoarthritis on human knee.joint [19]

results in the wearing out of the joint surface. Over time the Joint surface slowly erodes until the underlying bone is exposed. This exposed bone can be painful when the joint moves and bears weight. Osteoarthritis mainly damages the joint cartilage, b u t there is often some inflammation as well. It usually affects only one or two major joints (usually in the legs). It does not affect the internal organs. The cause of knee osteoarthritis is not known. It is thought to be simply a process of "wear and tear" in m ost cases. Some conditions may predispose the knee to osteoarthritis, for example, a previous fracture th a t involved the joint, or by lesser injuries th a t may have torn ligaments or menisci. In osteoarthritis of the knee the cartilage cushion is either

thinner than normal (leaving bare spots on the bone), or completely absent. Bare bones grind against each other and cause mechanical pain. Fragments of cartilage floating in the joint may cause inflammation in the joint, lining, and this is a second source of pain. X-ra.ys show the "joint space" to be narrowed and irregular in outline. There is no blood test for diagnosing osteoarthritis and its progression. Many patients have knee pain coming from injury to a meniscal cartilage rather

R e p ro d u c e d with p e rm issio n of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

th a n injury to the articular cartilage. The comparison between two categories are as follows: · The articular cartilage is the cartilage th a t covers the ends of the bone (similar to the tread on a tire). · A meniscal cartilage is a disc of cartilage th a t is actually separate from the femur, the tibia and the patella. There are two such c-shaped meniscal cartilages in the knee. They are sandwiched between the femur and the tibia. These meniscal cartilages are often injured, particularly during athletics of a meniscal cartilage is torn, it of ten does not heal and the pieces of the cartilage may become trapped in abnormal positions in the knee causing giving way, fluid on the knee, and pain with certain twisting activities. However, when the articular cartilage has been worn out (as in arthritis), arthroscopy is rarely able to correct the problem and a knee replacement is often needed. Osteoarthritis of the knee often develops in one weight-bearing com partm ent of the knee, while the other two compartments remain relatively healthy. Since osteoarthritis is a progressive disease, in the short term it can be managed con servatively. Anti-inflammatory drugs, cortisone injections, and physical therapy can delay the need for surgery, b u t eventually many people require surgical reconstruc tion of the loiee. -The traditional approach to knee reconstruction has been a total knee replacement, wliich replaces all three compartments of the knee. A total knee provides excellent pain relief and has been shown to be very durable. The problem w ith approach is th at i t 's a expensive procedure. For people who need two or more of their knee compartments resurfaced, total knee replacement is an excellent choice to relieve pain and restore function of the knee.

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oerm ission.

1.3

R e v ie w o f N on -In vasive D ia g n o sis o f O steo a rth ri tis:

There are a rmmber of non-invasive diagnostic method for Osteoarthritis (OA) other than the general clinical diagnosis like inspection, function testing and palpation. Few of them are described below [20] : (a) P la in R a d io g ra p h s or X -rays: Plain X-rays have been the primary imaging method used to confirm the diagnosis of OA, stage its severity, and follow its progression. Unfortunately, the severity of radiographic findings do not correlate well with the severity of symptoms or the presence of functional disability. Although more than 90% of people over age 40 have some radiographic evidence of osteoarthritic joint changes, only 30% have symptoms. This limits the use of radiography, both as a diagnostic tool and as a tool for ongoing assessment of disease progression. Because the plain radiograph is almost always sufficient, most of the follo-wing techniques are only used in special circumstances to aid in the diagnosis of OA. For example, these studies can be used to eliminate an infected joint (e.g., radionuclide scintigraphy) or to look for a herniated disc in the back (e.g., magnetic resonance imaging MRI). (b) A rth ro g ra p h y : This involves the injection of contrast media into a joint. Arthrogrr-'hy is a relatively time-consuming and invasive procedme, but it may be use ful in detecting meniscal injury, loose bodies in the joint cavity, and other local changes in joint structure. It has been mostly replaced by MRI.

Reproduced with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oerm ission.

I

(c) U ltra s o u n d : Ultrasound is inexpensive and widely available, and does not ex pose the patient to ionizing radiation; however, its use is limited because ultra sound waves do not readily pass through bone tissue. It is particularly valuable in the imaging of soft-tissue structures and tendons associated with the joint. Although ultrasound cannot evaluate bone, it can distinguish between solid and cystic soft-tissue lesions. It is also helpful in demonstrating joint effusions be hind the knee (Baker's or popliteal cyst) and to guide a needle for aspiration of fluid (arthrocentesis). (d) R a d io n u c lid e S cintigrap h y : Also loiown as a bone scan, this is a sensitive, but nonspecific, method of detecting OA activity. It creates images by scan ning affected areas of the body with a gamma camera after a bone-seeldng radiopharmaceutical is injected. Radionuclides, such as technetium-99 HDP, are attracted to areas of bone with relatively high blood flow, edema, and high bone-mineral turnover rates (abnormal joint physiology). Joints th a t are un usually active "light up" in the resulting images. Scintigraphic imaging can be used to distinguish between joints with active disease and those th at are altered, but inactive. Moreover, scintigraphic imaging may detect the presence of OA before these changes are detectable on X-rays. Unfortunately, tliis technique is very costly and time consuming, and requires the use of a radioactive material, which in turn needs special handling. Thus, it is not an appropriate teclmique for the routine diagnosis or management of OA. (e) M a g n e tic R eso n an ce Im aging (M R I) : MRI is a very expensive imaging tech nique th a t uses the behavior of atomic nuclei in a magnetic field to create im ages. Patients are exposed to radiowaves and a strong magnetic field, rather

r .
R e o ro d u ce d w ith D erm ission o f th e c o n u ria h t o w n e r F u rth e r re n rn rli Jotinn n rn h ih ite rl w ith m it n a rm icclr,r,

than X-rays or other types of radiation. This technique provides excellent re constructed images of interior organs, and can delineate muscle, bone, blood vessels, and nerves. MRI is limited as a diagnostic modality because of its expense. Although it is not routinely performed in patients with OA, MRI is useful when other entities, such as meniscal tears or ligament injuries need to be eliminated because it permits the simultaneous imaging of all joint compo nents with excellent contrast between different tissues. MRI has proven to be particularly valuable in imaging joint effusions, menisci, joint ligament, osteo phytes, and defects in bone, articular cartilage, and synovial tissue. Moreover, this technique has specific advantages in diagnosing osteonecrosis, internal joint derangements, bone and joint infections, and disorders of the structures around joints (e.g., rotator cuff lesions). (f) C o m p u te d T om ography: Computed tomography or computerized axial to mography is an examination th at uses X-ray to obtain a cross sectional im age of the hmnan body. CT Scan is helpful in detecting fine detail of cortical bone. Relative to X-ray, CAT reconstructs multiple, two dimensional images. It can distinguish normal and abnormal structures accurately. It is also a rel atively expensive test. Relative to MRI, it gives poor definition of soft-tissue boundaries.

1.4

A n In tro d u ctio n to K n e e S ou n d Sign als

In this work the vibration or sound signals emitted by knee joints during the course of normal movement known as VibroArthroGraphic (VAG) signals has been studied. It

R e p ro du c ed with perm ission of th e copy rip ht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oerm ission.

is hypothesized th a t this signals are associated Avith specific pathological conditions. In early stages of this work, the researchers [5] found out two types of knee sound signals. 1. Physiological PatellofemoralCrepitus (PPG) is the vibration signal produced during slow motion (less then 5°/s), which can be measured by Vibration arthrometry (VAM). and 2. The signal produced from the Icnee when the movement is pretty fast (more than 67% ), is called "Vibration signal in rapid knee me non" . A noninvasive procedure to diagnose cartilage pathology would be extremely useful in screening symptomatic patients before knee surgery and in follow-up after surgery. W ith appropriate teclmiques for recording and analysis, computer-aided analysis of VAG signals should provide quantitative indices representing the functional state of articular cartilage. VAG signal has the potential to be widely used non-invasive diagnosis and can be used as an inexpensive diagnosis tool for monitoring of cartilage disorders.

1.5

O b jectiv e o f th is p ro ject

· The key objective of this work is to find out an inexpensive diagnostic tool for finding the indication of OA in early stage. · Another motive of this project is to find out the appropriate angle of the damage area.

^ .
R e o ro du c ed with oerm ission of th e coovrioht owner. F u r t h e r r e n r n d u o t i n n n rnhihitoH Ufithnut norm icclrvn

1.6

O rgan ization o f th e R ep o rt

· In Chapter 2 we will talk about all the related works, people studied VAG signals in different way, only those comparable with our strategy have been presented here. · In Chapter 3, 1 would like to discuss about the methodology such as Adaptive segmentation technique, th a t 1 have used in this work as well as the other strategies th a t people have taken for doing the adaptive segmentation for nonstationary signals · Chapter 4 will give an idea of the pattern extraction and classification techniques as well as discussion about the Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) technique which 1 have used to do the signal classification Finally in Chapter 5 we will discuss the results and also try to give some future direction of this work

R eprod uced with perm ission of th e copvriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oermission.

C hap ter 2 R ela ted W orks
2.1 P re v io u s R esea rch

Robert Hooke is the person who worked first (in 17^^'' century) in this area and find out th a t joint noise could be used a diagnostic sign in patients sufiering from painful joints [5]. Mollan and his co-workers in Northern Ireland published a series of papers on various aspects of knee joint vibration analysis. They performed experiments on the type of recording system to be used for recording the knee joint vibration signals. A group led by Mang in Germany has also published a paper on the analysis of knee joint sound signals [1]. Based upon the division of sound peaks into frequency groups, this term was apparently able to identify by sound analysis clinically and operatively demonstrated chondromalacia patella, meniscus lesion s, and arthritis. Chondromala cia literally means "softening of the cartilage", and Patellae means "the knee-cap" . So Chondromalacia patellae means "softening of the articular cartilage of the knee cap." The articular cartilage is the cartilage lining under the knee-cap th a t articulates with the knee joint. Under normal circumstances, it is smooth and shiny, so th a t it glides smoothly along the articular groove of the femur as the knee bends. When

10

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of th e coovrioht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

11

it "softens" , it may break down, causing irregularities along the undersurface of the patella. In 1985 Mollan [5] and his group published a paper named "W hat is physiological patello-femoral crepitus?" They basically introduced the PPG signal. They used this name to the fine creaking sensation, which can be felt on all normal patellae as the knee moves slowly. This produces a very regular, reproducible signal. While working they do simultaneous recordings, from accelerometers taped to upper and lower poles of the patella. And they found out the traces are mirror image of each other. In 1990 [6] the same group made other publications describing the technique of vibration arthrometry being developed to assist the clinical examiner in identifying these vibrations and to improve diagnostic accuracy. They found out th a t varying the investigative procedure can affect the magnitude of some parameters of the vibration signal. And they do the research for the effect of speed of joint movement and th a t has been quantified in a pilot study involving 24 patients with internal knee damage. Custom designed hardware was used to measure joint speed as the rate of change of joint angle, which was measured by an electrogoniometer. It was found that the energy content of the vibration, reflected by the peak amplitude and root mean square value was strongly affected by joint speed. In 1992 a group led by Rangayyan, [l],in the University of Calgary has done a series of research on the analysis of knee vibration signal using Linear Prediction. This paper investigates the possibility of developing a noninvasive method based on analysis of vibration produced by the knee joint. Particularly they used the method of modeling by finear prediction for adaptive segmentation and parameterization of knee vibration signal. Parameters extracted from the LP model, such as dominant poles

R e p ro d u ce d with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

12

were found to be useful in constructing feature vectors. Dominant poles represent peaks of signal segments in the spectral domain. Two-dimensional feature vectors were constructed for the signal segments analyzed by using the first dom inant pole frequency and the ratio of power in the 40-120 Hz band to total power. In 1992, a comparative study of simultaneous Vibromyography and electromyog raphy with active human quadriceps has been done Rangayyan and Zhang [12]. Here they compared the Vibromyograghic (VMG) signals and Electromyography (EMG) signals and find out th a t VMG is a better way to understand the neuromuscular con trol than using EMG. In contrast to EMG signals, the VMG appears to more directly reflect contractile properties of muscles and may therefore be used also as an aid to the understanding of the neuromuscular control. Vibromyographic (VMG) signals are the low frequency vibration signals generated during muscle contraction and elec tromyographic (EMG) signals recorded simultaneously during isometric contraction of the human quadriceps muscles. In this paper, they compared VMG with EMG and found out th a t VMG have diagnostic potential in pediatric muscle diseases and like the EMG signal, exhibits a feature of joint angle dependents. The comparison was accomplished by evaluating the averaged root mean squared (rms) value, mean fre quency (ME) and peak frequency (PE) of the VMG and EMG signals for fom' muscle contraction levels at joint angles of 30°, 60° and 90°. Eurthermore the study indicates th a t the averaged ME (6-24Hz) and PE (9-19Hz) of the VMG signals are much lower than the ME(75-109Hz) and PE (40-80Hz)of the EMG signal, but they have similar slopes for 60° and 90° joint angle. This means VMG can reflect the same muscle activation patterns like EMG, while the difference in the frequency content between the VMG and EMG reflect the morphological differences between the mechanical and

R e o ro d u c e d with oerm ission of th e coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without o erm issio n -

13

electrical responses of muscle activation. In 1994, Zhang and Rangayyan [3], published another paper, which mentions about the filtering technique of the VAG signal for muscle contraction interference. W hile measuring the knee signal using a sensor, they contain significant interference caused by muscle contraction (MCI) th a t required for the Icnee movement. Previously a simple frequency domain high-pass filtering teclmique was used for minimizing the M CI cancellation, but in this work they used an adaptive MCI cancellation as an alternative for MCI cancellation in VAG signal. They basically used the Least Mean Square (LMS) for performing this job. And also they divide the whole MCI reduction in two parts:
1.

For detecting and characterizing the correlated MCI components for use as a reference signal in adaptive filtering and

2.

Optimizing the step size of the non-stationary adaptive filter

Simon and Verstraete in 1995 did some prediction of knee joint torque from the activity of knee flexion/extention [11]. In this study the authors investigated the relationship between the torque production of the knee flexors and extensors and the EMG of five muscles crossing the knee. EMG activity and the knee joint torque were recorded for five subjects using smdace electrodes and BIODEX system (the Biodex M ulti-Joint System allows the clinician to test, rehab, and analyze a wide range of joint movements at various speeds and various resistance settings. The Biodex System 's wide range of operational modes provides optimal flexibility, and is able to safely accommodate all levels of patients from the weakest individual to the strongest athlete), respectively. D ata were normalized and averaged for three trials, for each

 j"
R e p ro d u c e d with p erm ission of th e coovrioht ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without oerm ission .

14

of four speeds. The result showed consistent patterns for th e torque produced by the muscles and the muscle activity, although minor variations existed. A relationship between torque and EMG was developed for b o th extension and flexion with squared values ranging from 0.73 to 0.98. In 1996, Ragayyan and Moussavi did some progress [4] and published a work on Screening and Adaptive Segmentation of V ibroarthrographic Signals, This paper is basically th e continuation of the work reported by Thavathia [1] by using the LP modeling w ith a constant w idth reference window (N samples) .If a sudden variation appears in the middle of a test window then T havathia's [1] method will show it either at the beginning of th e window or at the end of the window, not in the exact position of the variation. So they present here a new adaptive segmentation based on Recursive Least Squares (RLS) algorithm. No reference window is required in this procedure. The filter used in this m ethod tries to predict the signal from a few past samples of the signal in memory, and computes the prediction error. If a change in signal statistics occurs, the tap-weights and the prediction error wiU show a change as well, which can be detected by applying a threshold. The m ethod was evaluated with 46 VAG signals, and the segment boundaries computed. Results of application of this m ethod of two VAG signals representative are shown in Figure 2.1. The segment lines are shown by the vertical dashed lines. It is seen from the figures th a t the clicks (sudden variations) as well as the transitional variations (gradual changes) have been detected successfully. Comparison of the

spectra of consecutive segments from a number of VAG signals indicated th a t the m ethod is able to track spectral changes very well.

R eo r a d u ce d with nerm isfiion of th e coovrlah t o w n e r

Further renrndi lo tin n n rn h lh ite d w ithout n o rm ic c io n

15

?

1

w o1

1 I

I
-151
a .5

Figure 2.1; the left one shows The arrow points to a chck Heard at 20° extension 0° is the Fully extended position and the right one shows the Arrows point to clicks and grinding sounds heard during auscultation [4]

In 1996, Kshirsagar, Robson and Herrod [10] worked on the thickness of artic ular cartilage, which can be an im portant param eter to assess the progression of osteoarthritis. So in this paper the authors give a complete computerized method for doing the analysis of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) for directly visualizing the cartilage. Here are the steps they have taken for doing this automation. · Identify the position of the femoral bone in the 2D MR image · The coarse edge detection, in order to locate the femur, th a t edge map is cross related to the standard template of hum an femur bone to maximize the corre lation value · The image is zoomed to define the area of interest. An edge map is obtained with a finer filter to delineate precisely the edges of the cartilage around the femur · Eliminate the artifact edges from the trabecular structure, then the thickness, defined as the perpendicular distances between the cartilage edges, is measured

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

16

along the femoral contour a t every point and the plot of cartilage thicloiess in mm is plotted against the distance along femur This autom ated method for cartilage thickness using MRI provides objective and rapid measurements at statistical significant number of points along th e joint. In 1998, Cashman and Kitnev [9] showed up w ith VAG analysis using MR images of th e knee, This paper talking about something related to our study bu t it really not of our interest. The authors here trying to highlighted the information in th e MR slice images of early knee joint damages. The reason for working on it cause, when a patient with osteoarthritis considering for the orthopedic knee surgery, it would be an advantage to present anatomical CT or MRI information to the surgeons in a more accessible format allowing them to display and manipulate anatomical structures as 3D objects. So the authors trying to develop techniques for autom ated segmentation and rendering of the major joint structures. They have used 1.5T gee body scanner and obtained sagittal Tl-weighted spin echo images from 4 volunteers and 2 patients w ith OA. Segmentation was performed using MIDUS (Medical Information Display and Analysis System: Imperial College). In recent work, Ching, Jiang and Lee in their paper on V ibration arthrometry, talked about the patients with failed total loiee replacement [7]. Here they did the preliminary study on VAM, of artificial knee joint in vivo. As discussed in Section 1.4, basically there are two speed protocols in knee kinematics: i) 2°/s, the signal is called "Physiological Patellofemoral Crepitus (PPG )" in which the value of Root Mean Square (rms) is used as a parameter, and ii) 67°/s, is called "Vibration signal in rapid knee motion" in which Autoregressive(AR) modeling is used for adaptive segmentation and extracting the dominant pole of each signal segment to calculate

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of th e copvricjht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

17

th e spectral pov  %lios in f<100Hz and r>500Hz. The study hat. .ected 14 Failed Total Knee Replacement (FTKR) and 12 Normal

T otal Knee Replacement (NTKR) patients. F T K R is clinically divided into three categories; m etal wear, polyethylene wear of the patellar component, and no wear but w ith prosthesis misalignment. From the study they found out th a t PPG signals are only detected in two cases of the M etal wear F T K R group. All other NTKR control group, the polyethylene wear FTK R group and the no wear FT K R group have no P P G signals produced. Therefore PPG signals can only be utilized to judge whether there is the metal wear in knee prosthesis, b u t cannot be used for th e detection of polythene wear in the early stage. On the other hand they showed th a t the vibration signal in rapid knee motion could be used for effectively detecting polythene wear of th e patellar component in the early stage. In another paper by Jiang and Yuan the authors utilize the PPG signals to evaluate the condition of pateHar-femoral joint for OA knee patients [8 ]. PPG signals measured when the knee joint goes through a flexion-extension motion slowly at an angular speed of about 2°/s. Typically, a PPG signal is a sequence of vibration pulses generated between the patellar and femoral surfaces. Therefore, a P P G signal usually carries information reflecting the integrity and lubrication of the articular cartilage. Also they analyzed th a t PPG signal is non-stationary in nature because of its manifestation of slip-stick friction. So to process a PPG signal, they divide it into locally-stationary segments for using signal processing techniques such as AR modehng. They divide osteoarthritis into three types: Typel : the cartilage of patellar-femoral joint is intact, the osteoarthritis found in femoral-tibia joint surface, Type2: degeneration occurs in the surface cartilage of both the femoral-tibial joint

R e p r o d u c e d with p e rm issio n of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

18

and femoral trochlea, b u t not on the patellar surface, TypeS: both patellar-femoral and femoral-tibial joint have osteoarthritis. The results obtained with PPG signals are as follows: · The proposed m ethod is efficient for the analysis of the Condition of patellar femoral joint cartilage, VAM could be seen as an alternative way of noninvasive diagnosis of OA · By Using the Intraclass Distances it is possible to differentiate OA type 1 alone from OA types
2

and 3

2 .2

S u m m a r y o f R e v ie w s

Various works have been done on VAG signals till to date. People applied many adaptive signal processing techniques such as time-frequency analysis, wavelet anal ysis, stochastic point process modeling for better analysis. But, VA.G, as an nonstationary signal, should get more attention in the process of segmentation before it get analyzed. This project mainly devoted for segmenting the signal intelligently, so th a t afte'' analysis it can give the better indication of the pathological condition and can do the localization as well.

ReorodUCed with o er m issio n of th e coovrioh t ow n er. Further renrndi m tinn n rn h ih ite d w ith n iit n o rm ic c ln n

C hap ter 3 S egm en tation B ased A n alysis o f VAG
Vibroarthi'ographic (VAG) signals th a t is emitted from knee when the leg is in motion can be recorded, and could be analyzed for different medical purposes. Here in this work VAG signals has been used which was recorded while knee moves from 135° to 0° position. This kind of movement causes the joint surfaces to rub against one another. The regions of the joint surfaces coming in contact are different at each angle position during the swing. Also the quahty of the joint surfaces coming in contact may change with joint angle. This means th a t the signals are expected to have different characteristics at different joint angles. Therefore the signal produced by a swing is non-stationary in nature, i.e., the statistical characteristics changes with time (angle). All the traditional spectral estimation methods require the signal to be stationary in nature, and further, ergodicity is assumed to permit signal analysis based on single observation. In order to use these techniques on VAG, the signals need to be segmented in such a way so th at each part of the signals can be assumed as stationary in nature. Such segmentation can be done in two ways: · Fixed Segmentation 19

R eproduced with permission of th e coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orahibited without nerm iasinn

20

· Adaptive segmentation F ixe d S e g m e n ta tio n : In this process the signal is segmented by a number of segments and the length of each segment will be same. This is commonly used in speech signal processing for short time analysis. This method has also been applied to heart sound analysis. The main problem with fixed segmentation is th at sometimes it causes redundant data, which is costly and not meaningful all the time. A d a p tiv e S e g m e n ta tio n : The main objective of adaptive segmentation is to trace the nonstationarities in the signals th a t are being processed. So the signal bound aries are determined adaptively and their length depends on the non-stationarity of the signal. This process has been used for analysis of biomedical signals, such as Electroencephalogram (BEG).

3.1

D ifferen t T echniques o f A d a p tiv e S eg m en ta  tio n

People did adaptive segmentation of signals in many research. One such Approach is Wavelet Packet Decomposition (WPD). This approach tries to find the most efficient partition of the frequency axis. The resulting frequency partitioning has narrow bands around prominent (high-energy) harmonics, and has wide bands to span the low-energy noise-like portions of the signal. WPD uses the so-called Best-Basis-Search algorithm (BBSA) to achieve this goal. This algorithm recursively splits the signal into high and low frequency portions and compares these partitions to select the best set th a t covers the whole frequency range. A drawback is th a t WPD is only adaptive to the frequency characteristics of the signal, not to its time/dynamic characteristics.

R0 D roduced with oerm iesion o f fhA onnvrinht nwnpr

Further ronmrli mtinn nmhlKitoH vA/ithr\i it rvormieeirxr

21

In a similar way, time adaptive approaches have been developed, but these approaches lack frequency adaptivity. Gonon proposes an approach to signal analysis th at is adaptive to both the time and frequency characteristics of the signal. The key idea is to use separate criteria for the time and frequency segmentations and the combine the two criteria. A useful concept based on the entropy is LSEC (Local Stabilized Entropy Criterion). It is a quantity th a t represents how the entropy of a windowed part of the signal relates to the entropy of two smaller windowed parts of the signal. Gonon chose first to split the signal into different frequency bands, and then perform a CELS segmentation on each of the bands separately. Lazareck and Moussavi adaptively did some similar segmentation to our work, they segment the normal swallowing sound signals [15]. It is speculated th at the swallowing sound, non-stationary by nature, may be decomposed into characteristic segments, representing different stages of swallowing mechanism. They measured the variance for each swallow using a 25ms window . A threshold greater th at f.i + a oî the calculated variance dimension was used to detect the peak of the variance dimen sions, which defined the segment boundaries of the swallowing sound. Lastly, each swallowing sound segment was labelled qualitatively as click or non-click segment. Ahmed [16] also present a novel algorithm for adaptive fuzzy segmentation of MRI d ata and estimation of intensity inhomogeneties using fuzzy logic. They used a differ ent approach to segment images with intensity inhomogeneities is to simultaneously compensate for the shading effect while segmenting the image. This approach has the advantage of being able to use intermediate information from the segmentation while performing the correction.

ReorodUCed with o erm issio n of th e coovrioht ow ner. Further reoroduction nrohlhited without norm iscinn

I

22

The whole project can be summarized in the following way · Initial segmentation of VAG signals · Model based adaptive segmentation · Finding the model order for AR modeling
o

Feature extraction, finding the LPC coefficients of the adaptive segments

3.2

In itia l S eg m en ta tio n (F ix ed W id th )

Figure 3.1 is showing the knee signal when the patient is moving his/her leg from 135° - 0° extension. For the sake of simplicity while describing the whole procedure the same signal will be used. The signal is represented in time domain. The signals were sampled at 25KHz and two sets of data is shown in the graphs. Initially for doing the fixed segmentation the ratio was around 17;N, where N is the length of each segment. So for the first half of the signal whose length was 3750, each segment length was 150, so the total no of initial segments was 25 (3750/150) for each VAG signal. So initially the total no of segments was 30X25=7500 for 30 VAG signals, which was used in this experiment for doing the LPC modehng. Aft.er th a t we find out the LP coefficient for each segment. Figm'e 3.2 shows the initial segment for a signal (the same one shown in Figure 3.1), which has been recorded from a person who is having the knee problem. In the Figure the lines are showing the fixed segmentation where the number of segments are 25, and each segment of width 150. The main problem with fixed segmentation is the fi:ced window constraint. The next section will show how the

-f:
R eo ro d u ced with oerm issio n of th e coovrioht ow ner. Further reorndi ictinn nrnhihitnrl withnnt ncsrmiccinn

23

60

VAG signal obtained from ab n o rm a l k n ee joint

40

-4 0 -6 0 -6 0

-1 0 0

-1 2 0

500

1000

1500

2000
Time S am ple

2500

3000

3500

4000

Figure 3.1: VAG when a person moving his leg from 135° - 0° extension

Fixed segmenlalion VAG signal obtained from abnormal knee joint

-60

-100 -120

500

1000

1500

2000 Time Sample

2500

3000

3500

4000

Figure 3.2: Fixed segmentation of the signal shown in Figure 3.1

R ep ro du ced with permission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without o erm issio n .

24

proposed algorithm will adaptively reduce the number of segment without losing much information, which is needed for diagnosis.

3.3

M o d el-B a sed A d a p tiv e S e g m e n ta tio n o f V A G Signals

As we know VAG is a non-stationary signal. So usually segmentation has been done on this type of signal to analysis the signal assuming th a t the signal is stationary for tha,t particular segment. The work in VAG signal processing carried out in such a way, th at it can be used as an alternative way to get a precise indication of OA. The main approach to overcome the problem called the fixed window constraint. Analysis of non-stationary signals is usually carried out by means of time segmentation; the size of the segments is generally fixed, and it is based on some a priori modelization of the data. By relaxing most of these modeling assumptions and by allowing for a more general approach to signal segmentation, significant improvements can be achieved. While analyzing each VAG signal, at first approach the segments was same in Wigth, but after finding out the LPC and choosing a minimum threshold the segments has been rebuilt. Basically, the length of signal has been decided according to the dynamics or the statistical changes occurring in the signal. As we know abnormal knees have rougher cartilage surfaces than normal knees hence VAG signals emitted from knees should have different frequency dynamics compared to the signal from normal knee. So in the proposed segmentation strategy it is hypothesized th at the signal from abnormal Icnee will be having more number of segments with smaller length and on the other hand the signals from normal knees should have less no of

R eo ro d u ced with oerm issio n of th e coovrioht ow ner. Further reoroduction orohibited without nermic.Qinn

25

VAG Signal obtained from abnorm al k n e e joint

60 40

I
-4 0 -6 0

S e g m e n ti

82

S e g n fe n tS

-100 -1 2 0

500

1000

1500

2000
Tim e S am ple

2500

3000

3500

4000

Figure 3.3: Adaptive segmentation of the signal

segments with higher segment length. Furthermore redundant segmentation could be been avoided using the proposed methodology. This is the most challenging part of this project. After getting the initial fixed number of segments. LPC coefficients for each of the segments are computed and the Euclidean distance between each adjacent segment has been calculated. If the distance is less than a certain "min_dis" value (which is usually less than 1 ) then those two segments has been added and assumed them as a single segment, the adaptive segmentation algorithm can be summarized as follows: Here is the pseudo-code (stepwise written) of the algorithm th a t has been used in this work: Stepl: R e a d in g th e Signal in T im e D o m ain

R o n r r \ /H l i r 'o H VA/itK r \ û r m l c c l r \ r » r \ f f h a a a r v x / r i r i h t a i A / n a r

Ri ir+ h a r

if ,

26

· Total length of the signal is 7500 · Half of the signal has been used for analysis, cause they are symmetric (1:3750) Step2: D oin g th e F ixed Segm entation · Divide each half of the signal in 25 segments (3750/25) · So the length of each segment is now 150 · Find out the LPC Coefficient of each segment · The model order was 17 so each segment has 17 coefficient right now · Store all the segments and coefficient in a Cell for total 30 signals Step3: D oin g th e A dap tive Segm entation · Define a threshold called min_dis, if the minimum distance between two seg ments is less than th at min_dis(this value has been selected adaptively), then the segments will be considered as a single segment · Check the distance between the adjacent segments · If the distance is less than mimdis then add them up and assume them as a single segment · Otherwise keep the old segment as it is Step4: F inding th e LPC C oefficients « So finally I got the adaptive segments for each signal, which is a lot less than the fixed segments number

R e p ro d u c ed with perm ission of th e coovrioht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oerm ission.

27

· Find out the LPC coeSicients for each segments · Store all the adaptive segments and their coefficients in a different Cell · These coefficients have been used as th e variables while doing the classifications For the simplicity the result of adaptive segmentation has been shown on the same signal th a t has been used in Figure 3.2. As it can be seen from Figure 3.3, after each signal gone through the proposed algorithm number of segments for th a t signal has been reduced remarkably. For the signal under illustration where th e number of segments was 25 while doing the fixed segmentation and after going through the proposed adaptive the number of segments becomes 5. From the Figure this is also notable th a t for stationary part the number of segments are of higher w idth whereas for the non-stationary parts the segments became smaller in width.

3 .4

F in d in g th e M o d e l O rder
For maintaining th e
10

In this phase appropriate model order has been calculated.

accuracy instead of taking one single signal, a number of signals (approximately signals has been averaged) has been taken into account.

First each VAG signals

transferred into frequency domain and then the average of those signals has been calculated. Figure 3.4 is showing the average of 10 VAG signal in F F T form. And from th a t averaged FF T signals, number of peaks has been calculate when the peaks are going above a certain threshold. Here one more thing has to be mentioned, while calculating the number of peaks the first half of the signals has been talcen into account, cause as we know from earlier knowledge th a t F F T gave us a symmetric representation for first half and the second half of the signal. So after counting th e

R e p ro d u c e d with p erm ission of th e copvriaht ow ner. Further reproduction orohibited without o erm ission.

28

120
110

A v e ra g e of 10 s ig n a ls in F req u e n cy do m ain

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

500

1000

1500

2000
F re q u e n c y In H z

2500

3000

3500

4000

Figure 3.4: Averaged spectrum for finding the number of peaks

number of peaks for one side it has been doubled up and for getting the final order number a threshold value has been added w ith th at. The threshold line has been has been adjusted adaptively. Finally good result found out when the threshold value has been fixed at 0.75 times of the maximum peak value. So the number of peaks has been calculated whenever the signal crosses this threshold value. In this project the model order was 17 th a t has been calculated using th e above method.

3.5

L P C M o d e lin g o f th e S ig n a l

After getting th e final segmentation of the VAG signal, LPC modeling has been performed on each segments, which has to be analyzed. The basic procedure is to

R e n m d i i c e d w ith n e r m i s R i n n n f thA n n n w r ln h t n w n A r

F iirth A r rA n rn rlim tin n nrrvhlhitArl vA/l+hrviit rvormlcicilrvn

29

estimate the power spectral density (PSD) of the signal for each particular segment. The length of the segment is allowed to increase, as long th e PSD is same for th a t part. The basis of LPC modeling is based on AR modeling and is explained as follows Based on the AR modeling , assume th a t the current signal (em itted from the knee) sample satisfies the following equation. M x{n) -- -- a[t)x{n -- ) + w(n). e=i

(3.5.1)

Where M is the order of AR model for the stationary random signal x(n), a{£), i = 1,2,., M, are the AR parameters, and w{n) is some input, in the case of knee joint vibration signals, w(n) is totally unknown. From (3.5.1), the approximation of x(n) can be given by
M

x{n) -- -- '^ a { i ) x { n -- i).
£=1

(3.5.2)

From (3.5.1) and (3.5.2), the resulting approximation error between x(n) and x{n) is given by
M

e(n) = x{n) -- x{n) = x{n) + ^

a{tjx{n -- i).

(3.5.3)

The corresponding mean square error for x(n) is the expectation of the squared error given by

MgÆ 7 = F;{|e(n)|^}.

(3.5.4)

Hence the optimal AR parameters can be found by rn1rnmi7:ing (3.5.4) from (3.5.1), the transfer function H(z) of the AR model is given by

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without oerm ission.

30

It follows from (3.5.5) th a t the Power Spectral Density (PSD) of the model signal is given by

For processing and analyzing VAG signals, AR modeling technique can be utilized on locally-stationary segment to find the corresponding AR param eters o(^)'s. the corresponding PSD for each signal segment is computed from (3.5.6). T he poles of the transfer function H(z) given by (3.5.5) contain useful spectral features of the modelled signal and the dominant poles of the AR model represent the dominant peaks of the signal's PSD. To analyze the VAG signals, the dominant poles can be utilized to show the maximum peak of the signal's PSD. T he AR parameters of a VAG signal could also be used to determine the separabil ity of the signal segments obtained from adaptive segmentation. Let Ufc(l), %(2), ..% (M ) be the AR parameters obtained from the signal segment.

So using the above strategy, 17 coefficients [note the model order is 17 in this project] has been found for each segment, which was fed to the SPSS p attern recog nition system based on variables. Appendix A provided th e table for the coefficient. The segments were labelled as normal and abnormal segment depending on the clin ical report obtained. LPC coding of VAG signal has been performed, th e coding benefits of adaptive time segmentation and model selection have been tested.

R eo r o d u ce d with o e rm issio n of th e coovrioht ow ner. F u rth er reoroduction nrohlhited w ithout oerm issio n

C h a p ter 4 P a tte r n C la ssification
A utom ated methods for making decisions based on inputs play a very im portant role both in engineering applications and in helping us understand how biological systems responds to their environments. As many engineers and cognitive scientists will attest, th e term "input" and "decision" for this p attern classification problem are not clearly defined in theory. In practice the problem is usually decomposed through design and analysis. A very simple method for making hard decision is the nearest neighbor classifier. This classifier keeps a database of labelled training pattern. Given a test pattern, the nearest neighbor classifier outputs the class of p attern in its database th a t is "closest" to the test pattern. Any decision metric m ay be used, but typically Euclidean distance or one of its generalizations are used. Typically the pattern classification problem can be improved in two techniques: · Employ various multivariate data analysis techniques (e.g., linear discriminant analysis, neural network, decision trees, support vector machines), and compare them by assessing their model performance. The most accurate model is then used for prediction. · Keep th e multivariate analysis technique fixed and instead work on improving 31

R e p r o d u c e d with pe rm issio n of th e copyright o w ner. Further reproduction orohibited without oerm ission.

32

the feature representation, by either selecting the most relevant features, or by constructing new features. In this project the second technique was consideration cause. Most classification algorithms are highly sensitive to the quality of the feature representation. And

by selecting the most relevant features, data distribution is transformed to a form amenable to current classification techniques. The feature has been extracted us ing LP modeling and extracted LPC features for each segment has fed to a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) technique for VAG signal classification.

4 .1

D ifferen t P a tte r n C la ssifica tio n T ech n iq u es

In this section we will briefly discuss the different pattern classification technique th a t is being in use now a days for different application. The next section we will discuss on Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) elaborately cause we use LDA as a pattern classification technique in this project.

4 .1 .1

P r in c ip a l C o m p o n e n t A n a ly s is

The principal component analysis [22] or Karhunen-Loeve transform is a m athe m atical way of determining th a t linear transformation of a sample of points in Ndimensional space which exliibits the properties of the sample most clearly along the coordinate axes. Along the new axes the sample variances are extremes (maxima and minima), and uncorrelated. The name comes from the principal axes of an ellipsoid (e.g., the ellipsoid of inertia), which are just the coordinate axes in question.

R e D T Q C iL J C e d w i t h

n A r m l . Q < i i n n n f t h c j n n r w / r l n h t n \A /n n r

P i i H - h o r r o r v r n r li ir * tlr \n

v A / i f li z - ii i+

33

By their definition, the principal axes will include those along which the point sample has little or no spread (minima of variance). Hence, an analysis in terms of principal components can show (linear) interdependence in data. A point sample of N dimensions for whose N coordinates M linear relations hold, will show only (N-M) axes along which the spread is non-zero. Using a cutoff on the spread along each axis, a sample may thus be reduced in its dimensionality. The principal axes of a point sample are found by choosing the origin at the center of gravity and forming the dispersion matrix.

= (1/A")

- (æi))(a;i - (a;;))].

(4.1.1)
components

where the sum is over the N points of the sample and the xi are the

of the point coordinates. The principal axes and the variance along each of them are then given by the eigenvectors and associated eigenvalues of the dispersion matrix.

4 .1 .2

G e n e tic A lg o r ith m

Genetic algorithm neural network (GANN) [21] is often able to provide good answers to questions in the biomedical sciences. It is a procedure th a t may be used to search among sets of clinical variables for those th at are the best predictors. When a neural network uses a genetic algorithm for training there is an increase in computational time, but compared with simple gradient descent, optimization does not fall into local minimum and be more accurate in prediction. A GANN was used to include those predictor variables which contain information to the predictive process. The probability th a t a variable would be selected was recalculated after each generation in their method. Because the outcome is also a binary indicator.

R e D r o d u c e d w ith o e r m i s s i n n n f t h n n n n v r i n h t n w n o r

P n r t h o r n a n rn rli in tin n r\rnhîhl+cirl tA/l+hrvut r\cirmie<=i/-vn

34

4 .1 .3

L o g is tic R e g r e ss io n

The method of logistic regression addresses the task of concept learning. A linear model of the following form is constructed;

Y = 60 +

+ 62A T ; + .............. bkXh,

where Y is the logit tranformation of the probability p. The logit transformation of the probabihty of a value is defined as

where p is the probability of an outcome. The finear fmiction can also be written as a prediction of the probability of a value, e.g.

1

P{class = pos) The constant a and the weights
61

1 - j - g a + b j L X i + f e 2 æ 2 + .................. bkXic

....

are chosen by a regi-ession method so

that the predictions for the class are optimal for a given set of classified examples. A number of tools are available for computing the weights.

4 .1 .4

M a x im u m L ik e lih o o d E s tim a tio n

There is nothing visual about the maximum likelihood method - but it is a powerful method and, at least for large samples, very precise. Maximum likelihood estimation begins with writing a mathematical expression known as the L ikelih o o d F u n c tio n of the sample data. Loosely speaking, the likelihood of a set of data is the probability

R e o r o d u c e d w ith o e r m is c iln n n f t h n r.n m /r in h t n w n o r

F u r t h e r m n r n H i m t i n n m m h ih itz aH \A/ithr\i it

35

of obtaining that particular set of data, given the chosen probability distribution model. This expression contains the unknown model parameters. The values of

these parameters th at maximize the sample likelihood are known as the M a x im u m Likelihood E s tim a te s or M L E 's.

4 .1 .5

D e c is io n T rees

Binary trees give an interesting and often illuminating way of looking at data in clas sification problems. In last few decades, considerable research has been conducted on the use of decision trees to solve classification problems. One important feature of decision trees is their capabihty to break down a complex decision-making or classi fying problem into a set of simplified problems. The purpose of a decision classifier is to draw a conclusion through the breaking down and solving of these simple problems that achieves the desired solution of the original complicated problem To construct a decision tree, the tree is first grown to completion so th a t the tree partitions the training sample into terminal regions of all one class. Tree construction uses the recursive partitioning algorithm, and its input requires a set of training examples, a splitting rule and a stopping rule.

4 .1 .6

L in ear D isc r im in a n t A n a ly s is

The main idea of this work is to classify between the abnormal and normal patients and we use Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) for classifying the data. Linear Discriminant Analysis easily handles the case where the witlfin class frequencies are unequal and their performances has been examined on randomly generated test data. As we know the Vibroarthrographic (VAG) signals i.e., the signal emitted from knee

R eorod u ced with oerm ission of th e coovrioht ow ner

Further renrndi ictinn

n r n h i h i t e d lA /ith n i it n o r m i c c . i n n

36

while it is naoving, is a nonstationary signal like all other biological signal. The method LDA maximizes the ratio of between class variance to the within class variance in any particular data set, thereby guaranteeing maximal separability. So LDA should successfully classify between the normal and abnormal patients analyzing the VAG signals. This technique has been applied for speech recognition as well as for image analysis and showed good results. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) is a classical statistical approach for classifying samples of unknown classes, based on training samples with known classes. There are many possible techniques for classification of data. Principal Component Analysis (PGA) and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) are two commonly used techniques for data classification and dimensionality reduction. The prime difference between LDA and PGA is th at PGA performs feature classification while LDA performs data classification. PGA changes both the shape and location of the data in its transformed space whereas LDA only provides more class separability by building a decision region between the classes. Linear Discriminant Analysis easily handles the case where the within-class frequencies are unequal and their performances has been examined on randomly generated test data. This method maximizes the ratio of between-class variance to the within-class variance in any particular data set thereby guaranteeing maximal separability. So the goal of LDA is « To perform dimensionahty reduction while preserving as much of the class dis criminatory information as possible. · It seeks to find directions along which the classes are best separated. It does so by taking into consideration the two approaches to LDA

R e o ro du c ed with oermission of th e coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without nerm iesinn

37

C la ss-d e p e n d e n t T r a n s fo rm a tio n : Class-dependent LDA produces one trans formation per class to discriminate th a t class from all other classes. This type of approach involves maximizing the ratio of between class variance to within class vari ance. The main objective is to maximize this ratio so th at adequate class separability is obtained. The class-specific type approach involves using two optimizing criteria for transforming the data sets independently. C la ss-in d e p e n d e n t T r a n s fo r m a tio n : Class-independent LDA produces a sin gle transform to maximally separate all classes. This approach involves maximizing the ratio of overall variance to within class variance. This approach uses only one optimizing criterion to transform the data sets and hence all data points irrespective of their class identity are transformed using this transform. In this type of LDA, each class is considered as a separate class against all other classes. M a th e m a tic a l O p e ra tio n s For ease of understanding, in this section, the mathematical operations has been done using LDA will be analyzed for a two-class problem. Each data set has 100 2-D data points. The operations are showing in steps here: S te p 1:. Suppose there are two classes. Class 1 and Class 2. Let p 2 are the mean

vector of class 1 and class 2 respectively, ps is the of the entire data set. It has been calculates as

Ps

=

P1P1P2P2

(4.1.2)

where P I and P2 are the a p rio ri probabilities of the classes. In the case of this simple two class problem, the probability factor is assumed to be 0.5. S te p 2: In LDA, within-class and between-class scatter are used to formulate criteria

R e p ro du c ed with permission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

38

for class separability. Within-class scatter is the expected covariance of each of the classes. The scatter measures are computed using Equations 3 and 4.

S-u) -- ^ yjPj ^ {coVj^ Therefore, for the two-class problem,

(4.1.3)

Sw -- 0.5

X

covx 4- 0.5 x (co%)

(4.1.4)

All the covariance matrices are symmetric. Let covi and C O V2 be the covariance of set 1 and set 2 respectively. Covariance matrix is computed using the following equation.

ccwj =

- A(j) X (%y - ^j)^

(4.1.5)

The between-class scatter is computes using the following equation.

Sb = ^ ( l ^ j --Ms) X
3

(4.1.6)

Note th a t Sb can be thought of as the covariance of data set whose members are the mean vectors of each class. As defined earlier, the optimizing criterion in LDA is the ratio of between-class scatter to the within-class scatter. The solution obtained by maximizing this criterion defines the axes of the transformed space. However for the class-dependent transform, the optimizing criterion is computed using equations (5) and (6). It should be noted th at if the LDA is a class dependent type, for L-class separate optimizing criterion are required for each class. The optimizing factors in case of class dependent type are computed as

R eo ro d u ced with oerm ifisinn nf th e r.nnv/rinht ow n er

Further renrndi lotinn nrnhihited w ithnnt nnrm lccinn

39

criterioiij = inv(covj) x Sb

(4.1.7)

For the class independent transform, the optimizing criterion is computed as

criteriorij = inv{Sw) x Sb

(4.1.8)

S te p 3: For any L-class problem we would always have L-1 non-zero eigen values. This is attributed to the constraints on the mean vectors of the classes in Equation 2. Having obtained the transformation matrices, we can transform the data sets using the single LDA transform or the class specific transforms which ever the case may be. For the class dependent LDA,

trnasform ed^set-j -- transform ^j'^ x set-j For the class independent LDA,

(4.1.9)

tr n a s f ormed-set = transform ^spec^ x d a ta ^ se f

(4.1.10)

Similarly the test vectors are transformed and are classified using the Euclidean distance of the test vectors from each class mean, for proper classification. In this example the classes were properly defined but cases where there is overlap between classes, obtaining a decision region in original space will be very difficult. S te p 4: Once the transformations are completed using the LDA transforms. Eu clidean distance or RMS distance is used to classify data points. The Euclidean distance matric is the simplest and most commonly used distance metric for classi fication of data. It is assumed th a t we can define a representative number for every

R e o ro d u ce d with oerm lsslon of th e coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohlhited without nerm ission

40

class involved in the classification problem. The test sample then assigned the class to whose representative number is the closest. The classes may have significant overlap in the input space making th e Euclidean distance metric ineffective. To counter this problem data is transformed to a feature space where the classes are b etter separated or the features are independent and the distance metric is more effective. Euclidean distance is computed using Equation 11 where /J,ntrans is the mean of the transformed data set, n, is the class index and x is the test vector. Thus for n classes, Euclidean distances are obtained for each test point.

distjn = {transform -n_specy x x -- p.ntrans

(4.1.11)

The smallest Euclidean distance among the distances classifies the test vector as belonging to class.

4.2

P a tte r n A n a ly sis o f V A G

LDA helps us to discriminate between the normal abnormal signals as two separate classes based on linear classification rule. Here is a flow chart showing how LDA worked on our system. Here is a complete description of each block of the flow chart which will basically give a overview of the whole procedure th a t has been taken for doing this model based segmentation of VAG signal analysis. I n p u t Signal: 30 VAG signals have been used as the input signal. 16 signals have been taken from normal knee joint and 14 signals from abnormal knee joint. A d a p tiv e S e g m e n ta tio n : Each signal has been adaptively segmented depending on the dynamics of the signal characteristics. After segmenting 30 signals, a total of 71

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oerm ission.

41

Input Signal

Segm entation

Feature Extraction

Obtain Model for each Class

LDA Analysis

Transform Test Data

Complete Euclidean Distance

Ciassify B ased on Minimum Euciidean Distance

Figure 4.1: Flowchart of VAG Analysis

segments have been produced which has been used as for analyzing the VAG signals. F e a tu r e E x tra c tio n : After getting the segments the features has been extracted from th a t segments using Autoregressive modeling. In this part of the work a total of 17 coefficients were produces for each segments. L D A A n aly sis: After getting the features, which are the LPC coefficients in this project, the transformation m atrix is formed by the eigenvectors corresponding to the dominant eigenvalues of the optimizing criterion. This LPC coefficients worked as the variables to the linear discriminant analysis tool for classification of VAG signals. T ra in in g a n d T esting: This part has been done by the SPSS system which has been used for discriminant analysis of the VAG signals. So the system got trained w ith the coefficient used for representing each segment. For testing the system ''Leave-oneout" strategy has been taken, where one of the input signal assumed to be unknown and it has been classified based on the training set. After transforming the test data, it computes the Euclidean distance between the test vector and trained vector and perform the classification based on the Euclidean distance.

R e o ro d u c e d with o erm issio n of th e nonurinht o w n e r

F u rth er ronroHi lotion

o ro h ih lte rf w ith o u t o e rm io o io n

C h a p ter 5 R e s u lts and C o n clu sio n
5 .1 M o tiv a tio n for O ur s tr a te g y

The main motivating factor for this project is to develop a non-invasive diagnostic tool using VAG signal for detecting some pathological condition such as Osteoarthritis. For fulfilling th a t objective a model based segmentation and analysis has been done on the knee signals, which is called as VAG. The propose scheme should have the following criteria · The diagnosis should use advanced digital signal processing techniques, so it should have the ability to correctly diagnosis OA in early stage. · The process designed to an inexpensive way of diagnosis. · It should correctly localize the problem area (the angle where the surface is more rough) · The whole system set-up should have simple mechanism.

42

R e o r o d u ce d with o e rm issio n of th e co o v ria h t o w n er. F u rth er reo ro d u ctio n nrnhihited w ithout norm iccion

43

VAG signal obtained from ab n o rm a l k n e e Joint

60

40

20

 §

I

20
-4 0

-6 0

S e g m e n ll

S2

S4

S e g rn e n t 5

-1 0 0 -120

50 0

1000

1500

2000
Tim e S am p le

2500

3000

3500

4000

Figure 5.1: Adaptive segmentation of the signal showing the localization

5 .2

R e s u lts o f L o ca liza tio n o f P a th o lo g y

In this section it has been explained how the proposed scheme can analyze the nonstationarity and can do the localization of a VAG signal. For describing the procedure it is necessary to repeat the same figure th a t has been used in C hapter 3 when adaptive segmentation procedure was described. As the project is basically doing the model based segmentation, where the main concept is to segment the signal effectively which will correctly diagnosis and do the localization. This is a segmented form of a abnormal knee signal after doing the segmentation using the proposed model based segmentation. After getting the adaptive segmentation using our model approach, we will get a scenario such as one in Table 5.1. The table is showing the width of each segment as

R e p r o d u c e d with perm ission of th e copvripht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oerm ission.

44

No of Segments 1 2 3 4 5

Starting Point 1 1501 1801 1951 2101

Ending Point 1500 1800 1950 2100 3750

Table 5.1: Starting and End point of each segment after doing th e adaptive segment well as the starting and ending point for th a t particular segment. The above figure represents a total 5 segments of different width depending on the characteristics of the VAG signal. It can be clearly seen from Figure 5.1 th a t the segments are localizing the problem area. The results of the localization are as follows: · It can be notified from the table the segment length gets bigger when the signal is pretty stationary and its getting thinner when the signal become more nonstationary. · As it has been described in Chapter 3 the adaptive segmentation has been done on the signal after they segmented in a fixed width.Features have been extracted for each fixed width segment and distance between the segments has been calculated. · A threshold value was adjusted adaptively and if the distance between two adjacent segment is less than the threshold, then they assumed to be a single segment. This way the non-stationary part of the signal can be recognized, cause more non-stationary the signal, more number of segments will be obtained. · The localization can be more precise when the threshold is minimized between the adjacent segments. B ut on the other hand when threshold become lower

R©Droduced with nermicLQinn nf th ^ nnnvrinht n w n o r

Pi irthor ronrnWi intlz-vn r\rr\hihl+aH vA /l+hr^i i+

45

th e number of segment for each signal will be increased. So cost for analyzing for more number of segments will be higher.

5 .3

R e s u lts

The analysis was done on 30 VAG signals obtained from subjects both normal and are from patients presenting with symptomatic knee. Among those 16 signals are from the abnormal loiee joint and the rest of the signals are from normal knee joint. After doing the adaptive segmentation for each VAG signal, each one was haying a different number of segments. A to tal of 71 segments have been used finally for analysis. Each segment has been named either as "Normal" or "Abnormal" segment as per the clinical report observed through arthroscopy. For analysis each segment has been classified in two categories, "1" for the segments from the normal VAG signal and "2" for the segments from the abnormal VAG signal. After doing the segmentation, features has been extracted from each segment using the AR modeling to obtain the LPC coefficients. The filter order has been selected using the criteria described in chapter 3, and the resulted order was 17. So each segment has 17 features, which was used as the variables while using the SPSS system for LDA p attern analysis. At the starting of doing the Discriminant analysis using SPSS software, it finds out the mean and standard deviation of all the variables. Then the LDA analysis has been performed. As shown in Table 5.2, 32 segments out of 71 were classified in categoryl and the rest of the segments were in category2.

R e p ro d u c e d with p erm issio n of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

46

Actual Group No of Segments N orm al Abnormal TotoZ 32 39 71

Predicted Group N orm al Abnormal 28 or 87.5% 4 or 12.5% 7 or 17.9% 32 or 82.1% Overall Accuracy 84.5%

Table 5.2: Classification results using LDA An acceptable number of segments have been experimented and the classification result suggests th a t VAG signal could be used as a diagnostic tool for detecting OA. The number and percentage of cases correctly classified and misclassified are tabulated. Out of 32 Normal segments 28 or 87.5 % has been classified properly whereas 4 or 12.5% segments have been misclassified. In other words, out of 32 norm al segments the system detects 28 segments as normal bu t 4 segments have been misclassified and detected as abnormal segments. For the case of 39 abnormal segments, 32 or 82.1% have been correctly classified i.e., detected as abnormal and 7 or 17.9% got misclassified. So the overall accuracy of the classification become 84.5%. For the classification using "Leave-one-out" method, one segment is used as a test vector while the others are used as the trained vector. While analyzing the VAG signals in this strategy, in case of normal 32 segments, 23 or 71.9% has been corrected classified, while 9 or 28.1% got misclassified. For analyze the abnormal 39 segments 27 or 69.2% got correctly classified and 12 or 30.8% got misclassified. The overall accuracy for this case is 70.4%. After doing the classification using the segments, it has calculated th a t how many segments from each signal has been correctly identified. If most of the segments from a particular signal has been classified correctly then its assumed th a t the signals has been classified correctly. Using th a t procedure out of 30 signals 26 signals has been

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

47

Actual Group No of Segments Normal Abnormal Total 32 39 71

Predicted Group Norm al Abnormal 23 or 71.9% 9 or 28.1% 12 or 30.8% 27 or 69.2% Overall Accuracv 70.4%

Table 5.3; Classification using leave-one-ont method classified properly (either normal or abnormal) and 4 signals got misclassified. So the overall accuracy of this work can be said as 86.7%.

5 .4

C on clu sion

In conclusion, 30 signals have been adaptively segmented and analyzed to differentiate between the normal and abnormal knee sounds signal. The segmentation has taken care of the non stationarity of the VAG signal. The segmentation technique has also been used to localize the range of pathology in the signal.

5.5

P o ssib le F uture W ork D ir e c tio n

Possible future work in this research can be to find out how early we can detect OA and how these signals can help us to determine the cause of Anterior knee pain. Moreover, PPG is also a non-stationary signal. So STFT or TFD and wavelet analysis can be performed on PPG signals.

R eoroduced with oerm ission of th e coovriaht ow ner. Further renrodiintlnn

n r o h lh l to H w i t h o u t n o rm lc .c .io n

A ppendix A

{

This is the resulted coefficients that have been extracted from the VAG signals and used for analyzing the signals. A total of 71 segments from 30 signals have been used. The name of the signals has been given in such a way so that it can be

I
\

j ] I j I

easily understood, from which signal the segment has been extracted Seg4.1 mean the first segment from 4th signal. Total 30 signals have been used which are numbered from signal 2 to signal 32. Start point and end point is showing the segment length, Category `1' represent that the segment is from the normal VAG signffi while category `2' represent th at the segment is extracted from a abnormal VAG signal. Coef_l to Coef_18 are the coefficients that has been extracted as the features of the segments and they are used as the variable for discriminant analysis.

48

R eprodu ced with perm ission of th e coovriaht owner. Further reproduction orohibited without oerm issio n .

CD a

J3

o Q. c o CD a.

A R C oefficients o f the VAG signals used in this project

D
CD

No of Seg Seg name Start pt
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29  30 31 32 33
34

End pt
150 1200 1350 3750 2250 3750 3750 3750 3750 1800 1950 2100 2250 2400 2550 3750 1650 1800 3750 2400 2700 3700 3750 1500 1800 1950 2100 3750 1500 1650 3750 2400

Category
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

Coef 1
1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00

Coef2

Coef 3

Coef 4

Coef 5

Coef 6

Coef 7
-4.562-02 -2.512-02 5.452-02 9.302-02 3.362-03 1.092-01 -3.992-02 2.942-02 6.912-04 6.482-03 -2.672-01 -2.732-01 1.032-01 -4.622-02 2.122-01 2.672-03 -2.262-02 -4.702-02 -1.952-02 -3.702-02 1.972-01 2.242-02 -1.022-02 -1.412-03 -8.122-02 8.922-02 1.572-01 -6.272-02 -7.712-02 1.132-02 -1.722-02 3.592-02 -3.942-02 -2.23E-01 -2.052-02 -4.142-02

ZT

O O O < D 3*
3

CD

CD T1

C
3
"

CD CD

D O a 3 a O 3

=T
D

C D CD W 3`
d

35 36

Seg4 1 Seg4 2 Seg4 3 Seg4 4 Seg5 1 Sega 2 Seg6-1 Seg7 1  Seg8_1 Seg10_1 Seg10_2 Seg10 3 Seg10_4 Seg10 5 SeglO 6 SeglO 7 Seg12 1 Seg12.2 Seg12_3 Seg13_1 Seg13 3 Seg13 4 Seg14_1 Seg15_1 Seg15 2 Seg15 3 Seg15 4 ! Seg15 5 Seg16 1 S e g ia 2 Seg16_3 Seg16_4 Seg17_1 Seg17_2 s e g lB J seg19_1

1 151 1201

1351
1 2251 1 1 1 1 1801 1951 2101 2851 2401 2551 1 1651 1801 1 2551 2701 1 1 1501 1801 1951 2101 1 1501 1651 2251 1 1501 1 1

1.00E+00
1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 lOOE+00 1.0QE+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 lOOE+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00
1 .0 0 E + 0 0

2 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 2

1500
1650

3750 1650

1 1 1 1 1 1

1.G0E+00 1.00E+00

-1.10E+00 1.78E-01 -3.322-02 -7.982-03 -7.512-02 -1.02E+00 4.00E-02 -2.50E-02 1.842-01 -1.052-01 -1.39E+00 7.39E-01 -6.692-02 -1.132-01 -4.392-02 -1.07E+00 2.47E-01 -2.192-01 1.532-01 -1.142-01 -1.00E+00 4.44E-03 -2.662-02 8.132-02 -2.132-02 -1.25E+00 2.30E-01 7.03E-02 3.082-03 -5.622-02 -1.11E+00 3.25E-02 2.452-03 1.032-01 -9.872-03 -7.59E-01 -8.57E-02 -4.75E-02 ·4.352-02 -3.042-02 -7.34E-01 -1.78E-01 -3.122-02 -4.192-02 7.922-03 -6.64E-01 -1.68E-01 -1.722-02 -4.572-02 4.072-03 -1.62E+00 1.19E+00 -7.092-02 -3.702-01 2.712-01 -1.462+00 7.51 E-01 1.522-01 -1.482-01 1.202-01 -1.27E+00 7.22E-01 -5.042-02 1.802-01 -1.272-02 -1.74E+00 1.33E+00 -2.56E-01 -1.462-01 1.432-01 -1.72E+00 1.10E+00 -1.702-01 1.012-03 -1.612-01 -B.55E-01 -1.33E-01 4.03E-02 5.062-02 -1.732-02 -6.52E-01 -1.06E-01 -5.05E-02 5.882-03 -8.342-02 -1.51E+00 1.26E-01 5.19E-01 1.132-01 -1.552-01 -7.03E-01 -1.36E-01 -5,022-02 -3.672-02 -9.902-03 -8.53201 -2.68E-02 1.312-02 -1.332-02 -5.132-02 -1.32E+00 4.69E-01 -1.512-01 2.212-01 -3.672-01 -7.35E01 -2.43E-02 -1.532-01 -5.482-02 -2.602-03 -5.89E-01 -1.072-01 -5.852-02 4.902-03 -3.992-02 -6.87E-01 -3.80E-02 -1.302-01 -2.742-02 -3.812-03 -9.19E01 1.402-01 -4.722-02 7.742-02 3.472-02 -1.73E+00 1,032+00 -2.852-01 3.442-01 -2.992-01 -1.00E+00 3.50E-01 -4.33E-01 4.622-01 -3.672-01 -7.40E-01 -1.18E-01 -4.802-02 4.122-02 -1.052-02 -8.80EO1 6.37E-02 7.992-03 -2.162-03 6.882-02 -1.552+00 5.172-01 2.562-01 -1.042-01 1.112-02 -1.17E+00 4.95E-02 1.312-01 4.702-02 1.002-01 -1.37E01 -1.95E-01 -1.732-01 -1.302-01 -6.182-02 -6.22E01 -8.38E-02 -1.332-01 -1.352-02 -1.682-02 1 .5 9 E -0 1 -1 .4 1 E + 0 0 1 .1 2 E + 0 0 -6.02E-01 1.10E-01 -2.052-02 -3.732-02 -6.30EO1 -6.93E-02 -9.092-02 -6.27E-01 -6.02E-02 -5.912-02 -4.792-02 1.842-02

I

D D 3 3 3 _
A R Coefficients o f the V A G signais used in th is project

No of Seg
37 38

Coef 8

Coef 9

Coef 10

Coef 11

39
40 41 42 43 44 45

46 47 48 49
D

D 3 I

T )

50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71

5.68E-02 -5.98E-02 -2.092-01 2.81 E-02 2.82E-02 -6.21 E-02 2.10E-02 -4.55E-02 -1.12E-01 -6.2ÛE-03 5.93E-02 9.26E-03 2.43E-02 -2.76E-02 -8.54E-02 1.55E-01 1.48E-02 -5.71 E-02 2.01 E-02 -2.25E-03 7.68E-03 -3.96E-02 9.20E-02 -4.97E-02 5.10E-02 -1.62E-02 4.90E-02 -3.51 E-02 -1.80E-01 6.10E-02 1.57E-02 -2.63 E-02 3.09E-02 -9.17E-02 3.06E-03 1.47Ë-01 6.39E-03 9.05E-02 3.28E-02 6.36E-02 3.16E-02 1.29E-02 3.46E-02 1.4 IE -02 -3.98E-02 -1.56E-02 2.05E-01 -2.26E-01 -1.91 E-04 2.98E-02 -3.96E-02 -1.43E-02 1.24E-02 2.43E-02 -2.05E-02 -1.37E-02 -2.31 E-02 -3.02E-02 4.21 E-02 5.02E-03 -1.66E-01 9.83E-02 2.84E-02 -3.29E-03 2.98E-02 -4.77E-02 1.06E-01 1.28E-02 1.12E-02 -1.50E-Q2

-1.25E-01 4.48E-02 2.49E-01 -2.33E-01

Coef 12 4.332-02
1.972-01

Coef 13 Coef 14 Coef 15 Coef 16 Coef 17 Coef 18 2.222-02 -4.92E-02 2.56E-02 2.30E-02 -1.04E-01 -3.52E-03 -1.042-02 -8.91 E-02 -1.672-01 2.56E-01 -1.98E-01 6.33E-02

-G.4SE-02 4.242-03 -1.83E-02 2.95E-02 -1.21E-02 2.51 E-02 -4.43E-03 -2.70E-02 1.812-02 2.89E-02 -1.242-02 -9.13E-03 -2.76E-02 -8.08E-04 3.34E-02 -6.05E-03 -4.99E-03 -1.272-03 -2.01 E-02 1.07E-01 -1.162-01 -7.962-02 -5.002-03 -1.17E-01 2.25E-01 -2.11 E-02 -9.892-02
-1.22E-01 4.70E-02 -2.90E-02 8.42E-02 2.10E-03 -1 .452-03 -9.04E-02 5.01 E-02 3.08E-03 -1.11 E-01 -5.64E-02 -1.732-02 -1:172-01 2.19E-02 -1.402-01 -9.99E-02 -4.332-03 -8.82E-04 -6.142-03 -2.64E-02 -2.672-02 1.77E-01 -2.67E-01 -4.87E-02 1.74E-02 -5.05E-02 2.21 E-02 -5.66E-02 2.362-02 -5.42E-02 -1.952-02 -1.58E-02 -3.11 E-02 -1.792-02 -1.02E-G2 -2.23E-02 3.59E-02 1.44E-01 -9.872-02 -9.69E-02 4.31 E-02 -4.71 E-02 2.562-02 -6.842-02 4.02E-02 -2.64E-02 -1.36E-01 3.312-02 1.01 E-02 -5.59E-02 -1.12E-03 2.262-02 6.47E-02 8.002-02 3.06E-02 5.98E-02 -1.67E-02 -4.78E-02 1.632-02 3.34E-03 1.45E-01 1.04E-01 -3.22E-02 -4.482-02 -2.44E-03 -4.06E-03 -1.96E-02 2.25E-02 6.53E-03 -2.74E-02 9.702-02 8.30E-02 -4.46E-02 2.382-02 8.21 E-02 -1.07E-01 6.91 E-02 1.17E-01 -1.24E-01 6.10E-02 -6.69E-02 7.33E-02 4.61 E-03 2.13E-01 -1.36E-01 -8.85E-02 -4.882-02 -3.992-02 5:60E-02 -2.802-02 9.09E-04 4.59E-02 1.83E-02 -9.972-02 4.26E-02 1.31 E-01 -4.35E-02 -9.24E-03 1.44E-03 -6.26E-02 6.66E-02 3.0ÜE-02 -1.25E-02 1.16E-02 4.192-03 5.89E-02 -3.01 E-02 -3.37E-02 -3.32E-02 3.79E-02 2.46E-02 -2.78E-02 7.48E-03 7.05E-02 5.40E-03 6.742-02 -2.25E-01 -3.87E-02 3.17E-02 2.922-02 8.92E-03 1.67E-02 -2.402-02 5.68E-02 -1.252-02 -1.13E-02 -5.73E-02 2.23E-01 6.682-02 -3.562-02 -5.53E-03 -2.09E-02 1.01 E-03 6.06E-02 -5.28E-02 -3.93E-02 3.29E-02 -1.282-02 -1.39E-01 -4.58E-02 1.242-01 4.90E-02 -5.80E-02 -1.282-02 6.60E-02 -1.722-01 -5.70E-02 -4.092-02 -1.432-02 1.812-03 -7.96E-02 -2.392-02 -6.462-03 8.122-02 1.112-02 -4.122-02 2.09E-01 -3.06E-03 4.552-03 -2.032-02 -3.082-02 9.102-05 -6.432-02 -3.632-02 -6.192-02 -1.222-01 -9.30E-03 -4.052-03 9.122-02 -7.262-03 -6.922-03 2.462-02 3.122-02 2.742-02 -1.472-02 2.772-02 4.942-02 4.232-02

-4.432-02
-1.69E-02 1.262-02 -1.432-02 -1.57E-01

1.182-02
3.38E-03

-4.86E-02
-5.142-02

3.262-02
-1.31 E-01

-2.04E-01
-4.80E-02 1.79E-G1 -7.06E-04 -4.382-02 1.07E-02 -2.312-02 2.35E-02 -1.892-02 1.60E-02 -1.97E-02 -2.57E-02 2.892-02 7.56E-02 -8.64E-03 2.83E-02 -1.75E-01 -2.45E-02

-2.622-02
-1.70E-01

5.202-02 -8.752-02 -6.832-02
2.122-02 3.372-02 1.032-02

6.292-02 -2.31 E-02
1.2 IE-01

2.442-01 -5.592-02 -2.772-02 -2.562-02 7.542-03 1.63E-02 -4.57E-03 3.752-03 -9.76E-03 -3.54E-02 2.532-02 -1.76E-03 -2.44E-02 -6.08E-04 -5.672-02 6.64E-02 -7.27E-02 -1.932-01 5.472-02 3.18E-01 2.08E-02 -2.042-02 2.562-03 5.59E-02 -2.382-02 -1.402-02
-1.62E-01 3.47E-02 6.95E-02 -1.45E-02 3.18E-04 -3.722-02

5.082-02 2.372-02

-3.002-03 -2.082-03 6.432-03 -2.31 E-03 1.822-02 3.842-02 -1.162-01 -2.822-03 -1.232-01 3.032-02 -5.502-03 -6.362-03 -3.262-02 -1.462-02 4.50E-02 3.41 E-03 3.35E-02 -1.992-02

s

o a c s Q. o CD

o

A R C oefficients o f the VAG signals used in th is project

No of Seg
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

Coef 8

Coef 9

Coef 10

Coef 1'

Coef 12

Coef 13

Coef 14

Coef 15

Coef 16

Coef 17

Coef 18

0 1
 ' 3-

n

ID

3
D 3
D

D

D.

T D 3.

3 -

3

30
31

32
33 34 35 36

1.63E-01 -2.52E-01 2.29E-01 -9.21 E-02 6.94E-02 2.48E-02 -1.74E-01 2.62E-01 -2.06E-01 5.76E-02 2.44E-02 -2.01 E-02 -9.92E-02 3.92E-02 1.60E-02 -1.44E-02 2.13E-02 -4.27E-02 -4.68E-03 2.68E-02 -5.55E-02 4.34E-02 8.35E-03 -1.10E-01 3.74E-02 -3.88E-03 -1.83E-02 -4.23E-02 2.61 E-02 5.72E-02 -1.16E-01 8.66E-02 -7.56E-02 -7.5 IE-02 4.51 E-02 1.48E-02 1.91 E-02 9.96E-03 -8.79E-02 3.00E-02 -1.402-02 2.68E-02 -3.16E-02 4.52E-03 1.40E-02 1.29E-02 7.12E-04 -2.19E-02 -4.00E-02 3.77E-02 -8.60E-03 -2.31 E-02 1.10E-02 -6.24E-02 6.31 E-02 -9.46E-02 - 9 .9 8 E -0 3 8 .3 8 E - 0 2 - 4 .0 5 E -0 2 - 8 .1 3 E -0 2 4 .7 2 E - 0 2 4 .3 0 E - 0 3 4 .6 4 E - 0 2 -1 .0 5 E -0 2 - 1 .3 3 E -0 2 1 .3 6 E -0 3 6.13E-02 -2.96E-02 -6.13E-03 5.85E-06 7.48E-03 -4.07E-03 -3.05E-02 -1.72E-03 1.72E-02 -1.092-02 2.66E-02 -2.51 E-02 -3.36E-03 9.06E-03 -7.96E-03 2.83E-02 -2.43E-02 1.90E-02 -2.30E-02 7.13E-03 -1.502-02 2.64E-03 1.19E-02 1.55E-02 2.92E-02 2.92E-02 -3.59E-02 1.79E-02 3.85E-02 -1.65E-02 2.17E-02 -5.29E-02 -4.00E-02 -3.63E-02 -5.02E-02 -2.90E-03 2.06E-02 4.23E-02 -3.37E-02 -2.72E-02 2.55E-03 5.11 E-02 -1.922-02 -3.86E-02 3.54E-01 -3.77E-01 7.39E-02 1.44E-01 -3.32E-01 2.24E-01 -1.74E-01 8.01 E-02 -1.04E-G1 2.40E-02 -7.92E-03 6.36E-02 3.20E-01 -3.29E-01 -3.02E-02 1.22E-01 -1.76E-01 1.38E-01 -7.70E-02 -1.70E-01 2.70E-01 -1.64E-01 -1.13E-01 1.93E-01 -1.67E-01 2.97E-01 -9.87E-02 1.53E-01 -2.04E-01 1.49E-01 -6.93E-02 1.79E-01 -1.21 E-01 2.66E-02 1.80E-01 -2.19E-01 1.97E-03 2.22E-01 -2.39E-01 3.06E-01 -2.53E-01 3.99E-02 1.06E-01 -6.70E-02 -2.18E-01 1.41 E-01 -4.17E-02 -1.04E-01 1.64E-01 -5.34E-Q3 -2.45E-01 1.62E-01 1.02E-01 -1.70E-01 3.38E-02 3.23E-02 -5.32E-02 -3.39E-02 -3.27E-02 8.82E-02 -3.88E-02 4.28E-02 -3.43E-02 -1.56E-02 -4.07E-02 3.2 IE-02 4.43E-02 -3.41 E-02 3.92E-02 -3.48E-02 -1.15E-03 -2.88E-02 2.99E-02 -4.72E-03 3.25E-02 -3.19E-02 -1.01 E-02 5.30E-02 3.80E-03 9.84E -02 -1.69E^01 -4.72E-02 2.09E-01 -1.62E-01 9.17E-02 -5.24E-02 6.82E-02 -3.60E-02 -2.43E-03 -2.96E-02 3.75E-02 1.16E-02 -3.17E-02 7.52E-02 -3.73E-02 -1.71 E-02 -1.54E-02 5.24E-02 -3.83E-02 6.18E-Q2 1.07E-02 1.75E-02 3.40E-03 -3.67E-02 7.13E-02 1.22E-02 -7.10E-02 -5.40E-02 3.02E-02 -5.92E-02 -3.36E-02 6.32E -02 1.16E-03 3.17E-02 -9.47E-02 1.66E-01 -7.14E-02 -1.37E-03 -1.52E-01 1.69E-01 -7.93E-02 2.58E-Q3 1.67E-02 -3.90E-03 -5.19E-03 -3.04E-02 6.78E-03 -2.90E-02 5.34E-02 -7.10E-02 4.89E-02 -1.23E-02 -5.21 E-03 -4.08E-02 -1.56E-02 -5.49E-Ü2 5.00E-03 1.04E-02 -2.03E-02 2.48E-02 -3.52E-02 -1.68E-02 -2.10E-02 -1.23E-02 5.27E-02 -4.85E-D2 8.52E-02 -5.14E-02 -3.28E-02 7.99E-03 5.40E-03 -7.51 E-03 -3.64E-02 -3.56E-03 3.58E-02 -1.29E-01 1.59E-01 -1.19E-01 2.96E-02 -1.17E-02 4.57E-Ü2 -1.04E-01 3.42E-02 -7.03E-02 3.16E-02 -8.91 E-02 2.27E-01 -2.20E-01 5.43E-02 1.08E-01 -1.9.1 E-01 1.08E-01 8.58E-02 -7.73E-02 -9.58E-02  9. I 8E-O2 -1.50E-01 2.00E-01 -8.74E-02 6.20E-02 -1.82E-02 -2.75E-02 -4.83E-02 -1.16E-02 -7.77E-02 -2:862-02 8.24E-02 2.63E-03 -3.66E-02 3.91 E-02 1.12E-02 -3.56E-02 -1.37E-02 3.53E-02 -8.80E-03 -1.92 E-02 -2.09E-02 1.52E-02 -3.82E-03 -7.97E-02 -2.35E-03 -4.84E-02 -2.37E-02 1.58E-02 -6.32E-02 3.71 E-02 -2.57E-02 -1.99E-02 4.54E-02 -1.84E-01 3.59E-02 2.04E-01 -1.02E-01 -9.36E-02 1.66E-01 -1.74E-01 4.79E-02 -7.81 E-02 1.51 E-01 -8.14E-02 -3.99E-02 6.11 E-02 -1.10E-01 -4.45E-02 -8.03E-03 7.6 IE-02 2.85E-02 -9.38E-02 6.17E-02 9.49E-03 -6.38E-02 6.40E-02 6.59E-02 4.35E-02 2.80E-02 5.66E-03 5.96E-03 7.07E-03 1.19E-G2 1.31E-02 4.19E-03 -8.30E-03 -2.48E-02 -4.44E-03 4.19E-03 1.03E-02 -3.55E-02 -3.20E-02 1.27E-02 -8.71 E-03 2.69E-02 -2.06E-02 5.77E-03 1.16E-01 2.18E-Q2 -8.21 E-02 1.11E-01 -5.13E-02 -2.54E-02 1.14E-01 -9.69E-02 4.06E-02 3.63E-02 -5.28E-02 -1.08E-02 -1.74E-02 -1.18E-02 -1.91 E-02 -9.41 E-03 -2.26E-02 -2.34E-03 2.20E-02 -3.20E-02 3.70E-02 -2.39E-02 1.43E-02 -8.66E-02 1.52E-G2 1.64E-03 -5.25E-02 -1.51 E-03 -3.57E-02 4.77E-02 8.46E-03 -1.73E-02 -1.02E-02

CD Ü O
Q_

J3

C a (D
Q.

A R C oefficients o f the V A G signals used in this project

e g D
CD

No of Seg Seg_name Start_pt
37

End_pt
2400 2550 3750 3750 1800 1550 2700 3000 3750 3750

Category

Coef 1
1.00E+00 1.Û0E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00 1.00E+00

Coef2
-7.05E-01 -7.94E-01 -6.18E-01 -7.37E-01 -6.67E-01 -4.70E-01 -1.25E+00 -1.24E+00 -7.97E-01 -6.70E-01 -6.98E-01 -1.31E+00 -9.07E-01 -1.04E+00 -8.00E-01 -9.63E-01 -1.19E+00 -1.30E+00 -1.12E+00 -1.04E+00 -1.24E+00 -1.10E+00 -1.20E+00 -1.69E+00 -1.27E+00 -7.68E-01 -9.18E-01 -7.46E-01 -9.10E-01 -7.09E-01 -1.19E+00 -7.33E-01 -6.59E-01 -1.53E+00 -7.16E-01

Coef 3
-1.55E-01 2.32E-02 -1.51 E-01 -8.43E-02 -1.28E-01 -1.48E-01 1.30E-01 2.59E-01 -1.35E-01 -1.34E-01 -6.72E-02 5.48E-01

Coef 4
-3.54E-02 -3.12E-02 -6.10E-02 -4.99E-02 -3.67 E-02 -6.79E-02 3.62E-01 -2.16E-01 -7.72E.02 -3.72E-02 -3.15E-02

Coef 5

Coef 6

Coef 7
8.26E-02 1.94E-01 1.472-02 1.19E-02 1.872-01

38
39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 - 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59

O 0 1

CD

rx

3 CD C §
CD CD D O a. c a o TI

·

3

D O

seg19_4 seg 1 9 5 seg19_6 Seg20_1 Seg21_2 Seg21_3 Seg21_4 Seg21.5 Seg21_6 Seg22^1 Seg23_1 Seg23_2 Seg23_3 Seg24_1 Seg24_2 Seg25_1Seg26_1 Seg26_2 Seg26_3 Seg26_4

1951 2401 2551

1
1651 1801 2551 2701 3001

1 1 2101
2251

2100
2250 3750 . 2700 3750 3750 1950

1
2701

1 1
1951

2100
2550

2101
2551 2851

^26_5
Seg27_1 Seg27_2

2850 3750
 1350 2850 3000 3750 2400 3750 3750 3750 750 900 3750 1350 1500 3750

1
1351 2851 3001

60

8eg27_3
Seg27_4 Seg28_1 Seg28_2 Seg29_1 Seg30_1 Seg31.1

O c D fD [/) I/) 5' 3

3

"

61

62. 63
64

1
2401

65 66
67

1 1 1
751 901

Seg31_2
Seg31_3 Seg32_1 Seg32 2 Seq32 3

68 69
70 71

1
1351 1501

1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

-3.90E-02
5.67E-02 -4.75E-02 5.60E-02 1.36E-01 4.39E-01 1.39E-01 3.03E-02 8.73E-02 1.50E-01 1.16E-01 1.19E+00 3.62E-01 -3.95E-02 1.51E-01 3.48E-02 -1.08E-01 -7.32E-02 1.37E-03 -1.83E-01 -1.00E-01 2.60E-01 -1.26E-01

3.15E-Û2 -6.40E-02 3.522-02 -2.08E-01 -2.342-02 -5.282-02 -4.25E-02 -4.71 E-02 2.64E-02 -5.582-02 3.57E-02 9.692-02 -1.462-02 -2.45E-03 5.40E-01 -1.56E-01 2.80E-02 -6.30E-03 -2.84E-02 -4.342-02 -2.32E-03 -6.052-02 -1.952-01 1.72E-01 -1.652-01 -3.20E-02 -6.172-02 2.732-02 -3.87E-02 4.782-02 -1.122-02 -3.852-04 5.60E-02 -1.862-01 -7.222-02 4.302-02 -1.042-02 7.31 E-02 1.35E-01 -1.092-01 -3.402-01 4.74E-01 -3.152-01 1.362-02 1.362-02 3.792-02 6.49E-03 -5.91 E-02 4.362-02 1.57E-01 4.962-02 -9.732-02

-2.242-02 -1.402-02
1.842-02 3.892-02 -1.522-02 4.452-02 1.302-01 3.41 E-02 -1.672-03 1.452-01 -2.142-02 3.502-02 1.212-01 -5.142-02 -1.64E-02 1.482-02 -2.852-02 3.112-02 -1.932-01 2.822-02 3.32E-02 -1.392-02 -1.172-02 -1.792-02 -4.652-02 -4.182-02 9.302-03 -1.902-02 7.9GE-02
to

-5.942-02 4.482-02 1.372-02 6.082-02
-5.592-01 7.47E-02

4.792-02 7.972-03
1.092-01

-4.932-02 -2.292-02 1.332-02 -6.692-02 -2.482-02 2.402-03 -1.18E-01 4.102-02 -6.5 IE-02
-3.66E-02 -5.63E-04 -2.13E-02 1.502-02 1.232-01 -4.002-02

1.572-01 -3.762-02 -7.372-02 3.41 E-01 1.80E-01 -2.63E-01 -4.382-02 -3.79E-02 -4.902-03 -2.732-02

-1.292-01 4.022-02 2.552-01 2.382-02 -2.94E-02 -5.472-02 -4.542-02 -1.462-02

-3.262-03

A p p en d ix B
Here is the results that has been produced from the SPSS software when Discriminant analysis on VAG signals has been performed

Discriminant
N otes O utput C reated C om m ents Input Filter W eight Split File N of Rows in Working D ata File Definition of Missing <none> <none> <none> 72 User-defined m issing values are treated a s missing in the. analysis phase. In the analysis p h a se , c a s e s with no u ser- or system -m issing values for any predictor variable are used. C a se s with user-, system -m issing, or out-of-range values for th e grouping variable are alw ays excluded. DISCRIMINANT /GROUPS=category(1 2) A/ARIABLES=coef2 coef_3 coef_4 coef_5 coef_6 coef_7 coef_8 coef_9 coef_10 coef_11 coef_12 ccef_13 co e f 14 coef 15 c o e f 16 coef 17 coef 18 /ANALYSIS ALL /PRIORS EQUAL /STATISTICS=MEAN STDDEV UNIVF BOXM COEFF RAW CORR COV GCOV TCOV TABLE CROSSVALID /PLOT=COMBINED SEPARATE MAP /PLOT=CASES /CLASSIFY=NONMISSING POOLED. 0:00:00.77 09-DEC-2003 15:16:14

Missing Value Handling

C a s e s U sed

Syntax

R eso u rce s

E lapsed Time

53

R e p ro d u ce d with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

54

A nalysis 1 B ox's T est of Equality of Covariance Matrices
Log Determinants
Log Determinant -96.386 -99.790 -90.942

CATEGORY 1 2 P ooled within-g roups

Rank 17 17 17

T he ran k s and natural logarithms of determ inants printed are those of th e group covariance m atrices.

Test Results
Box's M F 504.993 Approx. df1 df2 Sig. 2,417 153 13517.224 .000

T e s ts null hypothesis of equal population covariance m atrices.

Summary of Canonical Discriminant Functions
Eigenvalues
Canonical Correlation .685

Function 1

E igenvalue .8 8 3 (a)

% of V ariance 100.0

· Cum ulative % 100.0

a First 1 canonical discrim inant functions were u sed in th e analysis.

Wilks' Lambda
Wilks' . Lambda .531

T e s t of Function(s) 1

Chi-square 38.304 1

df 17

Sig. .002

Functions at Group Centroids
Function CATEGORY 1 2 1 1.023 -.839

U nstandardized canonical discriminant functions ev alu a ted at group m e a n s

R eo r o d u ce d with oerm ission of th e coovriaht ow n er. Further reoroductinn n r n h i h i t e d w i t h o u t nermi.c^inn

55

C lassification Statistics
C lassification Processing Summary
P ro c e s s e d E xcluded 72 Missing or out-of· range group co d es A t least o n e missing discriminating variable U sed in Output 0 1 71

Classification Results(b,c)
Predicted Group M embershio CATEGORY 1 2 % C ro ss validated(a) C ount % 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 28 7 87.5 17.9 23 12 71.9 30.8 2 4 32 12.5 82.1 9 27 28.1 69.2 Total 32 39 100.0 100.0 32 39 100.0 100.0

O riginal

C ount

classified by th e functions derived from all c a s e s o th e r than that case, b 84.5 % of original g ro u p ed c a s e s correctly classified, c 7 0 .4 % of cross-validated grouped c a s e s correctly classified.

R e o r o d u c e d with oerm ission of th e coovriah t ow n er. Further reoroduction n r n h i h i t e d w i t h o u t n e r m i c s i n n

B ib lio g ra p h y
[1] Sanjeev Tavathia, Rangaraj M. R, G.D.Bell, K.O.Laidly, Y.T. Ahang Analysis of Knee Vibration Signals Using Linear PredictioK. , IEEE Trans, on Biomed. Eng., Vol. 39, No 9, Septemberl992. [2] Y.T.Zhang, W.A. Rolston, R.M. Rangayyan, C.B. Frank, G.D. Bed. Wavelet Transform analysis of Vibroarthrographic (VAG) signals obtained during dy namic knee movement Departm ent of Electrical and Computer engineering. Sport Medicine Center, Department of Surgery. The University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada 1993-94. [3] Zhang, Y .T.; Rangayyan, R.M. Adaptive Cancellation o f Muscle Contraction linterference in Vibroarthrographic Signals Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transac tions on , Volume: 41 Issue: 2 , Feb. 1994 5Page(s): 181 -191 [4] Moussavi, Z.K., Rangayyan R.M., Frank C. et al.. Screening and Adaptive Seg mentation o f Vibroarthrographic Signals IEEE Trans, on Biomed. Eng., Vol. 43 (l):15-23, Jan. 1996. [5] D. E. Beverland, W. C. Kernohan, and R. A. B. Mollan, What is Physiological Patello-femoral Crepitus? Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 23, pp. 1249-1250, 1985. [6] W. C. Kernohan, D. A. Barr, C. F. McCoy, and R. A. B. Mollan, Vibration Arthrometry, in Assessm ent of Knee Disorder scientific and technical record, Au gust 1990. 56

R e p ro d u c e d with pe rm issio n of th e copyright o w n er. Furth er reoroduction orohibited without o e rm issio n .

57

[7] Clûng-Chauan jiang, Ju-Hong Lee, Tung-Tai Yuan, Vibration Arthrometry in Pa tients with Failed Total Knee Replacement IEEE Transactions on Bio Med Engg. Vol 47, No 2, January 2000 [S] Ju-Hong Lee*, Ching-Chuan Jiang, and Tung-Tai Yuan, Vibration Arthrometry in Patients with Knee Joint Disorders IEEE Transactions On Biomédical Engineering, Vol. 47, No. 8, August 2000  [9] R.I. Kitney, P.M.M C ashman, M.E. Carter, Fast Automated Segmentation and Visualization Methods fo r MR Image of the Knee Joint in Arthritis Proceeding of the 20th annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and biology society, Vol 20, No2, 1998. [10] Kshirsagar, A.; Robson, M.D.; Watson, P.J.; Herrod, N.J.; Tyler, J.A.; Hall, L.D.; Computer Analysis of MR Images of Human Knee Joints to Measure Femoral Cartilage Thickness Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 1996. Bridging Disciplines for Biomedicine. Proceedings of the 18th Annual International Confer ence of the IEEE , Volume; 2 , 31 Oct.-3 Nov. 1996 Page(s): 746 -747 vol.2 [11] Simon, B.N.; Verstraete, M.C.; Mulavara, A.P.; Zehner, L.; Reisberg, S.; Pre diction of Knee Joint Torque from Muscle Activity during Knee Flexion/extension Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 1995. IEEE 17th Annual Conference, Volume: 2, 20-23 Sept. 1995 Page(s): 1311 -1312 vol.2 [12] Y.T. Zhang, C.B. Frank, R. M. Rangayyan, G.D. Bell, A Comparative Study of Simultaneous Vibromyography and Electromyography with Active Human Quadri ceps IEEE Trans, on Biomed. Eng., Vol. 39, No 10, Octoberl992 [13] Suresh Balakrishnama, Aravind Ganapathiraju, Joseph Picone. Linear Discrim inant Analysis for Signal Processing Problems Institute of signal and In formation processing. , 1999 IEEE southeast contest, Mississipi State University. Mississippi, USA. Email: balakrish,ganapath, picone @isip.msstate.edu

R e p ro d u c e d with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction orohibited without oerm ission.

58

[14] Kil-Moo Lee, Member, IEEE, Peter Meer, Senior Member, IEEE, and Rae-Hong Park, Member, IEEE Robust Adaptive Segmentation of Range Images [15] Lisa J. Lazareck and Zalira Moussavi Adaptive Swallowing Sound Segmenta tion by Variance Dimension lûepaTtment of Electrical Engineering, University of M anitoba, Winnipeg, Canada, R3T 2N2 E-mail: lazareck@ee.umanitoba.ca, mousavi@ee.umanitoba.ca [16] M. N. Ahmed, 8. M. Yamany, A. A. Farag, and T. Moriarty Bias

Field Estim ation and Adaptive Segmentation o f M R I Data Using a Modifed Fuzzy C-Means Algorithm Univ. of Louisville, E.E. Dept., Louisville, ' KY 40292 E-mail:fmohamed,faragg@ca.iro.Bpd.louisville.edu D epartm ent of Neurolog ical Surgery, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292 [17] Krishnan, Sridhar Masters Thesis Department of Electrical and Computer En gineering, University of Calgary, April 1996 [18] New York Brace, www.mybrace.com/b-knee-is.html [19] A rthritis sheet.html [20] American College of Rheumatolotgy Diagonostic C riteria for OA Information Fact Sheet, http://w w w 2.state.id.ns/dhw /arth/fact-

http: / / W W W . mer cmedicus.com/ pp / us/hcp / diseasemodules / osteoarthritis / diagnosis, jsp [21] North American Congress on Biomechanics, University of W aterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, August 14-18, 1998 The D a ta Analysis Brief Book, http://rkb.hom e.ch/rkb/littleA .htnil

R e p r o d u c e d with pe rm ission of th e copyright ow ner. F urther reproduction orohibited without oerm ission .

