Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research 3-1-2002 Politics and Public Administration

Review [untitled]
Shane Gunster
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics Part of the Political Science Commons Recommended Citation
Gunster, Shane, "Review [untitled]" (2002). Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research. Paper 4. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics/4

This Other is brought to you for free and open access by the Politics and Public Administration at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

220

Recensions / Reviews

Sharon Sutherlandand David Shugarmanin their separateessays critical of dirty hands. Cruelty and Deception also fails to meet the editors' intent for it to be a more philosophicallyorientedsequel to Honest Politics. Much of the strength and popularity of the latterbook was thatit was so persuasivelylogical, concise and integratedin presentation,yet thorough and in-depth in coverage that it effectively informedthe reader.This is not the case with the currentedited collection of essays in partbecause the contributors are contentto go diverselyin theirown separatedirections,with theirown categorizations, points of emphasis and interpretations. At the same time, by focusing solely on dirtyhands,thereis no philosophicaldiscussionof other,more common,ethicalconcerns.An established scholaror graduatestudentin the field of political thoughtmay find the readings challenging, but the intended audience, especially those who found will be disappointed. Honest Politics so rewarding,
STEWART HYSON Saint John, New Brunswick

Gramsci and Contemporary Politics: Beyond Pessimism of the Intellect Anne ShowstackSassoon New York:Routledge, 2000, pp. 173 Antonio Gramsci'swritings on politics-best known from the collection published as Selectionsfrom the Prison Notebooks-successfully combinetheoretical speculationwith empiricalinvestigation to producea compellinganalysisof the evolving relationsbetween economics, politics, cultureand everyday life in advanced capitalist societies. The fertile, suggestive and open-ended quality of his work has inspired many attemptsto use his ideas in thinking through contemporarysocial and political issues: among the better known include StuartHall's analysis of the rise of Thatcheriteconservatismin Britain (The Hard Road to Renewal: Thatcherismand the Crisis of the Left [London: Verso, 1983]), Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe's discussion of "postMarxist" political theory in Hegemony and Socialist Strategy (London: Verso, 1985) and Robert Cox's use of hegemony to theorize international political economy in Production, Power and World Order (New York: ColumbiaUniversityPress, 1987). In a series of short essays, Anne Showstack Sassoon draws upon Gramsci in the hopes of stimulatingan approachto contemporary political analysis that moves beyond the fatalistic cynicism that, she argues, has come to characterize much centre-left academic work in the last decade. The book is divided into three sections. The first consists of largely exegetical essays that examine Gramsci's ideas on intellectuals and his unique use of political language. In the second section, which constitutes the core of the book, Sassoon presents four pieces that explore gender and citizenship, the role of the welfare state in the evolution of civil society, the British Labour Party's 1994 Commission on Social Justice reportand the "new labour" policies of Prime Minister Tony Blair. She concludes with three essays that reflect upon the possibilities for rethinking socialism, the relationshipbetween teachers and parents and the role of personal experience in the production of academic knowledge. While Gramsci and Contemporary Politics raises some importantquestions, it generally fails to break new ground either in its interpretationof Gramsci or in the application of his ideas to currentpolitical issues. Those looking for a theoreticalengagement with Gramsci's work are better advised to returnto Sassoon's earlier and much more detailed survey of his political

Recensions / Reviews

221

philosophy in Gramsci's Politics (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987) and/or the collection of essays she edited in Approaches to Gramsci (London: Writers and Readers Publishing Cooperative, 1982). Ratherthan open up new perspectiveson Gramsci's thought, the interpretive essays in the current book do little more than offer brief, straightforward summaries of Gramsci's ideas. The exception is the piece on political language in which Sassoon develops the argumentthat Gramsciused "ordinary" words to signify both conventionalmeanings as well as his own ideas. Unfortunately,the brevity of this essay-eight pages-disallows full explorationof the implicationsof this claim for readingGramsci'swork. In the second section, the work on civil society and citizenship begins with the criticism that most contemporary scholarship in this area has remained excessively abstract, leading to overly theoretical accounts of these concepts that are not rooted in the specificity of concrete social formations. Gramsci's combination of theory and historical investigation certainly stands as an exemplary corrective to this tendency. Yet Sassoon largely fails to take her own advice on this score as her own writing rarely moves beyond vague prescriptions for how academic work ought to be done differently. The two essays on Blair and the politics of "New Labour" are perhaps the most disappointing,consisting of little more than a plea for those on the left to give this projectmore credit for trying to build a "hegemonic politics" aroundthe themes of inclusion and social justice. Relying upon little more than Labour Party rhetoric (as contained in the Social Justice Commission Report and Blair's speeches), she makes the astonishing claim that Blair shares with Gramscia common goal of social and political transformation by organizing the active consent of the people. At their core, Gramsci's politics are animatedby the conviction that the organizationof society by capitalism inevitably produces exploitative social relations that not only stifle the autonomous self-developmentof most people but also inhibit the growth of society as a whole. Blair's pragmaticaccommodationwith the "realities" of capitalist globalization (and consequent acceptance of the narrowingof the possibilities for democraticself-governance)has little in common with Gramsci's revolutionaryaspirations. The final three pieces are perhapsthe most interestingin the collection, discussing in more personal terms the role of intellectuals in the production of academic knowledge. Here, Sassoon takes her cue from Gramsci's famous claim that "[t]he popularelement 'feels' but does not always know or understand [and] the intellectual element 'knows' but does not always understand and . . . does not always feel" (28), arguingfor the inclusion of both everyday experience and one's own "deepest feelings" (114) in intellectual work. As she notes, such a combinationhas long informed feminist academic practice and is a promising avenue for making critical academic work of all kinds more " organic." tics is its general neglect of both economic and cultural processes in its discussion of politics, a rathersurprisingomission in a work that claims Gramsci as its theoretical inspiration.Rarely do the economic and the cultural appear on their own terms, either as imposing restrictions upon or furnishing resources for political action. With respect to the role of intellectuals, for instance, a contemporary Gramscian perspective must surely address the remarkable success of the culture industry at harnessing organic cultural activity (and its associated intellectuals) to the processes and structuresof corporate capitalism. Similarly, explorations of citizenship must take into
Ultimately, the biggest shortcoming of Gramsci and Contemporary Poli-

222

Recensions /Reviews

account the dramaticforeclosure of politics accompaniedby the reconstrucAbove all, the severe limitations tion of the citizen as consumer/taxpayer. imposed upon a progressivepolitics that confines itself to reformswithin capitalism a la Blair cannotbe ignored. The phrase "pessimism of the intellect, optimism of the will," borrowed by Gramsci from Romain Rolland, loses its eloquence and power when it is read as tracing a binary, linear progression from the former to the latter. Instead, it signals the necessity of holding these two moments together, for progressive social thought is energized by the very tension that springs from their uneasy union. And it is hardto imagine a more productiveor ethical disposition for intellectuals in a world such as our own in which "the old is dying and the new cannotbe born" (Gramsci,ed. and trans.by QuintinHoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith, Selections from the Prison Notebooks [New York:International,1972], 275). SHANE GUNSTERRyersonPolytechnicUniversity

