THE  EVOLUTION  AND  FUTURE  OF  HYDRAULIC  FRACTURING  POLICY  IN  ONTARIO              by            Paul  McKinley,  BSc,  the  University  of  British  Columbia,  2013            A  Professional  Project  Paper  presented  to  Ryerson  University   in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of      Master  of  Applied  Science   In  the  Program  of  Environmental  Applied  Science  and  Management                     Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2015      ©Paul  McKinley  2015                                                              

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  PROJECT     PAPER.      I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  project  paper.  This  is  a  true  copy  of   the  project  paper  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my   examiners.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  project  paper  to  other  institutions  or   individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research  I  further  authorize  Ryerson   University  to  reproduce  this  project  paper  by  photocopying  or  by  other  means,  in   total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of   scholarly  research.      I  understand  that  my  project  paper  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the   public                                                                                                   ii  

The  Evolution  and  Future  of  Hydraulic  Fracturing  Policy  in  Ontario        Paul  McKinley,  2015   Master  of  Applied  Science   Environmental  Applied  Science  and  Management   Ryerson  University         ABSTRACT      As  of  2015  hydraulic  fracking  for  unconventional  shale  gas  in  Ontario  is  not   currently  being  used.  In  this  paper,  qualitative  in  person  interviews  of  government   officials  and  a  province  wide  survey  of  municipal  leaders  were  conducted  to   determine  the  level  of  support  for  the  potential  use  of  unconventional  fracking  in   Ontario.  Potential  reasons  for  the  current  absence  of  unconventional  fracking  in   Ontario  are  geology  and  lack  of  investment.  Although  fracking  is  a  topic  of   discussion  in  most  municipal  governments,  support  is  low.  The  likely  future  of   unconventional  fracking  in  Ontario  is  slim,  but  it  cannot  be  completely  ruled  out.   There  is  a  general  consensus  that  municipal  support  is  important  if  horizontal   fracking  was  to  be  used  in  Ontario.                                                        iii  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS      I  would  like  to  acknowledge  my  graduate  supervisor,  Christopher  Gore  for  his  help   in  this  project.  I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  the  cooperation  of  the  people  I   interviewed  as  well  as  the  respondents  of  the  survey.                                                                                                                        iv  

DEDICATION      I  would  like  to  dedicate  this  project  to  my  father  and  mother,  Michael  and  Carolyn   McKinley.                                                                                                                                v  

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS      1.0  Introduction                          1.1  Methods                                 2.0  Hydraulic  Fracturing:  Opportunities  and  Concerns                 2.1  Natural  Gas  and  Fracturing:  History                 2.2  Environmental  Concerns  with  Fracking            2.3  Cost  Effectiveness  and  Economic  Benefits         3.0  Fracking  Outside  North  America                     3.1  United  States                     4.0  Fracking  in  Canada                          4.1  British  Columbia                       4.2  Alberta                           4.3  Quebec                                            5.0  Fracking  in  Ontario                           5.1  Ontario's  Shale  Potential                    5.2  Current  Regulatory  Framework  in  Ontario           6.0  Survey  and  Interview  Results                                     6.1  Current  State  of  Horizontal  Fracking  in  Ontario           6.2  Ontario  Municipalities  and  Fracking              6.3  Municipal  Support  for  Fracking              6.4  Municipal  Governments'  Engagement                  7.0  Explanation  of  Absence  of  Fracking  in  Ontario           8.0  The  Future  of  Fracking  in  Ontario                    vi  

                                                                            1                                                                  2                                     7                         7                         8                   11  

                                                                      13                                                                         14                                                                                             15                                                 16                                               17                                               17                                               19                                                 19                                               20                      22    

                                            22                                                 24                                               28                      29  

                                            34                                               37    

           

8.1  Municipal  Policy  on  Fracking       

  

  

  

                                            39                                               40  

8.2  Factors  Encouraging/Discouraging  Use  of  Fracking       

8.3  Municipal  Perspectives  Compared  with  Public  Opinion                                                                43      9.0  Recommendations                                                                   46               9.1  Flowback  Water        9.2  Water  Extraction     9.3  Chemical  Disclosure     9.4  Baseline  Data                                                                                                                                                           46                                                                       47                                               48                                               50                                               52  

10.0  Conclusion                                                                                              

vii  

LIST  OF  TABLES      Table  1.  Comparing  Great  Lake's  Basin  and  Ontario's  Municipal  Leader  Opinion  for   Fracking  Authority                                                                                                  43      Table  2.  Comparing  Ontario's  Public  and  Municipal  Leader  Opinion  for  Federal   Government  Authority  Over  Fracking                                                             44                                                                                                                           viii  

LIST  OF  FIGURES      Figure  1.  Potential  Shale  Gas  Plays  in  Ontario                                                          20      Figure  2.  Local  Governments'  Familiarity  with  Hydraulic  Fracturing                                                        26      Figure  3.  How  Often  Hydraulic  Fracturing  is  Discussed  in  Local  Government                        27      Figure  4.  Local  Governments'  Level  of  Support  or  Opposition  for  Fracking                                29      Figure  5.  Municipal  Leaders'  Opinion  for  Jurisdiction  over  Fracking                                                          31      Figure  6.  Municipalities'  History  of  Conventional  Natural  Gas  Extraction                                        36        Figure  7.  Different  Fracking  Policies  Municipalities  of  Ontario  Have  Adopted  or  are   Likely  to  Adopt                                                                      40                    Figure  8.  Factors  Municipal  Leaders  Believe  are  Encouraging/Discouraging  the   Potential  use  of  Fracking  for  Shale  Gas  in  Ontario                                                       42                                                                                         ix  

List  of  Appendices        Appendix  A.  Interview  Question  Guide                                                                                                                                                                        54      Appendix  B.  Survey  Questions                                                                                                                                                                                                        55

  

x  

1.0  Introduction        Hydraulic  fracturing  is  a  technique  used  by  oil  and  gas  companies  to  extract  natural   gas  from  the  earth.  Its  colloquial  term  is  "fracking,"  which  represents  the  fractures   that  are  created  in  the  shale  rock,  as  part  of  the  extraction  process,  and  the  term  is   interchangeable  with  fracturing.  Although  it  has  been  around  since  the  mid  1900s,  it   is  more  extensively  used  today  as  it  is  combined  with  horizontal  well  drilling,   known  as  multistage  horizontal  fracking  (Yergin,  2011).  Natural  gas  can  be   extracted  conventionally  or  unconventionally.  When  natural  gas  is  located  near  the   surface  of  the  earth  in  porous  and  high  permeable  zones,  conventional  extraction  is   used  with  a  single  staged  vertical  well  and  a  lower  volume  of  fracking  fluid.   However,  when  natural  gas  is  trapped  far  beneath  the  ground  in  low  permeability   areas,  unconventional  fracking  is  used.  Meaning  that  a  higher  volume  of  fracking   fluid  is  used  in  conjunction  with  multistage  horizontal  drilling  (Ontario  Petroleum   Institute,  n.d.).     Oil  and  gas  companies  argue  that  fracking  is  a  cost  effective  method  of   extracting  natural  gas  from  the  ground  as  hundreds  of  conventional  wells  would  be   needed  to  match  the  contact  provided  from  one  fractured  well  (Fitzgerald,  2013).   Fracking  projects  on  average  account  for  10%  of  Canada's  GDP  and  contributed  36   billion  dollars  to  the  United  States'  economy  in  2011  (American  Enterprise  Institute,   2013;  Natural  Resources  Canada,  2014).  Increased  extraction  of  shale  gas  has  been   projected  to  make  USA  a  net  exporter  of  liquefied  natural  gas  by  2016  (Boersma  &   Johnson,  2012).  Opponents  of  fracking  argue  that  there  are  too  many  environmental   concerns  to  justify  the  practice.  From  groundwater  contamination,  extensive  water  

  

1  

use,  and  the  release  of  methane,  fracking  has  been  shown  to  cause  environmental   hazards  (Sumi,  2010).     This  research  project  has  two  central  goals:  1)  to  evaluate  the  evolution  of   policies,  and  regulations  for  horizontal  fracking  in  Ontario;  and,  2)  to  examine  the   attitudes,  opinions,  and  knowledge  of  municipal  leaders  towards  horizontal  fracking   in  Ontario.  To  date,  there  has  been  very  little  research  on  the  policy  and  regulatory   framework  for  fracking  in  Ontario,  and  no  research  on  municipal  leader  attitudes.   This  latter  omission  is  surprising  given  that  fracking  would  be  a  contentious  local   land  use  issue  in  Ontario.  Since  there  is  very  little  research  on  fracking  in  Ontario,   this  project  has  the  potential  to  provide  important  knowledge  for  future  policies  and   regulations  in  Ontario.  The  reason  multistage  horizontal  hydraulic  fracturing  is   worth  studying  is  because  it  has  the  potential  to  produce  many  benefits,  such  as   allowing  countries  to  become  their  own  supplier  of  natural  gas,  however,  at  the   same  time  many  environmental  concerns  are  at  the  forefront  of  doubts  about   pursuing  hydraulic  fracturing.  More  specifically,  Ontario  is  in  such  a  unique   situation  because  it  is  one  of  the  few  provinces  to  have  had  conventional  fracking   operations  with  not  a  single  well  drilled  using  unconventional  methods.  Why  this  is   will  be  answered  in  this  research  project.      1.1  Methods     The  information  gathered  for  this  research  project  came  from  three   dominant  sources:  secondary  literature  for  preliminary  research;  in-person   interviews,  and  a  province-wide  survey  of  municipal  leaders.  The  secondary  

  

2  

literature  including  government  reports,  novels,  and  journal  articles  sparked  the   eventual  goals  and  research  question  of  this  project.  By  examining  what  had  already   been  researched  and  what  was  missing,  it  was  clear  that  a  municipal  perspective  on   fracking  was  needed.  The  secondary  sources  were  used  to  theorize  and  help   structure  the  interview  questions,  based  on  what  was  missing.       The  in-person  interviews  were  qualitative  in  nature,  semi-structured,  and   used  a  snowball  method.  They  were  qualitative,  as  the  aim  of  the  interviews  was  to   acquire  individual  perspectives  of  government  officials  on  questions  about   hydraulic  fracturing  in  Ontario.  The  format  was  semi-structured,  as  the  interviews   operated  using  a  standard  set  of  interview  questions;  however,  if  other  questions   arose  in  the  interview  or  if  the  interviewee  was  not  comfortable  answering  certain   questions,  changes  were  made.  A  snowball  method  was  used,  meaning  at  the  end  of   each  interview,  the  interviewee  was  asked  to  identify  potential  people  that  would   also  be  a  sufficient  candidate  for  an  interview.  These  interviews  took  place  from  mid   December  2014  to  the  end  of  January  2015.  A  total  of  four  interviews  were   conducted,  at  locations  chosen  by  the  interviewees.  The  interviewees  were  all   government  officials  related  to  hydraulic  fracturing,  with  most  of  them  being  senior   level  officials.  The  organizations  they  work  for  are:  the  Environmental   Commissioners  office,  the  Council  of  Canadians,  and  the  Ministry  of  Natural   Resources  and  Forestry.  However,  to  keep  their  identities  anonymous,  they  are   simply  addressed  as  "Interviewees  A,  B,  C,  and  D"  without  other  specifications.       Each  interview  lasted  30-60  minutes.  The  Ryerson  Research  Ethics  Board  approved   the  interview  protocol.  Refer  to  appendix  A  for  the  interview  question  guide.  The  

  

3  

main  limitation  of  the  in-person  interviews  would  be  the  interviewees  not  giving   honest  answers  due  to  fear  of  their  identity  being  exposed.  Although  the  proper   steps  were  taken  to  prevent  this,  some  of  the  interviewees  might  have  been  worried,   which  prevented  them  from  giving  full  and  honest  answers.        The  survey  was  sent  out  to  350  municipal  leaders  of  Ontario  in  October  2014.  

Using  a  list  of  the  444  municipalities  of  Ontario,  emails  of  municipal  leaders  were   obtained.  However,  some  emails  were  not  working,  or  some  places  were  counties   and  therefore  had  duplicate  emails  in  the  list.  For  this  reason,  the  sample  size  was   350  and  not  444.  The  term  "municipal  leader"  refers  to  either  the  mayor  or  the   reeve  of  the  jurisdiction.  Some  jurisdictions  are  large  enough  to  have  a  mayor,  while   others  have  reeves.  Using  an  online  survey,  50  responses  were  returned,  which  is  a   response  rate  of  14%.  The  responses  were  from  a  variety  of  small,  medium,  and   large  municipalities  with  a  geographical  spread  throughout  Ontario.  Although  a   survey  of  provincial  or  federal  leaders  would  have  been  beneficial,  this  project  was   interested  in  municipal  officials'  opinion  regarding  hydraulic  fracturing,  therefore   was  sent  at  the  municipal  level.  As  fracking  is  a  local  land  use  issue,  it  was  important   to  look  at  how  municipalities  view  the  issue.  The  questions  were  closed  ended,  and   the  survey  covered  the  following  topics:  hydraulic  fracturing,  the  Great  Lakes,  wind   energy,  renewables,  and  land  use  issues.  The  section  regarding  hydraulic  fracturing   had  nine  questions,  ranging  from  the  municipal  leaders'  personal  opinion  of  fracking   to  whether  the  municipality  is  aware  or  not  aware  of  any  potential  shale  plays  in   their  area.  Refer  to  appendix  B  for  the  survey  questions.    

  

4  

One  of  the  main  reasons  an  online  survey  was  used  is  for  the  sample  size  and   geographical  location  of  the  subjects.  We  had  a  fairly  large  sample  size  and  our   participants  were  distributed  in  a  broad  geographical  area.  According  to  Sue  and   Ritter  (2007),  online  surveys  have  higher  start-up  costs  than  other  methods  but   become  cost-effective,  as  the  number  of  surveys  are  completed,  with  telephone  and   face-to-face  interviews  feasible  only  when  the  participants  are  in  a  narrow   geographic  area  with  a  smaller  sample  size.    Since  our  respondents  are  spread  out   all  over  Ontario,  an  online  survey  was  the  best  option.  The  limitation  with  doing  an   online  survey  would  be  not  having  open-ended  questions.  Although  the  responses   had  many  options  to  choose  from  the  exact  answer  that  the  respondent  wanted  to   give  might  have  not  been  on  the  list,  concealing  their  true  response  to  the  question.   Another  limitation  is  the  fact  that  although  the  survey  was  sent  out  the  municipal   officials'  email,  the  officials  themselves  might  have  not  been  the  ones  answering  the   survey.  The  main  limit  to  the  survey  is  the  sample  size.  Due  to  the  low  response  rate   of  14%,  the  sample  size  for  the  survey  was  50.  Therefore  the  discussion  of  the   results  and  the  conclusions  that  were  drawn  were  from  the  50  responses,  which   might  not  be  a  full  representation  of  all  the  municipalities  of  Ontario.        This  paper  is  organized  by  first  briefly  explaining  what  natural  gas  and  

hydraulic  fracturing  is  while  examining  the  benefits  and  concerns.  It  will  then   summarize  fracking  operations  around  the  globe,  while  narrowing  the  focus  onto   Canada  and  then  Ontario.  Next,  the  results  from  the  interviews  and  survey  will  be   discussed,  being  separated  into  different  categories.  It  will  then  explain  the  likely   future  of  unconventional  fracking  in  Ontario,  while  also  providing  recommendations  

  

5  

if  fracking  was  to  be  used  in  Ontario.  Although  the  future  of  unconventional  fracking   seems  unlikely,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out.  Municipal  leaders  believe  that  most  of  the   authority  should  reside  with  the  local  jurisdictions.    Given  that  fracking  is  a  local   land  issue,  if  it  was  to  be  used  in  Ontario,  local  government  support  is  important  to   obtain.                                                          

  

6  

2.0  Hydraulic  Fracturing:  Opportunities  and  Concerns   This  section  will  explore  what  natural  gas  is  and  a  brief  history  of  hydraulic   fracturing.  The  environmental  concerns  will  be  discussed  along  with  the   opportunities  and  benefits  of  fracking.         2.1  Natural  Gas  and  Fracturing:  History         Natural  gas  is  a  naturally  occurring  hydrocarbon  consisting  primarily  of  methane,   which  is  formed  over  millions  of  years  as  heat  and  pressure  transform  decaying   plant  and  animal  matter  buried  in  sedimentary  rock  layers  (Canadian  Association  of   Petroleum  Producers,  2012).  Natural  gas  has  been  a  part  of  Canada's  energy  mix   since  its  discovery  in  1859,  and  today  accounts  for  30%  of  Canada's  energy  needs   and  11%  of  Ontario's  energy  needs  (CAPP,  2012;  OEB,  2015).      In  North  America,  hydraulic  fracturing  was  first  used  at  the  end  of  the  1940s  

(Yergin,  2011).  However,  modern  day  fracking  is  now  being  combined  with   multistage  horizontal  well  drilling  where  wells  are  drilled  vertically,  kilometres   below  the  surface,  and  after  reaching  the  shale  rock,  are  drilled  horizontally  (United   States  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  2014).  Fractures  are  then  created  by   pumping  the  hydraulic  fracturing  fluid  consisting  of  water,  proppant  (sand  which   keeps  the  fractures  open),  and  chemicals  that  wedge  and  enlarge  fractures  in  the   rock  (USEPA,  2014).  The  gas  then  flows  through  these  fractures  to  the  horizontal   well,  and  eventually  pumped  to  the  surface  through  the  vertical  well  (USEPA,  2014).   Hydraulic  fracturing  has  actually  been  used  in  conventional  natural  gas  extraction,   but  recent  innovations  have  opened  up  unconventional  fields  (CAPP,  2012).  There  

  

7  

has  been  natural  gas  production  from  shale  in  the  Appalachian  Mountains  since  the   1800s;  however,  it  is  only  been  recently  that  shale  formations  started  to  be  a  major   source  of  North  American  gas  supplies  (IFC  International,  2010).  Recent  attention   has  been  directed  to  the  controversies  with  hydraulic  fracturing,  more  specifically   the  environmental  concerns.        2.2  Environmental  Concerns  with  Fracking     Fracking  is  highly  debated  by  governments,  energy  companies,  and  environmental   groups  mainly  because  of  its  real  and  potential  environmental  effects.  One  of  the   main  issues  with  hydraulic  fracturing  is  the  amount  of  water  required  per  well.   Modern  day  fracking  uses  a  technique  called  "slickwater"  fracturing,  which  uses  a   much  higher  volume  of  water  than  previous  fracking  sites  (Sumi,  2010).   Unconventional  hydraulic  fracturing  requires  1  to  10  million  gallons  of  water  per   well,  compared  with  50,000  gallons  for  conventional  wells  (Sumi,  2010).  In  order  to   transport  a  million  gallons  of  water,  an  estimated  200  trucks  are  required  (Sumi,   2010).  With  this  comes  concern  for  local  air  quality  (Sumi,  2010).  Operators   generally  try  to  extract  water  close  to  the  fracking  site,  which  can  cause  aquifer   depletion,  stream  flow  depletion,  and  disruption  of  natural  flow  regimes  (Sumi,   2010).  However,  when  comparing  the  water  used  to  produce  a  unit  of  energy  from   other  resources  such  as  coal  and  nuclear  power,  hydraulic  fracturing  requires  far   less  water  (Lave  and  Lutz,  2014).  Still,  due  to  the  high  demand  of  water  use,  some   areas  might  not  be  able  to  use  hydraulic  fracturing  (Lave  and  Lutz,  2014).  Although   fracking  uses  a  small  amount  of  water  intensity  (water  use  per  unit  energy),  the  

  

8  

total  amount  is  still  large.  Because  of  this,  there  needs  to  be  strict  regulations  in   place.     The  volume  and  type  of  chemicals  used  in  fracking  fluids  is  also  an   environmental  concern.  The  typical  fracking  fluid  contains  over  200  different   chemicals  (Sumi,  2010).  The  fracking  fluids  could  cause  groundwater  contamination   from  underground  injection  or  accidents  above  the  ground  (Gordalla  et  al.,  2013).   The  purpose  of  the  fracking  fluid  is  to  transport  the  proppant  into  the  well  and   stabilize  the  pressure  of  the  fracture  (Gordalla  et  al.,  2013).  The  design  of  the  fluid  is   unique  to  each  drilling  site  as  it  must  suit  the  different  properties  of  the  formation   (permeability,  water  saturation,  capillary  effects)  and  the  conditions  of  the  fracking   operation  (ground  pressure  and  temperature)  (Gordalla  et  al.,  2013).  Health   workers  and  operators  could  be  exposed  to  the  fracking  fluids  if  a  fluid  spill  was  to   occur  (Sumi,  2010).  Although  most  of  the  fracking  fluid  is  composed  of  water  and  a   small  percentage  is  chemicals,  the  large  quantity  of  fracking  fluid  still  leads  to  a  lot   of  chemicals  being  used.  Chemical  disclosure  of  these  chemicals  is  becoming  more   common  in  jurisdictions.         In  addition  to  the  fracking  fluid,  methane  (the  main  component  of  natural   gas)  in  some  places  has  been  found  in  drinking  water  wells  of  homes  closer  to  active   wells  compared  to  homes  further  away  (Lave  and  Lutz,  2014).  However,  because   there  was  no  baseline  data  pre-fracking,  it  was  impossible  to  tell  if  this  methane  was   a  result  of  the  fracking  operation  or  from  natural  seepage  of  methane  to  the   groundwater  (Lave  and  Lutz,  2014).  Due  to  a  lack  of  preexisting  data,  it  is  difficult  to   determine  if  fracking  operations  do  in  fact  cause  groundwater  contamination.  When  

  

9  

baseline  data  was  obtained  and  compared  with  data  after  fracking,  some  operations   in  Pennsylvania  had  no  change  in  methane  levels,  where  as  in  northern  Texas  there   was  an  observed  increase  (Lave  and  Lutz,  2014).  As  there  is  a  potential  for   groundwater  contamination,  it  is  clear  that  baseline  data  is  needed,  and  is  addressed   in  the  recommendations  section.        There  has  also  been  debate  whether  fracking  causes  seismic  activity,  which  

can  lead  to  earthquakes.  According  to  CAPP  (2012),  hydraulic  fracturing  can  cause   seismic  activity;  however,  the  level  is  microseismic.  The  process  of  injecting   pressurized  fluids  into  the  shale  rock  releases  energy  and  can  cause  sub-surface   microseismic  events  (CAPP,  2012).  Oil  and  gas  companies  argue  that  the  seismic   events  are  contained  in  the  area  where  gas  is  extracted  (deep  underground)  and   pose  no  risk  to  people,  the  environment,  or  structures  on  the  surface  (CAPP,  2012).   According  to  Skoumal,  Brudzinski,  and  Currie  (2015)  hydraulic  fracturing  fluids   could  raise  fluid  pressures  in  a  pre-existing  fault  or  fracture  zone,  which  could   reduce  the  normal  stress  of  the  fault  and  cause  a  fault  slip.  Seismic  events  associated   with  fracking  can  occur  near  or  up  to  100  metres  from  a  well  (Skoumal  et  al.,  2015).   In  recent  years,  America  has  had  over  100,000  wells  hydraulically  fracked  with  the   largest  induced  earthquake  only  being  a  magnitude  3.6  on  the  Richter  scale   (Ellsworth,  2013).                

  

10  

2.3  Cost  Effectiveness  and  Economic  Benefits     Although  fracking  is  believed  to  degrade  the  environment,  many  energy  companies   use  it  because  it  is  a  cost  effective  way  to  extract  natural  gas.  According  to  Fitzgerald   (2013),  hydraulic  fracturing  is  one  process  that  has  transformed  the  energy   industry  over  the  past  15  years.  There  have  been  four  innovations  that  have   changed  fracking  over  its  lifetime:  1)  larger  volumes  of  fluid  and  proppant  are  used;   2)  slickwater  fracturing  has  been  created,  which  enhances  permeability  by  adding   additional  lubrication  and  provides  cleaner  fractures;  3)  the  improvement  of   multistage  jobs  which  gives  additional  fracks  per  well,  allowing  for  more  gas  flow;   and  4)  changing  the  chemicals  that  are  used  in  the  injection  fluid  which  allow  for  a   greater  yield  of  natural  gas  (Fitzgerald,  2013).  Oil  companies  argue  that  fracking  is  a   cost  effective  extraction  technique  as  operators  would  have  to  drill  hundreds  or   thousands  of  wellbores  in  order  to  match  the  contact  provided  by  one  fracked  well   (Fitzgerald,  2013).  This  is  because  fracking  generally  involves  horizontal  drilling  (as   opposed  to  vertical  drilling  in  the  conventional  use),  which  can  extract  more  gas   using  only  one  well  (Fitzgerald,  2013).     Along  with  cost  effectiveness,  hydraulic  fracturing  does  contribute  to   countries'  economies.  The  oil  and  gas  industry  in  Texas  employs  over  200,000   people,  with  over  half  coming  from  the  shale  gas  industry,  and  contributes  over   $200  billion  (USD)  to  the  state's  economy  (Davis,  2012).  More  specifically,  shale  gas   extraction  in  the  United  States  using  hydraulic  fracturing,  contributed  $36  billion  to   the  country's  economy  in  2011  and  caused  a  drop  in  natural  gas  imports  by  25   percent  from  2007  to  2011  (American  Enterprise  Institute,  2013).  The  oil  and  gas  

  

11  

industry  currently  contributes  500,000  jobs  across  Canada  and  is  expected  to   contribute  $3.5  trillion  to  the  Canadian  economy  in  the  next  25  years  (Natural   Resources  Canada,  2012).  Shale  gas  development  in  Canada  contributes  over   300,000  direct  jobs  and  10%  of  Canada's  total  GDP  (Natural  Resources  Canada,   2014).  Given  the  economic  benefits  and  the  environmental  consequences  of   hydraulic  fracturing,  nations  and  jurisdictions  have  decided  to  regulate  fracking   differently,  some  being  supporters  while  others  applying  moratoriums  or  outright   bans.    In  the  next  section,  the  paper  reviews  the  scope  of  fracking  regulation  in   places  outside  North  America,  and  also  in  the  United  States  and  Canada.                                              

  

12  

3.0  Fracking  Outside  North  America     European  shale  gas  development  is  still  very  new,  and  unlike  North  America,   there  are  very  few  wells  being  explored  using  unconventional  methods,  including   fracking  (Boersma  &  Johnson,  2012).  France  and  Bulgaria  are  the  only  two  countries   in  the  world  to  have  completely  banned  hydraulic  fracturing  (Boersma  &  Johnson,   2012).    A  vested  interested  in  nuclear  energy  keeps  France  from  likely  using   fracking  for  its  energy  needs.  Poland  and  the  UK  have  seen  some  interest  in  fracking   and  both  have  potential  shale  plays  along  with  government  support  (Sergie  &   McBride,  2015;  Kavanagh,  2014).  Hydraulic  fracturing  has  been  used  in  the  UK,   mostly  for  conventional  purposes;  however,  recent  attention  has  turned  to  the  use   of  fracking  for  unconventional  shale  gas  (The  Royal  Society,  2012).  A  UK  energy   company  is  planning  on  testing  two  different  wells  in  the  Bowland  Basin,  with  hopes   of  showing  the  commercial  potential  (Kavanagh,  2014).  The  UK  shale  gas  and  oil   industry  has  welcomed  community  engagement  in  the  planning  process  as  well  as   creating  an  economic  package  to  those  areas  where  fracking  would  take  place.   During  the  exploration  process,  the  community  will  receive  £100,000  per  well-site   as  well  as  1%  of  revenues  at  the  production  stage  (Cronin,  n.d.).          In  Poland,  where  government  enthusiasm  is  high  and  public  opposition  is  

low,  as  of  2012  there  were  only  six  wells  drilled  for  natural  gas  extraction  (Boersma   &  Johnson,  2012).  In  2014  a  London  based  company  withdrew  their  investment  in  a   well  drilled  in  Poland's  Baltic  Basin.  Although  gas  and  oil  were  extracted,  the  flow   rates  were  not  profitable.  However,  government  support  for  fracking  in  Poland  is  

  

13  

still  high,  as  Poland  wants  to  minimize  their  dependence  on  Russian-supplied  gas   (Kavanagh,  2014).        3.1  United  States     Projections  are  that  the  increased  extraction  of  shale  gas  using  hydraulic  fracturing   will  make  the  United  States  a  net  exporter  of  liquefied  natural  gas  (LNG)  in  2016   (Boersma  &  Johnson,  2012).  In  2010  the  US  production  of  natural  gas  was  5  tcf  and   is  likely  to  triple  by  2035  (Boersma  &  Johnson,  2012).  Many  states  have  taken   different  regulations  towards  fracking.  Early  adopters  of  shale  gas,  including  Texas,   Oklahoma,  and  Pennsylvania,  are  extensively  using  fracking  methods  to  extract   natural  gas  to  promote  job  creation,  state  income,  and  economic  development   (Boersma  &  Johnson,  2012).  However,  other  states  such  as  New  York,  Delaware,   Vermont,  and  New  Jersey  all  are  very  reluctant  to  use  unconventional  gas  extraction   methods  (Boersma  &  Johnson,  2012).  New  York  currently  has  a  moratorium  on   hydraulic  fracturing  and  even  if  it  was  lifted,  fracking  is  unlikely  to  take  place   because  of  strict  regulations  on  shale  gas  drilling  in  the  upstate  area  that  supplies   most  of  New  York's  drinking  water  (Sumi,  2010).  As  companies  are  required  to   conduct  an  environmental  impact  review  for  every  proposed  well  in  New  York,  this   is  one  reason  why  there  is  difficulty  in  using  hydraulic  fracturing    (Sumi,  2010).                

  

14  

4.0  Fracking  in  Canada     Canada  has  been  producing  natural  gas  since  the  middle  of  the  19th  century;   however,  production  has  increased  in  the  second  half  of  the  20th  century  due  to  the   use  of  hydraulic  fracturing  in  large  reserves  in  Alberta  and  BC  (Council  for  Canadian   Academics,  2014).  Canada's  conventional  reserves  have  been  declining  since  2001   and  private  companies  have  been  using  unconventional  methods  such  as  hydraulic   fracturing  to  fill  the  gap  (Council  for  Canadian  Academics,  2014).  There  is  an   estimated  700-1000  tcf  of  shale  gas  in  Canada,  with  the  majority  of  the  shale  being   "sweet"  (containing  no  sulfur  content)  (Council  for  Canadian  Academics,  2014).     In  Canada,  the  federal  government  has  very  little  control  over  hydraulic   fracturing  (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).  Most  of  the  power  to  regulate  natural  gas   extraction  is  delegated  to  the  provinces  by  the  Canadian  Constitution  (Schroeck  &   Karisny,  2013).  The  federal  government  has  jurisdiction  over  interprovincial  and   international  natural  gas  projects  and  when  the  drilling  is  on  federally  owned  lands   (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).  The  Canadian  Fisheries  Act  does  give  federal   jurisdiction  over  natural  gas  extraction  to  protect  against  impacts  to  fish   populations  (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).  Canadian  production  of  shale  gas  is   substantial  in  BC  with  potential  in  Quebec,  New  Brunswick,  and  Nova  Scotia   (Council  of  Canadian  Academics,  2014).  Western  Canadian  provinces  such  as  BC  and   Alberta  have  had  ongoing  oil  and  gas  development  with  public  acceptance,  with   most  of  the  land  that  fracking  takes  place  on,  crown  lands,  being  owned  by  the   provincial  government  (Council  of  Canadian  Academics,  2014).  In  Eastern  Canada,   no  significant  shale  gas  development  has  occurred  in  the  past  half  century,  with  

  

15  

much  of  the  land  with  potential  shale  gas  reserves  being  privately  owned  (Council  of   Canadian  Academics,  2014).        4.1  British  Columbia     The  majority  of  shale  gas  development  in  Canada  takes  place  in  the  Horn  River  and   Montney  Basins  in  BC,  known  as  the  biggest  frack  in  the  world  (Council  for  Canadian   Academics,  2014;  The  Council  of  Canadians,  2014).  The  regulatory  board   responsible  for  regulating  hydraulic  fracturing  in  BC  is  the  BC  Oil  and  Gas   Commission  (Council  for  Canadian  Academics,  2014).  The  BC  Oil  and  Gas   Commission  is  responsible  for  the  entire  life  cycle  of  the  well  (exploration,   production,  to  reclamation)  (BC  Oil  &  Gas  Commission,  2014).  Hydraulic  fracturing   has  been  used  in  BC  since  1960  but  more  intensively  since  2004  for  unconventional   formations  (BC  Oil  &  Gas  Commission,  2014).    In  2013,  86%  of  new  wells  in  BC  were   hydraulically  fractured  (BC  Oil  &  Gas  Commission,  2014).  Since  2005,  7300  wells   have  been  fracked  with  almost  1000  wells  being  permitted  annually.  The  estimated   resources  of  BC's  shale  are  1000  tcf  of  natural  gas  (The  Council  of  Canadians,  2013).   There  are  current  proposals  for  Liquefied  Natural  Gas  plants  in  northern  BC,  and  an   already  approved  fracking  pipeline  that  would  transport  natural  gas  from  eastern   BC  to  the  coast  (The  Council  of  Canadians,  2013).  There  has  been  controversy  with   hydraulic  fracturing  in  BC  as  well.  In  2013,  Sierra  Club  BC  and  the  Wilderness   Committee  sued  the  BC  oil  and  Gas  Commission  and  an  energy  company,  Encana,   over  their  short-term  water  approvals,  which  violates  BC's  Water  Act  (The  Council   of  Canadians,  2013).    

  

16  

4.2  Alberta   Alberta  has  the  most  mature  oil  and  gas  industry  in  Canada  with  400,000   conventional  wells  drilled  at  the  end  of  2012  (Council  for  Canadian  Academics,   2014).  Since  the  1950s,  171,000  wells  have  been  fractured  in  Alberta  and  there  are   fifteen  prospective  shale  gas  formations  in  the  province  (The  Council  of  Canadians,   2013).  The  agency  responsible  for  regulation  of  oil  and  gas  development  is  The   Alberta  Energy  Regulator.  Amongst  other  things,  this  agency  is  responsible  for   providing  guidelines  on  environmental  issues,  deep-well  water  disposal,  and  water   management  associated  with  the  oil  and  gas  industry  in  Alberta  (Council  for   Canadian  Academics,  2014).  Although  Alberta  is  known  as  a  major  oil  and  gas   producing  province  in  Canada,  hydraulic  fracturing  is  relatively  new  to  Alberta  (The   Council  of  Canadians,  2013).  Conventional  fracking  has  been  used  in  Alberta  for  50   years,  but  multistage  horizontal  fracking  has  been  introduced  recently,  contributing   to  an  increase  in  Alberta's  oil  production  by  14  percent  from  2011  to  2012  by  giving   more  access  to  Alberta's  shale  (The  Council  of  Canadians,  2013).  Much  like  BC,  there   is  controversy  over  the  use  of  fracking  in  Alberta.  A  private  landowner  sued  Encana,   Alberta  Environment,  and  the  Energy  Resources  Conservation  Board  over   contamination  of  the  owner's  water  well;  however,  the  land-owner  ended  up  losing   the  lawsuit  (The  Council  of  Canadians,  2013).        4.3  Quebec     Most  of  the  primary  shale  gas  in  Quebec  is  the  Utica  Shale,  which  underlies  the  south   shore  of  the  St.  Lawrence  River  (Council  of  Canadian  Academics,  2014).  Exploration  

  

17  

is  still  in  its  early  stage,  and  local  opposition  to  shale  gas  development  using   hydraulic  fracturing  in  Quebec  has  been  substantial  (Council  of  Canadian  Academics,   2014).  As  a  result,  the  government  of  Quebec  has  taken  a  precautionary  approach  in   evaluating  the  environmental  risks  and  developing  a  regulatory  framework  before   deciding  if  hydraulic  fracturing  can  proceed  (Council  of  Canadian  Academics,  2014).   In  2011,  the  provincial  government  extended  a  moratorium  on  hydraulic  fracturing   and  shale  gas  development  in  the  province  until  further  research  is  conducted  on   the  environmental  concerns  (Council  of  Canadian  Academics,  2014).     Although  fracking  is  controversial  in  provinces  like  British  Columbia,   Alberta,  and  Quebec,  there  is  literature  and  knowledge  on  the  subject  in  these   provinces.  Ontario  can  be  seen  as  somewhat  of  an  anomaly  in  this  respect,  as  there   is  not  much  research  on  fracking,  specifically  multistage  horizontal  fracking  in  the   province.  The  rest  of  this  paper  will  discuss  hydraulic  fracturing  in  Ontario.                                  

  

18  

5.0  Fracking  in  Ontario     Ontario's  history  of  oil  and  gas  production  dates  back  to  the  1800s  as  the  first   commercial  natural  gas  well  in  Ontario  was  drilled  in  1889  in  the  Essex  County  area   (Environmental  Commissioner  of  Ontario,  2011).  According  to  one  interviewee,   conventional  fracking  has  taken  place  for  many  years  in  Ontario;  however,   unconventional  multistage  horizontal  fracking  has  not  (Interviewee  D,  January  28th,   2015).  The  multistage  horizontal  fracking  is  what  is  being  discussed  in  this  paper.   To  date  there  has  been  only  one  exploratory  well  drilled  in  Ontario,  located  near   Chatham  in  2011.  However,  it  was  plugged  without  completing  the  fracking   processes  due  to  inadequate  natural  gas  volumes  (Environmental  Commissioner  of   Ontario,  2011).  Despite  this  low  level  of  activity,  some  media  reports  indicate  that   some  companies  are  engaging  in  the  early  stages  of  fracking  as  they  are  obtaining   the  mineral  rights  for  natural  gas  in  southern  Ontario  (Environmental   Commissioner  of  Ontario,  2013).  According  to  the  Environmental  Commissioner  of   Ontario  (2011),  an  increase  in  local  production  of  natural  gas  could  help  lessen  the   strain  on  the  existing  supply  since  Ontario's  natural  gas  demands  are  equal  to  30%   of  Canadian  gas  consumption.        5.1  Ontario's  Shale  Potential     There  are  three  major  locations  for  hydraulic  fracturing  potential  in  Ontario:  1)  Blue   Mountain  Formation  and  Collingwood  Shale;  2)  Marcellus  Shale;  and  3)  Kettle  Point   Formation  (Carter,  Fortner,  &  Beland-Otis,  n.d).  The  Collingwood  Shale  covers  an   area  of  25,000  km2  and  the  Blue  Mountain  Formation  covers  an  area  of  75,000  km2  

  

19  

(Carter  et  al.,  n.d).  The  Marcellus  Shale  covers  an  area  of  4700  km2,  which  is  mostly   beneath  Lake  Erie,  while  the  Kettle  Point  Formation  covers  an  area  of  9500  km2,   which  is  located  50%  beneath  Lake  Erie  (Carter  et  al.,  n.d).  This  information  is   further  supported  in  Beland  Otis'  article  on  the  potential  Ordovician  shale  gas  units   in  Southern  Ontario  (Beland  Otis,  2012).    Figure  1  shows  where  these  formations   are  in  the  province  of  Ontario.    

Figure  1.  Potential  shale  gas  plays  in  Ontario.  From  Shale  Gas  Opportunities  in  Southern  Ontario  ­  and   Update,  by  T.  Carter,  L.  Fortner,  and  C.  Beland-Otis,  n.d,  retrieved  from   http://www.ogsrlibrary.com/downloads/Ontario_Shale_Gas_OPI_2009_Nov11.pdf     

  

5.2  Current  Regulatory  Framework  for  Hydraulic  Fracturing  in  Ontario   In  Ontario,  all  oil  and  gas  activities  are  regulated  by  the  Ministry  of  Natural  

Resources  and  Forestry  (MNRF)  and  the  Ontario  Energy  Board  (OEB)  (Schroeck  &  

  

20  

Karisny,  2013).  The  MNRF  regulates  the  permitting,  construction,  and  inspection  of   natural  gas  wells  while  the  Ontario  Energy  Board  controls  natural  gas  production   and  price  setting  (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).  In  order  to  drill  a  natural  gas  well  in   Ontario,  a  well  owner  must  apply  for  a  well  license  with  the  MNRF  under  the  Oil,   Gas,  and  Salt  Resources  Act.  After  the  well  is  constructed,  gas  production  may  begin   and  the  producing  well  comes  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  OEB  (Schroeck  &   Karisny,  2013).  The  well  owner,  if  selling  gas  to  low  volume  consumers  (residential   or  small  commercial  consumers),  must  apply  for  a  gas  marketer  license  to  prevent   utility  price  gouging  and  interruptions  in  service  (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).   Ontario  currently  permits  oil  and  gas  drilling  under  the  Great  Lakes  and  has  500   conventional  (onshore  and  offshore)  wells  producing  natural  gas  from  under  the   bed  of  Lake  Erie,  without  the  use  of  hydraulic  fracturing  (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).   To  date,  Ontario  has  not  implemented  a  comprehensive  fracking  regulatory  system   since  there  are  no  current  horizontal  fracking  operations  in  the  province;  however,   if  Ontario  was  to  permit  fracking  in  the  future,  a  separate  regulatory  program  would   need  to  be  in  place  to  address  this  issue  (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).  The  following   sections  provide  an  overview  of  the  state  of  regulatory  development  in  Ontario   based  on  interviews  with  government  experts  responsible  for,  or  knowledge  about,   fracking  potential  in  the  province.              

  

21  

   6.0  Survey  and  Interview  Results     The  following  sections  will  discuss  the  results  from  the  interviews  of  government   officials  as  well  as  the  province  wide  survey  of  municipal  leaders.  The  sections  are   framed  into  different  themes  regarding  hydraulic  fracturing  in  Ontario.        6.1  Current  State  of  Horizontal  Fracking  in  Ontario   It  is  important  to  discuss  the  current  state  of  fracking  in  Ontario  given  the   uncertainty  surrounding  its  use.  Ontario's  gas  industry  is  based  on  conventional   extraction  methods.  Therefore,  overtime  there  have  been  changes  to  policies   governing  conventional  extraction,  but  not  related  to  unconventional  fracking   (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).  "We  haven't  really  done  anything  on  fracking   here...There  is  no  fracking  and  there  aren't  any  proposals"(Interviewee  C,  January   13th,  2015).  According  to  Interviewee  C,  given  that  there  is  no  activity,  it  can  be   considered  a  non-event.  This  does  not  mean  there  has  not  been  progress  on   potential  policies.  According  to  Interviewee  C,  the  province  is  looking  at  Ontario's   current  laws  and  potential  policy  frameworks  before  any  decisions  are  to  be  made   about  the  potential  use  of  high  volume  fracking  in  the  province.  If  the  government   was  to  make  any  proposals  in  terms  of  changing  laws  and  policies  there  would  be   consultation  with  First  Nations,  stakeholders,  and  the  pubic  as  this  is  a  requirement   under  the  Environmental  Bill  of  Rights  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).  Some   municipal  planners  have  been  in  contact  with  the  provincial  government,  curious   about  what  exactly  hydraulic  fracturing  is.  However  this  is  more  of  a  "reactive  

  

22  

engagement,  not  proactive"  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).  Currently,   exploration  is  not  occurring  and  there  are  no  wells  being  drilled  for  hydraulic   fracturing  of  natural  gas  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th  2015).  The  government  of   Ontario  has  no  stated  position  on  multistage  horizontal  fracking;  however,  it  would   be  allowed  since  vertical  fracking  has  occurred  in  Ontario  (Interviewee  D,  January   28th,  2015).  As  of  now  there  is  lots  of  discussion  within  government  ministries  but   "no  applications  for  test  wells  that  we  know  of"  (Interviewee  D,  January  28th  2015).        Interviewee  A,  another  government  employee  familiar  with  the  issue,  

explained  that  there  is  not  a  moratorium  on  fracking  in  Ontario,  there  is  just  nothing   currently  happening.  There  are  two  companies  that  have  holdings  and  own  land   property  containing  natural  gas  but  have  yet  to  develop  it  (Interviewee  A,  December   4th,  2014).  The  Ontario  government  is  committed  to  a  review  of  the  environmental   consequences  before  fracking  can  take  place  (Interviewee  A,  December  4th,  2014).   The  Ontario  government  is  looking  into  what  types  of  policies  are  needed  if  fracking   was  to  take  place,  but  at  this  stage,  no  information  on  potential  policy  frameworks   were  expressed:  "because  there  is  a  review  on  the  way,  I  can't  comment"   (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).  The  interviews  revealed  that  there  are  no   current  applications  for  wells  to  be  used  for  unconventional  fracking  in  Ontario,   however  the  provincial  government  is  looking  into  laws  and  frameworks  for  the   potential  use.             

  

23  

6.2  Ontario  Municipalities  and  Fracking     Fracking  operations  produce  challenging  interactions  between  local  and  sub- national  governments.  To  set  a  context  for  the  local-subnational  challenges  that   Ontario  could  face,  a  brief  case  study  of  Pennsylvania's  fracking  industry  is   discussed.  Although  a  significant  contributor  to  the  local  governments  of   Pennsylvania,  horizontal  fracking  has  led  to  many  environmental  consequences   such  as  water  contamination,  strained  community  relations,  and  degraded  air   quality  (Rabe  &  Borick,  2013).  The  agency  responsible  for  governing  fracking  in   Pennsylvania  is  the  Bureau  of  Oil  and  Gas  Management  in  the  Pennsylvania   Department  of  Environmental  Protection  (Rabe  &  Borick,  2013).  However,  much   like  Ontario,  the  regulations  outlining  permit  and  inspection  for  conventional   drilling  were  created  before  hydraulic  fracturing  was  ever  used,  and  the  agenda  of   the  Bureau  has  been  challenged  as  it  has  roles  in  both  promoting  fossil  fuels  while   also  protecting  the  environment  (Rabe  &  Borick,  2013).        The  Unconventional  Gas  Well  Impact  Fee  Act  (Act  13)  was  created  in  2012,  

which  is  seen  to  maximize  short-term  development  of  the  shale  in  Pennsylvania  and   unfairly  constraining  local  governments'  authority  (Rabe  &  Borick,  2013).  This  is   also  known  as  the  "impact  fee,"  which  put  the  burden  of  implementation  onto  local   governments,  with  the  state  of  Pennsylvania  itself  avoiding  responsibility  (Rabe  &   Borick,  2013).  This  act  also  is  a  deterrent  to  local  governments  from  creating  other   environmental  protection  plans  that  are  not  defined  in  the  act,  as  the  local   governments  could  lose  revenues  if  there  is  noncompliance  (Rabe  &  Borick,  2013).   With  this  act,  the  state  of  Pennsylvania  also  has  the  power  to  withhold  impact  fee  

  

24  

revenue  from  local  governments  if  the  state  finds  local  governments  are  being   inconsistent  with  the  provisions  in  the  Act.  In  2012,  the  state  withheld  revenues   from  seven  local  municipalities  (Rabe  &  Borick,  2013).  A  survey  was  conducted  in   2011  and  2012,  which  found  strong  public  opposition  to  many  of  the  legislations  of   Act  13  (Rabe  &  Borick,  2013).  This  example  highlights  the  complex  and  important   relationship  between  local  and  subnational  authorities  in  fracking  operations.    In   other  jurisdictions  around  the  world,  it  is  often  local  governments  and  residents   that  are  most  concerned  and  outspoken  about  concerns  from  fracking.    For  these   reasons,  this  project  presents  original  results  from  a  survey  of  Ontario  municipal   elected  leaders'  perspectives  on  horizontal  fracking  of  unconventional  shale  gas.   Ontario  is  in  a  unique  situation  because  it  is  one  of  the  few  provinces,  other  than   New  Brunswick,  to  have  had  conventional  fracking  operations,  however  not  one   well  has  been  drilled  using  unconventional  methods.  Even  more  surprising  given  the   fact  that  there  are  potential  shale  gas  plays  in  Ontario.       To  start,  it  is  important  to  discuss  how  familiar  municipal  leaders  are  with   fracking  in  general.  The  survey  asked,  "How  familiar  would  you  say  you  are  with   hydraulic  fracturing?"  Looking  at  Figure  2,  out  of  the  50  people  who  answered  the   survey,  62%  answered  they  are  "somewhat  familiar"  with  fracking;  this  meant  they   had  heard  of  it,  understood  it,  but  did  not  know  many  details.  Twenty-two  percent   of  respondents  answered  they  are  "mostly  unfamiliar"  with  fracking;  and  only  16%   considered  themselves  "very  familiar"  with  fracking  meaning  they  knew  a  great  deal   about  it.  

  

25  

Familiarity)with)Fracking))

22%$

16%$

Very$Familiar$ Somewhat$Familiar$ Mostly$Unfamiliar$ Completely$Unfamiliar$$

62%$

Figure  2.  Local  governments'  familiarity  with  hydraulic  fracturing.          

  

How  prominent  is  fracking  in  Ontario  municipalities?  The  survey  asked,  "To   what  extent,  if  at  all,  would  you  say  current  or  potential  fracking  within  your   jurisdiction  is  a  topic  of  discussion,  either  in  the  community  at  large  or  within  your   jurisdiction's  government?"  Looking  at  Figure  3,  82%  answered  that  fracking  was   "not  an  issue"  meaning  that  there  has  not  been  any  discussion  of  fracking  within  the   municipality  now  or  in  the  past.  Eleven  percent  answered  that  fracking  is  a  "minor   issue,"  meaning  that  fracking  has  been  discussed,  but  not  extensively,  and  7%  (3  out   of  45)  answered  that  fracking  is  a  "major  issue,"  meaning  that  fracking  has  been   discussed  extensively  within  the  jurisdiction.    

  

26  

Fracking)as)a)Topic)of)Discussion)
7%# 11%# Major#Issue#(Discussed# Extensively)# Minor#Issue# Not#an#Issue#(No#Discussion)# Don't#Know#

82%#

Figure  3.  How  often  hydraulic  fracturing  is  discussed  in  local  governments.          

  

These  results  indicate  that  although  a  high  percentage  of  municipal  leaders   answered  they  are  somewhat  familiar  with  fracking,  an  overwhelming  number   answered  that  fracking  is  not  a  topic  of  discussion.  It  is  clear  that  fracking  is   currently  not  a  topic  of  discussion  in  the  jurisdictions  that  responded  to  the  survey,   but  does  remain  an  important  issue  in  a  small  number  of  responding  municipalities.   When  looking  at  the  3  municipalities  that  make  up  the  7%  who  responded  fracking   is  a  "major  issue"  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  their  jurisdiction  is  not  in  the  vicinity   of  the  potential  shale  gas  play  locations  discussed  earlier.  Only  2  of  the   municipalities  are  only  near  a  potential  shale  gas  play  and  not  actually  in  it.               

  

27  

6.3  Municipal  Support  for  Fracking     To  better  understand  how  fracking  resonates  with  municipal  leaders,  the  survey   asked  about  the  degree  of  support  and  opposition  to  horizontal  fracking.  Figure  4   shows  the  results.    Leaders  were  asked,  "We  are  interested  in  sources  of  support  or   opposition  to  the  potential  use  of  hydraulic  fracturing  in  your  community.  In  your   opinion,  do  the  following  people  or  groups  either  support  or  oppose  the  use  of   fracking  in  your  jurisdiction?"  14%  responded  that  their  jurisdiction's  council   strongly  opposed  the  potential  use  of  fracking  in  their  community.  25%  responded   that  their  jurisdiction's  council  neither  supported  nor  opposed  the  potential  use  of   fracking  in  their  jurisdiction.  Less  than  5%  responded  that  their  jurisdiction's   council  strongly  supports  the  potential  use  of  fracking  in  their  jurisdiction.  The   conclusion  that  can  be  drawn  from  these  results  is  that  from  the  perspective  of  local   governments,  there  is  not  a  high  level  of  support  for  horizontal  fracking  in  Ontario.   This  can  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  there  is  currently  an  absence  of  unconventional   natural  gas  fracking  in  Ontario.    

  

28  

  

Graph'Showing'the'Level'of'Support/Opposi=on'for'Fracking'
50" 45" 40" 35"

Percent'(%)'

30" 25" 20" 15" 10" 5" 0"

The"majority"of"your"jurisdicCon's"council" The"majority"of"your"JurisdicCon's"ciCzens" You"as"an"Official""

Strongly" Support"

Somewhat" Support"

Neither" Support"nor" Oppose"

Somewhat" Oppose"

Strongly" Oppose"

Don't"Know"

Choices'

Figure  4.  Local  governments'  level  of  support  or  opposition  for  horizontal  fracking.       

  

  

So  far  the  survey  has  indicated  that  although  municipal  leaders  see  

themselves  familiar  with  fracking,  it  is  not  an  issue  in  their  jurisdiction,  with  a  low   level  of  support.  The  following  section  will  explain  what  role  municipal   governments  should  play  if  unconventional  fracking  was  to  occur  in  Ontario.          6.4  Municipal  Governments'  Engagement     If  hydraulic  fracturing  was  to  take  place  in  Ontario,  how  might  municipalities  be   engaged  in  the  process?    It  is  important  to  consider  what  view  municipal   governments  of  Ontario  have  on  fracking  and  how  they  should  be  engaged.  If   Ontario  was  to  use  hydraulic  fracturing  to  extract  natural  gas,  municipalities  would   be  affected,  as  fracking  is  a  local  land  issue.  To  what  extent  should  municipalities  

  

29  

play  a  role  or  desire  to  play  a  role  in  influencing  decisions  about  fracking  in  Ontario   and  in  the  development  of  a  provincial  policy  framework  around  fracking?  In   interviews  with  provincial  officials  one  of  the  central  issues  discussed  was  what  role   municipalities  should  play  in  the  regulation  and  oversight  over  the  processes.     One  interviewee  believes  that  when  looking  at  other  jurisdictions  that  have   hydraulic  fracturing,  municipalities  have  played  a  significant  role  and  if  multistage,   horizontal  fracking  was  to  occur  in  Ontario,  it  would  be  "important  to  engage  them   in  the  process"  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).  In  general,  however,  because   municipal  officials  in  Ontario  do  not  have  experience  with  oil  and  gas  industries,  it   would  be  important  to  work  with  them  to  determine  what  role  they  could  play,   which  would  be  the  social  and  planning  side.  The  municipalities  themselves  have  an   interest  in  participating  as  well.  This  is  because  there  are  many  ways  that  fracking   may  produce  costs  and  benefits  to  municipalities  and  different  ways  that  authority   over  fracking  operations  can  be  shared.  In  Pennsylvania  there  is  an  Impact  Fee,   which  calculates  the  dollars  coming  into  the  state  and  is  distributed  to  the   municipalities  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).       To  investigate  how  municipal  governments  in  Ontario  feel  about  authority   for  fracking,  the  survey  asked  municipal  leaders  to  give  their  opinion  on  what  level   of  government  (federal,  provincial,  or  municipal)  should  have  authority  over   hydraulic  fracturing.  The  survey  asked,  "For  each  of  the  following  entities,  please   indicate  whether  you  think  they  should  have  a  great  deal  of  authority,  some   authority,  or  no  authority  for  such  decisions  regarding  fracking."  Figure  5  shows   that  55%  of  respondents  believe  that  the  municipal  government  should  have  "a  

  

30  

great  deal  of  authority,"  52%  believe  the  provincial  government  should  have  "a   great  deal  of  authority,"  and  38%  believe  the  federal  government  should  have  "a   great  deal  of  authority."  This  latter  response  is  interesting  given  that  the  federal   government  has  no  jurisdiction  over  fracking  in  provinces.  
Opinion'for'Fracking'Jurisdic:on'
60"

50"

40"

Percent'(%)'

30"

A"Great"Deal"of"Authority" Some"Authority"

20"

No"Authority" Don't"Know"

10"

0"

Federal" Government"

Provincial" Government"

Municipal" Government"

Land<Owners"

Choices'

Figure  5.  Municipal  leaders'  opinion  for  jurisdiction  over  hydraulic  fracturing       

  

Out  of  the  three  possible  level  of  governments,  over  half  of  the  respondents  of   the  survey  believe  that  if  fracking  was  to  occur  in  Ontario,  municipal  governments   should  have  a  great  deal  of  authority.  In  the  comment  section  of  the  survey,  one   municipal  leader  commented,  "municipal  input  before  fracturing  occurs."  Next  to   the  municipal  government,  municipal  leaders  believed  that  the  provincial   government  should  have  the  second  most  amount  of  authority  as  it  received  the   second  highest  responses  for  "a  great  deal  of  authority"  (52%).  In  short,  the  survey   reveals  that  municipal  leaders  believe  they  and  the  province  should  have  a  role.    It  is   interesting  to  note  that  54%  of  respondents  believe  that  land-owners  should  also   have  "some  authority"  if  fracking  was  to  take  place  in  Ontario.  According  to  this,      31  

municipal  leaders  believe  land-owners  are  also  entitled  to  a  say  over  fracking   operations.   In  another  interview,  a  government  official  said  that  municipal  governments   should  "definitely"  play  a  role  in  the  policy  framework  if  hydraulic  fracturing  for   unconventional  natural  gas  was  to  take  place  in  Ontario  (Interviewee  A,  December   4th,  2014).  The  interviewee  referred  to  the  conflict  that  has  emerged  around   renewable  energy  projects  not  supported  by  the  community  and  the  value  of  having   communities  on  side  if  fracking  proceeded:  it  would  "be  scary  if  [the  provincial   government]  would  do  that  [what  it  did  with  renewable  energy  project  siting]  with   fracking"  (Interviewee  A,  December  4th,  2014).     Interviewee  B  believes  that  it  is  beneficial  to  have  municipal  support  and   engagement  if  fracking  for  unconventional  shale  gas  was  to  occur.  When  a  certain   municipality  does  not  want  fracking  to  take  place,  there  is  a  lot  of  tension  between   locals  and  government.  "Municipalities  bear  the  brunt  of  the  complaints...  A  lot  of   citizens  could  complain  to  the  local  councillor"  especially  with  the  issues  fracking   causes:  local  air  quality,  noise,  land  degradation  (Interviewee  B,  January  9th,  2015).   There  would  be  benefits  to  have  the  discussion  with  a  potential  municipality  before,   to  prevent  such  occurrences  (Interviewee  B,  January  9th,  2015).  Municipal   governments  are  not  currently  involved  in  the  permitting  of  natural  gas  extraction,   and  it  is  unlikely  that  this  will  change,  as  it  is  regulated  by  the  provincial   government.  However,  because  horizontal  fracking  is  much  more  intrusive  than   conventional  extraction  techniques,  it  will  be  wise  if  the  province  includes   consultation  at  the  municipal  level,  which  does  not  exist  now  (Interviewee  D,  

  

32  

January  28th,  2015).  The  following  section  will  explain  potential  reasons  for  the   absence  of  unconventional  fracking  in  Ontario.                                                                   

  

33  

7.0  Explanation  of  Absence  of  Fracking  in  Ontario   Given  that  there  are  areas  in  Ontario  where  natural  gas  could  be  extracted  using   hydraulic  fracturing,  what  explains  the  absence  of  extraction  in  Ontario?  This  paper   finds  the  main  reasons  for  such  an  absence  are:  1)  the  geological  factors  of  Ontario's   shale;  2)  lack  of  investment  due  to  other  jurisdictions  already  having  a  solidified   conventional/unconventional  fracking  industry;  and  3)  low  local  and  provincial   support  to  conduct  fracking.      Geology  is  an  important  factor  in  determining  whether  a  fracked  well  will  be  

economically  feasible  or  not.  As  fracking  a  well  can  account  for  twenty-five  percent   of  the  total  drilling  cost,  it  is  important  that  the  geological  features  of  the  shale  be   favorable  for  a  productive  well  (Fitzgerald,  2013).  If,  however,  the  geological   conditions  do  not  favour  a  productive  well,  it  would  not  be  beneficial  to  use   horizontal  hydraulic  fracturing.  In  Ontario  the  "geology  is  not  as  promising"  as  the   western  provinces  of  Canada  (Interviewee  B,  January  9th,  2015).  Based  on  the  one   exploratory  well  that  was  drilled,  the  geological  formation  of  Ontario's  shale  are  "B   list,"  meaning  that  the  gas  content  of  the  formations  is  expected  to  be  low   (Interviewee  D,  January  28th,  2015).  The  shale  gas  plays  (shale  rock  containing   natural  gas)  that  are  found  in  Ontario  are  such  that  most  of  the  shale  is  too  shallow   and  not  as  thick  as  they  are  in  other  places  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).  The   shallow  nature  of  Ontario's  shale  makes  the  probability  of  seismic  activity  and   flowback  of  the  fracking  fluid  greater  (Interviewee  B,  January  9th,  2015).  This  means   that  oil  and  gas  companies  would  not  be  able  to  use  as  high  a  pressure  when   fracking,  making  it  less  economically  feasible  (Interviewee  B,  January  9th,  2015).  In  

  

34  

the  areas  identified  as  potential  shale  gas  plays  in  Ontario,  only  the  Blue  Mountain   play  has  a  distance  from  the  surface  to  the  top  of  the  shale  greater  than  250  metres.   The  Collingwood  Shale,  Marcellus  Shale,  and  Kettle  Point  Shales  in  Ontario  all  have  a   depth  that  ranges  from  175  metres  to  225  metres  below  the  earth's  surface  to  the   top  of  the  shale  play  (Carter  et  al.,  n.d).        Along  with  geological  issues,  the  fact  that  British  Columbia,  more  recently  

Alberta,  and  many  American  states  have  a  respected  fracking  industry  makes  the   incentives  to  experiment  in  Ontario  low.    "If  people  are  going  to  invest  money,  they   want  a  sure  return"  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).  British  Columbia  and   Alberta,  for  example,  already  have  proven  resources  for  hydraulic  fracturing  and   along  with  a  low  price  of  natural  gas,  this  discourages  companies  from  exploring  in   Ontario  for  unconventional  shale  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).  If  companies   know  they  can  go  to  other  places  for  natural  gas,  they  will  be  less  inclined  to   produce  in  an  area  with  potentially  poor  geology  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,   2015).        Another  reason  for  slow  investment  in  Ontario  is  the  lack  of  clear  

encouragement  or  support  for  exploration  by  the  Ontario  and  municipal   governments.  Compared  to  British  Columbia  and  Alberta,  Ontario  does  not  have  a   skilled  labour  force  for  hydraulic  fracturing  to  "kick-start  the  industry"  (Interviewee   B,  January  9th,  2015).  Looking  at  Figure  6,  87%  of  the  respondents  answered  that   their  municipality  has  no  history  regarding  conventional  natural  gas  extraction,   with  7%  having  inactive  traditional  wells,  and  only  4%  of  the  respondents  with   having  current  active  conventional  wells.    

  

35  

Jurisdic(ons',History,of,Conven(onal,Natural,Gas,Extrac(on,
2%# 4%# 7%#

Current#Ac/ve#Tradi/onal#Wells# Inac/ve#Tradi/onal#Wells## No#History# Don't#know#

87%#

Figure  6.  History  of  conventional  natural  gas  extraction  in  local  governments  of  Ontario.    

  

   Seeing  that  87%  of  the  respondents'  municipalities  have  no  history  of  conventional   natural  gas  extraction  could  make  the  labour  force  needed  and  equipment  required   for  unconventional  natural  gas  extraction  an  issue.     The  interviews  and  the  survey  reveal  that  there  is  no  provincial  policy   currently  on  hydraulic  fracturing  for  unconventional  shale  gas;  however,  the   provincial  government  is  conducting  a  review.  In  addition,  if  fracking  of  shale  gas   was  to  occur,  municipal  governments  seem  to  want  to  have  an  active  role  in  the   planning  process.  The  following  section  will  discuss  the  likely  future  of   unconventional  fracking  in  Ontario.                

  

36  

8.0  The  Future  of  Fracking  in  Ontario   Given  the  current  absence  and  uncertainty  of  unconventional  shale  gas  fracking  in   Ontario  it  is  difficult  to  determine  what  the  future  of  it  will  be  in  Ontario.  Based  on   my  interviews,  government  officials  had  mixed  views;  most  interestingly,  they  didn't   seem  to  agree  if  the  province  might  consider  fracking  in  future.  According  to  one   interviewee,  "the  answer  is  probably  yes,"  that  the  province  will  consider  allowing   fracking.  However,  the  interviewee  was  unsure  how  quickly  it  would  develop  or   grow  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).  Interviewee  C  said  that  Ontario  is  in  an   interesting  situation.  It  is  learning  from  other  jurisdictions  and  can  learn  from  their   policies,  more  specifically  what  has  worked  and  what  hasn't.  As  Ontario  doesn't   have  "anyone  knocking  on  the  door,  we  don't  need  to  rush"  (Interviewee  C,  January   13th,  2015).  One  of  the  biggest  obstacles  that  would  have  to  be  overcome  if  fracking   was  to  be  used  would  be  social  acceptance.  Much  like  nuclear  power,  where  people   always  associate  it  with  a  catastrophic  meltdown,  there  is  a  cloud  of  fear  around   hydraulic  fracturing.  "There  is  an  emotional  element  that  will  contribute  to  the   challenges"  (Interviewee  C,  January  13th,  2015).     In   contrast,   according   to   a   different   interviewee,   fracking   in   Ontario   is   unlikely:   "I   personally   don't   see   fracking   happening   in   Ontario,   as   the   way   Ontario's   energy   sector   is   structured,   people   don't   want   it"   (Interviewee   A,   December   4th,   2015).   This   view   is   explained   by   the   fact   that   Ontario   does   not   need   to   start   exploring  their  own  shale  plays  as  it  less  costly  to  import  natural  gas  from  eastern   United   States.   Because   of   this,   Ontario   has   gone   from   a   major   exporter   to   a   major   importer   of   natural   gas   since   the   start   of   the   century   (Canadian   Gas   Association,  

  

37  

2015).   "There   is   precedent   in   Ontario   that   public   opposition   will   stop   fracking"   (Interviewee   A,   December   4th,   2014).   However,   because   Ontario   does   not   have   a   policy   framework   for   hydraulic   fracturing,   one   would   need   to   be   created.   "Ontario   would   have   to   update   regulations   so   they   address   unconventional   extraction   of   natural  gas  using  hydraulic  fracturing"  (Interviewee  B,  January  9th,  2015).  Another   interviewee,   said   that   it   is   unlikely   that   multistage   fracking   will   occur   in   Ontario's   future   unless   someone   does   more   exploration   and   finds   that   the   geology   is   in   fact   favourable,   which   is   thought   to   be   unlikely   (Interviewee   D,   January   28th,   2015).   The   two   biggest   reasons   for   interviewees'   view   that   fracking   is   unlikely   relates   to   the   unfavourable   geology   and   the   lack   of   financing,   dropping   horizontal   fracking   from   a   high  level  of  concern  to  a  low  level  of  concern  (Interviewee  D,  January  28th,  2015).     How   does   natural   gas   fit   into   Ontario's   energy   supply,   and   what   is   the   future   of  natural  gas  in  this  mix?  In  Ontario,  natural  gas  is  used  to  mainly  heat  homes  and   businesses.   The   current   mix   of   electricity   sources   in   Ontario   are   nuclear,   hydro,   natural   gas,   coal,   and   wind/alternative   sources,   with   nuclear   accounting   for   57%   and   natural   gas   accounting   for   15%   of   the   total   (OEB,   2015).   Ontario   is   currently   relying  on  gas  from  western  Canadian  provinces  and  northeastern  American  states.   It  is  hard  to  say  exactly  how  natural  gas  will  change  in  the  future  of  Ontario's  energy   supply   and   ultimately   if   this   would   encourage   or   discourage   the   use   of   unconventional   fracking.      Ontario   is   committed   to   increasing   renewable   energy   as   well  as  the  continual  use  of  nuclear  power  in  the  future  (Ministry  of  Energy,  2015).   Because   of   this,   natural   gas   use   would   only   increase   conservatively,   and   therefore   the  likelihood  of  unconventional  fracking  being  used  very  slim.      

  

38  

8.1  Municipal  Policy  on  Fracking     The  survey  of  municipal  leaders  asked  them  if  they  had  adopted  or  implemented   any  policies  or  regulations  in  support  or  opposition  to  fracking.    Figure  7  shows  the   results  and  reveals  that  municipalities  themselves  do  not  see  horizontal  fracking  as   part  of  their  future.    When  asked  if  they  are  "likely  to  adopt  any  tax  or  other   incentives,  moratoria,  or  zoning  changes  that  attempt  to  promote,  restrict,  or  simply   regulate  hydraulic  fracturing,"  87%  of  the  respondents  answered  they  have  neither   adopted  nor  likely  to  adopt  any  tax  incentives;  78%  answered  they  have  neither   adopted  nor  likely  to  adopt  a  local  moratorium/ban  on  horizontal  fracking;  82%   answered  they  have  neither  adopted  nor  are  likely  to  adopt  local  regulation/zoning   conditions;  and,  84%  answered  they  have  neither  adopted  nor  likely  to  adopt  an   intergovernmental  agreement  with  neighbouring  jurisdictions.  Only  2%  answered   their  jurisdiction  has  adopted  a  local  moratorium/ban  on  fracking  and  2%   answered  their  jurisdiction  has  adopted  local  regulations/zoning  conditions  for   fracking.    These  results  suggest  that  fracking  is  not  a  central  area  of  concern  and  not   taking  up  time  on  municipal  agendas.      Looking  at  what  jurisdictions  have  already  adopted  some  hydraulic  

fracturing  policy  is  interesting.  The  two  jurisdictions  that  have  adopted  some   fracking  policy  also  responded  to  fracking  being  a  "major  issue"  in  their  jurisdiction.   Interestingly  enough,  the  jurisdiction  that  has  implemented  a  local  moratorium/ban   on  fracking  is  not  located  near  a  prospective  shale  play.  The  jurisdiction  that  has   implemented  local  regulations/zoning  conditions  is  located  near  a  shale  gas  play.   This  jurisdiction  seems  to  be  taking  a  proactive  approach  by  implementing  their  

  

39  

own  regulations  towards  hydraulic  fracturing.  This  explains  both  jurisdictions'   reasoning  for  answering  that  fracking  is  a  major  issue,  which  is  discussed   extensively  in  their  jurisdiction.    

Fracking'Policy'
100" 90" 80" 70"

Percent'(%)'

60" 50" 40" 30" 20" 10" 0"

Tax"or"Other"IncenGves" Local"Moratorium/Ban"on"Fracking" Local"RegulaGons/Zoning"CondiGons" Intergovernmental"Agreements"With" Neighbouring"JurisdicGons"

Have"Adopted"

Likely"to"Adopt"

Neither"Adopted"Nor" Likely"to"Adopt" Choices'

Don't"Know"

Figure  7.  Different  fracking  policies  municipalities  of  Ontario  have  adopted  or  are  likely  to  adopt.          

  

8.2  Factors  Encouraging/Discouraging  Potential  Use  of  Unconventional   Fracking      The  survey  also  asked  the  municipal  leaders  to  note  what  factors  encouraged  or   discouraged  consideration  of  fracking.    Leaders  were  presented  with  a  series  of   potential  risks  and  benefits  from  fracking  and  then  asked,  "Even  though  your   community  does  not  have  any  current  fracking  operations,  to  what  degree  would   you  say  the  following  items  may  encourage  or  discourage  the  use  of  fracking  within   your  jurisdiction  in  the  future?"  Figure  8  shows  the  results  from  this  question.  The   top  factors  that  municipal  officials  believe  significantly  discourages  the  use  of  

  

40  

horizontal  fracking  are:  risk  to  water  (48%),  environmental  damages  from  fracking   (40%),  risk  to  citizens'  health  (38%),  and  impact  on  property  values  (33%).  The   factors  that  municipal  officials  believe  significantly  encourages  the  use  of  horizontal   fracking  are:  potential  lower  energy  prices  (from  relying  on  own  resources)  (18%),   job  creation/economic  development  (13%),  property  tax  revenue  (13%),  and   environmental  benefits  from  cleaner  burning  natural  gas  (10%).       It  is  clear  that  there  is  a  far  greater  emphasis  on  factors  that  municipal   leaders  believe  discourage  the  use  of  fracking  as  opposed  to  encourage.  Written   responses  for  the  comment  section  had  differing  opinions.  One  respondent  believed   environmental  protection  is  the  top  priority  as  their  jurisdiction  has  a    strong   aboriginal  presence  and  threatened  and  endangered  species.  Another  respondent   felt  that  it  is  hard  to  find  an  unbiased  view  on  fracking  and  that  there  should  be  a   way  to  get  scientific  information  on  fracking  that  is  believable  by  the  majority  of  the   jurisdiction.  When  looking  at  what  municipal  leaders  responded  to  what  factors   encourage  or  discourage  the  use  of  fracking,  location  of  the  municipalites  did  not   significantly  affect  the  choices.  For  factors  that  encourag  the  use  of  fracking,  there   was  a  mix  of  municipal  leaders  representing  small  and  large  jurisdictions  both  near   and  far  from  a  shale  play.  The  same  trend  was  found  for  factors  that  discourage  the   use.   The   results   from   the   survey   show   that   most   municipalities   are   not   taking   a   proactive  approach  to  adopting  policies  and  the  factors  that  discourage  the  potential   use  outweigh  the  factors  that  encourage  the  use.       

  

41  

Graph*Showing*Factors*that*are*Discouraging/Encouraging*Use*of*Fracking*in*Jurisdic@ons*
50"

45"

40"

35"

30"

Percent(%)*

25"

20"

Significantly"Encouraging"" Somewhat"Encouraging""

15"

Mixed"" Somewhat"Discouraging"" Significantly"Discouraging"

10"

5"

Not"a"Factor" Don't"Know"

0"

Figure   8.   Factors   municipal   leaders   believe   that   are   encouraging/discouraging   the   potential   use   of   fracking   for   shale   gas   in   Ontario  

  

er gy "P am ric En a es ge vr " "f r "B en om efi " Fr ts" ac fro kin m g" "C lea n" Na Ri t." sk Ga "to s" "C i/ ze ns "H ea lth " Co R m i s I m k"t m pa un o" ct W ity "o at "O n er "P rg " ro an pe iza r Bu ty /o "V si n ns al u es "o n es s"P " F " ra ro ck po in sa g l s" "Is to su "E s es "" ta bi sh "F r Fe ac de kin ra g"" l /P ro vin Re cia ve nu l "R e"f eg s" or "L a nd SO Pr wn op er er s" ty "T a x"R Pr es ev er en va ue /o " n" Av o ail f "F ab ar ilit m lan y"o d" f "S ha le" De po si t s" vr "D
Choices*

ev elo co n re a/ on /E "D Jo b "C

Lo

En

we r"E n

pm en t"

42  

8.3  Municipal  Perspectives  Compared  with  Public  Opinion     The  above  results  show  an  overall  low  level  of  support  and  concern  for   unconventional  hydraulic  fracturing  amongst  municipal  leaders.  Does  this,  however,   match  the  opinions  of  the  general  public?  In  2014,  Brown  et  al.  surveyed  US  and   Canadian  citizens  living  in  the  Great  Lakes  Basin.  This  survey  also  asked  about  who   should  have  authority  over  hydraulic  fracking.    The  survey  revealed  that  47%  of  the   Basin  residents  believed  the  provincial/state  governments  should  have  a  great  deal   of  authority,  36%  believe  the  federal  government  should  have  a  great  deal  of   authority,  35%  believe  local  governments  should  have  a  great  deal  of  authority,  and   49%  of  the  Basin  residents  believe  land-owners  should  have  a  great  deal  of   authority.  Thus,  in  contrast  to  Ontario  municipal  leaders,  residents  in  the  Great   Lakes  Basin  believe  that  subnational  governments  should  have  much  more   authority  than  municipal  governments  (Brown  et  al.,  2014).    
Level  of   Government   Great  Deal  of   Authority   Public   Opinion   Federal   Provincial/State   Local   (Municipal)   Land-owners   49%   20%   38%   54%   6%   20%   7%   7%   36%   47%   35%   Municipal   Leaders   38%   52%   55%   Public   Opinion   37%   40%   47%   Municipal   Leaders   48%   40%   38%   Public   Opinion   18%   6%   11%   Municipal   Leaders   10%   2%   2%   Public   Opinion   9%   7%   8%   Municipal   Leaders   5%   5%   5%   Some  Authority   No  Authority   Not  Sure  

Table  1.  Comparing  Great  Lake's  Basin  and  Ontario's  municipal  leader  opinion  for  fracking  authority.  Adapted   from  Shale  Gas  and  Hydraulic  Fracturing  in  the  Great  Lakes  Region:  Current  Issues  and  Public  Opinion,  by   Brown  et  al.,  (2014),  retrieved  from:  http://closup.umich.edu/issues-in-energy-and-environmental- policy/9/shale-gas-and-hydraulic-fracturing-in-the-great-lakes-region-current-issues-and-public-opinion/     

  

43  

  

Table  1  shows  that  the  greatest  variation  between  municipal  leaders  and  

citizens  surrounds  the  degree  of  authority  each  should  have  over  fracking.    Only   35%  of  Great  Lakes  Basin  citizen  respondents  said  that  local  governments  should   have  a  great  deal  of  authority  for  fracking,  while  55%  of  the  municipal  leaders   answered  the  local  governments  should  have  a  great  deal  of  authority.  More  than   double  (49%  to  20%)  of  the  public  surveyed  believe  land-owners  should  have  a   great  deal  of  authority  over  fracking.          When  the  same  question  was  asked  to  just  Ontarians  living  near  the  Great  

Lakes  Basin,  oddly,  Ontarians  believed  the  federal  government  should  have  most  of   the  authority  (43%),  with  only  11%  answering  the  federal  government  should  have   no  authority  (Brown  et  al.  2014).  This  is  surprising  given  that  the  constitution   provides  little  to  no  authority  for  municipal  and  federal  governments.  Referring  to   Table  2,  it  seems  that  the  public  of  Ontario  is  slightly  more  trusting  of  the  federal   government  to  have  jurisdiction  over  fracking  than  the  municipal  leaders  (43%   compared  to  38%  for  "a  great  deal  of  authority").  These  are  interesting  results  and   contrast  with  the  basin-wide  results  quite  significantly.        
A  Great  Deal  of   Authority   Public   Opinion   43%   Municipal   Leaders     38%   Public   Opinion   33%   Municipal   Leaders   48%   Public   Opinion   11%   Municipal   Leaders   10%   Public   Opinion   13%   Municipal   Leaders   5%   Some  Authority   No  Authority   Not  Sure  

Table  2.  Comparing  Ontario's  public  and  municipal  leader  opinion  for  federal  government  authority   over  fracking.  Adapted  from  Shale  Gas  and  Hydraulic  Fracturing  in  the  Great  Lakes  Region:  Current   Issues  and  Public  Opinion,  by  Brown  et  al.,  (2014),  retrieved  from:  http://closup.umich.edu/issues-in- energy-and-environmental-policy/9/shale-gas-and-hydraulic-fracturing-in-the-great-lakes-region- current-issues-and-public-opinion/     

  

44  

  

The  surveys  show  a  discrepancy  between  who  the  public  and  municipal  

leaders  believe  should  have  authority  over  the  potential  use  of  unconventional   fracking  in  Ontario.  The  public  of  Ontario  believes  that  jurisdiction  should  be  with   the  federal  government;  while  the  municipal  leaders  believe  that  jurisdiction  should   be  with  the  local  governments.    Given  that  the  province  is  the  one  with  authority   over  fracking,  there  is  a  discrepancy  between  reality  and  desires.    No  matter  what   the  opinion  of  municipal  or  public  opinion,  it  remains  that  Ontario  will  have  to   consider  a  new  policy  and  regulatory  framework  if  fracking  is  considered  in  future.   The  following  section  outlines  some  recommendations  for  such  a  framework.      
                                                                                            

  

  

45  

9.0  Recommendations     While  the  likelihood  seems  slim,  it  is  still  possible  that  Ontario  could  use  fracking  to   extract  natural  gas  in  future.  Given  this,  a  comprehensive  policy  framework  would   need  to  be  created  to  protect  the  environment  and  human  health,  and  seeing  that   there  is  not  a  current  policy  framework,  it  is  a  contentious  issue.  This  section  will   outline  some  recommendations  that  could  be  useful  when  considering  a  regulatory   system  for  unconventional  fracking.          9.1  Flowback  Water   One  of  the  most  important  issues  that  would  need  to  be  addressed  is  flowback  water   management.  According  to  one  interviewee,  if  there  were  a  horizontal  fracking   operation  in  the  shale  rock,  flowback  water  would  be  the  biggest  issue.  This  is   because  there  is  no  proper  pathway  for  managing  this  wastewater  as  it  cannot  be   put  in  sewage  plants,  even  if  it  was  diluted,  due  to  its  toxic  nature  (Interviewee  D,   January  28th,  2015).    Up  to  30  percent  of  the  water  that  is  used  in  hydraulic   fracturing  is  returned  to  the  surface  (Grottenthaler,  2011).  The  flowback  contains   dissolved  solids,  hydrocarbons,  and  heavy  metals,  which  makes  discharging  into   streams  impossible  due  to  dangers  to  the  environmental  and  human  health.   Untreated  flowback  water  cannot  be  used  again,  and  in  order  for  the  fluid  to  be   reused,  the  flowback  must  be  treated  to  remove  harmful  chemicals  (Grottenthaler,   2011).  The  high  concentration  of  organic  and  inorganic  matter  such  as  diluted  acids,   biocides,  viscosity  modifiers,  has  caused  public  concern  about  effective  management   of  the  flowback  water  (He,  Wang,  Liu,  Barbot,  &  Vidic,  2014).  However,  due  to  high  

  

46  

concentrations  of  total  dissolved  solids,  the  best  option  for  Ontario  would  be  to   reuse  the  flowback  water  for  subsequent  fracking  (He  et  al.,  2014).  This  would  be   done  through  regulations  for  proper  disposal,  which  are  needed  in  advance  of  any   horizontal  fracking  operation  (Interviewee  D,  January  28th,  2015).  Different  shale   plays  have  different  means  of  water  treatment.  States  around  the  Marcellus  shale   use  injection  wells  (injecting  the  flowback  water  into  wells  in  the  earth),  recycle  the   water,  and  have  municipal  wastewater  treatment  facilities  while  places  around  the   Barnett  Shale  have  injection  wells  and  recycle  the  water.  The  geological  factors  of   the  shale  play  and  jurisdictional  laws  decide  what  type  of  option  is  necessary   (GWPC,  2009).     If  Ontario  was  to  use  fracking  for  the  unconventional  extraction  of  natural   gas,  a  separate  treatment  facility  should  be  set  up  to  treat  the  flowback  of  unwanted   chemicals  for  reuse.  An  investigation  would  need  to  be  completed  in  order  to  see   what  municipality  would  allow  such  a  treatment  facility,  as  massive  amounts  of   water  will  be  transported  to  and  from  the  treatment  plant.  In  order  for  this  to   happen,  a  facility  siting  and  risk  assessment  investigation  would  have  to  take  place   to  determine  what  municipalities  are  actually  capable  of  taking  this  treatment  plant   and  what  municipalities  actually  want  it.        9.2  Water  Extraction     The  second  issue  that  would  need  to  be  resolved  in  order  for  Ontario  to  use   hydraulic  fracturing  would  be  stringent  regulations  on  water  extraction.  As   hydraulic  fracturing  uses  a  substantial  amount  of  water  per  well,  a  water  policy  

  

47  

would  need  to  be  created  to  protect  the  local  lakes  and  aquifers  that  would  be  used.   Although  Ontario  signed  the  Great  Lakes-St.  Lawrence  River  Basin  Sustainable  Water   Resources  Agreement  in  2005,  which  aims  at  maintaining  sustainable  extraction  of   the  Great  Lakes,  the  integrity  of  the  Great  Lakes  is  being  diminished  due  to   slickwater  fracking  (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).  This  is  because  the  use  of  water  for   fracking  is  more  common  now  than  it  was  when  the  agreement  was  signed,  making   it  out  of  date.  Ontario  currently  allows  oil  and  gas  drilling  under  the  Great  Lakes  and   has  over  500  onshore  and  offshore  wells  producing  natural  gas  (from  conventional   methods)  under  Lake  Erie  (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).  The  reason  why  Ontario   would  need  a  better  regulatory  system  on  water  extraction  from  the  Great  Lakes  is   because  other  watersheds  that  are  connected  to  the  Great  Lakes  could  be  affected  as   well  if  contamination  or  low  water  levels  were  to  occur  (Schroeck  &  Karisny,  2013).        9.3  Chemical  Disclosure     Another  important  issue  that  would  need  to  be  included  in  an  Ontario  policy   framework  is  chemical  disclosure  of  the  fracking  fluid.  The  fracking  fluid  contains  a   cocktail  mixture  of  chemicals,  which  should  be  disclosed  to  the  local  jurisdictions   that  have  fracking  operations.  In  Canada  and  the  United  States,  as  fracking  is   regulated  by  the  individual  provinces  and  states  respectively,  there  exists  different   regulations  regarding  chemical  disclosure.  According  to  Maule,  Makey,  Benson,   Burrows,  and  Scammell  (2013)  insufficient  disclosure  laws  will  leave  regulators,   public  safety  officers,  and  the  public  uninformed  and  under  prepared  to  mitigate   environmental  and  human  health  hazards  associated  with  hydraulic  fracturing  

  

48  

fluids.  A  chemical  disclosure  website  for  American  companies  is  fracfocus.org  and   fracfocus.ca  for  Canadian  companies.  Under  provincial  law,  British  Columbia  was   the  first  Canadian  province  to  enforce  the  public  disclosure  of  chemicals  used  in   fracking  fluids  (FracFocus,  2014).  As  of  January  1,  2012  public  disclosure  for   hydraulic  fracturing  fluid  is  mandatory  in  British  Columbia.  On  December  19,  2012   Alberta  also  joined  in  on  the  disclosure  of  chemicals  used  in  fracking  fluid;  however,   no  information  on  whether  the  disclosure  in  Alberta  is  voluntary  or  mandatory  is   provided  (FracFocus,  2014).  In  the  United  States,  most  of  the  states  that  disclose   their  chemicals  to  fracfocus.org  do  so  voluntarily  (Maule  et  al.,  2013).  This  makes   the  accuracy  and  completeness  of  the  reported  chemicals  unknown  as  well  as  the   exact  chemical  identity  unknown  as  most  companies  report  classes  of  chemicals  and   not  specific  names  (Maule  et  al.,  2013).     If  Ontario  was  to  use  fracking,  mandatory  chemical  disclosure  of  all   chemicals  used  in  the  fracking  fluid  should  be  implemented.  However,  given  the  fact   that  companies  would  want  to  keep  their  competitive  advantage  with  regards  to   their  own  fracking  fluid,  there  should  be  enough  secrecy  that  would  allow  the   company  to  keep  their  own  recipe,  but  at  the  same  time  disclosing  enough   information  needed.  Regardless  of  whether  or  not  Ontario  uses  fracking,  Canada   should  implement  a  nationwide  disclosure  law  for  all  provinces.  According  to  Maule   et  al.,  (2013)  oversight  at  the  federal  level  will  ensure  a  standard  set  of  regulations,   which  could  streamline  the  regulatory  process.          

  

49  

9.4  Baseline  Data   Proponents  of  hydraulic  fracturing  claim  that  there  is  insufficient  data  to  determine   if  fracking  causes  environmental  degradation.  This  is  because  they  claim  there  is  not   enough  baseline  data  (methane  concentrations,  total  dissolved  solids,  biodiversity)   taken  before  fracking  takes  place  in  a  well.  Therefore,  an  important  regulation  that   would  be  needed  if  fracking  was  to  take  place  in  Ontario  is  mandatory  baseline  data   of  every  well  that  is  going  to  be  fracked.  This  could  be  done  in  an  environmental   impact  assessment.  Before  a  well  would  be  drilled,  an  impact  assessment  can  be   used  to  collect  the  necessary  data.  According  to  Yergin  (2011),  it  is  difficult  to  tell  if   methane  migrates  from  fracking  sites  into  wells  because  there  is  a  lack  of  baseline   data.  The  Council  of  Canadians  (2014)  also  states  that  shale  gas  extraction  has   proceeded  without  sufficient  environmental  baseline  data  being  collected.  One   example  of  a  type  of  chemical  that  could  be  monitored  is  methane.  Methane  levels   before  fracking,  during  fracking,  and  after  fracking  should  be  collected.  However,   because  methane  is  believed  to  migrate,  both  temporal  and  spatial  analysis  should   be  collected  (Lave  and  Lutz,  2014).  If  methane  concentrations  around  the  well  and   aquifers  surrounding  the  well  increase  after  fracking  takes  place,  this  would  suggest   that  fracking  is  responsible,  and  not  due  to  natural  events.  Another  component  of   the  baseline  data  should  be  general  groundwater  quality  levels.  A  general   measurement  such  as  total  dissolved  solids  (TDS)  is  a  good  indicator  of   groundwater  quality.  The  higher  the  amount  of  TDS,  the  more  polluted  the  water  is   (Wilson  et  al.,  2014).  If  baseline  data  was  taken  similar  to  the  methane   concentrations  over  time  and  space,  a  correlation  would  exist  that  could  show  an  

  

50  

increase  of  TDS  with  fracking.  A  last  indicator  that  could  be  taken  is  wildlife  habitat.   Indicators  such  as  land  degradation,  land  fragmentation,  and  animal  biodiversity  are   all  variables  that  could  change  due  to  fracking,  and  should  be  documented   throughout  the  process  to  show  if  fracking  does  affect  these  variables.  These  are   important  baseline  data  measurements  that  should  be  included  in  a  regulatory   framework  if  fracking  was  to  take  place  in  Ontario.                                                       

  

51  

10.0  Conclusion     The  goals  of  this  research  project  were:  1)  to  evaluate  the  evolution  of  policies,  and   regulations  for  horizontal  fracking  in  Ontario;  and,  2)  to  examine  the  attitudes,   opinions,  and  knowledge  of  municipal  leaders  towards  horizontal  fracking  in   Ontario.  Currently,  there  are  no  wells  being  drilled  in  Ontario  that  will  be  used  for   multistage  horizontal  fracking,  and  there  is  no  specific  regulation  for  fracking  in   Ontario.  Although  municipal  leaders  surveyed  generally  know  what  fracking  is,  in   most  municipalities  it  is  not  a  topic  of  discussion,  and  most  municipal  leaders   responding  to  a  survey  said  they  neither  support  nor  oppose  fracking.  From  the   survey  and  interviews,  it  is  generally  agreed  that  municipalities  should  play  some   role  in  future  decisions  over  fracking,  yet  there  is  a  variation  of  this  perceived  role   between  municipal  leaders  themselves  and  public  opinion.      This  paper  argued  that  there  is  an  absence  of  fracking  in  Ontario  due  to  two  

prominent  reasons:  Ontario's  physical  geology  and  economic  viability,  which  were   confirmed  by  interviews.  Ontario's  shale  is  such  that  it  is  potentially  too  shallow  and   of  a  lower  class/quality  to  support  productive  fracking,  leading  to  a  lack  of   investment.  The  future  of  horizontal  fracking  in  Ontario  is  uncertain,  as  there  is   mixed  opinion,  with  municipalities  not  likely  to  adopt  any  taxes,  incentives,  or   moratoriums.  From  the  in-person  interviews  with  key  informants  at  the  provincial   level,  and  the  survey,  the  possibility  of  unconventional  fracking  being  used  in   Ontario  seems  slim,  but  that  is  not  to  say  it  will  never  be  used.  Given  the  current   trend  of  Ontario  importing  gas  from  the  US,  fracking  for  unconventional  gas  does   not  seem  like  it  is  needed  in  Ontario  

  

52  

What  is  significant  about  this  paper  is  that  it  is  the  first  time  municipal  views   on  fracking  in  Ontario  were  researched  and  expressed.  It  revealed  that  fracking  is   not  a  major  concern  to  most  municipalities  in  Ontario.  Further  research  can  build  on   what  this  paper  uncovered.  Over  the  next  few  years  there  will  hopefully  be  more   clarity  on  the  issue,  future  research  could  look  at  what  municipalities  would  be   facing  pressures  for  fracking  operations  (if  they  have  shale  plays).  If  this  was   investigated,  municipal  engagement  and  support  is  needed,  along  with  early   communication  about  how  authority  will  be  shared  or  divided,  what  risks  and  costs   may  be  incurred  and  mediated,  and  how  benefits,  if  any,  would  be  shared.  Future   research  could  also  look  at  provincial  attitudes  towards  fracking,  in  the  same  way   this  paper  did  with  municipal  attitudes.  The  onus  is  on  the  current  government   authority  ­  the  province  ­  to  initiate  these  next  steps.                                                                         

53  

Appendix  A      Interview  Question  Guide        1) Please  explain  your  position.      2) What  is  the  government  of  Ontario's  current  position  on  the  role  of  fracking   in  energy  development  in  Ontario?      3) How  and  why  have  fracking  policies  evolved  in  Ontario  the  way  they  have?      4) How  is  Ontario  different  to  other  provinces  regarding  land  rights  for  drilling   and  oil  rights?      5) Are  municipal  governments  being  engaged  if  there  is  any  province  wide   process  of  potential  fracking  policies?      6) Do  you  think  municipal  governments  should  play  a  role  in  regards  to  policies   if  unconventional  fracking  was  to  be  used?      7) Are  there  any  current  applications  for  exploration  wells?      8) What  explains  the  absence  of  unconventional  fracking  currently  in  Ontario?      9) Do  you  think  unconventional  fracking  will  play  a  role  in  the  energy  sector  of   Ontario  in  the  future?      10)What  types  of  policies  are  necessary  if  unconventional  fracking  was  to  occur   in  Ontario?      11)Are  there  any  other  comments  that  you  can  share?                                                   54  

Appendix  B      Survey  Questions        1) Recent  attention  has  focused  on  the  extraction  of  natural  gas  through   hydraulic  fracturing  and  horizontal  drilling  of  underground  shale  deposits,   using  high  volumes  of  fluid  to  break  the  rock.  This  is  sometimes  called   "fracking,"  and  we  use  these  terms  interchangeably  throughout  this  section   to  refer  to  high-volume  hydraulic  fracturing.  How  familiar  would  you  say  you   are  with  hydraulic  fracturing?      2) As  far  as  you  know,  is  there  any  natural  gas  in  your  jurisdiction  or   neighbouring  jurisdictions  that  could  be  extracted  using  hydraulic   fracturing?      3) To  what  extent,  if  at  all,  would  you  say  current  or  potential  fracking  within   your  jurisdiction  is  a  topic  of  discussion,  either  in  the  community  at  large  or   within  your  jurisdiction's  government?      4) We  are  interested  in  sources  of  support  or  opposition  to  the  potential  use  of   hydraulic  fracturing  in  your  community.  In  your  opinion,  do  the  following   people  or  groups  either  support  or  oppose  the  use  of  fracking  in  your   jurisdiction?      5) Has  your  jurisdiction  adopted,  or  is  it  likely  to  adopt,  any  tax  or  other   incentives,  moratoria,  or  zoning  changes,  that  attempt  to  promote,  restrict,  or   simply  regulate  hydraulic  fracturing  in  your  jurisdiction?      6) We're  interested  in  factors  that  may  be  encouraging  or  discouraging  the  use   of  hydraulic  fracturing  in  jurisdictions  across  Ontario  now  or  in  the  last  few   years.  Even  though  your  community  does  not  have  any  current  fracking   operations,  to  what  degree  would  you  say  the  following  items  may  encourage   or  discourage  the  use  of  fracking  within  your  jurisdiction  in  the  future?      7) Hydraulic  fracturing  operations  are  sometimes  regulated  in  terms  of  their   location,  setbacks,  waste  disposal,  chemical  disclosure,  and  so  on.  For  each  of   the  following  entities,  please  indicate  whether  you  think  they  should  have  a   great  deal  of  authority,  some  authority,  or  no  authority  for  such  decisions   regarding  fracking.                           55  

References      American  Enterprise  Institute.  (2013).  Benefits  of  Hydraulic  Fracturing.  Retrieved   from:  https://www.aei.org/publication/benefits-of-hydraulic-fracking/      BC  Oil  &  Gas  Commission.  (2014).    Defining  Hydraulic  Fracturing.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.bcogc.ca/defining-hydraulic-fracturing      Beland  Otis,  C.  (2012).  Preliminary  results:  Potential  Ordovician  shale  gas  units  in   Southern  Ontario.  Earth  Resources  and  Geoscience  Mapping  Section,  Ontario   Geological  Survey,  6280,  29-1  -  29-12.  Retrieved  from:   http://canadians.org/sites/default/files/0721_001.pdf      Boersma,  T  &  Johnson,  C.  (2012).  The  shale  gas  revolution:  U.S.  and  EU  policy  and   research  agendas.  Review  of  Policy  Research,  29(4),  570-576.   http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1541-1338.2012.00575.x/full      Brown,  C.,  Borick,  C.,  Gore,  C.,  Banas-Mills,  S.,  &  Rabe,  B.G.  (2014).  Shale  gas  and   hydraulic  fracturing  in  the  Great  Lakes  region:  Current  issues  and  public   opinion.  Issues  in  Energy  and  Environmental  Policy,  (9),  1-20.  Retrieved  from:   http://closup.umich.edu/issues-in-energy-and-environmental-policy/9/shale- gas-and-hydraulic-fracturing-in-the-great-lakes-region-current-issues-and- public-opinion/      Canadian  Association  of  Petroleum  Producers.  (2012).  Hydraulic  Fracturing  and   Seismic  Activity.   http://www.capp.ca/aboutUs/mediaCentre/CAPPCommentary/Pages/hydrau lic-fracturing-and-seismic-activity.aspx      Canadian  Association  of  Petroleum  Producers.  (2012).  The  Facts  on:  Natural  Gas.   Retrieved  from:  http://www.capp.ca/getdoc.aspx?DocId=217568&DT=NTV      Canadian  Gas  Association.  (2015).  The  Changing  Pattern  of  Canada's  Natural  Gas   Trade.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.cga.ca/wp- content/uploads/2015/01/Natural-gas-trade_January-2015_EN.pdf      Carter,  T.,  Fortner,  L.,  &  Beland-Otis,  C.  (n.d)  Shale  Gas  Opportunities  in  Southern   Ontario  ­  an  Update.  Retrieved  from   http://www.ogsrlibrary.com/downloads/Ontario_Shale_Gas_OPI_2009_Nov11 .pdf      Council  of  Canadian  Academics.  (2014).  Environmental  Impacts  of  Shale  Gas   Extraction  in  Canada:  The  Expert  Panel  on  Harnessing  Science  and  Technology   to  Understand  the  Environmental  Impacts  of  Shale  Gas  Extraction.   http://www.scienceadvice.ca/uploads/eng/assessments%20and%20publication s%20and%20news%20releases/shale%20gas/shalegas_fullreporten.pdf      56  

   Cronin,  K.  (n.d.).  Community  Engagement  Charter  Oil  and  Gas  from  Unconventional   Reservoirs.  Retrieved  from:   https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data /file/256360/Publication_UKOOG_communityengagementcharterversion6.pdf      Davis,  Charles.  (2012).  The  politics  of  "fracking":  Regulating  natural  gas  drilling   practices  in  Colorado  and  Texas.  Review  of  Policy  Research,  29(2),  177-191.   Retrieved  from:  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1541- 1338.2011.00547.x/full      Ellsworth,  W.L.  (2013).  Injection-induced  earthquakes.  Science,  341(6142).  doi:   10.1126/science.1225942      Environmental  Commissioner  of  Ontario.  (2011).  Engaging  Solutions:  Annual  Report   2010/2011.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.eco.on.ca/uploads/Reports- Annual/2010_11/Final-English-Bookmarked-2010-AR.pdf      Environmental  Commissioner  of  Ontario.  (2013).  Serving  the  Public:  Annual  Report   2012/2013.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.eco.on.ca/uploads/Reports- Annual/2012_13/13ar.pdf      FracFocus.  (2014).  Canada's  First  Hydraulic  Fracturing  Registry  Now  Online.   Retrieved  from:  http://fracfocus.ca/node/358      FracFocus.  (2015).  Fracturing  Fluid  Management.  Retrieved  from:   https://fracfocus.org/hydraulic-fracturing-how-it-works/drilling-risks- safeguards        Fitzgerald,  T.  (2013).  Frackonomics:  Some  economics  of  hydraulic  fracturing.  Case   Western  Reserve  University  School  of  Law,  63(4),  1337.  Retrieved  from:   http://go.galegroup.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ps/i.do?action=interpret&id= GALE%7CA334277577&v=2.1&u=rpu_main&it=r&p=AONE&sw=w&authCoun t=1      Gordalla,  B.C.,  Ewers,  U.,  &  Frimmel,  F.H.  (2013).  Hydraulic  fracturing:  a  toxicological   threat  for  groundwater  and  drinking-water?  Environmental  Earth  Sciences,   70(8),  3875-3893.  doi:  10.1007/s12665-013-2672-9      Gov.UK.  (2015).  Developing  Shale  Gas  and  Oil  in  the  UK.  Retrieved  from:   https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/providing-regulation-and- licensing-of-energy-industries-and-infrastructure/supporting- pages/developing-shale-gas-and-oil-in-the-uk      Grottenthaler,  D.  (2011).  Recycling  water  for  hydraulic  fracturing.  Mechanical   Engineering,  133(12),  21.  Retrieved  from:      57  

   Ground  Water  Protection  Council.  (2009).  Modern  Shale  Gas  ­  Development  in  the   United  States:  A  Primer.  Retrieved  from:   http://fracfocus.org/sites/default/files/publications/shale_gas_primer_2009. pdf      He,  C.,  Wang,  X.,  Liu,  W.,  Barbot,  E.,  Vidic,  R.D.  (2014).  Microfiltration  in  recycling  of   Marcellus  Shale  flowback  water  removal  and  potential  fouling  of  polymeric   microfiltration  membranes.  Journal  of  Membrane  Science,  462,  88-95.  doi:   10.1016/j.memsci.2014.03.035      ICF  International.  (2010).  2010  Natural  Gas  Market  Review.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.ontarioenergyboard.ca/oeb/_documents/eb-2010- 0199/icf_market_report_20100820.pdf      Interviewee  A.  (2014,  December  4).        Interviewee  B.  (2015,  January  9).      Interviewee  C.  (2015,  January  13).      Interviewee  D.  (2015,  January  28).      Kavanagh,  Michael.  (2014).  Hostility  limits  growth  of  fracking  in  Europe.  Retrieved   from:  http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/03752734-4966-11e4-8d68- 00144feab7de.html#axzz3Ukj7GBEb      Lave,  R.  &  Lutz,  B.  (2014).  Hydraulic  fracturing:  A  critical  physical  geography  review.   Geography  Compass  8(10),  739-754.  doi:  10.1111/gec3.12162      Maule,  A.L.,  Makey,  C.M.,  Benson,  E.B.,  Burrows,  I.J.,  &  Scammell,  M.K.  (2013).   Disclosure  of  hydraulic  fracturing  fluid  chemical  additives:  Analysis  of   regulations.  New  Solutions:  A  Journal  of  Environmental  and  Occupational  Health   Policy,  23(1),  167-187.  doi:  10.2190/NS.23.1.j      Ontario  Energy  Board.  (2015).  Ontario's  Energy  Sector.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.ontarioenergyboard.ca/OEB/Consumers/OEB+and+You/Ontario +Energy+Sector      Ontario  Energy  Board.  (2015).  Natural  Gas  Rate  Updates.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.ontarioenergyboard.ca/OEB/Consumers/Natural+Gas/Natural+G as+Rates     

http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/910125324?pq- origsite=summon  

  

58  

Ministry  of  Energy.  (2015).  Ontario's  Long-Term  Energy  Plan.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.energy.gov.on.ca/en/ltep/      Natural  Resources  Canada.  (2012).  Shale  Gas.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/natural-gas/5687      Natural  Resources  Canada.  (2014).  Shale  Gas  Development  in  Canada  ­  An  NRCan   Perspective.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/natural- gas/14186      Ontario  Petroleum  Institute.  (n.d.)  Safely  Harvesting  Energy:  An  Overview  of   Hydraulic  Fracturing  in  Ontario.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.dundeedrilling.ca/docs/ONTARIO_SAFELY_HARVESTING_ENERG Y.pdf         Palliser,  J.  (2012).  Fracking  fury.  Science  Scope,  35(7),  20-24.  Retrieved  from:   http://search.proquest.com/docview/927534588?pq-origsite=summon      Rabe,  B.G.  &  Borick,  C.  (2013).  Conventional  politics  for  unconventional  drilling?   Lessons  from  Pennsylvania's  early  move  into  fracking  policy  development.   Review  of  Policy  Research,  30(3),  321-340.  doi:  10.1111/ropr.12018      Schroeck,  N.  &  Karisny,  S.  (2013).  Hydraulic  fracturing  and  water  management  in   the  Great  Lakes.  Case  Western  Reserve  Law  Review,  63(4),  1167-1185.   Retrieved  from:   http://go.galegroup.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CA33427 7571&v=2.1&u=rpu_main&it=r&p=AONE&sw=w&authCount=1      Sergie,  M.A.  &  McBride,  J.  (2015).  Hydraulic  fracturing  (fracking).  Retrieved  from:   http://www.cfr.org/energy-and-environment/hydraulic-fracturing- fracking/p31559      Skoumal,  R.J.,  Brudzinski,  M.R.,  &  Currie,  B.S.  (2015).  Earthquakes  induced  by   hydraulic  fracturing  in  Poland  Township,  Ohio.  Bulletin  of  the  Seismological   Society  of  America,  105(1),  189-197.  doi:  10.1785/0120140168      Sue,  V.M.  &  Ritter,  L.A.  (2007).  Conducting  online  surveys.  Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  SAGE   Publications,  Inc.  doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9781412983754.nl      Sumi,  L.  (2010).  Environmental  Concerns  and  Regulatory  Initiatives  Related  to   Hydraulic  Fracturing  in  Shale  Gas  Formations:  Potential  Implications  for  North   American  Gas  Supply.   http://www.ontarioenergyboard.ca/oeb/_Documents/EB-2010- 0199/Report_Sumi_CoC.pdf     

  

59  

The  Council  of  Canadians.  (2013).  A  Fractivist's  Toolkit.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.canadians.org/sites/default/files/publications/fracking- toolkit.pdf      The  Royal  Society  and  The  Royal  Academy  of  Engineering.  (2012).  Shale  Gas   Extraction  in  the  UK:  A  Review  of  Hydraulic  Fracturing.  Retrieved  from:   https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data /file/256359/Publication_RoyalSociety_2012-06-28-Shale-gas.pdf      United  States  Environmental  Protection  Agency.  (2014).  The  process  of  hydraulic   fracturing.  Retrieved  from:   http://www2.epa.gov/hydraulicfracturing/process-hydraulic-fracturing        Wilson,  J.,  Wang,  Y.,  &  VanBriesen,  J.  (2014).  Sources  of  high  total  dissolved  solids  to   drinking  water  supply  in  southwestern  Pennsylvania.  Journal  of  Environmental   Engineering,  140(5),  B4014003-1  ­  B4014003-10.  doi:   http://ascelibrary.org.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/doi/pdf/10.1061/%28ASCE%29 EE.1943-7870.0000733      Yergin,  D.  (2011).  The  quest:  Energy,  security,  and  the  remaking  of  the  modern  world.   New  York,  NY:  Penguin  Group.    

  

60  

