              

TUBULAR  LYSOSOME  BIOGENESIS  IN  INNATE  IMMUNE  CELLS         by      Amra  Saric   B.Sc.,  Ryerson  University,  2010         A  Dissertation   presented  to  Ryerson  University      in  partial  fulfillment  of  the   requirements  for  the  degree  of   Doctor  of  Philosophy   in  the  Program  of   Molecular  Science         Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2016   ©Amra  Saric  2016           

                     AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  DISSERTATION      I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  dissertation.  This  is  a  true  copy  of   the  dissertation,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my   examiners.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  dissertation  to  other  institutions  or   individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  dissertation  by   photocopying  or  by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other   institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  understand  that  my  dissertation  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.                                    ii  

TUBULAR  LYSOSOME  BIOGENESIS  IN  INNATE  IMMUNE  CELLS   Amra  Saric   Doctor  of  Philosophy,  2016   Molecular  Science,  Ryerson  University        

Abstract      Lysosomes   are   essential   organelles   required   for   breakdown   of   endocytic   and   biosynthetic   cargo,   pathogen   killing   and   autophagy.   In   most   cells,   lysosomes   are   typically   small   punctate   structures.   By   contrast,   innate   immune   cells   like   macrophages   and   dendritic   cells   that   have   been   exposed   to   bacterial   lipopolysaccharides  (LPS)  exhibit  strikingly  tubular  lysosomes  (TLs)  and  lysosome- related  major  histocompatibility  class  II  (MHCII)  compartments  (MIIC),  respectively.   TLs   are   suggested   to   play   a   role   in   phagosome   maturation   and   retention   of   fluid- phase   endocytic   uptake   in   activated   macrophages.   In   addition,   the   dendritic   cell   tubular   MIIC   (tMIIC)   may   be   involved   in   antigen   presentation.   Since   remarkably   little   was   known   about   how   tubular   lysosomes   form,   I   took   to   investigate   the   molecular   requirements   for   this   process   in   macrophages   and   dendritic   cells   and   present  my  findings  in  this  thesis.       Here,   I   confirm   that   microtubules   are   necessary   as   a   template   for   lysosome   tubulation,  along  with  dynein  and  kinesin  microtubule-dependent  motors.  We  were   first   to   identify   molecular   components   necessary   for   lysosome   tubulation;   TL   biogenesis  required  the  concerted  action  of  the  Arl8b  GTPase,  along  with  its  effector  

  

iii  

SKIP,  a  kinesin  adaptor  protein,  and  the  Rab7  GTPase,  along  with  its  effectors  RILP   and   FYCO1,   which   are   adaptor   proteins   for   dynein   and   kinesin,   respectively.   Importantly,  we  observed  that  TLs  are  highly  dynamic  structures  whereas  punctate   lysosomes  are  conspicuously  more  static.     I  also  present  evidence  that  mTOR,  a  lysosomal  protein  kinase,  is  required  for   LPS-induced   TL   biogenesis   and   cell   surface   delivery   of   MHCII   in   macrophages   and   dendritic   cells.      First,   I   show   that   the   MyD88-PI3K-Akt-mTOR   signaling   pathway   regulates   LPS-induced   lysosome   tubulation.      Second,   I   demonstrate   that   mTOR   is   required   for   anterograde   lysosomal   transport   suggesting   that   this   kinase   may   regulate  tubulation  and  antigen  presentation  by  modulating  the  microtubule-based   motor  activity  of  lysosomes.          Finally,   I   present   preliminary   data   on   the   properties   of   tubular   lysosomes  

compared   to   punctate   lysosomes   in   an   effort   to   characterize   these   organelles.     Among   the   data   presented   is   evidence   that   total   lysosomal   volume   increases   significantly   upon   tubulation,   which   may   have   important   underlying   implications   in   antigen  sampling  and  processing.   Overall,   my   work   has   expanded   on   our   knowledge   of   how   morphology   and   trafficking  of  lysosomes  is  modulated  in  immune  cells,  which  may  alter  cell  function.       

        

  

iv  

Acknowledgements      Firstly,   I   acknowledge   my   supervisor   and   mentor,   Dr.   Roberto   Botelho,   whose   guidance   and   passion   for   science   greatly   influenced   my   completion   of   this   body   of   work.    I  am  deeply  appreciative  of  the  time  and  effort  Dr.  Botelho  has  invested  in  my   graduate   studies   and   to   shaping   my   overall   positive   outlook   on   research   and   academia.          I   would   like   to   thank   Dr.   Sergio   Grinstein,   who   has   provided   invaluable   advice  and  thought-stimulating  discussions  that  have  strongly  impacted  by  graduate   research   projects.      I   am   greatly   indebted   to   Dr.   Grinstein   for   his   generosity   during   our   collaboration.      In   addition,   I   owe   a   great   deal   of   gratitude   to   Dr.   Jason   G.   Kay,   who   without   a   doubt   has   had   the   strongest   impact   on   my   technical   training   experience.          I  am  profoundly  thankful  to  all  members  of  the  Botelho  and  Grinstein  labs.    In   particular,   I   thank   Wendy   Furuya   whose   help   with   my   earlier   project   has   been   essential   to   its   successful   completion.      I   also   thank   Drs.   Spencer   Freeman   and   Danielle   Johnson,   Daniel   Schlam,   Harikesh   Wong,   Shannon   Ho,   Christopher   Choy,   Monica  Dayam  and  Victoria  Hipolito,  all  of  whom  I  have  either  worked  closely  with   or   who   have   significantly   contributed   to   my   progress   by   means   of   moral   support   and  stimulating  discussions.      I   wish   to   thank   my   graduate   committee,   Drs.   Debora   Foster   and   Jeffrey   Fillingham,  and  the  Molecular  Science  Graduate  Program  Director  Dr.  Michael  Arts.     The  feedback  and  support  from  my  graduate  committee  has  been  of  utmost  value  to   me  throughout  the  years.    Communication  with  Dr.  Arts  has  kept  me  confident  and   in   good   spirits   during   the   arduous   task   of   thesis   writing   and   preparation   for   a   defense.         Finally,  I  thank  my  mom,  dad  and  sister  for  their  constant  love  and  support.  

  

v  

Table  of  Contents      Abstract   Acknowledgements   Table  of  Contents   List  of  Tables      List  of  Figures   List  of  Abbreviations   Chapter  1:  Introduction   1.1:  Dissertation  Overview   1.2  Macrophages  and  Dendritic  Cells  in  Innate  Immunity   1.2.1  Functions  of  Macrophages  and  Dendritic  Cells   1.2.1.1  Phagocyte  Uptake  Mechanisms   1.2.1.2  Antigen  Processing  and  Presentation  by  Major  Histocompatibility   Complex  Class  II   1.2.2  Innate  Immune  Recognition  by  Macrophages  and  DCs   1.2.2.1  Pattern  Recognition  Receptors  and  Microbe-Associated  Molecular   Patterns   1.2.2.2  TLR4  Signaling   1.3  Lysosomal  Membrane  Trafficking   1.3.1  Microtubule-Based  Motility   1.3.2  Organelle  Identity  and  Transport  in  the  Endocytic  Pathway   1.3.2.1  Phosphoinositides   1.3.2.2  The  Small  GTPases  and  Effector  Proteins   1.3.2.2.1  Rab7  and  Arl8b   1.4  Mechanistic  Target  of  Rapamycin  and  Lysosomes   1.4.1  Nutrient  Sensing  at  the  Lysosome   1.4.2  Regulation  of  Lysosomal  Dynamics  by  mTOR   1.5  Lysosome  Tubulation      vi   7   8   9   10   12   13   14   15   17   19   20   21   6   7                           iii   v   vi                       ix   x   xii   1   2   4   4   5  

1.6  Project  Goals  and  Rationale   Chapter  2:  Experimental  Procedures   2.1:  Cell  Culture   2.2:  Transfection  and  Plasmids   2.3:  Gene  Silencing  by  siRNA  Electroporation   2.4:  SDS-PAGE  and  Western  Blotting   2.5:  Pharmacological  Inhibition   2.6  Immunofluorescence   2.7  Flow  Cytometry   2.8:  Reverse  Transcription  and  Quantitative  PCR   2.9:  Lysosome  Tubulation  Assays   2.10:  Timelapse  Microscopy  and  Particle  Tracking   2.11:  Lysosomal  Positioning  Assays   2.12  Image  Quantification  of  LC3,  RFP-Rab7  and  Arl8b-GFP   2.13:  Statistical  Analyses   Chapter  3:  Results   3.1:  Rab7  and  Arl8  GTPases  are  Necessary  for  Lysosome  Tubulation  in   Macrophages   Tubules   3.1.2:  Dynein  and  Kinesin  I  are  Required  for  Lysosome  Tubulation   3.1.3:  Rab7  is  Necessary  for  Lysosome  Tubulation   3.1.4:  RILP  is  Involved  in  Lysosome  Tubulation   3.1.5:  FYCO1  Plays  a  Role  in  Lysosome  Tubulation   3.1.6:  Arl8b  and  SKIP  are  Necessary  for  Lysosome  Tubulation   3.1.7:  Lysosome  Tubules  are  More  Motile  than  Punctate  Lysosomes   3.2:  mTOR  Regulates  Lysosome  Tubulation  and  Antigen  Presentation  in   Macrophages  and  Dendritic  Cells   3.2.1:  TLR4-Induced  Lysosome  Tubulation  in  Macrophages  Requires  MyD88   and  PI3-Kinase  

23   37   38   38   39   39   40   41   41   42   42   43   44   44   45   46   47   47   48   49   49   50   51   53   55   55  

3.1.1:  LPS-Stimulated  Macrophage  Cell  Lines  Form  Highly  Dynamic  Lysosome  

  

vii  

3.2.2:  The  Canonical  PI3K-Akt  Pathway  Regulates  LPS-Induced  Lysosome   Tubulation      3.2.4:  The  Akt-mTOR  Axis  Prolongs  LPS-Derived  Signaling  in  Macrophages   3.2.6:  Autophagy  Does  Not  Impact  LPS-Mediated  Lysosome  Tubulation   3.2.7:  mTOR  is  Required  for  AnterogradeLlysosomal  Transport   3.2.8:  mTOR  is  Required  for  Antigen  Presentation  in  Dendritic  Cells   3.2.9:  Model  of  Tubular  Lysosome  Biogenesis   Chapter  4:  Discussion   4.1:  Rab7  and  Arl8  GTPases  are  Necessary  for  Lysosome  Tubulation  in   Macrophages   4.2:  mTOR  Regulates  Lysosome  Tubulation  and  Antigen  Presentation  in   Macrophages  and  Dendritic  Cells   Lysosomes   4.3.1  Trafficking  of  Endocytic  Cargo  to  Tubular  Lysosomes   4.3.2  Lysosome  Tubulation  and  Lumenal  Volume   4.4  Additional  Contributions   Conclusion   Appendix   References                     103   108   108   109   112   125   128   135   4.3  Preliminary  Data  and  Discussion  on  the  Physiological  Properties  of  Tubular   100   56   57   58   60   61   62   63   99   3.2.3:  mTOR  is  Required  for  LPS-Induced  Lysosome  Tubulation  in  Macrophages

3.2.5:  mTOR  Controls  Lysosome/MIIC  Tubulation  in  Primary  Dendritic  Cells   59  

  

viii  

List  of  Tables      Table  A-1:  Absolute  values  of  lysosome  tubulation  number  for  section  3.1.                                                                                              130  

  

ix  

List  of  Figures      Figure  1.1:  Lysosomal  Trafficking  Pathways.   Figure  1.2:  Antigen  Processing  and  Presentation  by  MHCII  in  Antigen  Presenting   Cells  (APCs).   Figure  1.3:  TLR4  Signaling  Pathways.   Figure  1.4:  Microtubule-Based  Organelle  Transport.   Figure  1.5:  Activation  Cycle  of  Small  GTPases.   Figure  1.6:  Lysosomal  Inside-out  Activation  of  mTORC1  by  Amino  Acids.   Figure  3.1:  LPS  Stimulates  Lysosome  Tubulation  in  Macrophage  Cell  Lines.   Figure  3.2:  Dynein  and  Kinesin  I  are  Required  for  Lysosome  Tubulation.   Figure  3.3:  Rab7  is  Required  for  Lysosome  Tubulaton.   Figure  3.4:  RILP  is  Involved  in  Lysosome  Tubulation.   Figure  3.5:  FYCO1  is  Involved  in  Lysosome  Tubulation.   Figure  3.6:  Arl8b  and  SKIP  are  Required  for  Lysosome  Tubulation.   Figure  3.7:  Tubular  Lysosomes  are  Highly  Motile.   Inhibit  them.   Macrophages.   Figure  3.10:  The  Canonical  PI3K-Akt  Pathway  Regulates  LPS-Induced  Lysosome   Tubulation  in  Macrophages.   Macrophages.   Signaling  and  Coincides  with  Lysosome  Tubulation.   Figure  3.13:  mTOR  is  Required  for  MIIC  Tubulation  in  Primary  Dendritic  Cells.   Figure  3.14:  Torin1  Blocks  Lysosome  Tubulation  in  a  Manner  Independent  of   Autophagy.   Figure  3.15:  mTOR  is  Required  for  Anterograde  Lysosomal  Transport.   Figure  3.16:  mTOR  is  Required  for  LPS-Induced  Cell  Surface  Delivery  of  MHCII.      x   92   94   96   84   86   88   90   Figure  3.11:  mTOR  is  Activated  by  LPS  and  is  Required  for  Lysosome  Tubulation  in   Figure  3.12:  The  Akt-mTOR  Pathway  is  Activated  Early  and  Maintained  Under  LPS   28   30   32   34   36   66   68   70   72   74   76   78   80   82   26  

Figure  3.8:  Schematic  of  TLR4  Signaling  Pathways  and  Compounds  that  Selectively   Figure  3.9:    MyD88  and  PI3K  are  Required  for  LPS-Induced  Lysosome  Tubulation  in  

Figure  3.17:  Model  of  Tubular  Lysosome  Biogenesis  in  Macrophages  and  Dendritic   Cells.   Figure  4.1:  LPS  Increases  the  Levels  of  Membrane-Associated  Arl8b  in  an  mTOR- Dependent  Manner.   Rate  as  to  Punctate  Lysosomes.   Figure  4.3:  Total  Lysosomal  Volume  Increases  upon  Tubulation.   Figure  4.4  Evidence  for  Membrane  Fusion  and  Fission  in  Regulating  Tubular   Lysosome  Biogenesis.   Figure  A-1:  MRT67307,  IRAK1/4  Inhibitor  and  PepinhMYD  Inhibit  Pathways   Downstream  of  their  Targets.   Figure  A-2:  mTOR  Activity  is  Required  for  Lysosome  Tubulation.   Figure  A-3:  mTOR  Inhibition  does  not  Affect  Microtubules  or  Basal  Lysosomal   Motility.                                                         xi   134   131   133   124   118   120   122   Figure  4.2:  Endocytic  Fluid-Phase  Cargo  Traffics  to  Tubular  Lysosomes  at  the  Same   98  

List  of  Abbreviations      Abt1  ­  activator  of  basal  transcription  1   Ag  ­  antigen   ALR  ­  autophagic  lysosome  reformation   APC  ­  antigen  presenting  cell   Arl  ­  Arf-like   Atg13  ­  autophagy-related  protein  13   ATPase  ­  adenosine  triphosphatase   BMDC  ­  bone  marrow-derived  dendritic  cell   cDNA  ­  complementary  DNA   CLIP-170  -  cytoplasmic  inker  protein  of  170  kDa   DC  ­  dendritic  cell   deptor  ­  DEP  domain-containing  mTOR-interacting  protein   EE  ­  early  endosome   EEA1  ­  early  endosomal  antigen  1   FcR  ­  Fc  gamma  receptor   FYCO1  ­  FYVE  and  coiled-coil  domain-containing  protein  1   FYVE  -  Fab1,  YOTB,  Vac1,  EEA1   GAP  ­  GTPase  activating  protein   GDI  ­  GDP  dissociation  inhibitor   GEF  ­  guanine  nucleotide  exchange  factor   GTPase  ­  guanosine  triphosphatase   IgG  ­  immunoglobulin  G   IkB  ­  inhibitor  of  kappa  B   IKK  ­  IkB  kinase   IL-6  ­  interleukin-6   IRAK1/4  ­  interleukin-1  receptor-associated  kinase  1/4   IRF3  ­  interferon  regulatory  factor  3   KIF  ­  kinesin  family  member   KIF5B  ­  kinesin  family  member  5B  /  conventional  kinesin  /  kinesn  I      xii  

LAMP1  ­  lysosome-associated  membrane  protein  1   LC3  ­  light  Chain  3   LE  ­  late  endosome   LPS  ­  lipopolysaccharide   MAL  ­  MyD88  adaptor-like   MAMP  ­  microbe-associated  molecular  pattern   MHCII  ­  major  histocompatibility  complex  class  II   MIIC  ­  MHCII  compartment   mLST8  ­  mammalian  lethal  with  SEC13  8   mSin1  ­  stress-activated  MAP-kinase  interacting  protein  1   MT  -  microtubule   MTOC  ­  microtubule  organizing  center   mTOR  ­  mechanistic  target  of  rapamycin   mTORC1/mTORC2  ­  mTOR  complex  1/2   MVB  ­  multivesicular  body   MyD88  ­  myeloid  differentiation  primary  response  protein  88   NFkB  ­  nuclear  factor  kappa  B   NPC1  -  Niemann-Pick  C1   ORP1L  -  oxysterol-binding  protein-related  protein  1L   PepinhCtrl  ­  control  peptide   PepinhMYD  ­  peptide  inhibitor  of  MyD88   PH  ­  pleckstrin  homology   PI  ­  phosphatidylinositol   PI3K  ­  phosphatidylinositol  3-kinase   PIP  ­  phosphoinositide   PRAS40  ­  proline-rich  Akt1  substrate   protor1/2  ­  protein  observed  with  rictor   PRR  ­  pattern  recognition  receptor   qRT-PCR/qPCR  ­  quantitative  real-time  polymerase  chain  reaction   raptor  ­  regulatory  associated  protein  of  mTOR   Rheb  ­  Ras  homolog  enriched  in  the  brain      xiii  

rictor  ­  rapamycin  insensitive  component  of  TOR   RILP  ­  Rab7-interacting  lysosomal  protein   SDS-PAGE  ­  sodium  dodecyl  sulfate-polyacrylamide  gel  electrophoresis   Ser/Thr  ­  serine/threonine   siRNA  ­  small  interfering  RNA   SKIP  ­  SifA  and  kinesin-interacting  protein   TBK1  ­  TANK-binding  kinase  1   tel2  ­  telomere  length  regulation  protein  2   TL  ­  tubular  lysosome   TLR  ­  toll-like  receptor   tMIIC  ­  tubular  MHCII  compartment   TRAF6  ­  TNF  receptor-associated  factor  6   TRAM  ­  TRIF-related  adaptor  molecule   TRIF  ­  TIR-domain  containing  adaptor  inducing  interferon-   tti1  ­  tel2-interacting  protein  1   Ulk1  ­  Unc51-like  autophagy  activating  kinase  1   V-ATPase  ­  vacuolar  H+-ATPase                                            

  

xiv  

                       

  

Chapter  1  

Introduction  

                                            

  

1  

1.1:  Dissertation  Overview      In   this   thesis,   I   present   and   discuss   findings   from   my   research   on   the   molecular   requirements  of  lysosome  tubulation  in  macrophages  and  dendritic  cells.          In  Chapter  1,  I  introduce  macrophages  and  dendritic  cells  and  their  roles  in   innate   immunity.      As   host   sentinels,   they   function   to   engulf   and   digest   foreign   particles  by  various  uptake  mechanisms  such  as  phagocytosis,  thus  neutralizing  the   immediate  threat  of  invading  pathogens.    Digestion  of  foreign  matter  by  these  cells   confers   a   unique   ability   to   generate   and   present   antigens   on   their   cell   surface   to   alert  the  immune  system.    In  addition  to  these  functions,  I  introduce  their  means  of   activation   by   bacterial   molecules   via   a   repertoire   of   innate   immune   receptors.     Furthermore,   I   introduce   key   concepts   of   membrane   trafficking   with   a   focus   on   lysosomes.    The  endocytic  pathway  is  discussed  in  some  detail  and  the  major  groups   of   molecules   that   cells   use   to   confer   organelle   identity   and   carry   out   membrane   trafficking   are   discussed.      These   include   but   are   not   limited   to   the   phosphoinositides,   small   GTPases   and   their   effectors,   microtubules   and   microtubule-based   motor   proteins.   I   focus   on   lysosome-specific   markers   and   introduce   the   emerging   role   of   the   lysosomal   Ser/Thr   kinase   mTOR   as   a   major   sensor  of  cell  stress  and  metabolism.    Finally,  I  discuss  the  phenomenon  of  lysosome   tubulation,  proposed  functions  in  innate  immune  cells  and  the  scarcity  of  knowledge   of   their   biogenesis   and   regulation.      Chapter   1   concludes   with   rationale   and   objectives  for  this  thesis.     In   Chapter   2,   I   provide   descriptions   of   the   experimental   procedures   involved   in  carrying  out  this  research.    Techniques  include  and  are  not  limited  to  culture  of   murine   cell   line   macrophages,   dendritic   cell   harvest   from   mouse   bone   marrow,   plasmid   transfection   of   cells   and   live-cell   confocal   fluorescence   microscopy.      In   addition,   molecular   biology   techniques   like   small   interfering   RNA   (siRNA)   gene   silencing   and   quantitative   polymerase   chain   reaction   (qPCR)   were   employed   to   knock  down  or  detect  gene  expression  levels,  respectively.      Finally,  various  assays   were   developed   such   as   quantification   of   lysosomal   tubulation   and   intracellular   lysosomal  positioning.          2  

Chapter   3   covers   the   major   results   of   this   thesis   work   presented   in   two   sections:   1)   identification   of   molecular   regulators   of   lysosome   tubulation   in   macrophages,  2)  the  role  of  mTOR  in  lysosome  tubulation  and  antigen  presentation   in  macrophages  and  dendritic  cells.     My  first  project  resulted  in  the  identification  of   multiple   membrane   trafficking   components   necessary   for   lysosome   tubulation.     Among   these   components   are   microtubules,   the   microtubule-associated   motor   proteins  dynein  and  kinesin,  the  lysosomal  small  GTPases  Rab7  and  Arl8b  as  well  as   their  effectors  which  link  to  motor  proteins.    This  work  was  published  in  the  journal   Traffic  (Mrakovic,  Kay,  Furuya,  Brumell,  &  Botelho,  2012).    My  second  major  thesis   project   describes   a   role   for   the   lysosomal   protein   kinase   mTOR   (mechanistic   Target   of   Rapamycin)   in   lysosome   tubulation   and   antigen   presentation,   and   I   provide   evidence  that  mTOR  affects  anterograde  lysosomal  transport.    A  manuscript  of  this   work  is  in  press  in  the  journal   Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell  (manuscript  #  E15-05- 0272).        In   Chapter   4,   I   present   a   discussion   of   the   two   projects   grouped   into   sections   mirroring   those   in   Chapter   3.      In   the   first   project,   I   envision   that   lysosomal   morphology  is  controlled  by  microtubule-associated  molecular  machinery  that  links   to   lysosomes   and   pulls   the   organelle   bi-directionally   to   cause   tubulation.         In   the   second   project,   I   discuss   the   consideration   that   mTOR   may   control   lysosomal   morphology   and   cell-surface   antigen   delivery   by   integrating   signals   from   the   LPS   receptor   TLR4   to   act   on   the   microtubule-based   transport   machinery   of   this   organelle.      In   addition   to   these   two   sections,   I   include   a   third,   showcasing   preliminary   data   of   ongoing   projects   and/or   data   I   have   provided   as   a   secondary   contributor   to   alternate   projects.      I   present   a   short   discussion   of   each   of   these   contributions.        Finally,  I  provide  concluding  remarks  on  the  impact  of  this  thesis  in  the  fields   of   intracellular   membrane   trafficking,   organelle   identity   and   innate   immune   cell   function.     

  

3  

1.2  Macrophages  and  Dendritic  Cells  in  Innate  Immunity      All   eukaryotic   organisms   possess   some   form   of   immunity.      Higher   eukaryotes,   including   mice   and   humans,   have   two   major   immune   systems   that   differ   in   specificity   and   outcome:   innate   and   adaptive   immune   systems.      Both   work   in   concert   to   defend   the   host   organism   against   invading   pathogens   and   potentially   associated  infection/disease.    The  innate  immune  system  is  the  first  line  of  defense   should   physical   barriers   such   as   the   epithelium   be   breached   by   foreign   microbes,   and  is  a  general  non-specific  response.    This  system  is  comprised  of  specialized  cells   called  leukocytes,  which  are  of  myeloid  origin  and  include  neutrophils,  macrophages   and   dendritic   cells  (DCs).     While   neutrophils   have   a   robust   and   short-lived   response   during  infection,  macrophages  and  DCs  carry  out  constant  surveillance  of  the  host.     These  cells  engulf  and  kill  microbes,  clear  dead  cells  and  debris  from  host  tissue,  and   particularly   in   the   case   of   DCs,   bridge   innate   and   adaptive   immunity   by   antigen   presentation  to  T  cells  in  order  to  confer  a  complete  immunological  response  upon   the  host  (Steinman  &  Hemmi,  2006).    Macrophages  and  DCs  are  able  to  fulfill  these   diverse   roles   owing   to   their   numerous   functions   and   methods   of   innate   immune   sensing.      1.2.1  Functions  of  Macrophages  and  Dendritic  Cells      The   main   functions   of   macrophages   and   DCs   are   their   abilities   to   sample   the   extracellular   milieu   via   several   uptake   mechanisms,   most   notably   phagocytosis,   and   in   so   doing   monitor   their   environment   for   infection.      An   overview   of   uptake   mechanisms   is   presented   in   Figure   1.1   in   the   Figures   section   at   the   end   of   this   chapter.    Particles  that  are  taken  up  by  these  cells  are  trafficked  to  lysosomes,  highly   degradative   organelles   that   break   down   macromolecules   into   smaller   products   known   as   antigens   (Watts,   1997).      Interestingly,   these   cells   express   a   set   of   molecules   of   the   major   histocompatibility   complex   class   II   (MHCII),   which   are   localized   to   lysosomes   and   can   bind   a   vast   diversity   of   antigens   (Robinson   &   Delvig,  

  

4  

2002).    A  critical  function  of  these  cells,  in  particular  DCs,  is  the  delivery  of  MHCII- antigen   complexes   from   lysosomes   to   the   plasma   membrane   for   recognition   by   T   cells.    T  cells  then  coordinate  appropriate  adaptive  immune  responses.    An  overview   of  these  critical  functions  is  presented  in  this  section.      1.2.1.1  Phagocyte  Uptake  Mechanisms      In   addition   to   constitutively   conducting   endocytosis   for   nutrient   uptake   as   most   other   cells   do,   macrophages   and   DCs   are   endowed   with   phagocytic   receptors   that   allow  these  cells  to  engulf  large  particles  (0.5  m)  by  phagocytosis  (Figure  1.1B).     For   this   reason,   these   cells   are   professional   phagocytes.      Of   note,   immature   DCs   which   have   not   encountered   dangerous   particles   like   pathogenic   bacteria,   are   particularly   efficient   at   macropinocytosis   (Steinman   &   Swanson,   1995),   another   uptake   process   in   which   large   plasma   membrane   ruffles   extend   into   the   extracellular   space   and   collapse   to   form   large   intracellular   organelles,   macropinosomes,  full  of  extracellular  fluid  (Figure  1.1C).    In  this  way,  immature  DCs   are   extremely   effective   at   sampling   their   environment   for   sources   of   antigen.      While   multiple  important  uptake  mechanisms  exist,  Fc  receptor-mediated  phagocytosis,  a   specialized  mechanism  largely  restricted  to  these  cell  types,  is  introduced  here.        Phagocytosis   of   Immunoglobulin   G   (IgG)   opsonized   particles   is   the   most   studied   of   phagocytic   processes   and   will   be   briefly   described   here,   though   there   are   numerous   forms   of   phagocytosis   customized   for   uptake   of   numerous   types   of   target   particles   (Flannagan,   Jaumouillé,   &   Grinstein,   2012).      Particle   binding   occurs   through  recognition  of  the  Fc  portion  of  IgG  by  Fc  receptors  on  the  cell  surface  of   professional   phagocytes.      Binding   of   antibody-coated   bacteria   by   these   receptors   signals   to   remodel   the   phagocyte   actin   cytoskeleton   required   for   formation   of   pseudopods  around  the  particle  for  engulfment.    Once  internalized,  particles  reside   within   early   phagosomes,   organelles   with   a   lumen   reminiscent   of   the   extracellular   milieu.      However,   subsequent   membrane   fusion   with   endosomes   and   lysosomes,   termed   "phagosome   maturation"   (Beron,   Alvarez-Dominguez,   Mayorga,   &   Stahl,  

  

5  

1995;   Tjelle,   Lovdal,   &   Berg,   2000),   endows   phagosomes   with   numerous   microbicidal   properties   including   a   lower   pH   and   enhanced   enzymatic   activity.     Thus  fusion  with  lyososmes  not  only  allows  for  microbial  killing  but  also  allows  for   generation   of   antigens   through   digestion   of   the   foreign   particle   into   smaller   molecules.    Fittingly,  the  antigen-presenting  MHCII  molecules  also  reside  within  this   compartment.    Phagosome  maturation  and  cargo  trafficking  to  the  lysosome  will  be   described   in   more   detail   in   section   1.3,   which   introduces   key   concepts   of   endosomal/lysosomal  trafficking.      1.2.1.2   Antigen   Processing   and   Presentation   by   Major   Histocompatibility   Complex   Class  II      In   addition   to   being   professional   phagocytes,   macrophages   and   DCs   are   also   professional   antigen   presenting   cells   (APCs).      Indeed,   DCs   are   hailed   as   the   most   potent  APCs  in  the  body.    These  cells  synthesize  MHCII  molecules  that  are  composed   of      and      heterodimers   and   contain   a   highly   polymorphic   region   known   as   the   antigen-binding   groove.      This   region   is   capable   of   binding   an   enormous   variety   of   foreign  peptides.    New  MHCII  molecules  are  synthesized  along  with  an  endogenous   peptide   called   invariant   chain,   which   blocks   the   antigen-binding   groove   during   trafficking   to   endosomes,   and   thus   prevents   premature   loading   of   antigen   onto   MHCII   (Roche   &   Cresswell,   1990;   Cresswell,   1996).      The   topology   of   MHCII   molecules  when  in  endosomes  is  such  that  the  antigen-binding  groove  faces  into  the   lysosomal  lumen  where  antigens  can  easily  be  loaded  by  virtue  of  their  affinity  for   the  groove.    As  previously  discussed,  cargo  (ie.  pathogen)  is  trafficked  to  lysosomes   and   digested   to   generate   small   antigenic   molecules   (Figure   1.1   and   Figure   1.2).     Protein   antigens   are   processed   by   lysosomal   cathepsins,   proteases   that   function   optimally  at  low  pH  and  cleave  proteins  at  specific  amino  acid  residues  to  generate   peptides   between   15   and   24   amino   acids   in   length.      In   addition   to   antigen,   invariant   chain   is   also   cleaved   by   acid   hydrolases,   leaving   a   small   fragment,   CLIP   (Class   II   associated   invariant   chain   peptide)   within   the   MHCII   peptide-binding   groove.      An   MHCII-like  molecule,  HLA-DM  (human  leukocyte  antigen-DM),  catalyzes  the  release      6  

of  CLIP  from  MHCII,  and  the  antigen-binding  groove  is  quickly  occupied  by  a  higher   affinity  antigen  (Sloan  et  al.,  1995).          Once   antigen   is   loaded   onto   MHCII   within   this   lysosome-related   MHCII   compartment   (MIIC),   mature   DCs   deliver   large   amounts   of   antigen-MHCII   complexes   to   their   plasma   membrane   (Cella,   Engering,   Pinet,   Pieters,   &   Lanzavecchia,   1997).      This   surface   display   is   necessary   for   recognition   by   CD4+   T   helper  cells,  which  directly  interact  with  the  MHCII-peptide  complex  through  the  T- cell   receptor   and   the   co-receptor   CD4   (Figure   1.2).      Antigen   presentation   is   therefore   critical   for   activating   T   cells   which   further   trigger   adaptive   immunity   (Askew,   Gatewood,   Olivas,   Havenith,   &   Walker,   1995;   Banchereau   &   Steinman,   1998;  Yrlid  &  Wick,  2002).    In  addition  to  increasing  plasma  membrane  MHCII,  DC   maturation  is  accompanied  by  a  rapid  down-regulation  of  uptake  mechanisms  and   an  up-regulation  of  factors  that  aid  the  cell  in  migration  toward  lymph  nodes,  where   T  cells  reside  (Banchereau  &  Steinman,  1998;  Cella,  Sallusto,  &  Lanzavecchia,  1997).          1.2.2  Innate  Immune  Recognition  by  Macrophages  and  DCs      Macrophages   and   DCs   express   an   array   of   receptors   that   recognize   and   bind   common   bacterial   and   viral   molecules   and   thus   represent   the   initial   point   of   discrimination   between   self   and   non-self.      Collectively,   these   receptors   are   termed   pattern  recognition  receptors  (PRRs)  and  the  molecules  they  recognize  are  termed   microbe-associated  molecular  patterns  (MAMPs).          1.2.2.1  Pattern  Recognition  Receptors  and  Microbe-Associated  Molecular  Patterns      The   PRRs   of   macrophages   and   DCs   recognize   key   evolutionarily   conserved   microbial   signature   molecules   such   as   lipopolysaccharide   (LPS),   flagellin,   peptidoglycan   and   unmethylated   CpG   DNA.      PRRs   can   be   located   at   the   plasma   membrane,   endosomes   or   even   in   the   cytosol   as   is   the   case   with   several   PRRs   dedicated  to  anti-viral  responses.    The  most  important  family  of  PRRs  is  the  Toll-like  

  

7  

receptors   (TLRs),   of   which   there   are   10   members   in   humans   and   13   in   mice.      These   receptors   are   either   endosomal   or   found   on   the   cell   surface,   where   they   bind   MAMPs,   undergo   a   conformational   change   and   initiate   a   signaling   cascade   that   ultimately   generates   an   anti-microbial   response,   such   as   transcription   of   pro- inflammatory  genes  (Yamamoto  &  Takeda,  2010).          TLRs   dimerize   upon   ligand   binding   and   this   dimerization   can   be   hetero-   or   homotypic  depending  on  the  ligand  and  TLR  in  context.    Importantly,  dimerization   leads   to   the   interaction   of   intracellular   TIR   (Toll-IL-1   receptor)   domains   on   the   individual   TLR   molecules,   which   induces   signaling   by   the   receptors   by   binding   to   TIR   domains   of   cytoplasmic   adaptor   proteins.      There   are   four   known   TLR   adaptor   proteins:   MyD88   (Myeloid   differentiation   primary   response   protein   88),   MAL   (MyD88   adaptor-like),   TRIF   (TIR   domain-containing   adaptor-inducing   IFN-)   and   TRAM  (TRIF-related  adaptor  molecule)  (reviewed  in  O'Neill  &  Bowie,  2007).    TLRs   can  signal  through  any  of  these  adaptors  or  combinations  thereof.          1.2.2.2  TLR4  Signaling      Innate  immune  cells  respond  to  LPS  through  TLR.    LPS  first  binds  LBP  (LPS  binding   protein)  in  the  serum.    CD14  on  the  surface  of  leukocytes  then  transfers  the  LPS-LBP   complex   to   TLR4,   which   itself   is   tightly   bound   to   another   molecule   critical   for   its   activation,   MD2   (Myeloid   differentiation   factor   2)   (Shimazu   et   al.,   1999;   Muta   &   Takeshige,  2001).    Typically,  TLR4  activation  triggers  signaling  pathways  that  result   in   the   production   of   inflammatory   mediators   (Figure   1.3,   middle   and   right   pathways).      A   MyD88-independent   pathway   requires   TRIF   to   activate   the   kinases   TBK1   (TANK   binding   kinase   1)   and   IKK   (IkB   kinase),   which   stimulate   the   transcription  factor  IRF3  (Interferon  regulatory  factor  3)  for  the  production  of  type   1   interferons   (Fitzgerald   et   al.,   2003;   Kawai   et   al.,   2001;   Kawai,   Adachi,   Ogawa,   Takeda,   &   Akira,   1999;   Yamamoto,   Sato,   &   Hemmi,   2003;   Yamamoto   et   al.,   2002;   Yamamoto,   Sato,   Hemmi,   et   al.,   2003).      In   comparison,   the   MyD88-dependent   pathway   activates   IRAK1/4   (IL-1   receptor   associated   kinase)   and   TRAF6   (TNF  

  

8  

receptor-associated   factor   6)   via   MyD88   (Burns   et   al.,   2003;   Suzuki   et   al.,   2002).     Ultimately,   this   leads   to   the   degradation   of   IB   (Inhibitor   of   kappa   B),   which   liberates   the   bound   transcription   factor   NF-B      (nuclear   factor   kappa   B)   for   translocation   to   the   nucleus   where   it   induces   production   of   pro-inflammatory   cytokines  (Beg,  Finco,  Nantermet,  &  Baldwin,  1993).       LPS-induced  stimulation  of  MyD88  may  also  activate  phosphatidylinositol  3- kinase   (PI3K),   which   synthesizes   phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate   [PI(3,4,5)P3],   a   major   signaling   hub   that   coordinates   cell   survival   and   growth,   inflammatory   response   and   metabolic   activity   (Cantley,   2002;   Laird   et   al.,   2009;   Stambolic   et   al.,   1998)   (Figure   1.3,   left   pathway).      A   key   effector   of   PI(3,4,5)P3   is   the   kinase   Akt,   which   is   a   potent   pro-survival   signal   (reviewed   in   Datta,   Brunet,   &   Greenberg,  1999).    While  Akt  itself  has  numerous  targets,  it  can  phosphorylate  the   GTPase-activating   proteins   (GAPs)   TSC1/2   (Tuberous   Sclerosis   1/2),   which   suppress   the   GTPase   Rheb   (Ras   homolog   enriched   in   the   brain),   the   major   activator   of   mTOR.      In   other   words,   Akt   activates   mTOR   (Inoki,   Li,   Xu,   &   Guan,   2003;   Inoki,   Li,   Zhu,  Wu,  &  Guan,  2002).       Given   that   antigen   uptake,   processing   and   presentation   all   require   membrane   trafficking   to   lysosomes,   that   it   is   unknown   how   TLR4   signaling   may   interface  with  lysosomes,  and  the  recent  evidence  in  the  literature  that  mTOR  may   play   a   role   in   controlling   lysosome   morphology   and   dynamics   (Krajcovic,   Krishna,   Akkari,   Joyce,   &   Overholtzer,   2013;   L.   Yu   et   al.,   2010),   lysosomal   membrane   trafficking  will  be  introduced.      1.3  Lysosomal  Membrane  Trafficking      Lysosomes   are   membrane-bound   organelles   that   enclose   various   hydrolytic   enzymes  that  are   optimally  active  within  the  acidic  lysosome  lumen.    The  low  pH  of   4.5-5.5   is   maintained   by   a   transmembrane   vacuolar   H+-ATPase,   a   multi-subunit   complex  that  actively  pumps  protons  into  the  organelle.    Thus,  lysosomes  provide  an   essential   niche   for   molecular   digestion   while   the   rest   of   the   cell   is   protected   from  

  

9  

damage.      Important   pathways   like   endocytosis,   phagocytosis   and   autophagy   all   converge   on   the   lysosome   and   cells   rely   on   proper   lysosomal   function   for   acquisition   of   nutrients,   microbial   killing   and   clearing   dead   cells,   debris   and   damaged  organelles  from  the  system  (Figure  1.1)  (Gahl,  1989;  Hochreiter-Hufford  &   Ravichandran,  2013;  Mizushima,  2007).    The  endocytic  pathway,  which  mirrors  the   phagocytic  pathway  is  described  in  more  detail  below.      1.3.1  Microtubule-Based  Motility      Eukaryotic   cells   maintain   structure,   movement   and   organellar   distribution   and   reorganization   through   polymerization   of   filaments   that   collectively   constitute   the   cell   cytoskeleton.      Globular   actin   can   polymerize   into   filaments   that   are   largely   found  at  the  cell  cortex  and  aid  cell  motility,  plasma  membrane  ruffling  and  short- range  vesicular  transport.    Other  critical  processes  such  as  cell  division,  long-range   vesicular   transport   and   maintenance   of   the   general   distribution   of   organelles   are   achieved  by  microtubules.    Microtubules  are  generated  through  the  polymerization   of   -   and   -tubulin   monomers   into   long   protofilaments   that   in   turn   assemble   into   long  rigid  filaments  (tubes)  throughout  the  cytosol.    Initial  nucleation  of  a  filament   occurs   at   the   microtubule   organizing   center   (MTOC),   typically   juxtaposed   at   the   nucleus.      The   assembly   of   tubulin   monomers   in   each   protofilament   is   such   that   - tubulin  is  exposed  at  one  end  and  -tubulin  is  always  exposed  at  the  opposite  end,   providing   polarity   to   the   microtubules.      The   ends   are   thus   designated   (-)   and   (+)   where   -   or   -tubulin   is   exposed,   respectively.      Microtubule   polymerization   is   significantly   more   rapid   at   the   (+)   end,   though   microtubule   depolymerization,   known   as   catastrophe,   also   occurs   at   this   end.      Certain   (+)   end-tracking   proteins   (+TIPs)  like  CLIP-170  (cytoplasmic  inker  protein  of  170  kDa)  can  cap  these  (+)  ends   to   stabilize   them   and   promote   depolymerization   rescue.      Microtubule   stability   is   alternatively  enhanced  by  post-translational  modifications  like  acetylation.      One   of   the   most   notable   functions   of   microtubules   is   their   association   with   motor   proteins   that   carry   out   membrane   trafficking   (Figure   1.4).      Microtubule  

  

10  

motor   proteins   are   a   class   of   ATPases   capable   of   converting   chemical   energy   into   mechanical   work.      Importantly,   these   molecular   `machines'   are   able   to   bind   cargo   while   moving   along   microtubules.      This   results   in   the   physical   translocation   of   the   cargo,   which   includes   organelles   like   mitochondria,   neuronal   vesicles   and   lysosomes.      There   are   two   types   of   microtubule   motor   proteins:   kinesin   and   dynein.     These  motors  differ  in  size  and  directionality  of  transport.        The  kinesin  superfamily  (KIFs)  consists  of  45  genes  in  mice  grouped  into  15   families.      All   kinesins   have   two   things   in   common:   a   kinesin   motor   domain   and   a   coiled-coil   domain   (Hirokawa,   Noda,   Tanaka,   &   Niwa,   2009).      Kinesins   bind   cargo   either   directly   or   through   accessory   proteins   to   transport   that   cargo   along   microtubules.    While  the  vast  majority  of  kinesins  are  +  end-directed  (anterograde)   motors,   two   have   been   identified   as   ­   end-directed   (retrograde)   motors.     Conventional  kinesin  (kinesin  I/KIF5B),  initially  identified  by  Vale  et  al.  (Vale,  Reese,   &   Sheetz,   1985),   was   later   found   to   be   the   main   +   end   directed   motor   driving   lysosomal  transport.          Retrograde   organelle   transport   is   carried   out   by   cytoplasmic   dynein   (Lin   &   Collins,   1992;   Lye,   Porter,   Scholey,   &   McIntosh,   1987;   Shpetner,   Paschal,   &   Vallee,   1988).      Dynein   is   a   massive   motor   consisting   of   two   heavy   chains,   three   intermediate   chains   and   four   light   chains,   resulting   in   a   ~1.2   megadalton   complex   (Hirokawa,  1998).    In  addition,  dynein  interacts  with  a  ten-member  protein  complex   called   dynactin,   which   is   important   for   the   function   of   dynein   and   has   been   proposed   to   serve   as   a   linker   between   dynein   and   its   cargo   through   the   essential   dynactin   subunit,   dynamitin   (Echeverri,   Paschal,   Vaughan,   &   Vallee,   1996).     Uncovering   the   role   of   dynein   has   been   made   possible   by   the   observation   that   exogenous   expression   of   dynamitin   destabilizes   the   dynactin   complex   and   renders   dynein   non-functional   (Burkhardt,   Echeverri,   Nilsson,   &   Vallee,   1997;   Melkonian,   Maier,  Godfrey,  Rodgers,  &  Schroer,  2007).          Lysosomal  transport  is  carried  out  by  the  coordinated  activities  of  kinesin  I   and   dynein.      Retrograde   lysosomal   transport   occurs   when   dynein-dynactin   is   recruited   by   the   lysosomal   small   GTPase   Rab7   and   its   effectors   RILP   (Rab7   interacting   lysosomal   protein)   and   ORP1L   (oxysterol-related   protein-related      11  

protein   1L)   (Johansson   et   al.,   2007).      Rab7   can   also   bind   its   effector   FYCO1   (FYVE   and   coiled-coil   domain-containing   protein   1)   to   link   to   kinesin   I   and   carry   out   anterograde   transport   of   lysosomes.      In   addition,   kinesin   I   can   bind   lysosomes   through  Arl8b,  via  direct  interaction  with  the  Arl8b  effector  protein  SKIP  (SifA  and   kinesin-interacting   protein)   to   carry   out   anterograde   lysosomal   transport   (Rosa- Ferreira  &  Munro,  2011).    A  description  of  these  small  GTPases  follows  in  upcoming   sections.      1.3.2  Organelle  Identity  and  Transport  in  the  Endocytic  Pathway      Organelles   carry   out   specific   functions;   the   mitochondrion   generates   most   of   the   cells'   energy   in   the   form   of   adenosine   triphosphate   (ATP),   the   endoplasmic   reticulum   (ER)   is   the   site   of   protein   synthesis   and   endosomes   degrade   and   sort   internalized   molecules.      The   process   of   transporting   molecules   via   membrane   fission   and   fusion   events   is   collectively   termed   membrane   trafficking.      Described   here   is   endocytosis,   the   process   by   which   extracellular   milieu   and   receptors   (collectively,   cargo)   are   taken   up   by   invaginations   of   the   plasma   membrane   into   early   endosomes   that   mature   and   ultimately   fuse   with   lysosomes   where   cargo   is   degraded.      During  endocytosis,  plasma  membrane  receptors  and  extracellular  molecules   are   internalized   by   invaginations   of   the   plasma   membrane.      This   process   may   or   may   not   be   mediated   by   coat   proteins   like   clathrin.      Plasma   membrane-derived   endocytic   cups   pinch   off   to   form   endocytic   vesicles   that   are   trafficked   to   and   fuse   with   the   early   endosome,   a   tubular-vesicular   sorting   organelle   where   various   receptors   are   pooled   into   membrane   domains   (Abrahamson   &   Rodewald,   1981).     Membrane  extensions  fission  from  the  early  endosome  and  are  further  trafficked  to   other  places  within  the  cell,  depending  on  the  cargo  they  carry.    Some  vesicles  are   trafficked  back  to  the  plasma  membrane  via  recycling  endosomes  as  is  the  case  with   vesicles   carrying   Low   Density   Lipoprotein   Receptor   (LDLR)   which   delivers   the  

  

12  

nutrient   cholesterol   into   the   cell   (Anderson,   Brown,   Beisiegel,   &   Goldstein,   1982).     Other  cargo  at  the  early  endosome  is  siphoned  off  for  degradation.      Cargo   destined   for   degradation   is   typically   ubiquitinated,   the   process   in   which   ubiquitin   proteins   are   ligated   onto   the   cytosolic   portion   of   cargo   molecules   carried   by   early   endosomes.      This   ubiquitin   tag   recruits   proteins   of   ESCRT   (endosomal   sorting   complexes   required   for   transport)   machinery   which,   through   membrane   deformation,   further   compartmentalizes   cargo   into   small   intraluminal   vesicles   to   form   multivesicular   bodies   (Miller,   Beardmore,   Kanety,   Schlessinger   &   Hopkins,  1986;  Katzman,  Babst  &  Emr,  2001).    This  ensures  that  cargo  destined  for   degradation   is   quarantined   for   this   fate.      As   early   endosomal   markers   are   shed,   endosomes   further   mature   by   acquiring   late   endosomal   identity   markers   (Rink,   Ghigo,   Kalaidzidis,   &   Zerial,   2005).      Late   endosomes   also   undergo   maturation   by   fusing  with  lysosomes,  the  terminal  organelle  in  the  endocytic  pathway.   Despite  constant  membrane  mixing  during  intracellular  trafficking,  cells  are   able  to  maintain  distinct  organelle  identities.    Cells  utilize  a  multitude  of  molecules   as   organelle   identity   markers   and   orchestrators   of   intracellular   membrane   trafficking,  most  notably  phosphoinositide  lipid  species  and  small  GTPases.      1.3.2.1  Phosphoinositides      Phosphatidylinositol   (PI),   which   represents   no   more   than   15%   of   total   cellular   phospholipids,  can  be  phosphorylated  at  any  of  three  positions  on  its  inositol  head   group,   giving   rise   to   seven   distinct   species   of   phosphoinositides   (PIPs).      The   six   phosphorylated   derivatives   of   PI   are   each   approximately   one   order   of   magnitude   lower  in  abundance  than  PI.    Remarkably,  despite  their  low  abundance,  PIPs  control   functions   as   diverse   and   essential   as   signaling   from   receptor   tyrosine   kinases   to   membrane  trafficking.    The  synthesis  and  turnover  from  one  PIP  to  another  relies  on   the   spatiotemporal   localization   and   action   of   various   lipid   kinases   and   lipid   phosphatases.      This   generates   a   unique   subcellular   distribution   of   PIPs.      Both  

  

13  

differential   distribution   and   rapid   interconversion   render   these  phospholipids   ideal   markers  of  membrane  identity  and  mediators  of  signaling.          Various   protein   modules   exist   which   recognize   phosphoinositides.      As   previously  discussed  for  example,  PI(3,4,5)P3  which  is  transiently  generated  by  PI3K   from   PI(4,5)P2,   is   recognized   by   the   plekstrin   homology   (PH)   domain   of   the   signaling  kinase  Akt.    The  recruitment  of  Akt  to  the  membrane  via  this  PH  domain- PI(3,4,5)P3   interaction   is   critical   for   the   activation   of   Akt   and   the   propagation   of   a   signaling   cascade   that   controls   cell   growth.      In   the   endocytic   pathway,   PI(3)P   is   generated  on  the  early  endosomal  membrane  and  is  recognized  by  the  FYVE  (Fab1,   YOTB,   Vac1,   EEA1)   domain   of   PIKfyve,   a   lipid   kinase   that   converts   PI(3)P   into   PI(3,5)P2,   a   lipid   which   is   more   characteristic   of   late   endosomes   (Gary,   Wurmser,   Bonangelino,   Weisman,   &   Emr,   1998;   Hurley   &   Meyer,   2001;   Ikonomov,   Sbrissa,   &   Shisheva,   2001).   Thus,   the   lipids   themselves   as   well   as   their   various   effector   proteins  all  contribute  to  establishing  organelle  identity.          1.3.2.2  The  Small  GTPases  and  Effector  Proteins      In   addition   to   phosphoinositides,   organelle   identity   and   membrane   trafficking   is   established   by   members   of   the   Ras   superfamily   of   monomeric   guanosine   triphosphatases   (monomeric   or   small   GTPases).      Small   GTPases   convert   from   an   "active"   GTP-bound   form   to   an   "inactive"   GDP-bound   form   (Figure   1.5).      All   small   GTPases  contain  conserved  regions  called  switch  I  and  switch  II,  which  experience   conformational   alterations   upon   GDP/GTP   exchange.      When   GDP   is   bound,   the   switch  I  and  switch  II  regions  are  relaxed  and  the  GTPase  exists  in  a  conformation   that  is  unable  to  bind  effector  proteins.    In  order  for  the  GTPase  to  be  switched  "on",   guanine  nucleotide  exchange  factors  (GEFs),  that  promote  the  switching  of  GDP  for   GTP,  are  required.    GEFs  act  by  binding  GTPases  and  inserting  residues  within  the   GDP-GTPase   interface   and   destabilizing   the   interaction.      This   ultimately   results   in   loss  of  GDP,  followed  by  rapid  subsequent  acquisition  of  GTP.    When  GTP  is  bound,   critical   conserved   residues   in   switch   I   and   switch   II   interact   directly   with   the   -

  

14  

phosphate   of   GTP   to   keep   the   GTPase   in   a   conformation   that   is   favourable   for   effector  binding.    As  their  name  suggests,  the  small  GTPases  are  enzymes  that  have   an   intrinsic   ability   to   hydrolyze   GTP   into   GDP.   However,   this   process   is   extremely   slow  and  inefficient.    GTPase  activating  proteins  (GAPs)  help  induce  the  hydrolysis   of   GTP   by   GTPases   by   binding   the   GTPase   and   stabilizing   the   transition   state,   and   possibly  contributing  residues  for  the  GTP  hydrolysis  in  the  process  (Scheffzek  et  al.,   1997).         Rab  and  Arf  GTPases  are  heavily  involved  in  vesicular  transport  and  different   Rabs   and   Arfs   are   specific   to   different   membrane-bound   organelles   (reviewed   in   Chavrier  &  Goud,  1999).    When  GTP-bound,  they  are  localized  to  the  cytosolic  face  of   organelle   membranes   and   recruit   effector   proteins   (Grosshans,   Ortiz,   &   Novick,   2006).    The  plethora  of  effectors  that  bind  various  GTPases  is  diverse,  and  effector   proteins   have   many   different   functions   in   cells   including   membrane   tethering,   fusion   and   transport.      When   GDP-bound,   these   GTPases   detach   from   membranes   and   become   cytosolic.      Importantly,   they   are   unable   to   bind   effectors   while   in   this   inactive   state.      This   ability   of   GTPases   to   act   as   `molecular   switches'   is   critical   for   membrane  trafficking  and  for  bestowing  identity  to  the  compartments  they  bind.          1.3.2.2.1  Rab7  and  Arl8b      Rab7  and  the  Arf-like  GTPase  Arl8b  are  involved  in  late  endosomal/lysosomal  traffic   (Bagshaw,  Callahan,  &  Mahuran,  2006;  Nakae  et  al.,  2010;  Wang,  Ming,  Xiaochun,  &   Hong,   2011).      When   GTP-bound,   they   localize   to   the   lysosomal   membrane   and   recruit  effector  proteins  that  are  known  to  control  lysosomal  dynamics.    The  activity   of   Rab7   and   Arl8b,   like   other   GTPases,   is   dependent   on   GEFs   and   GAPs.      A   well- defined  Rab7  GEF  is  the  dimer  Mon1-Ccz1,  initially  discovered  as  the  major  GEF  for   the   yeast   Rab7   homolog,   Ypt7   (Nordmann   et   al.,   2010;   Poteryaev,   Fares,   Bowerman,   &   Spang,   2007).      In   addition,   the   homotypic   fusion   and   protein   sorting   complex   (HOPS)   which   mediates   late   endosome/lysosome   tethering   and   fusion   has   GEF   activity  toward  Rab7  via  its  Vps39  subunit  (Wurmser,  Sato,  &  Emr,  2000).    There  are  

  

15  

also   two   known   GAPs   of   Rab7,   the   TBC   (Tre2/Bub2/Cdc16)   domain-containing   proteins  TBC1D15  and  Armus  (TBC1D2A)  (Peralta,  Martin,  &  Edinger,  2010;  Frasa   et  al.,  2010).    Unlike  Rab7,  much  less  is  known  about  the  regulation  of  Arl8b.    As  yet,   no   Arl8b   GEFs   or   GAPs   have   been   identified,   though   a   candidate   GEF   may   be   the   lysosomal   multi-subunit   complex   BORC   (BLOC   one-related   complex),   which   directly   interacts  with  Arl8b  and  promotes  Arl8b-dependent  lysosomal  transport  (Pu  et  al.,   2015).      Although   Pu   et   al.   failed   to   detect   GEF   activity   of   recombinant   BORC   in  vitro,   the   authors   report   the   possibility   that   post-translational   modifications   absent   in   the   recombinant  complex  may  be  necessary  for  its  activity.        As   described,   small   GTPases   exert   functions   via   their   effector   proteins.     Several   Rab7   and   Arl8b   effector   proteins   have   been   identified   as   key   players   that   help   carry   out   late   endosomal/lysosomal   traffic,   including   RILP   and   FYCO1.      RILP   has   been   shown   to   link   Rab7   with   the   minus-end-directed   microtubule   motor   dynein   (Jordens   et   al.,   2001).      This   occurs   as   another   Rab7   effector,   ORP1L   (oxysterol-binding   protein-related   protein   1L),   is   recruited   to   Rab7-RILP   to   facilitate   the   linkage   of   late   endsosomes/lysosomes   to   dynactin,   a   regulatory   subunit  of  dynein  (Johansson  et  al.,  2007).    Conversely,  the  Rab7  effector  FYCO1  has   been  implicated  as  an  adapter  of  the  plus-end-directed  microtubule  motor  kinesin  I   (Jordens  et  al.,  2001;  Pankiv  et  al.,  2010;  Wang,  Ming,  Xiaochun,  &  Hong,  2011).    By   linking   late   endosome/lysosome-bound   Rab7   to   microtubule   motor   machinery,   these   effectors   are   key   regulators   of   the   trafficking   of   these   organelles.      The   Arl8b   effector   protein   SKIP,   was   identified   as   the   link   between   lysosomes   and   kinesin-1,   by   binding   directly   to   active   Arl8b   and   the   kinesin   I   light   chain   (Boucrot,   Henry,   Borg,  Gorvel,  &  Meresse,  2005;  Rosa-Ferreira  &  Munro,  2011).    Indeed,  cells  silenced   for   SKIP   displayed   an   accumulation   of   lysosomes   in   the   perinuclear   region,   confirming   its   critical   role   in   peripheral   lysosome   distribution   (Rosa-Ferreira   &   Munro,  2011).    In  these  ways,  Rab7  and  Arl8b  promote  minus  and  plus  end-directed   lysosomal  transport  (Jordens  et  al.,  2001;  Pankiv  et  al.,  2010,  Bagshaw,  Callahan,  &   Mahuran,  2006).      While  kinesin  I  and  dynein  are  required  for  lysosomal  transport,  regulators   of   lysosomal   morphology   and   trafficking   continue   to   be   uncovered.      Signals   that      16  

cause  increased  GTP  loading  and  membrane  association  of  the  small  GTPases  Rab7   and   Arl8b   in   turn   determine   motor   protein   recruitment   and   lysosomal   morphology/transport.      Many   of   the   regulators   of   lysosomal   morphology   and   trafficking   remain   elusive.      This   thesis   provides   tantalizing   evidence   that   the   Ser/Thr   kinase   mTOR   (mechanistic   Target   of   Rapamycin)   may   be   one   such   important  regulator.      1.4  Mechanistic  Target  of  Rapamycin  and  Lysosomes      Cells   respond   to   nutrient   status   and   integrate   signaling   for   growth   through   the   protein   kinase   mTOR,   which,   not   surprisingly,   is   deregulated   in   cancer   and   other   diseases  (Dazert  &  Hall,  2011;  Zoncu,  Sabatini,  &  Efeyan,  2011).    mTOR  itself  is  the   catalytic   subunit   of   at   least   two   known   complexes,   mTOR   complex   1   (mTORC1)   and   mTORC2  (described  in  yeast  by  Loewith  et  al.,  2002).    mTOR  is  a  ~280  kDa  protein   that  bears  a    C-terminal  kinase  domain  that  highly  resembles  the  catalytic  domain  of   PI3K   (reviewed   in   Wullschleger,   Loewith,   &   Hall,   2006).      Thus,   mTOR   is   regarded   as   a  PI3K-related  kinase.       mTOR   exerts   its   effects   on   cell   growth   and   proliferation   mainly   via   its   substrates   which   generally   control   protein   translation.      Remarkably   few   mTOR   substrates   are   known,   and   the   two   most   well   characterized   are   the   translational   repressor   4E-BP1   (eukaryotic   initiation   factor   4E-binding   protein   1)   and   the   ribosomal   protein   S6K   (S6   kinase)   (Chung,   Kuo,   Crabtree,   &   Blenis,   1992;   von   Manteuffel,  Gingras,  Ming,  Sonenberg,  &  Thomas,  1996).    As  the  name  suggests,  4E- BP1   binds   and   suppresses   the   eukaryotic   initiation   factor   4E   (eIF-4E)   which   otherwise  promotes  protein  synthesis  by  binding  to  mRNA  5'-cap  to  recruit  protein   translation   machinery.      Upon   mTOR   stimulation,   4E-BP1   is   phosphorylated,   preventing   binding   to   eIF-4E   and   liberating   it   for   protein   translation   (Pause   et   al.,   1994;   von   Manteuffel,   Gingras,   Ming,   Sonenberg,   &   Thomas,   1996).      On   the   other   hand,   S6K,   when   phosphorylated   and   activated   by   mTOR,   is   capable   of  

  

17  

phosphorylating   its   own   substrate,   the   ribosomal   protein   S6,   as   well   as   other   components  of  translational  machinery  collectively  enhancing  protein  synthesis.     One   of   the   most   important   functions   of   mTOR   is   its   ability   to   suppress   autophagy.      Autophagy   is   a   homeostatic   and   physiologically   important   process   by   which   cells   degrade   cytosolic   components,   including   damaged   organelles   and   protein   aggregates,   by   sequestering   that   cargo   into   a   double-membrane   structure   called   a   phagophore,   or   isolation   membrane   (Stromhaug,   Berg,   Fengsrud,   Seglen,   1998;   Lamb,   Yoshimori,   &   Tooze,   2013;   Tooze   &   Yoshimori,   2010).      The   isolation   membrane,  marked  by  the  presence  of  the  ubiquitin-like  protein  LC3  (light  chain  3),   extends   around   the   cargo   and   fuses   with   itself   to   form   an   organelle   called   the   autophagosome,   which   further   fuses   with   lysosomes   to   form   autophagolysosomes.     This   fusion   with   lysosomes   is   critical   for   the   downstream   degradation   of   autophagosomal   cargo   by   lysosomal   hydrolases.      Under   nutrient-rich   conditions,   mTOR   is   active   and   directly   suppresses   the   formation   of   autophagosomes,   by   phosphorylating   and   inhibiting   the   activity   of   ULK1/2   (Unc51-like   autophagy   activating   kinase   1)   and   Atg13   (Autophagy-related   protein   13),   core   machinery   of   autophagosome   biogenesis   (Jung   et   al.,   2009;   Jung,   Ro,   Cao,   Otto,   &   Kim,   2010).     Autophagy  becomes  activated  upon  nutrient  starvation  and/or  mTOR  inhibition.     The   two   mTOR   complexes,   mTORC1   and   mTORC2,   share   some   subunits   including   deptor   (DEP   domain-containing   mTOR-interacting   protein),   mLST8   (mammalian  lethal  with  SEC13  8),  Tti1  (tel2-interacting  protein  1),  Tel2  (telomere   length   regulation   protein   2)   (Laplante   &   Sabatini,   2013).      However,   mTORC1   contains  the  subunits  Raptor  (regulatory  associated  protein  of  mTOR)  and  PRAS40   (proline-rich   Akt1   substrate)   whereas   mTORC2   contains   Rictor   (rapamycin   insensitive   component   of   TOR),   mSin1   (stress-activated   MAP-kinase   interacting   protein  1)  and  protor1/2  (protein  observed  with  rictor)  (Laplante  &  Sabatini,  2013).   Unlike  mTORC1,  mTORC2  is  not  inhibited  by  rapamycin,  the  macrocyclic  antifungal   metabolite   produced   by   the   soil   microorganism   Streptomyces  hygroscopicus,   found   to   target   and   inhibit   mTORC1,   hence   the   name   of   the   kinase   itself.      In   the   last   few   years  however,  research  has  introduced  many  new  compounds  that  are  potent  and  

  

18  

specific  mTOR  inhibitors  including  torin1,  pp242  and  wye687  (Feldman  et  al.,  2009;   Liu  et  al.,  2010;  K.  Yu  et  al.,  2009).          The   two   different   complexes   also   have   different   functions   in   cells.      For   example,   mTORC1   which   is   localized   to   lysosomes,   has   been   shown   to   integrate   signals   from   nutrients   like   amino   acids   and   growth   factors,   as   well   as   energy   and   stress  (Zoncu,  Sabatini,  &  Efeyan,  2011).    The  lysosomal  localization  of  mTORC1  is   consistent   with   the   localization   of   its   activator,   the   lysosomal   small   GTPase   Rheb   (Ras   homolog   enriched   in   the   brain)   (Inoki,   Li,   Xu,   &   Guan,   2003).      Surprisingly,   much   less   is   known   about   mTORC2   except   that   insulin   activates   Akt   in   an   mTORC2- dependent   manner   (Sarbassov,   Guertin,   Ali,   &   Sabatini,   2005),   thus   providing   the   notion  that  mTORC2  likely  integrates  growth  factor  signaling.    Outputs  of  mTORC2   include  cell  survival  and  cytoskeletal  organization  (Laplante  &  Sabatini,  2013).     Interestingly,  it  is  now  appreciated  that  lysosomes  can  sense  stress  and  the   metabolic   state   of   the   cell   through   mTOR   (Sengupta,   Peterson,   &   Sabatini,   2010;   Settembre  et  al.,  2012;  Settembre,  Fraldi,  Medina,  &  Ballabio,  2013).    This  ability  of   mTOR   to   sense   nutrients   via   lysosomal   association,   has   gained   much   interest   in   recent  years  and  is  briefly  introduced  below.        1.4.1  Nutrient  Sensing  at  the  Lysosome      It   was   previously   observed   that   mTORC1   re-localized   from   a   predominantly   cytosolic   pool   to   lysosomes   upon   addition   of   amino   acids   (Sancak   et   al.,   2008).      This   prompted   the   investigation   of   the   mechanisms   by   which   amino   acids   promote   the   localization   of   mTOR   to   the   lysosome   where   it   is   activated.      It   has   since   been   proposed   that   amino   acids   signal   from   within   lysosomes   by   interacting   with   the   lysosomal   H+   V-ATPase,   which   in   turn   activates   the   multi-protein   complex   Ragulator.    Ragulator  is  a  GEF  for  Rag  GTPases  that  recruit  mTOR  to  the  lysosomal   membrane,   bringing   it   in   close   proximity   to   its   activator,   the   small   GTPase   Rheb   (Figure  1.6).    

  

19  

In   addition   to   being   associated   with   lysosomes   and   bestowing   these   nutrient   sensing   properties   to   the   organelle,   mTOR   has   been   shown   to   play   a   role   in   regulating  lysosomal  morphology  as  well.      1.4.2  Regulation  of  Lysosomal  Dynamics  by  mTOR      Not   only   is   mTOR   localized   to   lysosomes   as   part   of   mTORC1,   it   is   required   for   autophagic   lysosome   reformation,   a   process   in   which   lysosomes   are   retrieved   through   tubular   intermediates   from   autophagolysosomes   at   the   end   of   autophagy   (L.  Yu  et  al.,  2010).    During  starvation,  cells  generate  autophagosomes,  intracellular   membrane-bound   organelles   that   sequester   cytosolic   components   including   other   organelles,  and  target  these  components  to  lysosomes  for  degradation.  (Figure  1.1D)     The   fusion   with   lysosomes   to   form   autophagolysosomes   allows   for   breakdown   of   sequestered  material  into  smaller  precursor  molecules,  which  can  be  retrieved  from   lysosomes   via   egress   through   lysosomal   channels   and   transporters.      This   process   effectively   replenishes   nutrients,   and   cells   can   survive   longer   during   starvation   periods.      During   this   nutrient   recovery   period,   lysosomes,   which   were   previously   fused  with  autophagosomes  to  generate  autophagolysosomes,  begin  to  re-form  and   the  total  cellular  lysosomal  pool  begins  to  appear  as  it  did  prior  to  starvation.    This   process  of  "autophagic  lysosome  reformation"  (ALR)  is  a  method  of  homeostasis  and   naturally  occurs  through  tubular  intermediates.    That  is,  lysosomes  begin  to  bud  off   of   autophagolysosomes   in   long   tubular   structures,   which   ultimately   pinch   off   to   form   bona   fide   lysosomes.      Interestingly,   mTOR   was   found   to   be   required   for   this   process,   as   inhibition   with   rapamycin   prevented   the   reformation   of   lysosomes   following   autophagy   and   blocked   formation   of   tubular   lysosomal   intermediates   (L.   Yu  et  al.,  2010).   In   addition,   mTOR   has   also   been   reported   to   regulate   fission   from   phagosomes   and   entotic   vacuoles,   cell-in-cell   structures   that   result   from   the   cell   death  mechanism,  entosis  (Krajcovic  et  al.,  2013).    Phagosomes  and  entotic  vacuoles   mature   by   fusing   with   lysosomes   where   their   cargo   is   degraded,   followed   by  

  

20  

subsequent   fission   steps   during   late-stage   maturation.      Krajcovic   et   al.   found   that   mTOR   gene   silencing   or   inhibition   by   torin1   blocked   this   late-stage   fissioning   step   from  both  entotic  vacuoles  and  phagosomes.       As  yet,  it  is  unclear  what  the  substrates  of  mTOR  might  be  that  are  involved   in   regulation   of   organelle   morphology,   as   the   only   substrates   known   to   date   are   found  to  function  in  protein  translation.    Given  the  lysosomal  localization  of  mTOR,   and   its   implications   in   regulating   ALR   and   phagosome/vacuole   membrane   dynamics,  this  kinase  is  poised  to  be  a  master  regulator  of  lysosomal  morphology.          1.5  Lysosome  Tubulation      Lysosomes   are   normally   small   punctate   organelles,   appearing   as   dots   dispersed   throughout   the   cell   cytosol.      In   activated   innate   immune   cells   however,   lysosomes   become   strikingly   tubular   in   morphology.      Joel   Swanson   and   colleagues   observed   highly   tubular   lysosomes   (TLs)   upon   activation   of   macrophages   with   phorbol   12- myristate   13-acetate   (PMA)   (Swanson,   Bushnell,   &   Silverstein,   1987),   a   potent   activator  of  protein  kinase  C  (PKC)  which  is  a  key  intermediate  in  the  NFB  signaling     pathway.      In   addition,   the   dendritic   cell   MIIC,   a   lysosome-related   organelle,   undergoes  the  same  profound  morphological  changes  to  form  tubular  MIIC  (tMIIC)   when   cells   are   exposed   to   the   MAMP   LPS   (Chow,   Toomre,   Garrett,   &   Mellman,   2002).      Meanwhile,   it   was   reported   in   the   laboratory   of   Hidde   Ploegh   that   engagement   of   DCs   with   T-cells   was   also   sufficient   to   induce   the   tubular   reorganization  of  the  lysosome-related  MIIC.          While  the  phenotype  of  TLs  is  striking,  their  function  remains  largely  elusive.     There  is  evidence  that  tubulation  of  lysosomes  can  enhance  retention  of  fluid  phase,   that   is,   soluble   molecules   taken   up   by   stimulated   pinocytosis   are   routed   to   the   tubular   lysosomal   network   and   retained   (Swanson,   Yirinec,   &   Silverstein,   1985;   Swanson,   Burke,   &   Silverstein,   1987).      Furthermore,   tubulation   is   thought   to   aid   phagosome   maturation   by   enhancing   the   fusion   of   phagosomes   with   lysosomes   (Harrison,  Bucci,  Vieira,  Schroer,  &  Grinstein,  2003).    Harrison  et  al  observed  tubular  

  

21  

membrane   extensions   emanating   from   phagosomes   and   fusing   with   late   endosomes/lysosomes.      Finally,   and   possibly   most   convincing,   is   the   role   of   lysosome  tubulation  in  antigen  presentation.    Stimulation  of  DCs  with  LPS  resulted   in  a  radial  extension  of  tMIIC  emanating  from  MIIC  clusters  near  the  nucleus  toward   the   cell   periphery   (Chow,   Toomre,   Garrett,   &   Mellman,   2002).      Interestingly,   DCs   re- localized   their   MHCII   from   intracellular   MIIC   to   the   plasma   membrane   within   hours   of  LPS  treatment  (Chow,  Toomre,  Garrett,  &  Mellman,  2002).    Similarly,  engagement   of   DCs   with   T-cells,   which   induces   secretion   of   MHCII   to   the   immunological   synapse   for   antigen   presentation,   proceeded   with   a   rapid   rearrangement   of   the   MIIC   into   long   tubules   which   were   polarized   toward   the   T-cell/DC   synapse   (Bertho   et   al.,   2003;  Boes  et  al.,  2002,  2003).            How   do   TLs   form?      Interestingly,   though   there   are   several   studies   documenting   their   formation   in   activated   macrophages   and   DCs,   little   is   known   about  how  tubular  lysosomes  are  generated  in  cells.    Early  works  by  Swanson  et  al.   identified   a   role   for   microtubules   and   kinesin   in   tubular   lysosome   biogenesis   in   macrophages  (Hollenbeck  &  Swanson,  1990;  Swanson,  Locke,  Ansel,  &  Hollenbeck,   1992).    It  was  fifteen  years  later  that  Vyas  et  al.  described  the  requirement  for  the   TLR   adaptor   MyD88   in   LPS-induced   TL   biogenesis   in   DCs   and   characterized   the   tubules   further   as   being   positive   for   the   lysosomal   markers   CD63   and   LAMP1   (lysosome  associated  membrane  protein  1)  (Vyas  et  al.,  2007).    As  stated  previously,   mTOR   has   also   been   implicated   in   regulating   lysosomal   morphology,   including   tubulation,   though   in   a   different   context.      Clearly,   understanding   how   lysosome/MIIC   tubulation   is   regulated   is   critical   to   understanding   their   seemingly   important  functional  roles.                               22  

1.6  Project  Goals  and  Rationale      Lysosomes   are   vital   organelles,   regulating   diverse   processes   including   turnover   of   cytoplasmic   components   via   autophagy,   cholesterol   homeostasis   via   the   lysosomal   protein  Niemann-Pick  C1  (NPC1)  and  plasma  membrane  repair  via  focal  exocytosis   to   name   a   few.      In   an   immunological   context,   lysosomes   and   lysosome-related   organelles   play   critical   roles.      For   example,   in   macrophages,   lysosomes   fuse   with   phagosomes   to   digest   microbes   and   protect   the   host.      In   professional   APCs   like   DCs,   the  lysosome-related  MIIC  processes  and  delivers  antigen  to  the  plasma  membrane   for   T-cell   recognition   (Neefjes,   Stollorz,   Peters,   Geuze,   &   Ploegh,   1990;   Neefjes,   1999).      And   in   cytotoxic   lymphocytes,   lytic   granules   are   secreted   to   kill   virally- infected  target  cells  (Burkhardt,  Hester,  Lapham,  &  Argon,  1990;  Peters  et  al.,  1991).     With  this  broad  array  of  important  functions  in  organisms,  understanding  how  the   morphology  and  identity  of  lysosomes  is  regulated  is  of  great  interest.        Lysosome   tubulation,   which   is   a   striking   morphological   change   that   these   organelles  undergo,  remains  elusive,  yet  may  be  essential  to  the  proper  functioning   of  innate  immune  cells,  and  potentially  other  cells  as  well.    Thus,  for  my  Ph.D.  thesis,   I   set   out   to   explore   how   innate   immune   cells   form   tubular   lysosomes.      I   hypothesize   that   lysosome   tubulation   is   driven   by   the   coordinated   actions   of   lysosomal   small   GTPases   Rab7   and   Arl8b   and   their   effectors   that   link   to   microtubule-based   motor   proteins   to   help   stretch   lysosomes   into   tubules.      Furthermore,   I   hypothesize   that   mTOR   plays   a   role   in   lysosome   tubulation   by   integrating   LPS   signaling   to   activate   lysosome   tubulation   machinery.      To   address   these   hypotheses,   the   following   goals   were  set:           1) Develop  a  model  system  to  study  tubular  lysosome  biogenesis   2) Determine  the  molecular  machinery  that  drives  tubulation  of  lysosomes   3) Elucidate  the  signaling  pathway  that  leads  to  lysosome  tubulation   4) Identify  the  role  of  mTOR  in  lysosome  tubulation            23  

                                       Figures  for  Chapter  1                                                                     24  

Figure  1.1:  Lysosomal  Trafficking  Pathways.    (A)  All  cells  undergo  endocytosis,  the   mechanism   of   constitutive   uptake   of   cargo   including   plasma   membrane   receptors,   receptor-bound   cargo   and   fluid-phase   molecules.      Cargo   is   internalized   via   invagination  of  the  plasma  membrane  that  pinches  off  to  form  an  endocytic  vesicle.     The   lumen   of   the   endocytic   vesicle   resembles   the   extracellular   milieu.      Endocytic   vesicles  fuse  with  early  endosomes,  a  tubule-vesicular  sorting  station.    The  diagram   depicts  some  cargo  receptors  being  sorted  within  tubules  (blue  receptor)  that  will   pinch   off   and   be   delivered   elsewhere,   such   as   recycled   back   to   the   plasma   membrane.    Other  cargo  destined  for  degradation  (red  receptor)  and  may  be  further   compartmentalized  within  intraluminal  vesicles  as  the  endosome  becomes  a  multi- vesicular  body.    This  compartment  matures  by  acquiring  markers  of  late  endosomes   and   progressively   acquires   a   lower-pH   lumen.      Ultimately,   cargo   destined   for   degradation   is   trafficked   to   the   lysosome,   the   most   acidic   and   degradative   organelle   in  the  cell.    Here,  cargo  molecules  are  degraded  into  building  blocks  by  the  actions  of   multiple   acid   hydrolases.      (B)   Leukocytes   like   macrophages   and   DCs   are   professional  phagocytes  and  therefore  undergo  phagocytosis.    During  this  receptor- mediated   process,   binding   of   bacteria   by   leukocyte   phagocytic   receptors   (ie.   Fc   receptors  bind  IgG  on  surfaces  of  bacteria)  triggers  remodeling  of  the  cytoskeleton   to   form   actin-driven   pseudopodia   that   extend   and   surround   the   bacterium.      Once   internalized,   the   phagosome   matures   by   subsequent   fusion   steps   between   early   and   late   endosomal   compatments.      Ultimately,   phagosomes   must   fuse   with   lysosomes   to   ensure   bacterial   killing.      (C)   Leukocytes   like   macrophages   and   particularly   immature   DCs   are   particularly  good  at   macropinocytosis.      This   actin-driven   process   is  non-specific  and  proceeds  by  the  extension  of  large  plasma  membrane  ruffles  into   the   extracellular   space   which   collapse   and   fuse   with   the   plasma   membrane   culminating   in   the   internalization   of   a   large   amount   of   extracellular   fluid.      In   this   way,   APCs   like   macrophages   and   DCs   are   able   to   continuously   monitor   their   extracellular   environment   for   soluble   antigens.      (D)   Autophagy   is   a   pathway   important   for   homeostasis   that   all   cells   undergo,   which   also   converges   on   the   lysosome.      During   this   process,   damaged   organelles,   protein   aggregates   and   other   cytosolic  components,  are  surrounded  by  a  forming  double  membrane  that  extends      25  

and   seals   to   form   an   organelle   called   the   autophagosome.      Autophagosomes   ultimately   must   fuse   with   lysosomes   where   the   inner   membrane   and   sequestered   components   within   are   degraded   into   precursor   molecules.      This   evolutionarily   conserved  pathway  is  important  for  cell  survival  during  starvation  and  stress.                 

              

  

26  

Figure   1.2:   Antigen   Processing   and   Presentation   by   MHCII   in   Antigen   Presenting   Cells   (APCs).      Bacteria   and   other   antigenic   sources   are   taken   up   by   the   APC   and   trafficked  to  lysosomes  where  they  encounter  lysosomal  proteases  (Cathepsins)  that   degrade   the   cargo   into   smaller   peptides,   antigens.      Meanwhile,   MHCII   molecules   are   synthesized   in   the   endoplasmic   reticulum   along   with   invariant   chain,   an   endogenous   protein   that   binds   and   blocks   the   antigen-binding   groove   of   MHCII,   preventing  premature  antigen  loading  by  self  peptides.    The  MHCII-invariant  chain   complex   is   trafficked   through   the   biosynthetic/secretory   pathway   directly   to   late   endosomes   and   lysosomes.      Within   lysosomes,   Cathepsin   S   degrades   most   of   the   invariant   chain   leaving   behind   a   small   peptide,   CLIP   (Class   II   associated   invariant   chain  peptide),  within  the  antigen-binding  groove.    In  the  lysosome,  where  antigen   is   encountered,   MHCII-CLIP   binds   a   chaperone-like   molecule   (not   depicted)   called   HLA-DM  (human  leukocyte  antigen-DM)  that  facilitates  the  release  of  CLIP  allowing   higher-affinity   antigen   to   bind   within   the   groove.      The   antigen-MHCII   complex   is   transported  to  the  plasma  membrane  where  they  bind  and  activate  CD4+  T-cells  via   the  TCR  (T-cell  receptor)  and  other  co-receptors  not  depicted,  including  CD4.                 

  

27  

Figure 1.2

CD4+ T cell TCR plasma membrane of APC out in

late endosome/lysosome

golgi apparatus

endoplasmic reticulum

MHCII invariant chain

CLIP lysosomal proteases

antigenic source (ie. bacterium) antigen

                        28  

Figure  1.3:  TLR4  Signaling  Pathways.    Innate  immune  cells  respond  to  LPS  through   the   TLR4   (Toll-like   receptor   4).      TLR4   activation   can   trigger   multiple   TLR   adaptor   proteins.      Signaling   can   proceed   via   the   adaptor   protein   TRIF   (TIR-domain   containing   adaptor   inducing   interferon-)   to   activate   the   kinases   TBK1   (TANK- binding   kinase   1)   and   IKK   (IkB   kinase),   which   in   turn   phosphorylate   IRF3   (Interferon   regulatory   factor   3),   a   transcription   factor   that   controls   production   of   type  I  interferons.    Another  major  TLR4  adaptor  is  MyD88  (Myeloid  differentiation   primary   response   protein   88)   that   can   recruit   IRAK1   (IL-1   receptor   associated   kinase  1)  and  IRAK4.    This  in  turn  activates  TRAF6  (TNF  receptor-associated  factor   6)   ultimately   causing   degradation   of   IkB   (inhibitor   of   NFkB)   and   nuclear   translocation   of   NFkB   (nuclear   factor   kappa   B)   that   controls   transcription   of   pro- inflammatory  cytokines.    Finally,  MyD88  can  stimulate  PI3K  (phosphatidylinositol  3- kinase),   which   generates   the   signaling   phospholipid   PI(3,4,5)P3   at   the   plasma   membrane  (not  depicted).    This  in  turn  recruits  the  PH  domain-containing  protein   Akt   leading   to   its   activation   (not   depicted).      Akt   can   activate   mTOR   (mechanistic   target   of   rapamycin)   via   phosphorylation   and   suppression   of   TSC1/2   (Tuberous   sclerosis   1/2),   a   Rheb   GAP,   which   effectively   enhances   the   activity   of   the   mTOR   activator   Rheb   (dashed   line).      mTOR   in   turn   regulates   cell   growth   by   inducing   protein   translation,   inhibiting   autophagy   and   generally   promoting   anabolic   processes.                                

  

29  

Figure 1.3
TLR4
MyD88 TRAM

PI3K

TRIF

IRAK4

AKT

IRAK1/2

TBK1

mTOR

TRAF6

IRF3

Translation Autophagy Metabolism

IB NF-B

N

proinflammatory cytokines

                                    30  

Figure   1.4:   Microtubule-Based   Organelle   Transport.      This   schematic   depicts   roughly   how   organelle   transport   is   accomplished   in   leukocytes.      Microtubules   polymerize   from   the   MTOC,   near   the   nucleus   (-)   outward   toward   the   cell   periphery   (+)   and   provide   a   scaffold   along   which   organelle   transport   takes   place.      Large   cytosolic   proteins,   kinesins,   and   the   massive   complex   dynein,   "walk"   along   microtubules   in   the   +   end-directed   and   ­   end-directed   directions,   respectively.      Interestingly,   both   motor  proteins  are  ATPases  that  convert  chemical  energy  into  mechanical  work  by   hydrolyzing   ATP.      This   results   in   small   conformational   changes   that   ultimately   generate   "power   strokes"   to   move   along   microtubules.      In   addition,   these   motors   harbour   cargo-binding   domains,   which   are   the   regions   that   directly   interact   with   cargo   directly,   or   in   the   case   of   organelles,   an   effector   protein   that   is   linked   to   the   organelle.    For  example,  lysosomes  link  to  kinesin  through  the  small  GTPase  Arl8b   and  its  effector  SKIP.    (Image  adapted  from  Vale,  2003)                       

  

31  

Figure 1.4

"cargo" (organelle, ie. lysosome)

"cargo"

kinesin

dynein

microtubule

+

                                                     

  

32  

Figure   1.5:   Activation   Cycle   of   Small   GTPases.      Small   GTPases   can   cycle   from   an   active   "on"   state   to   an   inactive   "off"   state.      This   is   determined   by   the   nucleotide   bound   to   the   GTPase.      Small   GTPases   that   are   GTP-bound   are   in   an   "on"   state,   meaning   that   they   are   in   a   conformation   capable   of   recruiting   effector   molecules,   and   in   the   case   of   the   lysosomal   small   GTPases   Rab7   and   Arl8b,   the   "on"   state   exposes   a   lipid   modification   which   targets   the   GTPase   to   the   membrane   of   the   organelle.    The  effectors  that  GTPases  bind  in  the  "on"  state  dictate  the  outcome  for   the  cell.    For  example,  effector  proteins  can  be  long  tethering  molecules  that  bring   organelles   in   close   proximity   to   facilitate   membrane   fusion.      Switching   a   GTPase   "on"   requires   a   GEF   (guanine   nucleotide   exchange   factor)   that   facilitates   the   dissociation   of   GDP   from   the   GTPase,   at   which   point   the   GTPase   quickly   acquires   GTP  and  becomes  activated.    Conversely,  switching  to  an  "off"  state  means  that  the   GTPase   is   bound   to   GDP   instead   of   GTP.      This   is   accomplished   by   the   intrinsic   enzymatic  activity  of  the  GTPase  that  hydrolyzes  the  terminal  phosphate  group  from   GTP,   converting   it   to   GDP   and   releasing   inorganic   phosphate   in   the   process.      This   intrinsic   enzymatic   activity   is   slow   and   made   efficient   in   the   presence   of   a   GAP   (GTPase   activating   protein).      Importantly,   when   GDP   bound   and   "off"   the   GTPase   exists  in  a  conformation  that  is  unable  to  bind  effector  proteins.                   

  

33  

Figure 1.5
GTP GEF GDP GTPase GTP "OFF" "ON" GTPase effector GDP

effector

GAP downstream effector functions Pi

                                                                                

  

34  

Figure   1.6:   Lysosomal   Inside-Out   Activation   of   mTORC1   by   Amino   Acids.      Amino   acids   that   are   internalized   via   endocytosis,   or   transported   from   the   cytosol   across   the  lysosomal  membrane  into  the  lysosomal  lumen,  interact  directly  with  V-ATPase   from   within   lysosomes.      This   "sensing"   by   the   V-ATPase   is   thought   to   convey   information  to  Ragulator,  a  pentameric  complex  that  is  tethered  to  the  lysosome  on   the  cytosolic  face.    In  turn,  Ragulator,  which  has  GEF  activity  toward  lysosomal  Rag   GTPases,   activates   Rags   which   recruit   and   directly   bind   to   mTORC1.      This   is   considered  to  be  important  for  physically  bringing  mTOR  into  close  proximity  to  its   activator,   the   lysosomal   small   GTPase   Rheb.      This   translocation   of   mTORC1   to   the   lysosomal  membrane  via  Rags  results  in  the  activation  of  mTOR  at  this  site.    Thus,   inside-out   amino   acid   sensing   by   lysosomes   can   activate   mTOR.   (Image   modified   from  Bar-Peled,  Schweitzer,  Zoncu,  &  Sabatini,  2012)                                

  

35  

                                                              

  

36  

     

                    

Chapter  2  

Experimental  Procedures  

                                            

  

37  

2.1:  Cell  Culture      The  macrophage-like  murine  cell  lines  RAW264.7  and  J774  were  respectively  grown   in   RPMI   1640   and   DMEM   media   supplemented   with   5­10%   fetal   bovine   serum   (Wisent,   St.   Bruno,   QC)   at   37C   and   5%   CO2.      Mouse   bone   marrow-derived   dendritic   cells   were   harvested   from   wild-type   female   7-9   week   old   C57BL/6J   mice   (Jackson   Laboratories,  Maine,  USA)  or  from  MHC-II-GFP  knock-in  mice  (Boes  et  al.,  2002)  as   previously  described  (Inaba  et  al.,  1992)  with  minor  modifications.    Briefly,  the  bone   marrow   was   flushed   from   leg   bones   with   phosphate-buffered   saline   (PBS)   using   a   25G   syringe   and   red   blood   cells   were   lysed   with   a   brief   hypoosmotic   treatment.     Cells  were  plated  at  2  x  106  per  well  in  4  mL  DMEM  supplemented  with  10%  fetal   bovine   serum,   55   M   2-mercaptoethanol,   10   ng/mL   recombinant   mouse   GM-CSF   (PeproTech,  Rocky  Hill,  NJ)  and  penicillin/streptomycin  antibiotics  (Pen/Strep  from   Wisent).    Cells  were  washed  every  2  days  by  replacing  half  the  medium  with  fresh   medium.      Experiments   were   conducted   on   days   7-9.      All   animals   were   used   following  Institutional  ethics  requirements.      2.2:  Transfection  and  Plasmids      Plasmid   transfections   of   cells   were   carried   out   by   treating   cells   with   2   g   plasmid   DNA   and   5   L   Fugene   HD   (Roche)   as   per   the   manufacturer's   protocol.   Cells   were   allowed   to   recover   for   16   h   prior   to   imaging.      The   plasmids   encoding   GFP-Rab7,   Rab7T22N-GFP,   Rab5S34N-GFP,   RILP-GFP,   RILPc33-GFP   and   p50-dynamitin-GFP   have   previously   been   described   (Bucci,   Thomsen,   Nicoziani,   McCarthy,   &   van   Deurs,   2000;  Cantalupo,  Alifano,  Roberti,  Bruni,  &  Bucci,  2001;  Echeverri,  Paschal,  Vaughan,   &  Vallee,  1996;  Vieira  et  al.,  2003).    Plasmids  encoding  Arl8b-GFP  and  Arl8bT24N-GFP   were   characterized   previously   (Kaniuk   et   al.,   2011).   mCherry-FYCO1   was   a   kind   gift   from  Terje  Johansen  (University  of  Tromsø,  Norway)  (Pankiv  et  al.,  2010).    KIF5DN- RFP   was   generously   provided   by   Rene   Harrison   (University   of   Toronto   Scarborough,  Toronto,  ON,  Canada)  (Silver  &  Harrison,  2011).  

  

38  

2.3:  Gene  Silencing  by  siRNA  Electroporation      Gene   silencing   in   RAW   cells   by   siRNA   oligonucleotides   was   conducted   using   electroporation.    Briefly,  RAW  cells  were  grown  to  confluence  in  a  T25  flask.    Cells   were   then   scraped,   pelleted   and   resuspended   in   90   µl   Amaxa   electroporation   solution   (Lonza,   Switzerland)   and   5   µl   of   20   µM   SMARTpool   set   containing   four   siRNA   oligonucleotides   against   a   target   gene   or   individual   siRNA   oligos   selected   from   the   SMARTpool   mix.         siRNA   against   the   following   mouse   genes   was   used:   FYCO1   (Gene   ID:   17281,   SMARTpool:   ORF   L-055432-01,   individual   oligos:   ORF   J   055432-09,   ORF   J-055432-11),   RILP   (Gene   ID:   280408,   individual   oligos:   ORF   J   063866-11,  ORF  J-063866-12),  Arl8B  (Gene  ID:  67166,  SMARTpool:  3_-UTR/ORF  L   056525-01,   individual   oligos:   ORF   J-056525-10,   3_-UTR   J-056525-12),   SKIP   (Gene   ID:  69582,  SMARTpool:  ORF  L-050865-00,  individual  oligos:  ORF  J-050865-05,  ORF   J-050865-07),   mTOR   (Gene   ID:   56717,   SMARTpool:   ORF   L-065427-00-0005)   or   Ulk1   (Gene   ID:   22241,   SMARTpool:   ORF   L-040155-00-0005)   all   from   Dharmacon,   Lafayette,   CO.      As   a   control,   a   non-targeting   SMARTpool   siRNA   oligonucleotide   set   was   used   (D-001810-10,   Dharmacon,   Lafayette,   CO).      To   optimize   target   knockdown,  cells  were  electroporated  with  either  a  single  or  double  pulse  separated   by   one   minute   with   an   Amaxa   Nucleofector   1   Electroporator   and   incubated   for   either  24  or  48  hours  to  allow  for  gene  silencing.          2.4:  SDS-PAGE  and  Western  Blotting        Total   cell   lysates   were   prepared   by   resuspending   and   homogenizing   cells   in   lysis   buffer   consisting   of   protease   (cOmplete,   mini,   EDTA-free)   and   phosphatase   (PhosSTOP)  inhibitor  cocktail  tablets  from  Roche  (Indianapolis,  IN)  dissolved  in  PBS   +   0.1%   Triton   X-100.      Cell   lysates   were   cleared   by   centrifuging   for   10   min   at   18,000   g.      The   supernatant   was   then   mixed   with   2x   Laemmli   sample   buffer   (Bio-Rad,   Hercules,  CA)  and  boiled  for  5  minutes.    Lysates  were  then  loaded  and  separated  in  a   12%   SDS-PAGE   and   transferred   onto   a   PVDF   membrane   (Bio-Rad,   Hercules,   CA).    

  

39  

The   membranes   were   incubated   with   primary   antibodies,   followed   by   HRP-linked   secondary  antibodies  in  Tris  Buffered  Saline  +  0.1%  Tween-20  containing  5%  non- fat  milk  or  bovine  serum  albumin  (BSA)  (BioShop  Canada,  Burlington,  ON),  followed   by   enhanced   chemiluminescence   detection   using   the   Amersham   ECL   Western   Blotting  Detection  Reagent  and  high-performance  chemiluminescence  film  from  GE   Healthcare   (Buckinghamshire,   UK).      Western   blots   were   quantified   using   the   software  program  ImageStudio  (Version  3.1.4,  LI-COR,  Lincoln,  NE).          Primary  antibodies  used  for  Western  blotting  were  rabbit  antiserum  against   Arl8B   which   was   a   kind   gift   from   Dr.   Michael   Brenner   (Brigham   and   Women's   hospital,   Boston,   MA,   USA)   (Garg   et   al.,   2011),   rabbit      anti-mTOR,   rabbit   anti-S6K,   rabbit  anti-pS6K,  rabbit  anti-Akt,  rabbit  anti-pAkt,  rabbit  anti-pIRF3  (Cell  Signaling,   Danvers,  MA),  all  used  at  1:1000  dilution,  mouse  anti-GAPDH  antibodies  (Millipore,   Billerica,  MA),  used  at  1:10000  dilution  and  Bett  polyclonal  antibody  against  MHC-II     chain  which  was  a  kind  gift  from  Dr.  Shin  (UCSF,  California).    Secondary  antibodies   were   HRP-linked   goat   anti-rabbit   or   donkey   anti-mouse   from   Jackson   ImmunoResearch  (West  Grove,  PA).              2.5:  Pharmacological  Inhibition      Cells   were   treated   with   various   compounds   throughout   this   study   including   1   M   LY294002   (L9908),   2   M   MRT67307   (SML0702),   5   M   IRAK1/4   Inhibitor   I   (I5409),   1  M  Rapamycin  (R8781),  200  nM  PP242  (P0037),  10  M  Nocodazole  (M1404),  all   from   Sigma   (St.   Louis,   MO),   200   nM   Torin1   (cat   #   4247),   50   nM   WYE687   (cat   #   4282),  100  M  A769662  (cat  #  3336)  from  Tocris  (Bristol,  UK)  and  1  M  ZSTK474   (S1072)   from   Selleckchem   (Houston,   TX).      Dyngo   4a   was   used   at   50   M   (abcam,   ab120689).      Typically,   inhibitors   were   added   to   cells   for   20   minutes   prior   to   stimulation  with  LPS  to  induce  lysosome  tubulation.    As  a  control,  cells  were  treated   with  DMSO.    MyD88  inhibitory  peptide  (Pepinh-MYD)  and  control  peptide  (Pepinh- ctrl)   were   from   InvivoGen   (Cat   code:   tlrl-pimyd)   and   endocytosed   by   cells   for   3   h   prior  to  downstream  treatments.  

  

40  

2.6  Immunofluorescence      To  visualize  microtubules,  immunostaining  was  conducted  by  briefly  washing  cells   in   PBS   and   fixing   cells   with   4%   paraformaldehyde   for   20   min.      For   mTOR   and   lysosome   staining,   cells   were   briefly   washed   in   PBS   and   fixed   with   0.5%   paraformaldehyde   and   0.2%   gluteraldehyde   as   per   a   previously   established   protocol   for   preserving   tubular   lysosomes   (Robinson,   Chiplonkar,   &   Luo,   1996).     Cells  were  washed  in  0.5%  BSA/PBS,  permeabilized  with  0.1%  Triton  X-100  in  PBS   for   5   min   and   washed   again   with   BSA/PBS.      Staining   with   primary   antibodies   was   conducted   at   room   temperature   for   0.5   h.      Cells   were   washed   with   BSA/PBS,   incubated   with   secondary   antibodies   for   1   h   and   washed   a   final   time   before   mounting  coverslips  with  Dako  fluorescent  mounting  medium.     Primary   antibodies   used   for   immunofluorescence   were   mouse   anti--tubulin   (Sigma),   rabbit   anti-mTOR   (Cell   signaling,   Danvers,   MA),   LAMP1   (1D4B   antibody   from   Cell   Signaling   all   used   at   1:1000.      Secondary   antibodies   were   AlexaFluor488   linked  donkey  anti-mouse,  AlexaFluor488  linked  donkey  anti-rabbit  and  Cy3-linked   donkey  anti-rat,  from  Jackson  ImmunoResearch  (West  Grove,  PA).          2.7  Flow  Cytometry      BMDCs   were   washed   in   0.5%   BSA/PBS   three   times   and   incubated   on   ice   for   30   minutes   with   primary   antibodies   (1:100).      Cells   were   washed   twice   with   0.5%   BSA/PBS   and   incubated   on   ice   for   20   minutes   with   secondary   antibodies   (1:50).     Cells  were  washed  with  BSA/PBS  then  fixed  in  2%  paraformaldehyde  in  PBS  for  20   minutes.    Finally,  cells  were  washed  in  PBS  and  stored  on  ice  until  analyzed.    Flow   cytometry  was  performed  at  the  University  of  Toronto  Flow  Cytometry  facility  on  an   LSRII   flow   cytometer   (BD   Biosciences)   and   analysis   was   conducted   using   FlowJo   software  (Tree  Star,  Ashland,  OR).   Cells  were  labeled  for  flow  cytometry  with  hamster  anti-CD11c  and  rat  anti- MHC-II   primary   antibodies   from   BD   Pharmingen   (San   Jose,   CA),   followed   by   Dylight649-linked   donkey   anti-hamster   and   AlexaFluor488-linked   donkey   anti-rat      41  

from  Jackson  ImmunoResearch  (West  Grove,  PA).      2.8:  Reverse  Transcription  and  Quantitative  PCR      To  determine  relative  gene  expression  of  FYCO1,  RILP,  Arl8b,  SKIP,  Ulk1  and  IL-6  we   employed   mRNA   reverse   transcription   and   quantitative   PCR   (qPCR).      Briefly,   RNA   was   extracted   using   the   GeneJET   RNA   Purification   Kit   (Thermo   Scientific,   Cat#:   K0731),   as   per   manufacturer's   instructions.   Equal   amounts   of   RNA   from   all   conditions  were  loaded  as  template  for  generation  of  cDNA  by  reverse  transcription   PCR   using   the   SuperScript   VILO   cDNA   synthesis   kit   (Invitrogen,   Cat#   11754050).     cDNA   was   diluted   1:100   and   qPCR   was   conducted   using   the   TaqMan   system   (Life   Technologies)   on   a   Step   One   Plus   Real-Time   PCR   thermal   cycler   (Applied   Biosystems)   with   Step   One   software   (Applied   Biosystems,   v2.2.2).      The   TaqMan   gene  expression  assays  for  the  reference  gene  Abt1  (Cat#  4331182  /  Mm00803824   /  Life  Technologies)  and  target  genes  FYCO1  (Cat#  4331182  /  Mm00530503  /  Life   Technologies),  RILP  (Cat#  4331182  /  Mm01240442  /  Life  Technologies),  Arl8b  (Cat   #   4331182   /   Mm00482600   /   Life   Technologies),   SKIP   (Cat   #   4351372   /   Mm01351044   /   Life   Technologies)   Ulk1   (Cat#   4331182   /   Mm00437238   /   Life   Technologies)   or   IL-6   (Cat   #   4331182   /   Mm00446190   /   Life   Technologies)   were   duplexed   in   triplicate   and   the   TaqMan   Fast   Advanced   Master   Mix   (4444963)   was   used.      Target   gene   expression   was   determined   by   relative   quantification   (Ct   method)  to  Abt1  reference  gene  and  the  control  sample.            2.9:  Lysosome  Tubulation  Assays         In   order   to   visualize   lysosomes,   cells   were   allowed   to   endocytose   dextran   labeled   with  AlexaFluor-555  or  -488  (Invitrogen)  at  100  g/mL  for  0.5­1.5  h,  followed  by  at   least   a   1   h   chase   in   dextran-free   medium.   To   induce   lysosome   tubulation,   cells   were   then   treated   with   100   ng/mL   LPS   (Salmonella   minnesota   serotype   minnesota   Re   595;   Sigma)   for   2   h   prior   to   imaging   or   equivalent   volume   of   PBS   was   used   as  

  

42  

control.      LPS   was   maintained   in   the   medium   during   imaging.   When   appropriate,   lysosomes   were   pre-labeled   with   fluorescent   dextrans   prior   to   transfection   or   electroporation   to   ensure   trafficking   of   the   probe   to   lysosomes.   Where   inhibitors   were  used,  cells  were  pre-treated  with  compounds  at  the  concentrations  indicated   for   20   min   prior   to   LPS   addition   for   2   h,   or   equivalent   volume   of   DMSO   was   used   as   control  followed  by  LPS  treatment.    Cells  were  imaged  live  following  treatments  and   LPS/inhibitors/DMSO/PBS   were   maintained   in   the   medium   during   imaging.      TLs   were   quantified   manually   by   counting   all   lysosomal   tubules   that   were      4   m   in   length.    Lastly,  and  because  of  significant  variation  in  the  actual  number  of  tubules   from  day-to-day,  we  developed  a  tubulation  index  where  the  number  of  tubules  in   any   given   condition   within   a   specific   day   is   normalized   against   number   of   tubules   found  in  cells  treated  with  LPS  for  2  h.    For  the  kinetics  of  lysosome  tubulation,  cells     were  treated  with  100  ng/mL  LPS  and  imaged  live  at  various  time  points.      2.10:  Timelapse  Microscopy  and  Particle  Tracking      Live-cell   images   were   acquired   using   a   Quorum   Wave-FX   spinning   disk   confocal   microscope   (Quorum   Technologies)   based   on   a   Zeiss   Axiovert   200M   fitted   with   a   Yokogawa   CSU10   spinning   disk   head   and   a   back-thinned   electron   multiplier   camera   (C9100-13   ImagEM;   Hamamatsu).   Timelapse   microscopy   was   carried   out   by   capturing   images   every   0.5   seconds   for   2­3   min   using   the   63x   oil   immersion   objective   and   a   37°C   stage.   Images   were   acquired   and   analyzed   with   VOLOCITY   software  (version  4.4;  PerkinElmer).  Cells  were  kept  in  RPMI  1640  (Wisent)  media   supplemented  with  5%  FBS  and  buffered  with  HEPEs  during  live-cell  imaging.     TLs   and   punctate   lysosomes   were   tracked   manually   in   each   frame   in   VOLOCITY   using   the   `manual   tracking   with   the   region   of   interest'   function   for   a   minimum   of   120   frames.   Mean   velocity   measures   and   averages   speed   during   both   motile   and   non-motile   phases   of   lysosomes.   Displacement   measures   the   distance   between  starting  and  end  positions  during  an  observation  period.  Total  track  length   measures   total   distance   traveled   during   the   observation   period.   Image   processing  

  

43  

was  done  with  CS3  Adobe  Photoshop  (version  10.0)  and  Illustrator  (version  13.0.0).      2.11:  Lysosomal  Positioning  Assays      Lysosomes  of  RAW  264.7  cells  were  labeled  and  cells  were  either  left  untreated  or   were   treated   with   200   nM   Torin1   for   1   h.      Cells   were   either   kept   in   regular   Ringer's   medium  (pH  7.2)  for  20  min,  Acetate  Ringer's  (pH  6.8)  for  20  min  or  Acetate  Ringers   for   20   minutes   followed   by   regular   Ringers   medium   for   20   min   (Ringer's   and   Acetate   Ringer's   solutions   were   prepared   as   per   Heuser,   1989).      Cells   were   briefly   washed  in  PBS,  fixed  in  4%  paraformaldehyde  and  mounted  onto  glass  slides  with   Dako  fluorescent  mounting  medium.    Cells  were  imaged  by  confocal  microscopy  and   z-stacks  were  acquired.       Lysosomal   positioning   was   quantified   using   ImageJ   software   (National   Institutes   of   Health,   Bathesda,   MD).      Briefly,   z-stacks   were   collapsed   to   give   an   extended  view  of  all  lysosomes  in  cells.    Each  cell  was  outlined  manually  to  generate   a   region   of   interest   (shell)   and   the   same   shell   was   reduced   in   size   by   15   pixel   iterations   to   produce   3   shells   in   total,   per   cell.      Thresholding   for   lysosomal   signal   was   conducted   manually   and   the   lysosomal   area   was   computed   in   each   shell   and   normalized  to  shell  area.          2.12  Image  Quantification  of  LC3,  RFP-Rab7  and  Arl8b-GFP      To   determine   if   Ulk1   silencing   affected   autophagy,   control   and   Ulk1-silenced   cells   were   either   untreated   or   treated   with   torin1   for   2   hours.   Immunofluorescence   against  LC3  was  conducted  (described  above)  and  images  of  cells  were  acquired  (z- stacks)   by   spinning   disk   confocal   microscopy.      Cells   were   analyzed   for   average   number   of   LC3   puncta,   representing   autophagosomes.      Briefly,   using   ImageJ   software  (1.46r,  NIH),  z-stacks  were  collapsed  to  provide  an  extended  view  of  each   field  and  individual  cells  were  cropped.    A  manual  threshold  was  applied  to  all  cells   to   exclude   all   cytosolic   signal,   which   did   not   appear   punctate.      Using   the   `analyze  

  

44  

particles'  tool,  the  `count'  was  obtained,  which  identified  the  number  of  LC3  puncta.     This   was   done   for   each   cell   for   each   condition   (at   least   15   cells   per   condition   across   2  experiments).     For   quantification   of   membrane-to-cytosol   distribution   of   Arl8b   and   Rab7,   cells   were   transfected   with   Arl8b-GFP,   RFP-Rab7   and   Rilpc33-GFP   plasmids   using   Fugene   HD   (Promega)   as   per   manufacturer's   instructions.      After   each   treatment,   live-cell   imaging   with   spinning   disc   confocal   microscopy   was   performed.     Subsequently,   each   image   was   analysed   using   ImageJ   by   manually   applying   a   threshold   outlining   only   the   membrane-bound   fluorescence   (punctate),   creating   a   mask.      The   mean   fluorescence   intensity   under   this   mask   was   then   subjected   to   Analyze   Particle   function,   followed   by   background   subtraction.   Next,   the   mean   intensity  of  the  cytosol  was  obtained  by  drawing  regions  of  interest  in  the  cytosolic   pool,  followed  by  background  subtraction.  The  average  ratio  of  membrane-bound  to   cytosolic   fluorescence   intensity   was   then   calculated   for   each   treatment   (This   method  was  performed  by  Victoria  Hipolito).        2.13:  Statistical  Analyses      All   experiments   were   repeated   independently   at   least   three   times.      In   some   cases,   due  to  variation  in  the  absolute  number  of  TLs  in  any  given  day  (but  not  within  the   same  day),  data  shows  normalized  mean  values  against  the  corresponding  control.   Measurements  of  lysosomal  tubulation  across  various  conditions  (multiple  groups)   were   subject   to   analysis   of   variance   (ANOVA)   with   Tukey's   post-hoc   test.      Statistical   analysis   of   differences   between   two   groups   under   an   experimental   condition   was   done   using   a   Student's   t-test.      A   p   value   of   <0.05   was   considered   significant.      Data   are  presented  as  mean  ±  standard  error  of  the  mean  (SEM),  unless  stated  otherwise.       For  qRT-PCR  analysis  of  gene  silencing,  we  employed  one-sided  Student's  t-test.             

  

45  

  

  

  

         Chapter  3  

Results                                                     

  

46  

3.1:  Rab7  and  Arl8  GTPases  are  Necessary  for  Lysosome  Tubulation  in  Macrophages      3.1.1:   LPS-Stimulated   Macrophage   Cell   Lines   Form   Highly   Dynamic   Lysosome   Tubules      The   study   of   tubular   lysosomes   in   activated   macrophages   has   been   challenging   in   part  due  to  the  fact  that  primary  macrophages  are  not  easily  amenable  to  common   methods   of   genetic   manipulation   such   as   transfection.      Thus,   to   enable   the   characterization   of   tubular   lysosomes,   we   developed   a   model   system   for   this   purpose.    Using  the  mouse  macrophage  cell  lines  RAW  264.7  and  J774,  which  have   been   widely   employed   in   the   study   of   phagocytosis   and   phagosome   maturation   (Beemiller  et  al.,  2010;  Garg  et  al.,  2011;  Harrison,  Bucci,  Vieira,  Schroer,  &  Grinstein,   2003;  Hoffmann  et  al.,  2010),  we  tested  whether  LPS  activation  induced  tubulation   of   lysosomes,   as   was   previously   observed   in   dendritic   cells   with   tMIIC.      We   proceeded   to   do   this   by   fluorescently   labeling   lysosomes   with   AlexaFluor555- conjugated  dextran,  which  was  taken  up  by  cells  for  30  min  through  endocytosis  and   following   a   1-hour   chase,   accumulated   in   lysosomes.      Resting   macrophages   exhibited   predominantly   punctate   lysosomes   (<4   m   in   length)   under   the   fluorescence   microscope   (Figure   3.1A,   Figures   section   at   the   end   of   this   chapter).     On   average,   these   cells   exhibited   one   tubular   lysosome   per   cell   (4   m   in   length)   (Figure  3.1C).      In  contrast,  macrophages  stimulated  with  100ng/mL  LPS  for  2  hours   displayed   extensive   tubulation   of   lysosomes   (Figure   3.1A),   where   the   number   of   cells   with   at   least   one   TL   increased   from   50%   to   about   85%   (Figure   3.1B)   and   there   was   approximately   a   threefold   increase   in   the   average   number   of   TLs   per   cell   (Figure  3.1C).    Due  to  variation  in  the  extent  of  tubulation  between  experiments,  but   not  within,  the  tubulation  values  were  normalized  to  control  conditions.    A  complete   listing   of   absolute   values   corresponding   to   results   in   section   3.1   is   presented   in   Table   A-1   of   the   Appendix.      Overall,   both   RAW   and   J774   cell   lines   underwent   lysosome   tubulation   when   exposed   to   LPS.      Despite   a   limited   resolution   with   spinning   disk   confocal   microscopy,   tubular   lysosomes   were   observed   to   be   very   dynamic,  frequently  elongating,  collapsing,  fusing  and  branching  (Figure  3.1D).          47  

3.1.2:  Dynein  and  Kinesin  I  are  Required  for  Lysosome  Tubulation      The   observation   that   TLs   are   highly   dynamic   suggests   the   involvement   of   microtubules  and  the  microtubule-associated  motor  proteins  dynein  and  kinesin  in   their  formation.    Indeed,  the  microtubule  depolymerizing  agent  nocodazole  caused   lysosomal  tubules  to  fragment  and  collapse  (Figure  3.2A).    This  observation  is  in  line   with   previous   literature   reports   that   microtubules   were   necessary   for   TLs   and   tMIICs   in   macrophages   and   DCs   (Swanson,   Burke,   &   Silverstein,   1987;   Vyas   et   al.,   2007).      To   test   the   requirement   of   each   motor   protein   in   TL   biogenesis,   we   examined   TL   formation   under   conditions   where   proper   function   of   each   was   hindered.    Kinesin  I,  encoded  by  KIF5,  has  been  shown  to  associate  with  lysosomes   (Tanaka   et   al.,   1998),   therefore   we   overexpressed   a   previously   characterized   kinesin   I   dominant   negative   mutant   fused   to   red   fluorescent   protein   (KIF5DN-RFP)   (Silver   &   Harrison,   2011).      Cells   overexpressing   this   construct   were   strongly   hindered   in   their   ability   to   form   tubular   lysosomes   with   41±5%   fewer   tubular   lysosomes  than  control,  untransfected  cells  (Figure  3.2B,  D).       To   disrupt   dynein,   we   overexpressed   p50   dynamitin,   a   subunit   of   dynactin,   which  is  required  for  proper  dynein  function  but  causes  disassembly  of  the  dynein- dynactin   complex   when   expressed   exogenously   (Burkhardt,   Echeverri,   Nilsson,   &   Vallee,   1997).      LPS-treated   cells   overexpressing   dynamitin-GFP   exhibited   a   reduction   of   38±6%   in   the   number   of   TLs   per   cell   relative   to   untransfected   cells   (Figure  3.2C,  D).    Co-expression  of  KIF5DN-RFP  and  dynamitin-GFP  did  not  have  an   additive   effect.      This   may   be   due   to   plasmid   co-transfections   not   necessarily   reflecting   same   level   of   expression   of   the   individual   mutant   proteins   as   single   transfections.    Taken  together,  these  data  indicate  that  tubular  lysosome  biogenesis   is  dependent  on  both  dynein  and  kinesin  I  microtubule  motor  proteins,  results  that   are  consistent  with  the  dynamic  nature  of  this  organelle.              

  

48  

3.1.3:  Rab7  is  Necessary  for  Lysosome  Tubulation      Dynein   assembly   on   lysosomes   is   controlled   by   the   lysosomal   small   GTPase   Rab7,   which   nucleates   a   complex   between   RILP,   ORP1L   and   dynactin   (Johansson   et   al.,   2007;  Jordens  et  al.,  2001).    Furthermore,  Rab7  has  been  shown  to  control  kinesin   activation   on   lysosomes   via   the   effector   protein   FYCO1,   though   direct   interaction   between  these  two  proteins  has  not  yet  been  detected  (Pankiv  et  al.,  2010).    Given   these   roles   in   lysosomal   trafficking,   we   examined   whether   this   GTPase   was   necessary   for   the   formation   of   tubular   lysosomes.      We   first   made   use   of   a   GFP-Rab7   construct   to   determine   whether   it   was   expressed   on   tubular   lysosomes.      Indeed,   GFP-Rab7   co-localized   with   Alexa-555-labeled   TLs   after   LPS   treatment   of   macrophages   (Figure   3.3A).      What   is   more,   the   GTP-bound   form   of   Rab7   can   be   visualized   by   expressing   RILP-c33-GFP   ­   this   fragment   of   RILP   binds   to   GTP-Rab7   but   lacks   domains   required   for   interaction   with   dynein,   preventing   aggregation   of   lysosomes   (Cantalupo,   Alifano,   Roberti,   Bruni,   &   Bucci,   2001).      RILP-c33-GFP   was   visible  on  tubular  lysosomes  indicating  that  GTP-bound  Rab7  exists  on  TLs  (Figure   3.3B).    Finally,  to  determine  whether  or  not  Rab7  was  required  for  TL  formation,  we   overexpressed  a  dominant  negative  mutant  GFP-Rab7T22N.    As  shown  in  Figure  3.3C   and  3.3D,  cells  expressing  GFP-Rab7T22N  had  67±5%  fewer  TLs  per  cell  than  control   cells   expressing   GFP-Rab7.      Collectively,   these   results   indicate   that   Rab7   is   important  in  TL  biogenesis.          3.1.4:  RILP  is  Involved  in  Lysosome  Tubulation      The   findings   that   Rab7,   dynein   and   kinesin   were   all   necessary   for   lysosome   tubulation   to   occur,   suggested   that   links   between   Rab7   and   the   motors   were   required.      As   indicated   above,   Rab7   can   modulate   dynein   and   kinesin   activity   on   lysosomes   through   the   effector   proteins   RILP   and   FYCO1   respectively.      Therefore,   we   explored   the   role   of   these   effectors   in   lysosome   tubulation.      By   overexpressing   RILP,   lysosomes   can   be   clustered   in   the   perinuclear   region   near   the   MTOC,   due   to   hyperstimulation   of   dynein   (Cantalupo,   Alifano,   Roberti,   Bruni,   &   Bucci,   2001;      49  

Jordens  et  al.,  2001).    Indeed,  overexpressing  a  GFP-tagged  version  of  RILP  induced   lysosomal   clustering   in   macrophages   (Figure   3.4A).      Importantly,   this   overexpression   impaired   lysosome   tubulation   where   GFP-RILP   transfected   cells   exhibited   51±7%   fewer   TLs   than   untransfected   control   cells   (Figure   3.4B).     Strikingly,   tubules   that   escaped   this   inhibitory   effect   and   managed   to   form   in   transfected   cells   were   decorated   with   GFP-RILP   and   this   is   in   line   with   the   observation  that  active  Rab7  is  also  present  on  lysosomal  tubules  (Figure  3.4A).       We   further   complemented   this   overexpression   technique   with   siRNA   gene   silencing   against   RILP   to   determine   if   loss   of   RILP   affected   TL   biogenesis.      To   quantify  RILP  silencing,  we  employed  quantitative  reverse  transcription-polymerase   chain  reaction  (qRT-PCR)  to  determine  the  relative  amount  of  RILP  mRNA,  as  viable   anti-RILP   antibodies   were   not   available   at   the   time   to   detect   expression   knockdown   by   western   blotting   for   RILP   protein.      Using   this   technique,   we   show   that   two   individual  sets  of  siRNA  oligonucleotides  (oligos)  against  RILP,  siRILP  oligo  11  and   12,   caused   a   reduction   of   54±11%   and   52±8%   in   RILP   expression,   respectively,   compared   to   control   cells   electroporated   with   scrambled   siRNA   oligos   (Figure   3.4   C).    Most  importantly,  cells  silenced  for  RILP  expression  with  either  of  these  oligos   demonstrated   an   approximately   60%   reduction   in   the   number   of   TLs   per   cell,   relative   to   the   control   scrambled   condition   (Figure   3.4D).      Taken   together,   these   results   suggest   that   RILP,   a   Rab7   effector,   is   involved   in   TL   biogenesis,   likely   by   regulating  the  dynein  motor  activity  on  lysosomes.         3.1.5:  FYCO1  Plays  a  Role  in  Lysosome  Tubulation      As   previously   discussed,   FYCO1   is   another   Rab7   effector,   thought   to   modulate   the   motor   activity   of   kinesin   on   lysosomes.      Thus,   we   proceeded   to   define   its   role   in   lysosome  tubulation.    As  with  RILP,  we  first  applied  overexpression  of  an  mCherry- tagged   FYCO1   construct   in   macrophages.      This   was   previously   shown   to   force   lysosomes   and   autophagosomes   to   the   cell   periphery,   presumably   through   kinesin   (Pankiv   et   al.,   2010).      Indeed,   overexpression   of   mCherry-FYCO1   caused   a      50  

centripetal   distribution   of   lysosomes   labeled   with   Alexa-488-dextran   in   macrophages   (Figure   3.5A,B).      Importantly,   this   overexpression   was   accompanied   by  a  robust  decrease  of  62±5%  in  lysosome  tubulation  compared  to  untransfected   control  macrophages  (Figure  3.5C).    As  with  RILP  overexpression,  FYCO1  was  also   localized   to   TLs   that   were   able   to   form,   albeit   weakly   (Figure   3.5B),   and   as   with   RILP,   the   inhibition   of   TL   formation   may   be   due   to   pleiotropic   effects   such   as   overstimulation  of  kinesin,  as  evidenced  by  peripheral  clustering  of  lysosomes.       We   further   complemented   overexpression   of   FYCO1   with   silencing   of   the   FYCO1  gene  using  siRNA,  to  determine  its  requirement  in  TL  biogenesis.    Once  again,   we  employed  qRT-PCR  to  determine  FYCO1  silencing  efficiency  due  to  lack  of  anti- FYCO1   antibodies.      First,   we   show   that   a   SMARTpool   oligo   mix,   or   two   individual   FYCO1-specific   siRNA   oligos   (siRNA   oligos   9   and   11)   could   knockdown   FYCO1   expression   by   54±4,   46±7%   and   32±10%   respectively,   compared   to   the   corresponding   control   cells   treated   with   scrambled   siRNA   (Figure   3.5D).      Most   significantly,   cells   silenced   for   FYCO1   expression   with   either   the   SMARTpool   mix,   or   oligo   9   or   11,   respectively,   produced   30±5%,   47±6%   and   47±9%   fewer   TLs   than   corresponding   controls   (Figure   3.5E).      These   results   indicate   that   FYCO1   is   necessary   for   lysosome   tubulation   and   suggests   a   model   by   which   Rab7   recruits   both   RILP   and   FYCO1   to   modulate   dynein   and   kinesin   respectively   to   facilitate   lysosome  tubulation  (refer  to  model  in  Figure  3.17).            3.1.6:  Arl8b  and  SKIP  are  Necessary  for  Lysosome  Tubulation      In  addition  to  the  Rab7-FYCO1  link,  lysosomal  kinesin  activity  can  be  regulated  by   the   lysosomal   small   GTPase   Arl8b,   through   interaction   with   its   effector   SKIP,   a   kinesin-interacting  protein  (Bagshaw,  Callahan,  &  Mahuran,  2006;  Behnia  &  Munro,   2005;  Hofmann  &  Munro,  2006;  Rosa-Ferreira  &  Munro,  2011).    We  reasoned  that   this   regulatory   arm   may   also   play   a   role   in   tubulating   lysosomes,   thus   we   investigated   whether   Arl8b   and   SKIP   are   necessary   for   this   phenomenon   as   well.    

  

51  

Like  GFP-Rab7,  we  first  show  that  Arl8b-GFP  localized  to  lysosomal  tubules  (Figure   3.6A).      Overexpression   of   a   dominant-negative   mutant   of   Arl8b,   Arl8bT24N-GFP,   strongly   inhibited   TL   biogenesis   in   LPS-stimulated   macrophages,   compared   to   Arl8b-GFP  (Figure  3.6B,  C).       To   complement   overexpression   of   this   dominant-negative   mutant,   we   applied  siRNA-mediated  gene  silencing  of  Arl8b  to  determine  if  loss  of  endogenous   protein   affected   TL   formation.      First,   we   detected   a   strong   knockdown   of   more   than   90%  of  Arl8b  at  the  protein  level  using  anti-Arl8b  antibodies  and  western  blotting,   compared   to   control   cells   treated   with   scrambled   siRNA   oligos   (Figure   3.6D).     Second,  cells  electroporated  with  SMARTpool  siRNA  oligo  mix  against  Arl8b  showed   a  drop  of  69±4%  in  TLs  relative  to  control  (Figure  3.6F).    To  ensure  specificity  of  the   SMARTpool   oligo   mix,   we   further   assessed   the   effect   of   two   independent   siRNA   oligos  against  Arl8b.    Using  qRT-PCR,  we  showed  that  siRNA  oligos  10  and  12  abated   Arl8b   expression   to   23±4%   and   24±3%   of   control   cells   (Figure   3.6E)   and   abated   TL   formation   by   58±5%   and   51±7%,   respectively   (Figure   3.6F).      These   observations   suggest  that  in  addition  to  Rab7,  the  lysosomal  small  GTPase  Arl8b  is  essential  for   TL  formation.       On  this  line  of  reasoning,  we  tested  if  SKIP,  which  couples  Arl8b  and  kinesin   on   lysosomes,   was   necessary   for   TL   biogenesis.      As   before,   we   could   show   that   cells   electroporated   with   an   siRNA   SMARTpool   or   two   individual   oligos   (5   and   7),   depleted  endogenous  SKIP  expression  by  68±2%,  57±5%  and  36±7%  respectively,   relative  to  control  cells  (Figure  3.6G).    Consequently,  SKIP-silenced  cells,  in  the  same   order  as  indicated,  suffered  a  loss  of  74±5%,  51±6%  and  49±8%  of  TLs  respectively,   relative  to  cells  electroporated  with  corresponding  scrambled  siRNA  oligos  (Figure   3.6H).      Together,   these   results   strongly   suggest   that   SKIP,   along   with   Arl8b,   is   necessary  for  TL  biogenesis.           

  

52  

3.1.7:  Lysosome  Tubules  are  More  Motile  than  Punctate  Lysosomes      Lysosomes   are   dynamic   organelles   and   can   frequently   undergo   bidirectional   movement   along   microtubules,   but   also   exhibit   periods   of   no   movement   (Cordonnier,   Dauzonne,   Louvard,   &   Coudrier,   2001;   Falcón-Pérez,   Nazarian,   Sabatti,   &   Dell'Angelica,   2005;   Luzio,   Pryor,   &   Bright,   2007).      Little   is   known   about   how   tubulation   of   lysosomes   affects   their   motility.      Visually,   it   appears   as   though   tubular   lysosomes   in   macrophage   cell   lines   are   highly   dynamic   (Figure   3.1D)   and   more   so   than  punctate  lysosomes.    To  test  this,  we  employed  particle  tracking  of  individual   random   lysosomes   and   mapped   their   motilities   to   quantify   and   compare   various   parameters   of   punctate   lysosomes   and   tubular   lysosomes.      As   expected,   punctate   lysosomes  and  TLs  often  exhibited  bidirectional  movement  (Figure  3.7A,  B;  tracks  1- 5).      Strikingly,   TLs   underwent   significantly   greater   directional   displacement   compared  to  punctate  lysosomes,  as  can  be  appreciated  from  tracks  in  Figure  3.7B   compared   to   Figure   3.7A.      Punctate   lysosomes   were   more   often   static   and   underwent   small   vibrational   movements   (compare   Figure   3.7A   and   Figure   3.7B).     Using  tracking  software,  we  show  that  over  a  one-minute  period,  TLs  were  displaced   by   3.96±0.47   m   from   their   starting   position   compared   to   only   1.29±0.31   m   for   punctate   lysosomes   (Figure   3.7C).      We   further   examined   total   track   length,   as   displacement  does  not  take  into  account  overall  distance  traveled.    Once  again,  TLs   exhibited   longer   track   lengths   of   11.8±1.0   m   relative   to   punctate   lysosomes   with   7.8±0.6   m   tracks   (Figure   3.7D).      A   significant   portion   of   punctate   lysosome   track   lengths   was   likely   due   to   small   distances   traveled   during   stochastic   or   vibrational   movement   of   lysosomes.      Finally,   we   measured   mean   velocity   of   punctate   and   tubular   lysosomes.      We   found   that   the   mean   velocity   of   tubules   was   significantly   larger  than  that  of  punctate  lysosomes  (Figure  3.7E).    In  LPS-treated  cells  punctate   lysosomes  moved  at  0.16±0.024  m/sec,  whereas  TLs  in  the  same  LPS-treated  cells   moved   at   0.36±0.039   m/sec   (Figure   3.7E;   dark   grey   bars).      A   similar   result   was   obtained  between  punctate  and  tubular  lysosomes  in  non-LPS-treated  cells  (Figure   3.7E;   light   grey   bars)   suggesting   that   the   difference   in   mean   velocity   between   TLs   and   punctate   lysosomes   is   not   attributable   to   LPS   treatment.      However,   mean      53  

velocity   represents   speed   of   both   moving   and   static   phases   of   lysosomes.      When   we   quantified   speed   of   moving-only   lysosomes,   both   puncta   and   tubules   exhibited   a   similar   speed   of   0.61±0.039   m/sec   and   0.60±0.18   m/sec,   respectively.      These   results   suggest   that   TLs   are   more   often   `on   the   move'   than   punctate   lysosomes.     Taken   together,   these   results   indicate   that   TLs   are   generally   a   more   motile   population  of  lysosomes  and  that  LPS-activated  macrophages  have  a  larger  number   of  these  tubular,  motile  lysosomes.                                                                                               

  

54  

3.2:   mTOR   Regulates   Lysosome   Tubulation   and   Antigen   Presentation   in   Macrophages  and  Dendritic  Cells      3.2.1:   TLR4-Induced   Lysosome   Tubulation   in   Macrophages   Requires   MyD88   and   PI3-Kinase      As   shown   in   section   3.1,   LPS   exposure   converts   punctate   lysosomes   into   a   tubular   network   of   lysosomes   in   macrophages.      Other   than   a   requirement   for   the   TLR4   adapter  protein  MyD88  in  LPS-induced  MIIC  tubulation  in  dendritic  cells  (Boes  et  al.,   2003),  little  is  known  about  the  downstream  signaling  pathway  responsible  for  this   phenotype.      We   sought   to   fill   this   gap   of   knowledge   by   applying   pharmacological   antagonists   targeting   MyD88-dependent   and   MyD88-independent   pathways   downstream   of   TLR4,   and   assessed   their   impact   on   lysosome   tubulation   in   RAW   macrophages.      The   various   inhibitors   used   and   their   targets   are   schematically   represented   in   Figure   3.8.      As   before,   lysosomes   were   pre-labeled   by   a   pulse   of   fluorescent   dextran,   followed   by   a   1   hour   chase   and   lysosome   tubulation   was   stimulated   by   exposing   cells   to   100   ng/mL   LPS   for   2   hours.      Lysosome   tubulation   was  assessed  by  confocal  fluorescence  microscopy.    Lysosome  tubulation  data  was   normalized  to  the  LPS  condition.   LPS   exposure   induced   a   2-fold   increase   in   the   average   number   of   tubular   lysosomes  per  cell  compared  to  unstimulated  cells  (Figure  3.9A,  B).    Pre-treatment   of   cells   with   the   MyD88-antagonistic   peptide   PepinhMYD   significantly   abated   lysosome   tubulation   in   response   to   LPS,   while   a   control   peptide   had   no   effect   (Figure   3.9A,   B).      In   contrast,   blocking   the   kinase   TBK1   with   MRT67307   had   little   effect  on  LPS-induced  lysosome  tubulation  (Figure  3.9A,  B).    To  ensure  that  this  drug   did   indeed   block   TBK1   activity,   we   detected   decreased   phosphorylated   IRF3,   a   substrate  of  TBK1,  in  response  to  LPS  (Appendix  Figure  A-1,  A).    This  data  suggests   that   LPS-induced   lysosome   tubulation   proceeds   through   the   MyD88   signaling   arm   downstream  of  TLR4.     

  

55  

Because   MyD88   can   stimulate   IRAK1/4   and   PI3K   following   LPS   stimulation   (Burns  et  al.,  2003;  Laird  et  al.,  2009;  Suzuki  et  al.,  2002),  we  applied  inhibitors  of   each  of  these  kinases  to  elucidate  their  roles  in  TL  formation.    Inhibition  of  IRAK1/4   did  not  affect  TL  formation  in  RAW  macrophages  (Figure  3.9A,  B).    To  test  that  the   IRAK1/4   inhibitor   indeed   blocked   its   target,   we   measured   transcription   levels   of   IL- 6,   a   cytokine   expressed   upon   TLR   stimulation   of   the   IRAK1/4-NFB   pathway   (Suzuki   et   al.,   2002;   Thomas   et   al.,   1999).      Indeed,   IL-6   transcription   was   strongly   attenuated   with   IRAK1/4   inhibitor   (Appendix   Figure   A-1,   B).      These   data   suggest   that   IRAK1/4   is   dispensible   for   lysosome   tubulation.      In   contrast,   lysosome   tubulation   was   strongly   impaired   in   LPS-stimulated   cells   which   were   treated   with   LY294002,   a   general   PI3K   inhibitor,   or   the   Class   I   PI3K   inhibitor   ZSTK474   (Figure   3.9A,  B).    Overall,  the  data  suggests  that  LPS  signals  via  a  TLR4-MyD88-Class  I  PI3K   pathway  to  induce  lysosome  tubulation.      3.2.2:   The   Canonical   PI3K-Akt   Pathway   Regulates   LPS-Induced   Lysosome   Tubulation      The   generation   of   PI(3,4,5)P3   at   the   inner   leaflet   of   the   plasma   membrane   via   active   PI3K,   recruits   the   signaling   protein   Akt   via   its   PH   domain   (Bellacosa   et   al.,   1998).     Having  observed  a  strong  impediment  on  lysosome  tubulation  in  cells  inhibited  for   PI3K,   we   asked   whether   Akt   played   a   role   in   lysosome   tubulation.      First,   we   characterized  the  signaling  pathway  to  determine  whether  LPS  indeed  triggered  the   PI3K-Akt  pathway  in  RAW  cells.    LPS  increased  the  levels  of  phospho-Akt  in  cells,  a   read-out  for  activation  (Figure  3.10A).    In  addition,  Akt  activation  was  independent   of   IRAK1/4   and   TBK1,   but   required   PI3K   (Figure   3.10A)   and   MyD88   (Appendix   Figure  A-1,  C).      We   then   assessed   the   requirement   of   Akt   in   LPS-induced   lysosome   tubulation.      Pre-treatment   of   cells   with   an   Akt   inhibitor,   Akti,   followed   by   LPS,   blocked  lysosome  tubulation  by  70%  relative  to  LPS  condition  alone  (Figure  3.10B,   C).    These  results  illustrate  that  Akt,  which  is  activated  by  LPS  in  a  PI3K-dependednt   manner,  is  necessary  for  lysosome  tubulation.      56  

3.2.3:  mTOR  is  Required  for  LPS-Induced  Lysosome  Tubulation  in  Macrophages      mTOR   is   a   key   downstream   effector   in   the   PI3K-Akt   pathway.      Thus,   we   asked   whether   it   is   involved   in   LPS-mediated   lysosome   tubulation.      First,   we   assessed   mTOR   activation   in   LPS-stimulated   cells.      Since   lysosome   tubulation   occurs   at   1-2   hours   post-LPS   exposure   in   RAW   cells,   we   sought   to   determine   whether   mTOR   is   activated  within  this  timeframe.    We  performed  western  blotting  to  probe  the  level   of  phosphorylated  S6K,  a  canonical  target  of  mTOR  (Isotani  et  al.,  1999;  Saitoh  et  al.,   2002).    Indeed,  phospho-S6K  levels  were  enhanced  by  77%  and  78%  after  1  and  2  h   of  LPS  exposure,  respectively,  relative  to  control  cells  (Figure  3.11A).    As  expected,   this   effect   was   completely   abolished   by   torin1   (Figure   3.11A).      In   addition,   and   consistent   with   a   role   for   the   PI3K-Akt-mTOR   axis   but   not   for   IRAK1/4   or   TBK1,   PI3K   inhibition,   but   not   IRAK1/4   or   TBK1,   abolished   LPS-mediated   increase   in   phospho-S6K   levels   (Figure   3.11B).      We   could   localize   mTOR   to   lysosomal   tubules   by  immunofluorescence  microscopy  (Appendix  Figure  A-2,  A)  and  most  importantly,   when   we   assessed   lysosome   tubulation,   cells   treated   with   torin1   prior   to   LPS   addition  were  severely  impaired  in  their  ability  to  form  tubular  lysosomes  (Figure   3.11C,   D).      Similar   results   were   obtained   when   various   other   mTOR   antagonists   were   applied,   including   rapamycin,   PP242   or   WYE687   (Appendix   Figure   A-2,   B).     These   results   suggest   that   mTOR,   which   is   activated   by   LPS   in   a   PI3K-dependent   manner,  is  required  for  LPS-induced  lysosome  tubulation  as  well.   To  complement  the  pharmacology-based  findings,  we  employed  siRNA  gene   silencing   against   mTOR   to   determine   if   depletion   of   endogenous   protein   also   affects   lysosome   tubulation.      We   electroporated   RAW   cells   with   a   pool   of   four   siRNA   oligos   against  mouse  mTOR,  which  were  then  stimulated  with  LPS  and  scored  for  lysosome   tubulation.      Western   blot   analysis   confirmed   that   mTOR   silenced   cells   expressed   less   than   40%   mTOR   protein   relative   to   control   cells   treated   with   a   non-targeting   pool   of   siRNA   oligos   (siNTP)   (Appendix   Figure   A-2,   C).      As   with   pharmacological   inhibition,   silencing   mTOR   resulted   in   impaired   lysosome   tubulation   in   RAW   cells   (Figure  3.11E,  F).  

  

57  

We   further   sought   to   inhibit   mTOR   function   in   an   independent   way   by   activating   AMP-kinase   (AMPK).      This   cellular   energy   sensor   is   activated   when   the   ATP:ADP   ratio   is   low,   leading   to   arrest   of   anabolic   processes   and   a   shift   to   catabolic   processes   like   autophagy   (reviewed   in   Hardie,   Ross,   &   Hawley,   2012).      Notably,   activation  of  AMPK  increases  the  activity  of  the  mTOR  repressor  TSC1/2  and  results   in   phosphorylation   of   Raptor,   a   component   of   mTORC1,   which   impairs   mTOR   complex  assembly  and  function  (Gwinn  et  al.,  2008;  Inoki,  Zhu,  &  Guan,  2003).    Thus,   AMPK   activation   is   inversely   related   to   mTOR   activation.      Therefore,   we   activated   AMPK  using  the  agonist  A769662,  which  in  turn  inhibits  mTOR  (Appendix  Figure  A- 2,   D),   and   scored   lysosome   tubulation.      This   method   of   mTOR   inhibition   also   strongly   blocked   TL   biogenesis   in   response   to   LPS   (Figure   3.11G,   H).         Overall,   these   results  demonstrate  that  mTOR  is  required  for  LPS-induced  lysosome  tubulation  in   RAW  cells.      3.2.4:  The  Akt-mTOR  Axis  Prolongs  LPS-Derived  Signaling  in  Macrophages      Following   exposure   to   LPS,   cells   quickly   internalize   the   TLR4-MyD88   complexes,   which   are   transported   to   endosomes   for   inactivation   (Husebye   et   al.,   2006).      This   led   us   to   question   whether   the   Akt-mTOR   pathway   may   serve   to   sustain   LPS- induced  signaling  after  TLR4  degradation.    To  test  this,  we  examined  the  kinetics  of   phospho-Akt   and   phospho-S6K   to   assess   Akt   and   mTOR   activation   after   LPS   exposure,   respectively.      Interestingly,   both   were   significantly   stimulated   within   15   minutes   of   LPS   exposure   and   remained   strongly   upregulated   for   at   least   2   hours   (Figure  3.12A).   To  determine  if  this  activation  correlates  with  lysosome  tubulation,  we  tested   the   kinetics   of   lysosome   tubulation.      Interestingly,   significant   lysosome   tubulation   occurred  within  only  30  minutes  of  LPS  exposure  and  gradually  increased  over  time   (Figure   3.12B,   C).      These   results   suggest   that   the   Akt-mTOR   axis   may   help   sustain   signaling  after  TLR4  internalization  and  degradation,  and  may  help  program  various   aspects   of   macrophages   including   lysosome   morphology   and   function.      Is   this   a  

  

58  

conserved   phenomenon   in   other   innate   immune   cells?      It   is   known   that   primary   dendritic   cells   convert   their   MIIC,   a   lysosome-related   organelle,   into   long   tubular   structures   following   LPS   stimulation,   and   this   is   proposed   to   aid   antigen   presentation   in   maturing   DCs   (Boes   et   al.,   2002;   Chow,   Toomre,   Garrett,   &   Mellman,   2002).      Thus,   we   next   examined   if   the   role   of   mTOR   on   lysosome   tubulation   extended  to  dendritic  cells  as  well.      3.2.5:  mTOR  Controls  Lysosome/MIIC  Tubulation  in  Primary  Dendritic  Cells      To  test  whether  mTOR  controls  lysosome  tubulation  in  other  cell  types,  we  extended   our   experimental   analysis   to   primary   mouse   bone   marrow-derived   dendritic   cells   (BMDCs).    To  confirm  that  the  tubular  MIIC  and  TLs  are  the  same  compartment  in   BMDCs,   we   labeled   lysosomes   of   BMDCs   from   MHCII-GFP-expressing   transgenic   mice   (Boes   et   al.,   2002)   with   fluorescent   dextrans.      After   LPS   stimulation,   cells   were   observed   by   live-cell   imaging.      We   observed   abundant   MHCII-GFP-positive   tubules   that   overwhelmingly   co-labeled   with   Alexa-555-dextran,   suggesting   that   the   MIIC   tubules  are  indeed  lysosomal  (Figure  3.13A).          We   next   demonstrated   that   LPS   treatment   increased   the   levels   of   phospho- S6K   in   BMDCs   by   about   90%   at   1   and   2   h   and   this   effect   was   abolished   by   torin1   (Figure  3.13B).    This  result  indicates  that,  as  in  RAW  cells,  LPS  stimulates  mTOR  in   DCs.      LPS   activation   induced   a   striking   amount   of   lysosome   tubulation   in   BMDCs   with   a   20-fold   increase   over   unstimulated   BMDCs   (Figure   3.13C,   D).      Finally,   we   applied   mTOR   inhibitors   and   scored   lysosome   tubulation   in   BMDCs.      Treatment   with   rapamycin   or   torin1   prior   to   LPS   stimulation   impeded   TL   formation,   as   we   observed   a   5-fold   reduction   in   lysosome   tubulation   compared   to   LPS   condition   alone   (Figure   3.13C,   D).      Overall,   these   results   indicate   that   mTOR   plays   an   important  role  in  lysosome  tubulation  in  innate  immune  cells.        

  

59  

3.2.6:  Autophagy  Does  Not  Impact  LPS-Mediated  Lysosome  Tubulation      mTOR   inhibition   is   a   key   trigger   for   autophagy   (Beugnet,   Tee,   Taylor,   &   Proud,   2003).      Therefore,   we   questioned   whether   autophagy   might   antagonize   lysosome   tubulation  in  torin1-treated  cells.    To  test  this,  we  employed  siRNA-mediated  gene   silencing   against   ULK1   (unc51-like   autophagy   activating   kinase   1),   the   major   kinase   responsible  for  autophagy  induction.    Using  this  approach,  we  successfully  silenced   ULK1   expression   by   >60%,   as   measured   by   quantitative   PCR   (Figure   3.14A).      To   ensure   that   this   level   of   ULK1   silencing   was   sufficient   to   impair   autophagy,   we   examined   the   number   of   LC3   puncta   that   formed   in   cells   by   immunofluorescence   microscopy,   a   well-characterized   assay   for   autophagosome   formation   (Kimura,   Fujita,  Noda,  &  Yoshimori,  2009;  Mizushima,  Yoshimori,  &  Levine,  2010).    Using  cells   electroporated   with   control   non-targeting   siRNA,   we   observed   a   3-fold   increase   in   the   number   of   LC3-positive   stuctures   upon   torin1   treatment   (Figure   3.14B,   C).     Remarkably,   ULK1-silenced   cells   strongly   resisted   the   formation   of   LC3-positive   puncta   after   torin1   treatment   (Figure   3.14B,   C),   indicating   that   autophagy   was   indeed  suppressed  in  these  cells.          Having   shown   that   silencing   ULK1   successfully   blocked   autophagy,   we   assessed   the   effect   of   torin1   in   tubular   lysosome   biogenesis   in   these   cells.      First,   ULK1-silenced  cells  were  as  proficient  at  tubulating  their  lysosomes  in  response  to   LPS   as   control   cells   electroporated   with   non-targeting   oligonucleotides   (Figure   3.14D,   E).      Most   importantly,   LPS-induced   lysosome   tubulation   was   suppressed   by   torin1  equally  between  ULK1-silenced  cells  and  control  cells  (Figure  3.14D,  E).    This   data  suggests  that  autophagy  is  not  responsible  for  blocking  lysosome  tubulation  in   cells   treated   with   torin1,   but   rather   that   mTOR   activity   is   necessary   for   lysosome   tubulation.           

  

60  

3.2.7:  mTOR  is  Required  for  Anterograde  Lysosomal  Transport      To   address   how   mTOR   influences   lysosome   morphology,   we   tested   whether   there   were  any  apparent  changes  to  the  aforementioned  lysosome  tubulation  machinery   (Chapter   3,   Section   3.1)   upon   inhibition   of   mTOR.      We   began   with   microtubules,   the   scaffold   along   which   lysosomes   tubulate   (Swanson,   Bushnell,   &   Silverstein,   1987;   Vyas   et   al.,   2007).      We   employed   immunofluorescence   against   -tubulin   and   compared   the   general   appearance   of   microtubules   in   cells   with   or   without   functional   mTOR.      We   observed   no   obvious   differences   in   the   overall   microtubule   organization   in   RAW   cells   between   control,   LPS,   Torin1   or   Torin1+LPS   conditions   (Appendix  Figure  A-3,  A).    In  addition,  we  observed  no  difference  in  basal  lysosomal   motility  upon  mTOR  inhibition  (Appendix  Figure  A-3,  B).   Because  microtubules  and  basal  lysosomal  motility  appeared  unaffected,  we   sought   to   determine   whether   motility/position   of   lysosomes   was   affected   in   stimulated   cells.      In   order   to   examine   both   kinesin-   and   dynein-   dependent   lysosomal   transport,   we   applied   a   previously   established   protocol   developed   by   Heuser  (Heuser,  1989).    By  lowering  the  pH  of  the  medium  with  acetate,  lysosomes   could  be  forced  to  the  cell  periphery,  a  process  that  required  kinesin  activity.    This   treatment   could   be   followed   by   a   recovery   period   in   which   regular   medium   is   replaced.    During  this  time,  lysosomes  returned  to  their  perinuclear  and  dispersed   distribution,   which   required   dynein.      Thus,   we   assessed   the   distribution   of   lysosomes   in   cells   under   resting   conditions,   acidic   conditions   and   following   recovery,   in   both   control   and   mTOR-inhibited   cells.      To   quantify   lysosomal   distribution,  we  applied  a  shell  analysis  in  which  the  percentage  of  total  lysosomes   was   computed   in   three   different   regions   of   the   cell:   near   the   nucleus,   in   the   cell   periphery  or  the  intermediate  space  between  these  two  areas  (schematic  in  Figure   3.15B).      As   expected,   acetate   redistributed   lysosomes   toward   the   cell   periphery   in   control  cells,  as  there  was  a  depletion  of  lysosomes  from  the  perinuclear  shell  and   subsequent   accumulation   in   the   peripheral   shell   (Figure   3.15A,   B).      We   computed   redistribution  as  a  ratio  of  the  percentage  of  lysosomes  in  the  peripheral  shell  to  the   percentage  of  lysosomes  in  the  perinuclear  shell,  with  a  high  ratio  indicating  strong      61  

peripheral  redistribution  and  a  low  ratio  indicating  poor  peripheral  redistribution.     Interestingly,   although   mTOR-inhibited   cells   behaved   similar   to   control,   the   extent   of   peripheral   lysosomal   distribution   following   acetate   treatment   was   significantly   attenuated  (Figure  3.15A,  B-compare  black  and  grey  bars  in  acetate  conditions).    Of   note,  mTOR-inhibited  cells  showed  a  recovery  of  lysosomes  back  to  the  perinuclear   shell   comparable   to   that   of   control   cells   (Figure   3.15A,   B-compare   black   and   grey   bars  in  recovery  conditions).    Since  the  acetate  condition  shows  a  ratio  of  only  2.2  in   torin1-treated  cells  compared  to  3.8  in  control  cells,  and  recovery  was  comparable   between   the   two,   we   conclude   that   anterograde   rather   than   retrograde   lysosomal   trafficking  is  likely  affected  by  mTOR.    Thus,  the  results  suggest  that  mTOR  may  be   exerting   its   effects   on   lysosome   tubulation   by   directly   or   indirectly   up-regulating   kinesin  and/or  down-regulating  dynein  activity.         3.2.8:  mTOR  is  Required  for  Antigen  Presentation  in  Dendritic  Cells      Others   have   previously   observed   tubules   containing   MHCII-GFP   in   DCs   being   targeted  to  the  immunological  synapse  between  host  DC  and  bound  T-cell  (Boes  et   al.,   2002,   2003).      From   this,   it   has   been   proposed   that   MHCII   is   delivered   to   the   plasma   membrane   for   antigen   presentation   via   these   tubular   MIIC   intermediates   Barois,   de   Saint-Vis,   Lebecque,   Geuze,   &   Kleijmeer,   2002;   Boes   et   al.,   2002;   Chow,   Toomre,   Garrett,   &   Mellman,   2002).      We   thus   asked   whether   inhibition   of   mTOR,   which   impairs   TL   formation,   would   also   impair   MHCII   delivery   to   the   plasma   membrane   of   activated   DCs.      To   test   this,   we   treated   BMDCs   from   wild-type   C57BL/6J   mice   with   either   LPS   or   LPS   and   Torin1,   and   stained   for   surface   MHCII.     Using  flow  cytometry  we  detected  a  strong  surface  accumulation  of  MHCII  in  the  LPS   condition,   as   expected   (Figure   3.16A).      In   comparison,   mTOR-inhibited   cells   displayed   a   significantly   reduced   amount   of   plasma   membrane   MHCII   after   LPS   stimulation  (Figure  3.16A).    This  change  in  surface  MHCII  was  not  due  to  an  overall   change   in   MHCII   expression   as   total   MHCII   levels   remained   unchanged   between   treatments   (Figure   3.16B,   C).      Taken   together,   there   results   indicate   that   mTOR,   a      62  

regulator  of  the  morphology  and  trafficking  of  lysosomes/MIIC,  controls  cell-surface   delivery   of   MHCII   in   BMDCs.      In   addition,   these   results   remain   consistent   with   a   proposed  role  for  tubular  MIIC  intermediates  in  delivering  antigen  to  the  cell  surface   for  antigen  presentation.      3.2.9:  Model  of  Tubular  Lysosome  Biogenesis      Tubular   lysosome   biogenesis   required   the   concerted   actions   of   lysosomal   small   GTPases   Rab7   and   Arl8b,   their   effectors   RILP,   FYCO1   and   SKIP,   and   the   microtubule   motor  proteins  dynein  and  kinesin  I  (Chapter  3,  Section  3.1).    LPS-induced  lysosome   tubulation   appears   to   be   activated   through   a   TLR4-MyD88-PI3K-Akt-mTOR   axis.     Although   the   mechanism   of   how   mTOR   affects   lysosome   tubulation   has   not   been   worked  out,  I  provide  evidence  that  mTOR  likely  impedes  on  anterograde  lysosomal   transport,  and  is  therefore  necessary  for  processes  like  antigen  presentation,  which   rely   on   lysosome   tubulation/anterograde   lysosomal   transport   (Chapter   3,   Section   3.2).      Thus,   I   integrated   my   experimental   results   from   sections   3.1   and   3.2   into   a   model  for  tubular  lysosome  biogenesis  (Figure  3.17).    In  this  model,  I  envision  that   LPS   signals   through   its   receptor   TLR4   to   activate   the   MyD88-PI3K-Akt-mTOR   pathway.    In  turn,  mTOR  integrates  these  signals  to  influence  lysosomal  anterograde   transport   through   modulating   activity   of   microtubule-based   motors.      As   yet,   it   is   unclear   whether   mTOR   acts   directly   or   indirectly   on   the   motors   to   affect   their   activity.      Finally,   motors   engage   lysosomal   movement   by   linking   to   lysosomal   machinery:  kinesin  can  bind  the  Arl8b  effector  SKIP  or  the  Rab7  effector  FYCO1  and   dynein  can  bind  the  Rab7  effector  RILP.    It  is  the  concerted  action  of  these  motors   and   their   links   to   the   lysosome   that   allow   for   "stretching"   of   this   organelle   along   microtubules  to  bestow  a  tubular  structure  upon  the  lysosome.    Finally,  the  activity   of  all  the  components  of  TLs  is  required  for  efficient  cell-surface  delivery  of  MHCII  in   professional   antigen   presenting   cells,   as   these   tubular   lysosomes   appear   to   be   the   compartment  that  is  important  for  antigen  delivery  to  the  plasma  membrane.            63  

                                                Figures  for  Chapter  3                                                                                      

  

64  

Figure   3.1:   LPS   Stimulates   Lysosome   Tubulation   in   Macrophage   Cell   Lines.   (A)   Lysosomes   of   resting   (left)   and   LPS-stimulated   (right)   RAW   macrophages.     Arrowheads  indicate  tubular  lysosomes.    Insets,  bright  field;  scale  bars,  15  m.    (B)   Percentage   of   cells   displaying   at   least   one   tubular   lysosome,   where   tubular   lysosome  4  um.    (C)  Average  number  of  tubular  lysosomes  per  cell.    In  both  (B)  and   (C)   data   are   mean   ±   SEM   of   n=3   experiments,   where   >50   cells   were   examined   per   condition   per   experiment;   means   were   statistically   analyzed   by   Student's   t-test;   p<0.0001.      (D)   Snapshots   of   live-cell   movies   of   tubular   lysosomes   undergoing   elongation  (top  panel-across),  fusion  (middle  panel)  and  branching  (bottom  panel).     Arrowheads  indicate  TLs  undergoing  each  event.    Numbers  represent  time  points  in   seconds.    Scale  bars,  5  m.     

  

65  

              

  

66  

Figure   3.2:   Dynein   and   Kinesin   I   are   Required   for   Lysosome   Tubulation.      (A-C)   Lysosomes   of   LPS-stimulated   RAW   cells   were   labeled   with   fluorescent   dextrans   (left).      Arrowheads   indicate   TLs.      Scale   bars,   10   m.      (A)   LPS-treated   cells   before   (left)   and   after   (right)   treatment   with   20   M   nocodazole   for   0.5   h.      (B)   Cells   expressing   KIF5DN-RFP   (right,   outlined   on   left)   show   abated   TL   formation   compared   to   surrounding   untransfected   cells.      (C)   Cells   expressing   dynamitin-GFP   (right,   outlined   on   left)   show   reduced   number   of   TLs   compared   to   untransfected   cells.    (D)  Quantification  of  number  of  TLs  in  cells  inhibited  for  kinesin  and  dynein.     Data   are   mean   ±   SEM   normalized   to   untransfected   control   cells   within   the   same   experiment  (n=4  experiments,  30-60  cells  per  condition  per  experiment;  p<0.0001   for  both  experimental  conditions).  

  

67  

     

  

68  

Figure   3.3:   Rab7   is   Required   for   Lysosome   Tubulaton.      (A-C)   Lysosomes   of   LPS- stimulated   RAW   cells   labeled   with   Alexa-555-dextran   (left)   and   expressing   GFP- tagged  Rab7  probes  (right).    Arrowheads  indicate  TLs.    Scale  bars,  10  m.    (A)  Cells   expressing  GFP-Rab7  (right,  outlined  on  left)  show  that  GFP-Rab7  colocalized  with   dextran   labeled   TLs   (left).      (B)   Cells   expressing   GFP-RILP-c33   (right,   outlines   on   left),   a   probe   for   active   Rab7,   indicate   that   TLs   display   GTP-Rab7.      (C)   Cells   expressing   GFP-Rab7T22N   (right,   outlined   on   left)   experienced   a   strong   decline   in   lysosome   tubulation   compared   to   control   GFP-Rab7   transfected   cells.      (D)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation.      Data   are   mean   number   of   TLs   per   cell   ±   SEM   in   GFP-Rab7T22N   transfectants   normalized   to   cells   transfected   with   GFP-Rab7   (n=3   experiments,  with  >30  cells  per  condition  per  experiment;  p<0.0001).  

  

69  

            70  

Figure   3.4:   RILP   is   Involved   in   Lysosome   Tubulation.      (A)   Lysosomes   of   LPS- simulated,   GFP-RILP-expressing   (right)   RAW   cells   were   labeled   with   TMR   dextran   (left).    GFP-RILP  localized  to  existing  TLs,  as  indicated  by  arrowheads.    Scale  bars,  10   m.      (B)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   in   cells   overexpressing   GFP-RILP,   normalized  to  untransfected  control  cells.    Data  are  mean  ±  SEM  (n=3  experiments,   >20   cells/condition/experiment;   p<0.0003).      (C)   Quantification   of   RILP   silencing   using   two   different   siRNA   oligos   (siRNA   oligo   11   and   12).      Data   are   mean   ±   SEM,   normalized   to   the   corresponding   scrambled   control   (n=3   experiments;   p<0.005).     (D)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   in   RILP-silenced   cells,   normalized   to   corresponding  scrambled  control.    Data  are  mean  number  of  TLs  per  cell  ±  SEM  (n=3   experiments  for  each  oligo  with  >30  cells  quantified  per  condition,  per  experiment;   p<0.0001  for  each  treatment).                                                              

  

71  

                           72  

Figure  3.5:  FYCO1  is  Involved  in  Lysosome  Tubulation.    (A  and  B)  Lysosomes  of  LPS- stimulated,   mCherry-FYCO1   transfected   cells   (right,   outlined   on   left)   RAW   cells   were   labeled   with   Alexa-488-dextran   (left).      Tubular   lysosomes   are   highlighted   by   arrowheads.      Scale   bars,   10   m.   (A)   Cells   overexpressing   FYCO1   show   a   reduced   number   of   TLs   relative   to   surrounding   untransfected   cells.      (B)   mCherry-FYCO1   labeled   TLs.      (C)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   in   cells   overexpressing   mCherry-FYCO1,   normalized   to   control   untransfected   cells   (n=3   experiments,   20-40   cells   quantified   per   experiment,   per   condition;   p<0.0001).      (D)   Quantification   of   FYCO1  expression  by  qRT-PCR  following  silencing  with  SMARTpool  siRNA  oligo  mix   or   two   individual   siRNA   oligos   (9   and   11).      Data   are   mean   ±   SEM,   normalized   to   respective  scrambled  control.    (For  SMARTpool  mix:  n=4  experiments,  p<0.0001;  for   oligos   9   and   11:   n=3   experiments   each,   p<0.006).      (E)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   in   FYCO1-silenced   cells   normalized   to   corresponding   scrambled   oligos.     Data   are   mean   number   of   TLs   per   cell   ±   SEM.      (For   the   SMARTpool   mix:   n=4   experiments,   with   >40   cells   quantified   per   condition   per   experiment;   for   oligos   9   and  11:  n=3,  with  >30  cells  counted  per  condition  per  experiment,  p<0.0001  for  all   conditions).     

  

73  

        

  

74  

Figure   3.6:   Arl8b   and   SKIP   are   Required   for   Lysosome   Tubulation.      (A   and   B)   Lysosomes   of   LPS-stimulated   RAW   cells   transfected   with   Arl8b-GFP   probes   (right,   outlined   in   left)   were   labeled   with   Alexa-555-dextran   (left).      Arrowheads   indicate   TLs.      Scale   bars,   10   m.      (A)   TLs   are   labeled   with   Arl8b-GFP.      (B)   Cells   expressing   Arl8bT24N-GFP   are   strongly   impaired   in   their   ability   to   for   TLs   compared   to   surrounding   untransfected   cells.      (C)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   in   Arl8bT24N-GFP  expressing  cells,  normalized  to  cells  expressing  the  wild-type  Arl8b.     Data   are   mean   number   of   TLs   per   cell   ±   SEM   (n=3   experiments,   with   >15   cells   quantified   per   condition   per   experiment;   p<0.0001).      (D)   Western   blot   showing   knockdown   of   Arl8b   in   Arl8b-silenced   RAW   cells   using   the   SMARTpool   mix.      The   `RAW   lysate'   and   `Scrambled'   lanes   show   Arl8b   expression   in   whole   cell   lysates   of   untreated   RAW   cells   and   RAW   cells   treated   with   scrambled   siRNA,   respectively.     Arl8b   was   probed   using   anti-Arl8b   antibodies   that   were   a   generous   gift   from   Dr.   Michael   Brenner   (Harvard).      GAPDH   expression   was   used   as   a   loading   control   and   was   detected   using   anti-GAPDH   antibodies.      (E)   Quantification   of   Arl8b   silencing   using   two   different   siRNA   oligos   (oligos   10   and   12).      Data   are   mean   ±   SEM,   normalized   to   scrambled   control   (n=3   experiments,   p<0.0001   for   each   oligo).      (F)   Quantification  of  TL  formation  in  Arl8b-silenced  cells.    Data  are  mean  number  of  TLs   per   cell   ±   SEM,   normalized   to   the   corresponding   scrambled   control   oligos   (n=3   experiments,  with  >20  cells  quantified  per  condition  per  experiment;  p<0.0001  for   each   condition.      (G)   Quantification   of   SKIP   silencing   using   SMARTpool   mix   or   two   individual   oligos   (5   and   7).      Data   are   mean   ±   SEM,   normalized   to   respective   scrambled   controls   (n=3   experiments;   p<0.0040   for   each   condition.      (H)   Quantification   of   TL   formation   in   SKIP-silenced   cells.      Data   are   mean   number   of   TLs   per   cell   ±   SEM,   normalized   to   control   cells   treated   with   scrambled   siRNA   (n=3   experiments,   with   >20   cells   counted   per   condition   per   experiment;   p<0.0001   for   each  condition).     

  

75  

      76  

Figure   3.7:   Tubular   Lysosomes   are   Highly   Motile.      (A   and   B)   Motility   tracks   of   randomly   selected   lysosomes   in   LPS-treated   cells,   where   individual   punctate   lysosomes  (A)  and  TLs  (B)  are  represented  by  different  colours.    All  lysosomes  were   tracked  for  1  min  each  and  tracks  were  overlayed  to  show  total  distance  traveled  by   each   lysosome.      (C)   The   displacement   distance   between   starting   and   end   points   after   1   min   of   observation   for   punctate   and   TLs   in   LPS-treated   cells,   data   are   means   ±  SEM  and  are  based  on  >30  randomely  chosen  lysosomes/TLs  within  15  different   cells   from   three   independent   experiments.      Means   were   compared   using   the   Student's  t-test  with  a  p<0.0001.    (D)  Total  track  lengths  after  1  min  of  observation   for  punctate  and  TLs  in  LPS-treated  cells,  data  are  means  ±  SEM  and  are  based  on   >30  randomly  chosen  lysosomes/TLs  within  15  different  cells  from  three  different   experiments.    Means  were  compared  using  the  Student's  t-test  with  a  p<0.0009.    (E)   Quantification   of   lysosome   mean   velocities   for   punctate   and   TLs   in   LPS   and   non- LPS-treated   cells.      Data   are   mean   ±   SEM   and   are   based   on   >30   randomly   chosen   lysosomes/TLs  among  15  different  cells  from  three  independent  experiments.    Mean   velocities   of   puctate   lysosomes   and   TLs   in   LPS-treated   cells   were   tested   against   those   in   non-LPS-treated   cells   using   Student's   t-test   with   p-values   of   0.0097   and   0.0006,  respectively.                                         

  

77  

  

  

  

78  

Figure  3.8:  Schematic  of  TLR4  Signaling  Pathways  and  Compounds  that  Selectively   Inhibit  Them.    Three  major  signaling  pathways  are  known  to  eminate  downstream   of  the  LPS  receptor,  TLR4.    These  include  the  PI3K,  which  is  likely  recruited  to  TLR4   via   the   adapter   MyD88   (Laird   et   al.,   2009).      The   MyD88-IRAK-TRAF6   pathway,   which  ultimately  leads  to  cytokine  production  by  inducing  nuclear  translocation  of   the  transcription  factor  NFB.    Finally,  the  TRAM/TRIF-TBK1-IRF3  pathway  is  also   known   to   be   activated   downstream   of   TLR4   and   results   in   production   of   pro- inflammatory   mediators   through   transcriptional   control.      To   inhibit   each   pathway   independently,   we   applied   the   compounds   LY294002,   IRAK1/4   inhibitor   and   MRT67007   to   inhibit   PI3K,   IRAK1/4   and   TBK1,   respectively.      In   addition,   PepinhMYD,  a  MyD88-inhibitory  peptide  was  used  to  block  MyD88  signaling.        

  

79  

                                    80  

Figure   3.9:      MyD88   and   PI3K   are   Required   for   LPS-Induced   Lysosome   Tubulation   in   Macrophages.   (A)   Lysosomes   of   RAW   264.7   macrophages   labeled   with   Alexa555   dextran.    Cells  were  either  treated  with  the  vehicle  dimethyl  sulfoxide  (DMSO)  alone   as   a   control,   or   pre-treated   for   20   min   with   DMSO,   2   M   TBK1   inhibitor   (MRT67307),   5   M   IRAK1/4   inhibitor,   1   M   PI3K   inhibitor   (LY294002)   or   1   M   Class  I  PI3K  inhibitor  (ZSTK474)  before  stimulating  with  100  ng/mL  LPS  for  2  h  to   induce   lysosome   tubulation.      Alternatively,   cells   were   incubated   with   Pepinh-ctrl   (control   peptide)   or   Pepinh-MYD   (MyD88-inhibitory   peptide)   for   3   h   before   stimulating   with   LPS.      LPS   induces   extensive   tubulation   but   not   in   cells   inhibited   for   MyD88   and   PI3Ks.      Dashed   lines   outline   individual   cells.      Red   arrowheads   denote   individual   lysosome   tubules.      Scale   bar   =   10   m.      (B)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   under   conditions   described   in   A.      Shown   are   the   mean   ±   SEM   of   three   independent  experiments  based  on  25-30  cells  per  condition  per  experiment.    Data   was   statistically   analysed   using   a   one-way   ANOVA,   followed   by   Tukey's   post-hoc   test.    An  asterisk  (*)  indicates  a  significant  difference  (p  <  0.001)  between  LPS  alone   and  cells  pre-treated  with  the  MyD88  inhibitory  peptide  and  the  PI3Ks  inhibitors.       

  

81  

           82  

Figure   3.10:   The   Canonical   PI3K-Akt   Pathway   Regulates   LPS-Induced   Lysosome   Tubulation   in   Macrophages.      (A)   Western   blots   of   whole   cell   lysates   from   RAW   cells   treated   as   indicated   across   lanes.      LPS   increases   the   levels   of   activated   Akt   (pAkt)   in   a  PI3K-dependent  manner,  but  independently  of  IRAK1/4  and  TBK1  activity.    Total   Akt  was  probed  for  as  loading  control.    (B)  Lysosomes  of  RAW  264.7  macrophages   labeled   with   Alexa555   dextran.      Cells   were   treated   with   vehicle   alone   (DMSO)   or   pre-treated   for   20   min   with   DMSO,   or   5   M   Akt   inhibitor   (Akti)   before   2   h   LPS   stimulation.      Extensive   lysosomal   tubules   appear   upon   LPS   stimulation,   but   not   in   cells  inhibited  for  Akt.    Dashed  lines  outline  individual  cells.    Red  arrowheads  denote   individual  TLs.    Scale  bar  =  10  m.    (C)  Quantification  of  lysosome  tubulation  under   conditions   described   in   B.      Shown   are   the   mean   ±   SEM   of   three   independent   experiments   based   on   25-30   cells   per   condition   per   experiment.      Data   was   statistically  analysed  using  a  one-way  ANOVA,  followed  by  Tukey's  post-hoc  test.    An   asterisk   (*)   indicates   a   significant   difference   (p   <   0.0001)   between   LPS   alone   and   cells  inhibited  for  Akt.           

  

83  

                                      

  

84  

Figure  3.11:  mTOR  is  Activated  by  LPS  and  is  Required  for  Lysosome  Tubulation  in   Macrophages.      (A)   Western   blots   of   whole   cell   lysates   from   RAW   cells   treated   as   indicated  across  lanes.    LPS  treatment  for  1  and  2  h  enhances  S6K  phosphorylation   (pS6K)   relative   to   non-LPS   treated   cells   and   this   is   suppressed   by   torin1.      Total   S6K   was  probed  for  as  a  loading  control.    (B)  LPS-dependent  increase  in  pS6K  levels  is   dependent  on  PI3K  but  independent  of  IRAK1/4  and  TBK  activity.    (C)  Lysosomes  of   RAW   264.7   macrophages   labeled   with   Alexa555   dextran.      Cells   were   treated   with   vehicle  alone  (DMSO)  or  pre-treated  for  20  min  with  DMSO,  or  100  nM  torin1  before   2  h  LPS  stimulation.    Extensive  lysosomal  tubules  appear  upon  LPS  stimulation,  but   not   in   cells   inhibited   for   mTOR.      Dashed   lines   outline   individual   cells.      Red   arrowheads   denote   individual   TLs.      Scale   bar   =   10   m.   (D)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   under   conditions   described   in   C.      (E)   Lysosomes   labeled   with   Alexa555   dextran   in   LPS-treated   cells   electroporated   with   non-targeting   pool   (siNTP)   or   with   mTOR-targeting   siRNA   oligonucleotides   (simTOR).   (F)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   under   conditions   described   in   E.      Data   are   mean  ±  SEM  of  four  independent  experiments  containing  25-30  cells  per  condition.     (G)   Treatment   of   RAW   cells   with   the   AMPK   activator   A769662   blocks   TL   formation.     (H)  Quantification  of  lysosome  tubulation  under  conditions  described  in  G.    Data  are   mean   ±   SEM   of   three   independent   experiments   containing   25-30   cells   per   sample.     For   D,   data   were   statistically   tested   using   one-way   ANOVA   test,   followed   by   Tukey's   test.      For   G   and   H,   data   were   tested   with   a   paired   Student's   t-test,   *   p   <   0.0001.     Arrowheads  indicate  TLs  in  micrographs.    Scale  bars  =  10  m.       

  

85  

  

  

86  

Figure   3.12:   The   Akt-mTOR   Pathway   is   Activated   Early   and   Maintained   Under   LPS   Signaling   and   Coincides   with   Lysosome   Tubulation.      (A)   Western   blots   of   RAW   whole-cell   lysates   following   LPS   stimulation   for   the   time   points   indicated   across   top   (in  minutes).    LPS  stimulation  caused  phosphorylation  of  Akt  and  S6K  as  early  as  15   minutes,  increasing  at  30  min  and  remaining  for  at  least  2  h.    (B)  Lysosomes  of  RAW   264.7  macrophages  labeled  with  Alexa555  dextran.    Cells  were  treated  with  LPS  and   live-cell  imaging  was  carried  out  at  the  time  points  indicated  (in  minutes).    Dashed   lines  outline  individual  cells.    Red  arrowheads  denote  individual  TLs.    Scale  bar  =  10   m.      (C)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   under   conditions   described   in   B.     Data  was  statistically  analyzed  using  a  one-way  ANOVA,  followed  by  Tukey's  post- hoc  test.    An  asterisk  (*)  indicates  a  significant  difference  from  0  min  condition  (p  <   0.05).                                      

  

87  

                             

  

  

88  

Figure  3.13:  mTOR  is  Required  for  MIIC  Tubulation  in  Primary  Dendritic  Cells.    (A)   LPS-stimulated   BMDCs   from   MHC-II-GFP   mice   labeled   with   Alexa555-dextran.     Merge   shows   intracellular   co-localization   of   MHC-II   and   dextran.      Insets   highlight   lysosomal   tubules.      (B)   Western   blot   of   whole   cell   lysates   from   wild   type   BMDCs.     LPS   treatment   for   1   and   2   h   increases   the   levels   of   phospho-S6K   in   a   torin1- dependent  manner  indicating  that  LPS  activates  mTOR.    Total  S6K  was  probed  for  as   loading  control.    (C)  Lysosomes  of  wild  type  BMDCs  labeled  with  Alexa555  dextran.     Cells   were   treated   with   vehicle   alone   (DMSO)   or   pre-treated   for   20   min   with   DMSO,   100   nM   rapamycin,   or   100   nM   torin1   followed   by   100   ng/mL   LPS   treatment   for   2   hours   to   induce   lysosome   tubulation.      Both   torin1   and   rapamycin   appeared   to   strongly   reduce   lysosome   tubulation   in   BMDCs.      (D)   Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   under   conditions   described   in   C.      Data   are   mean   ±   SEM   of   three   independent  experiments  containing  25-30  cells  per  sample  per  experiment.    Scale   bars,  10  m.    Data  are  mean  ±  SEM  of  three  independent  experiments  containing  25- 30   cells   per   sample.      Data   was   statistically   analyzed   using   a   one-way   ANOVA,   followed  by  Tukey's  post-hoc  test.  An  asterisk  (*)  indicates  a  significant  difference  (p   <  0.0001)  between  LPS  alone  and  cells  exposed  to  rapamycin  and  torin1.               

  

89  

                             

  

90  

Figure   3.14:   Torin1   Blocks   Lysosome   Tubulation   in   a   Manner   Independent   of   Autophagy.      (A)   Relative   mRNA   expression   of   ULK1   in   RAW   cells   upon   siRNA   mediated   silencing   of   ULK1   compared   to   control   cells   treated   with   siNTP.      Data   is   mean   ±   SEM   of   3   independent   experiments.      (B)   Immunofluorescence   staining   of   RAW  cells  for  LC3  in  control  (siNTP)  and  ULK1-silenced  (siULK1)  conditions.    Note   the  increased  punctate  staining  of  LC3  in  siNTP  condition  with  2  h  of  200  nM  torin1,   indicating  autophagy  induction,  and  lack  of  LC3  puncta  in  ULK1-silenced  cells  under   the  same  condition  indicating  a  block  in  autophagy.    (C)  Quantification  of  LC3  puncta   in   B.    Data  are  mean  ±  SEM  from  2  individual  experiments  where  15-20  cells  were   analyzed   per   condition   per   experiment.      (D)   Lysosomes   of   siNTP   (top   panel)   or   siULK1   (bottom   panel)   RAW   264.7   macrophages   were   labeled   with   Alexa555   dextran.    Cells  were  treated  either  with  vehicle  (DMSO)  alone  or  pre-treated  for  20   min   with   DMSO   or   200   nM   torin1   followed   by   2   h   LPS   stimulation.      Dashed   lines   outline  individual  cells.    Red  arrowheads  denote  individual  TLs.    (E)  Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation   in   D.      Data   was   statistically   analyzed   using   a   two-way   ANOVA,  followed  by  Tukey's  post-hoc  test.  In   C,  an  asterisk  (*)  indicates  significant   difference  compared  to  siNTP/-torin1  condition  (p  <  0.0001).      In   E,  an  asterisk  (*)   indicates   significant   difference   between   DMSO   and   DMSO+LPS   conditions.      Scale   bars  =  10  m.                                

  

91  

                                   

  

92  

Figure   3.15:   mTOR   is   Required   for   Anterograde   Lysosomal   Transport.   (A)   Lysosomes  of  RAW  cells  were  pre-labeled  with  Alexa555-dextran  and  treated  for  2  h   with  either  DMSO  (top  row)  or  200  nM  torin1  (bottom  row).    Cells  were  either  left   sitting  in  regular  Ringer's  medium  ("resting"),  treated  with  Acetate  Ringer's  for  20   min   ("acetate")   or   treated   with   Acetate   Ringer's   for   20   min   followed   by   regular   Ringer's  medium  for  20  min  ("recovery").    Scale  bars  =  10  m.    (B)  Left:  schematic  of   shell   analysis   in   which   three   different   regions   (peripheral   shell   1;   middle   shell   2,   inner   shell   3)   were   analyzed   for   percentage   of   lysosomes.      Right:   Quantification   of   the   ratio   of   percent   lysosomes   in   shell   1   to   shell   3.      Data   are   mean   ±   SEM   of   tour   independent  experiments  containing  10  cells  per  condition  per  sample.    Data  were   statistically   analyzed   using   a   two-way   ANOVA,   followed   by   Tukey's   post-hoc   test.     An   asterisk   (*)   indicates   significant   difference   between   control   acetate   and   torin1- acetate  treatments,  *  p  <  0.05.  

  

93  

                 

  

94  

Figure  3.16:  mTOR  is  Required  for  LPS-Induced  Cell  Surface  Delivery  of  MHCII.  (A)   BMDCs   from   wild-type   C57BL/6J   mice   were   treated   with   DMSO   for   5   hours,   DMSO+LPS   for   5   hours   or   pre-treated   for   20   min   with   Torin1   followed   by   LPS+Torin1  for  5  hours.    Cells  were  stained  live  and  gated  on  the  DC-specific  marker   CD11c.    This  subset  was  analyzed  for  cell  surface  MHCII  using  anti-MHCII  antibodies   and   flow   cytometry.      Data   are   mean   ±   SEM   of   seven   independent   experiments,   normalized   to   control   (DMSO).      10,000   events   were   collected   per   condition.      Data   were   statistically   analyzed   by   one-way   ANOVA   and   Tukey's   post-hoc   test.      An   asterisk  (*)  indicated  significant  difference  between  LPS  and  LPS+Torin1  treatments   (*p<0.0001).      (B)   Western   blot   of   BMDC   whole-cell   lysates   treated   as   described   in   (A)  showing  total  MHCII  levels  using  an  anti-MHCII  antibody  graciously  provided  by   Dr.   Shin   (UCSF)   and   GAPDH   as   loading   control   (top).      (C)   Quantification   of   three   individual  western  blots  under  conditions  described,  normalized  to  GAPDH.                           

  

95  

                                                           

  

96  

Figure   3.17:   Model   of   Tubular   Lysosome   Biogenesis   in   Macrophages   and   Dendritic   Cells.    Activation  of  TLR4  with  LPS  engages  the  adaptor  MyD88,  which  recruits  PI3K   leading   to   the   activation   of   Akt   and   mTOR.      mTOR   likely   modulates   lysosome   morphology   by   controlling   microtubule-dependent   motor   activity   of   the   organelle.     In  turn,  microtubule  motors  link  to  lysosomes  through  Rab7  and  Arl8b  GTPases  and   their  effectors  RILP,  FYCO1  and  SKIP  to  allow  for  stretching  of  this  organelle  along   microtubules.      A   functional   consequence   of   inadequate   mTOR   signaling   is   not   only   lack  of  TL  formation  but  also  delivery  of  MHCII  to  the  plasma  membrane,  which  may   be   due   to   tubulation   deficiency.      Dashed   lines   indicate   incompletely   understood   mechanisms.        

  

97  

                                   

  

98  

              

               Chapter  4  

Discussion                                                  

  

99  

4.1:  Rab7  and  Arl8  GTPases  are  Necessary  for  Lysosome  Tubulation  in  Macrophages      Lysosomes   and   the   related   MIIC   normally   appear   as   small   punctate   structures   in   resting  macrophages  and  DCs  respectively.    However,  upon  exposure  of  these  cells   to  activating  agents  such  as  LPS,  fungal  antigens  and  phorbol  esters,  lysosomes  and   MIICs   undergo   a   dramatic   metamorphosis   that   is   visually   striking,   where   they   transform  into  long  tubular  lysosomes  and  tubular  MIICs  (TLs  and  tMIIC)  (Boes  et   al.,   2003;   Mrakovic,   Kay,   Furuya,   Brumell,   &   Botelho,   2012;   Swanson,   Yirines,   &   Silverstein,  1985;  Vyas  et  al.,  2007).    It  has  been  proposed  that  the  tMIIC  functions  to   deliver   antigen-bound   MHCII   complexes   to   immunological   synapses   (Bertho   et   al.,   2003;   Boes   et   al.,   2002,   2003).      TLs   in   macrophages   appear   to   retain   fluid-phase   content,  as  resting  macrophages  lose  approximatey  50%  of  their  pinocytosed  fluid   compared   to   activated   macrophages   (Swanson,   Yirinec,   &   Silverstein,   1985;   Swanson,   Burke,   &   Silverstein,   1987)   and   other   studies   implicate   TLs   in   phagosome   maturation  and  acidification  and  NOD  2  signaling  (Harrison,  Bucci,  Vieira,  Schroer,  &   Grinstein,   2003;   Nakamura   et   al.,   2014;   Sun-Wada,   Tabata,   Kawamura,   Aoyama,   &   Wada,  2009).    Surprisingly,  other  than  a  requirement  for  microtubules  and  kinesin,   very  little  was  known  about  how  TLs  and  tMIICs  form  (Boes  et  al.,  2003;  Swanson,   Bushnell,  &  Silverstein,  1987;  Vyas  et  al.,  2007).    Using  the  RAW  264.7  macrophage   cell   line   I   demonstrate   that   LPS   induces   the   transformation   of   lysosomes   into   tubular  lysosomes  and  exploit  this  model  system  for  the  study  of  TL  biogenesis.        The   data   presented   in   section   3.1   of   this   thesis   suggests   that   TL   biogenesis   occurs   through   the   coordinated   action   of   the   microtubule   motor   proteins   dynein   and   kinesin.      Thus   we   speculate   that   tubulation   occurs   in   part   by   `stretching',   as   lysosomes   are   pulled   in   opposite   directions   along   microtubules   by   these   motors.     Given   that   TLs   can   reach   excessive   lengths,   sometimes   15-20   m   long,   we   hypothesize   TLs   are   generated   from   enlarged   lysosomes   that   have   experienced   increased  membrane  fusion  or  decreased  membrane  fission.    Thus,  we  envision  that   these  enlarged  lysosomes  are  stretched  along  microtubule  scaffolds  by  dynein  and   kinesin  to  generate  TLs.    In  support  of  this  reasoning,  large  spherical  lysosomes  are   frequently   observed   when   microtubules,   or   the   link   between   lysosomes   and      100  

microtubules   is   perturbed   (Figure   3.1.2),   consistent   with   loss   of   a   scaffold   for   tubulation.      Alternatively,   it   is   possible   that   LPS   increases   the   number   of   lysosomes,   thus  providing  more  membrane  for  tubulation.      This   work   provides   evidence   that   the   lysosomal   small   GTPases   Rab7   and   Arl8b   are   essential   for   TL   biogenesis.      Given   that   FYCO1,   RILP   and   SKIP   appear   to   play   roles   in   TL   formation,   it   is   likely   that   Rab7   and   Arl8b   are   modulating   dynein   and   kinesin   activity   during   TL   biogenesis.      Rab7   recruits   RILP   and   FYCO1   to   lysosomes,   which   are   adaptors   of   dynein   and   kinesin   respectively.      Arl8b   recruits   SKIP   and   this   effector   directly   binds   kinesin   to   modulate   kinesin-dependent   trafficking   of   lysosomes   and   lysosome-related   organelles   (Bagshaw,   Callahan,   &   Mahuran,  2006;  Kaniuk  et  al.,  2011;  Rosa-Ferreira  &  Munro,  2011).    Beyond  a  role  in   governing   microtubule-associated   motors,   Rab7   and   Arl8b   play   other   important   roles   in   lysosomal   regulation.      Specifically,   both   GTPases   have   been   shown   to   associate   with   the   HOPS   (homotypic   fusion   and   protein   sorting)   complex   on   lysosomes   (Khatter   et   al.,   2015;   Wurmser,   Sato,   &   Emr,   2000).      This   complex   is   necessary   for   lysosome   membrane   fusion   (Garg   et   al.,   2011).      Thus,   it   remains   unclear   whether   these   GTPases   influence   TL   formation   by   controlling   membrane   trafficking.      In  addition  to  their  striking  change  in  morphology,  overall  lysosomal  motility   is  significantly  increased  upon  formation  of  TLs.    In  section  3.1.7,  I  provide  evidence   that   TLs   are   more   often   in   a   motile   phase,   compared   to   punctate   lysosomes.      This   is   obvious   when   TL   mean   velocities   are   computed,   which   averages   the   speed   over   periods  of  motile  and  static  phases.    Importantly,  all  lysosomes,  regardless  of  their   morphology,   migrate   at   similar   speeds,   thus   TLs   do   not   experience   faster   overall   speeds.      Instead,   the   data   indicates   that   punctate   lysosomes   undergo   longer   periods   of   latency   and   static   behaviour,   while   TLs   are   more   often   in   a   motile   phase.     Previously,   Falcon-Perez   et   al.   reported   that   lysosomes   labeled   with   fluorescent   dextrans,   as   was   done   here,   exhibited   mainly   short-range   movement   relative   to   LAMP1-GFP-labelled   organelles,   which   displayed   a   mixture   of   both   long-range   and   short-range   movement   (Falcón-Pérez,   Nazarian,   Sabatti,   &   Dell'Angelica,   2005).     This   `short-range'   and   `long-range'   movement   may   be   indicative   of   the   `static'   and      101  

`motile'  phases  described  here.    Thus,  in  agreement  with  previous  studies,  it  appears   that  punctate  lysosomes  are  more  often  in  the  `short-range'  or  `static'  phase,  while   we  observe  TLs  to  be  in  the  `long-range'  or  `motile'  phase.      Finally,   these   data   imply   that   regardless   of   LPS   treatment,   TLs   always   experienced   a   similarly   enhanced   mean   lysosome   velocity   compared   to   punctate   lysosomes.      Because   resting   macrophages   experience   some   basal   lysosome   tubulation  and  LPS-activated  macrophages  still  retained  some  punctate  lysosomes,   we   used   these   incomplete   phenotypes   to   our   advantage   and   measured   mean   lysosome  velocities  of  punctate  lysosomes  and  tubular  lysosomes  with  and  without   LPS  treatment  (Figure  3.7E).    This  analysis  was  able  to  discern  that  LPS  is  not  acting   to   directly   hyperactivate   lysosomal   movement.      Rather,   LPS   initiates   a   signaling   cascade   that   increases   tubulation   and   tubulation   itself   is   associated   with   hypermotility.      While   the   exact   mechanism   behind   the   enhanced   motility   of   TLs   is   unknown,  this  data  implies  several  possibilities:  1)  TLs  have  greater  levels  of  active   motor   proteins   associated   with   them   and/or   2)   these   motor   proteins   are   more   processive   and/or   3)   their   activity   is   better   coordinated.      Alas,   bidirectional   movement  of  organelles  is  a  poorly  understood  phenomenon  (Kardon  &  Vale,  2009).     Perhaps   tubular   lysosomes   will   prove   a   good   model   system   for   the   study   of   these   processes.                                          102  

4.2:   mTOR   Regulates   Lysosome   Tubulation   and   Antigen   Presentation   in   Macrophages  and  Dendritic  Cells      Continuing   on   the   investigation   of   tubular   lysosome   biogenesis   in   macrophages   and   DCs,  I  propose  a  role  for  the  lysosomal  protein  kinase  and  major  cell  stress  sensor,   mTOR,   in   regulating   lysosome   tubulation   by   integrating   signals   downstream   of   TLR4  to  the  cellular  machinery  that  drives  lysosome  tubulation.    In  addition  to  the   proposed   function   of   TLs   in   delivering   MHCII-antigen   complexes   to   the   surface   of   antigen   presenting   cells   (Boes   et   al.,   2002,   2003)   and   remodeling   phagosomes   (Mantegazza  et  al.,  2014;  Stephen  et  al.,  2007),  I  have  shown  in  chapter  3,  section  3.1   that   TLs   are   highly   motile   compared   to   punctate   lysosomes,   which   may   enhance   trafficking   rates   to   lysosomes   (Mrakovic,   Kay,   Furuya,   Brumell,   &   Botelho,   2012).     Interestingly,   little   is   known   about   how   LPS-mediated   signaling   interfaces   with   molecular  machinery  that  governs  lysosomal  morphology  and  identity.      Here   I   discuss   my   interpretation   of   the   data   presented   in   section   3.2   from   which   I   propose   a   model   where   the   TLR4-MyD88-PI3K-Akt-mTOR   signaling   pathway  helps  trigger  lysosome  tubulation  in  response  to  LPS  in  macrophages  and   DCs.    This  is  supported  by  evidence  that  pharmacological  inhibition  of  MyD88  and   PI3K,  in  particular  the  Class  I  PI3Ks,  Akt  and  mTOR  all  lead  to  a  strong  impediment   in   TL   formation   in   macrophages   and   DCs.      Conversely,   inhibition   of   TBK1   or   IRAK1/4  had  no  impact  on  lysosome  tubulation.    This  finding  is  consistent  with  LPS- dependent  activation  of  Akt  and  mTOR,  independently  of  IRAK1/4  or  TBK1  (Figures   3.10  and  3.11).    Of  note,  the  data  presented  here  is  in  agreement  with  previous  work   showing   that   MyD88,   an   adapter   protein   that   can   link   TLR4   to   PI3K-Akt,   is   required   for  lysosome  tubulation  (Bauerfeld  et  al.,  2012;  Boes  et  al.,  2003;  Laird  et  al.,  2009).       It   remains   possible   that   TL   biogenesis   is   regulated   by   multiple   signaling   pathways.      Vyas   and   colleagues   have   previously   shown   that   a   fungal   pathogen,   Cryptococcus  neoformans,   which   engages   both   TLR2   and   TLR4,   can   induce   extensive   tubulation   of   endolysosomes,   in   a   MyD88-independent   manner   in   DCs   (Vyas   et   al.,   2007),   though   it   is   possible   that   this   still   proceeds   through   the   PI3K-Akt-mTOR   module.      It   may   be   that   multiple   signals   converge   on   mTOR   to   induce   tubulation,      103  

such   as   those   derived   from   phorbol   esters   and   T-cell-MHCII   engagement.      Indeed,   others  have  shown  an  upregulation  of  Akt  and  mTOR  activity  in  multiple  cell  types   in  response  to  phorbol  esters  (Aeder,  Martin,  Soh,  &  Hussaini,  2004;  Hartmann  et  al.,   2013;  Ni  et  al.,  2015).   Having   shown   that   the   PI3K-Akt-mTOR   axis   controls   LPS-induced   TL   biogenesis,   we   next   asked   how   mTOR   governs   this   event.      We   thus   examined   the   factors   known   to   be   required   for   TL   biogenesis   and   whether   or   not   inhibition   of   mTOR  causes  changes  to  these  factors.    We  began  with  the  very  template  required   for   TL   formation,   microtubules.      There   appeared   to   be   no   observable   difference   in   the  gross  morphology  of  microtubules  or  the  basal  motility  of  lysosomes    (Appendix   Figure   A-3,   A   and   B)   in   cells   inhibited   for   mTOR.      These   findings   suggested   that   mTOR  does  not  control  overall  microtubule  architecture  or  the  basal  motor  activity   associated   with   lysosomes   in   macrophages.      However,   mTOR   inhibition   did   affect   stimulus-dependent  changes  in  lysosome  positioning  and  motility.    As  described  in   chapter   3,   sub-section   3.2.7,   lysosomes   can   be   forced   to   the   cell   periphery   upon   cytosol  acidification,  while  subsequent  neutralization  allows  for  a  recovery  period  in   which  lysosomes  return  to  the  center  of  cells  (Heuser,  1989).    Interestingly,  mTOR   inhibition   blocked   acid-induced   anterograde   lysosomal   transport   but   had   no   observable   impact   on   retrograde   transport   as   recovery   of   control   and   mTOR- inhibited   cells   showed   a   comparable   lysosomal   distribution.      This   suggests   that   mTOR   may   respond   to   certain   stimuli   to   switch   the   equilibrium   between   anterograde   and   retrograde   lysosomal   transport.      I   further   interpret   this   to   mean   that  mTOR  can  stimulate  kinesin  and/or  repress  dynein,  either  directly  or  indirectly,   to   assist   lysosomal   anterograde   transport.      Unfortunately,   the   morphological   changes  lysosomes  undergo  upon  LPS  stimulation  confounded  this  analysis  and  the   LPS  condition  could  not  be  analyzed.    Nonetheless,  I  speculate  that  mTOR  helps  to   coordinate   kinesin   and/or   dynein   to   induce   lysosome   tubulation   during   LPS   stimulation.   The   mechanism   by   which   mTOR   may   control   motor   activity   remains   unknown.      It   is   possible   that   mTOR   directly   phosphorylates   motor   subunits   to   control   their   activity,   or   indirectly   regulates   their   activity   through   modulation   of      104  

other  factors  that  control  motor  activation  or  anchoring  to  lysosomes.    To  test  this,   Victoria   Hipolito   in   our   lab   transfected   RAW   cells   with   RFP-Rab7,   RILPc33-GFP   (a   probe   for   GTP-Rab7)   or   Arl8b-GFP   and   assessed   overall   lysosomal   localization   of   the  GTPases  under  control,  LPS  or  torin1+LPS  conditions.    While  Rab7  and  RILPc33   localization   to   lysosomal   membranes   remained   unchanged   after   LPS   stimulation,   Victoria   found   that   LPS   increased   the   association   of   Arl8b   with   lysosomal   membranes   compared   to   control   resting   cells   (Figure   4.1,   Figures   section   at   the   end   of   this   chapter).      Interestingly,   inhibition   of   mTOR   abolished   this   LPS-induced   membrane-localization,   but   not   below   control   levels   (Figure   4.1).      These   data   suggest   that   mTOR   may   control   stimulus-dependent   activation   of   lysosomal   transport  machinery  to  alter  lysosome  morphology,  and  is  in  line  with  results  from   chapter   3,   sub-section   3.2.7.      A   more   rigorous   biochemical   approach   to   determine   the   actual   activation   state   (GTP-   vs   GDP-bound)   of   the   GTPases   under   these   conditions   is   required,   and   is   part   of   ongoing   work   from   myself   and   other   members   of  the  Botelho  lab.   Indeed,   there   exist   several   connections   between   microtubule   motors   and   regulatory   machineries   of   mTOR.      Recently,   Pu   et   al   have   identified   BORC   (BLOC- one-related   complex),   a   novel   lysosomal   complex   that   recruits   Arl8b   to   lysosomes   (Pu  et  al.,  2015).    Interestingly,  the  complex  appears  to  be  required  for  anterograde   lysosomal   motility   and   tubulation.      Among   the   components   found   to   interact   with   BORC,  the  authors  list  Ragulator,  a  lysosomal  complex  responsible  for  the  activation   of   mTORC1   (Pu   et   al.,   2015).      Since   this   study   focused   on   characterizing   the   interactions   between   Arl8b   and   BORC,   further   research   into   the   mechanism   and   requirements   of   BORC   in   mTOR   activation   would   be   required.      In   addition,   Arl8b   and  Ragulator  subunits  have  been  shown  to  be  necessary  for  the  proper  delivery  of   focal   adhesion   components   to   the   plasma   membrane   during   cell   adhesion,   further   emphasizing   a   potential   role   of   mTOR   regulatory   machinery   in   coordinating   anterograde  trafficking  (Schiefermeier  et  al.,  2014).    Finally,  mTOR  complexes  with   and   phosphorylates   CLIP-170,   a   plus-end   microtubule   tracking   protein,   which   controls   the   development   of   dendrites   and   arborization   of   neurons   in   a   PI3K- dependent  manner  (Swiech  et  al.,  2011).      105  

All  of  the  aforementioned  studies,  and  supporting  data  from  Victoria  Hipolito   (Figure   4.1)   implicate   mTOR   in   microtubule-dependent   transport,   particularly,   anterograde   transport.      These   findings   are   consistent   with   our   observations   that   mTOR   is   necessary   for   cell   surface   accumulation   of   MHCII   in   APCs   and   correlates   with  a  role  for  mTOR  in  TL  biogenesis.    This  in  turn  supports  a  proposed  function  of   TLs   in   delivering   antigen-MHCII   complexes   to   the   plasma   membrane   at   immune   synapses   (Boes   et   al.,   2002).      The   small   GTPase   Arl8b   has   already   been   shown   to   be   required  for  MHCII  delivery  to  the  plasma  membrane  (Michelet  et  al.,  2015),  thus  we   speculate   that   LPS-induced   activation   of   mTOR   regulates   Arl8b,   either   through   BORC,   or   an   unknown   guanyl   exchange   factor,   to   coordinate   kinesin   I   activity   on   lysosomes  and  drive  tubulation  and  exocytosis.   Given   the   association   of   mTOR   with   the   lysosomal   membrane   via   mTORC1,   it   is   a   suitable   candidate   to   govern   lysosomal   properties.      One   of   the   best-characterized   functions   of   lysosomal   mTOR   is   its   ability   to   integrate   signals   derived   from   amino   acid  levels  in  cells  (Bar-Peled,  Schweitzer,  Zoncu,  &  Sabatini,  2012;  Zoncu,  Bar-Peled,   et  al.,  2011).    Clearly,  mTOR  is  activated  by  other  signals,  including  those  from  the   plasma  membrane  such  as  growth  factors  and  LPS,  and  thus  may  act  on  lysosomes   to   adapt   their   function   and   properties   to   these   diverse   stimuli.      It   is   possible   therefore   that   mTOR   controls   lysosome   tubulation   by   mechanisms   other   than   microtubule-motor  activity,  such  as  through  control  of  membrane  fission  (Krajcovic,   Krishna,  Akkari,  Joyce,  &  Overholtzer,  2013).   Finally,   mTOR   is   central   to   growth   control   and   clearly   senses   nutrients   via   the   lysosome   as   part   of   mTORC1.      It   is   widely   known   that   mTOR   and   its   regulation/deregulation   is   linked   to   multiple   cancers,   as   a   search   in   the   PubMed   database   for   "mTOR   and   cancer"   yields   nearly   10,   000   studies.      Some   of   these   implicate   mTORC1   in   cancer   via   its   promotion   of   protein   translation   and   suppression   of   autophagy,   as   well   as   ageing,   where   dietary   restriction,   which   extends   the   lifespan   of   mice,   acts   mainly   via   suppression   of   mTORC1   (reviewed   in   Zoncu,   Sabatini,   &   Efeyan,   2011).      Indeed   lysosomes   and   alterations   in   their   functions   have   also   been   linked   to   ageing   (Cuervo   &   Dice,   2000).      Interestingly,   mTORC1   can   also   directly   influence   cancer   cell   growth   and   survival,   independent   of      106  

translation   and   autophagy   regulation.      A   study   from   earlier   this   year   in   Oncogene   identified   a   direct   interaction   between   mTORC1   and   ER   (Estrogen   Receptor   ),   a   transcription   factor   present   in   almost   two   thirds   of   breast   cancers   that   promotes   growth  and  survival  of  cancer  cells  in  an  estrogen-dependent  manner  (Alayev  et  al.,   2015).    In  this  study,  the  authors  describe  an  interaction  between  Raptor  (mTORC1   subunit)  and  ER,  which  results  in  direct  phosphorylation  and  activation  of  ER  by   mTOR  leading  to  expression  of  growth  and  survival  genes  (Alayev  et  al.,  2015).   Given  the  association  of  mTORC1  and  lysosomes  and  the  work  of  this  thesis   implicating  for  the  first  time  regulation  of  lysosomal  morphology  by  mTOR  in  innate   immune   cells,   it   remains   to   be   tested   whether   other   physiological   or   pathological   conditions  lead  to  lysosome  tubulation  in  other  cell  types.    I  believe  it  would  be  of   great   interest   to   investigate   if/how   lysosomal   morphology   is   altered   in   disease   states  like  cancer  and  ageing  and  whether  or  not  lysosome  morphology  contributes   to   disease   progression.      For   example,   lysosomes   of   the   highly   transformed   human   epithelial   cell   line,   HeLa,   appear   highly   tubular   under   resting   conditions   (unpublished  data,  Danielle  Johnson  &  Sergio  Grinstein).    Indeed,  it  is  possible  that   lysosome  tubulation  is  intimately  linked  with  a  number  of  diseases  in  which  mTOR   is   deregulated,   including   cancer,   but   has   remained   overlooked.      For   example,   lysosomal   tubules   are   sensitive   to   common   fixation   methods   like   those   relying   on   paraformaldehyde  or  methanol,  and  completely  fragment  under  these  conditions.    In   addition,  unless  specifically  labeled  with  a   bona  fide  lysosomal  marker,  the  tubules   could  go  unnoticed.                    

  

107  

4.3   Preliminary   Data   and   Discussion   on   the   Physiological   Properties   of   Tubular   Lysosomes      4.3.1  Trafficking  of  Endocytic  Cargo  to  Tubular  Lysosomes      Given   the   striking   phenotype   of   tubular   lysosomes,   we   questioned   if   the   morphological   change   translated   to   a   physiological   change   to   the   identity   of   the   organelle  for  the  purposes  of  acutely  fine-tuning  lysosomal  properties  when  needed.     For   example,   the   motility   of   tubular   lysosomes   is   greater   than   punctate   lysosomes   (Figure  3.7).    That  is,  tubular  lysosomes  are  on  the  move  more  often  than  punctate   lysosomes.      Could   there   be   biological   implications   for   this?      We   speculated   that   tubular   lysosomes   might   acquire   incoming   cargo   faster   than   punctate   lysosomes,   by   virtue  of  their  increased  motility.       I   sought   to   test   the   acquisition   of   incoming   endocytic   cargo   by   tubular   lysosomes   and   compare   these   rates   to   those   of   punctate   lysosomes.      RAW   cell   lysosomes   were   pre-labeled   with   Alexa555-dextran   (red)   and   lysosome   tubulation   was  stimulated  with  LPS.    Then,  a  second  Alexa488-dextran  (green)  was  pulsed  for  5   minutes   to   allow   for   internalization   of   this   second   dextran   into   endocytic   vesicles,   followed  by  0,  5  or  20  minute  chase  times  at  which  points  the  cells  were  observed   under   the   fluorescence   microscope.      The   resulting   micrographs   were   analyzed   by   manually  drawing  regions  of  interest  (ROIs)  around  tubular  lysosomes  and  punctate   lysosomes   within   the   red   channel   (lysosomes).      We   then   computed   whether   each   ROI   at   each   time   point   was   positive   for   any   green   signal   above   background   (schematic   in   Figure   4.2A).      Using   this   approach,   the   data   suggest   that   tubular   lysosomes   acquire   fluid-phase   endocytic   cargo   at   the   same   rates   as   punctate   lysosomes   as   there   was   no   significant   difference   in   the   percentage   of   lysosomes   containing   green   dextran   at   the   chase   times   indicated,   between   the   two   lysosome   populations   (Figure   4.2B).      Thus,   the   data   suggest   that   the   increased   motility   of   tubular   lysosomes   is   likely   not   for   the   purposes   of   acquiring   incoming   endocytic   cargo   at   enhanced   rates,   though   this   remains   to   be   tested   for   receptor-mediated  

  

108  

cargo.      Interestingly,   with   both   types   of   lysosomes,   a   striking   40%   of   lysosomes   already  contained  the  second  dextran  at  chase  time  zero.    This  indicates  that  RAW   macrophages  can  deliver  endocytosed  fluid-phase  cargo  to  lysosomes  within  only  5   minutes.        4.3.2  Lysosome  Tubulation  and  Lumenal  Volume      Under   the   fluorescence   microscope,   tubular   lysosomes   appear   to   traverse   more   of   the   cell   cytosol   than   punctate   lysosomes   do.      For   example,   when   assessing   the   appearance   of   lysosomes   in   unstimulated   macrophages   and   dendritic   cells,   fluorescent  fluid-phase  markers  of  the  lumen  feature  defined  "spherical"  structures   throughout   the   cell.      However,   upon   activation   with   LPS   and   conversion   of   these   compartments   into   long   tubular   networks,   lysosomal   lumen   appears   to   spread   throughout   the   cell   within   these   defined   tubules.      It   appears   as   though   LPS- stimulated   cells   harbor   an   expanded   lysosomal   lumen   and   that   lumen   appears   heavily   interconnected.      These   observations   prompted   us   to   consider   that   tubulation,   as   a   biophysical   phenomenon,   might   be   a   mechanism   by   which   these   cells  expand  and  perhaps  homogenize  their  lysosomal  lumen.          To   preliminarily   test   the   expansion   of   volume,   we   used   primary   mouse   BMDCs,  as  LPS  activation  induces  a  robust  lysosome  tubulation  phenotype  which  is   typically   much   stronger   than   in   RAW   cells.      Lysosomes   of   immature   DCs   were   labeled   with   Alexa555-dextran   by   pulse-chase   and   images   of   cells   were   acquired   by   confocal   fluorescence   microscopy.      The   same   was   done   for   DCs   that   were   treated   with   LPS   to   induce   lysosome   tubulation,   after   lysosomes   were   labeled.      Importantly,   z-stacks  were  acquired  for  all  the  cells.    That  is,  individual  confocal  slices  in  the  z- axis  were  acquired  in  order  to  reconstruct  a  3-dimensional  image  of  each  cell.    This   allowed   us   to   measure   the   number   of   voxels   (voxel   count)   containing   the   fluorescent   signal,   where   a   voxel   is   a   unit   of   value   within   a   3D   dataset,   analogous   to   a   pixel   in   a   2D   dataset.      A   3D   rendering   of   immature   and   LPS-activated   DCs   is   presented  in  Figure  4.3A.    Interestingly,  and  consistent  with  the  idea  that  lysosome  

  

109  

tubulation   increases   the   total   lysosomal   volume,   the   average   voxel   count   was   significantly   higher   in   highly-tubulating   cells   compared   to   immature   DCs   (Figure   4.3B).          Although   preliminary,   these   data   suggest   that   lysosome   tubulation   expands   the   total   lysosomal   volume   and   by   extension,   membrane   surface   area   of   this   compartment   as   well.      This   prompts   the   question,   where   is   this   extra   source   of   membrane   coming   from?      The   likely   explanations   are   increased   membrane   fusion,   decreased   membrane   fission,   or   both.      Indeed,   several   preliminary   experiments   seem   to   suggest   that   both   mechanisms   might   be   occurring   simultaneously.      The   evidence  for  increased  membrane  fusion  comes  from  the  observation  that  blocking   incoming  endosomal  membrane  trafficking  by  expressing  a  dominant  negative  Rab5   GTPase   (Rab5S34N),   an   essential   component   of   early   endosomal   trafficking,   significantly   suppresses   lysosome   tubulation   (Figure   4.4A).      This   result   suggests   that   membrane   trafficking   through   the   early   endosomal   compartments   is   required   for   lysosome   tubulation,   perhaps   because   it   is   a   major   pathway   contributing   membrane   to   lysosomes   during   the   process   of   forming   tubules.      In   addition,   treatment   of   cells   with   the   microtubule-depolymerizing   agent   nocodazole,   which   causes   the   collapse   of   TLs   due   to   the   loss   of   a   microtubule   scaffold,   results   in   apparently   enlarged   lysosomes   throughout   the   cytosol   (Figure   4.4B).      This   preliminary  experiment,  which  is  not  without  caveats  like  the  limit  of  resolution  in   light  microscopy,  appears  to  suggest  that  LPS  signaling,  which  led  to  the  formation   of  lysosomal  tubules,  increased  membrane  fusion  to  this  compartment,  resulting  in   enlarged  organelles  after  microtubule  loss.       Finally,   preliminary   data   from   experiments   in   which   the   membrane- scissioning   GTPase   dynamin   is   blocked   with   the   pharmacological   inhibitor   dyngo,   appears   to   induce   tubulation   of   lysosomes   alone   (Figure   4.4C).      This   was   an   interesting  result  as  it  suggests  that  dynamin  may  function  in  lysosomal  fission  and   that   tubulation   can   occur   through   simply   down-regulating   this   GTPase.      Thus,   it   is   possible  that,  in  addition  to  the  signals  invoked  by  LPS  to  cause  lysosome  tubulation,   dynamin   down-regulation   might   be   one   of   them.      Collectively,   these   data   provide  

  

110  

evidence   for   both   increased   membrane   fusion   and   decreased   membrane   fission   as   mechanisms  of  expanding  lysosomal  volume  during  TL  biogenesis.      Why  do  DCs  expand  their  lysosomal  compartments?      A   plausible   physiological   function   of   increasing   total   lysosomal   volume   via   what   appear   as   inter-connected   networks   of   tubules   might   be   to   homogenize   cargo.     Homogenization  of  lumenal  content  might  serve  to  allow  for  enhanced  sampling  of   antigen   in   professional   APCs   like   DCs.      For   example,   due   to   high   polymorphism   in   the  MHCII  peptide-binding  groove,  all  MHCII  molecules  will  slightly  differ  from  one   another   in   the   antigens   they   can   bind.      In   addition,   MHCII   molecules   are   sorted   to   lysosomes  that,  due  to  the  variability  in  MHCII  affinities  for  different  antigens,  could   by  extension  generate  slight  heterogeneity  among  lysosomes,  in  terms  of  the  types   of  antigen  each  lysosome's  MHCII  molecules  are  capable  of  binding.    These  factors,   combined   with   trafficking   of   different   antigens   to   individual   lysosomes   might   statistically  limit  the  possibilities  of  antigen-MHCII  combinations.    However,  if  all  the   slightly   heterogeneous   lysosomes   were   to   fuse   into   an   expanded,   inter-connected   tubular   network,   this   would   allow   for   free   diffusion   of   antigens   throughout   the   lumen   and   free   lateral   diffusion   of   MHCII   molecules   in   the   lysosomal   membrane,   thus   increasing   the   possibility   that   all   the   various   MHCII   molecules   are   accessible   to   all  the  various  antigens  taken  up  by  the  cell.   Though   it   would   be   technically   challenging   to   test   an   effect   on   antigen   presentation,   a   first   step   would   be   to   test   the   homogenization   hypothesis.      We   envision   using   a   photo-activatable   probe   that   targets   to   lysosomes.      Using   this   probe,   we   would   photo-activate   one   half   of   a   cell,   which   would   fluorescently   label   half   of   all   lysosomes.      After   this,   we   would   monitor   the   spread   of   the   fluorescent   signal   throughout   the   lysosomes   of   the   cell,   over   time.      This   would   be   conducted   with  cells  that  are  highly  tubulating  their  lysosomes  and  compared  with  cells  with   mostly  punctate  lysosomes.      We  expect  that  highly-tubulated  lysosomes  will  spread   the   fluorescent   signal   across   the   cell   faster   than   punctate,   non-connected   lysosomes   would.    This  work  is  currently  ongoing  and  in  preparation  for  these  experiments  we      111  

have   acquired   a   photo-activatable   GFP-LAMP1   plasmid   construct   to   transfect   into   RAW   cells.      Alternatively,   lysosomal   homogenization   could   be   quantified   by   pre- labeling  lysosomes  of  a  cell  with  one  fluorescent  marker  (ie.  Alexa555-dextran),  pre- labeling  lysosomes  of  another  cell  with  a  different  fluorescent  marker  (ie.  Alexa488- dextran)   and   conducting   a   cell-cell   fusion   assay   using   the   fusogen   polyethylene   glycol   (PEG)   (Yang   and   Shen,   2006).      The   colocalization   of   two   markers   would   be   assessed   in   untreated   and   LPS-treated   cells.      This   experiment   would   serve   to   enhance   our   knowledge   of   whether   LPS   induces   homogenization   of   lysosomal   content  via  homotypic  lysosomal  fusion.      4.4  Additional  Contributions      During  the  course  of  my  graduate  studies,  I  have  mainly  focused  on  my  projects  on   the   elucidation   of   tubular   lysosome   biogenesis   in   innate   immune   cells,   as   this   thesis   describes.    This  work  has  resulted  in  two  first-author  publications:      Mrakovic,  A.*,   Kay,   J.G.,   Furuya,   W.,   Brumell,   J.H.,   Botelho,   R.j.   (2012)   Rab7   and   Arl8   GTPases   are   necessary   for   lysosome   tubulation   in   macrophages.   Traffic   13:1667- 1679.      Saric,   A.,   Hipolito,   V.E.B.,   Kay,   J.G.,   Canton,   J.,   Antonescu,   C.,   Botelho,   R.J.   (2015)   mTOR   controls   lysosome   tubulation   and   antigen   presentation   in   macrophages   and   dendritic  cells.  Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell  [Epub  ahead  of  print].      However,  unique  opportunities  for  collaboration  with  peers  have  presented   themselves   over   the   years   and   I   was   happy   to   lend   expertise   to   my   collaborators   toward  the  completion  of  several  other  projects.    The  following  works  are  additional   projects   I   have   contributed   to.      I   briefly   describe   the   extent   of   each   of   my   contributions.                                                                                                                          *  Note:  Some  publications  contain  my  previous  last  name,  Mrakovic.      112  

The  following  article  was  published  in  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry:      Alghamdi,   T.,   Ho,   C.,   Mrakovic,   A.*,   Taylor,   D.,   Mao,   D.,   Botelho,   R.J.   (2013)   Vac14   protein   multimerization   is   a   prerequisite   step   for   Fab1   protein   complex   assembly   and  function.  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry  288(13):9363-72.      This   project   involved   determining   the   multimeric   state   of   the   Vac14   adaptor   protein,   which   is   required   for   the   proper   functioning   of   the   Fab1   complex.      This   complex  regulates  synthesis  of  PI(3,5)P2  on  vacuole  membranes  and  therefore  is  a   major   contributor   to   establishing   organelle   identity   in   yeast.      Most   of   my   contributions   to   this   work   were   the   result   of   experiments   I   conducted   during   my   undergraduate   thesis,   specifically   the   generation   of   truncated   Vac14   mutant   yeast   expression   vectors   ultimately   used   for   expression   and   immunoprecipitation   work.     However,  as  a  PhD  student  I  contributed  to  the  completion  of  this  work  by  providing   manuscript  inputs  and  editing.        The  following  article  was  published  in  Traffic:      Dayam,   R.   M.,   Saric,   A.,   Shilliday,   R.   E.,   Botelho,   R.   J.   (2015)   The   phosphoinositide- gated   lysosomal   Ca   2+   channel,   TRPML1,   is   required   for   phagosome   maturation.     Traffic  16(9):1010-1026      This   project   was   on   the   elucidation   of   the   role   of   a   phagosomal   Ca2+   channel,   TRPML1   (transient   receptor   potential   cation   channel,   mucolipin   subfamily,   member   1),   in   phagosome   maturation.      Indeed,   we   found   that   this   channel   is   necessary   for   the  fusion  of  phagosomes  with  docked  lysosomes,  likely  due  to  its  ability  to  release   phagosomal   Ca2+   stores,   which   we   reason   is   the   fusogenic   signal   that   completes   phagosome  maturation.    My  contribution  to  this  work  has  been  to  show  that  a  delay   in  phagosome  maturation  in  TRPML1-deficient  cells  is  specifically  due  to  loss  of  the   channel   and   not   an   effect   of   altering   phosphoinositide   dynamics   on   phagosomes.    

  

113  

Thus   I   conducted   the   appropriate   experiments,   quantified   data   and   generated   "Figure  3"  in  the  article.    A  snapshot  of  this  figure  is  included  here:        

              

  

114  

The  following  manuscript  is  under  review  in  Cell  Reports.      Wong,   H.,   Jaumouille,   V.,   Freeman,   S.,   Doodnauth,   S.,   Schlam,   D.,   Canton,   J.,   Mukovozov,   I.,   Saric,   A.,   Grinstein,   S.,   Robinson,   L.   (2015)   CX3CL1   enhances   CD36   responsiveness   towards   oxidized   low-density   lipoproteins   and   accelerates   foam   cell   formation.  Cell  Reports.  Manuscript  number:  D-15-01971      My  contribution  to  this  work  was  the  bone  marrow  harvesting  and  differentiation  of   mouse   macrophages   used   in   the   study,   from   wild-type   and   CD36-/-   mice.         In   addition,   I   contributed   to   discussion   of   the   experiments   and   scientific   merit   of   the   work  with  the  primary  author.                                                                  115  

                                 Figures  for  Chapter  4                                                               116  

Figure   4.1:   LPS   Increases   the   Levels   of   Membrane-Associated   Arl8b   in   an   mTOR- Dependent  Manner.    (A)  Quantification  of  fluorescence  micrographs  of  membrane- associated  RFP-Rab7  (black  bars)  or  RILPc33  (grey  bars).    Quantification  is  a  ratio  of   fluorescence   intensity   in   membrane   (defined   by   overlapping   with   fluorescent   lysosomal  dextran)  to  the  fluorescence  intensity  in  the  cytosol,  normalized  to  cells   unexprosed  to  LPS.    (B)  Fluorescence  micrographs  of  RAW  cells  expressing  Arlb-GPF   and   lysosomes   labeled   with   Alexa555-dextran.      Scale   bar   =   10   m.      (C)   Quantification  of  membrane-associated  Arl8b0GFP  signal  as  in   A.    Data  are  mean  ±   SEM.    Data  was  statistically  analyzed  using  a  one-way  ANOVA,  followed  by  Tukey's   post-hoc   test.      An   asterisk   (*)   indicates   significant   difference   between   DMSO+LPS   and  DMSO  conditions  (p<0.001).  Note:  data  was  collected  and  analyzed  by  Victoria   Hipolito.     

  

117  

     

  

118  

Figure  4.2:  Endocytic  Fluid-Phase  Cargo  Traffics  to  Tubular  Lysosomes  at  the  Same   Rate   as   to   Punctate   Lysosomes.      (A)   Sample   of   method   of   measuring   cargo   trafficking   to   punctate   and   tubular   lysosomes.      RAW   cell   lysosomes   were   pre- labeled  with  Alexa-555  dextran  (0.5  h  pulse,  1h  chase)  followed  by  LPS  stimulation   to   induce   lysosome   tubulation.      Alexa-488   dextran   was   pulsed   briefly   (5   min)   to   allow   for   uptake   of   this   second   dextran,   followed   by   various   chase   times:   0   min,   5   min   or   20   min.      Sample   micrograph   shows   20   min   chase   with   second   dextran.     Individual   tubular   or   punctate   lysosomes   were   identified   and   outlined   in   the   red   channel  (blue  dashed  lines).    Volocity  program  was  used  to  compute  whether  or  not   the  outlined  lysosomes  contained  green  signal  (second  dextran  pulse)  at  the  chase   times  indicated.    Lysosomes  were  positive  for  green  if  signal  was  above  a  threshold   (background).      (B)   Graph   of   quantification   using   approach   in   A,   among   three   individual   experiments.      Data   are   presented   as   the   percentage   of   lysosomes   containing   second   dextran   at   the   chase   times   indicated.      Data   was   analyzed   by   paired  Student's  t-test  and  was  not  significantly  different  between  TLs  and  punctate   lysosomes  at  any  time  point  tested.                                         

  

119  

        120  

Figure  4.3:  Total  Lysosomal  Volume  Increases  Upon  Tubulation.    (A)  3D  rendering  of   unstimulated   (left)   and   LPS-stimulated   (right)   dendritic   cells   in   which   lysosomes   were  pre-labeled  with  Alexa-555  dextran.    Arrows  point  out  lysosomal  tubules.    3D   images  are  a  rendering  of  multiple  confocal  images  spanning  the  z-axis  and  allow  for   easier  visualization  of  lysosomal  volume.    (B)  Lysosomal  volume  was  computed  as  a   total   number   of   voxels   that   were   positive   for   Alexa-555   dextran   signal   above   a   threshold   value.      Data   is   based   on   70-75   cells   analyzed   per   condition   across   3   individual   experiments.      LPS   condition   is   significantly   greater   than   control   with   p=0.0012  determined  by  Student's  t-test.                                                              

  

121  

                                      

  

122  

Figure   4.4   Evidence   for   Membrane   Fusion   and   Fission   in   Regulating   Tubular   Lysosome   Biogenesis.      (A)   Lysosomes   of   non-transfected,   resting   RAW   cells   and   RAW   cells   transfected   with   a   plasmid   construct   expressing   dominant   negative   Rab5   (Rab5S34N)  were  labeled  with  Alexa555-dextran  and  stimulated  with  LPS.    The  cells   were  imaged  by  fluorescence  microscopy  and  the  number  of  tubular  lysosomes  per   cell  was  scored.    (B)  RAW  cell  lysosomes  were  labeled  with  Alexa555-dextran.    Cells   were  either  left  untreated  (-LPS,  -Nocod),  treated  with  LPS  (+LPS,  -Nocod),  treated   with  nocodazole  (-LPS,  +Nocod)  or  both  (+LPS,  +Nocod)  and  imaged  by  fluorescence   microscopy.      Dashed   cyan   lines   outline   individual   cells.      Red   arrowheads   indicate   lysosomal   tubules,   yellow   arrowheads   point   out   what   appear   as   "enlarged"   lysosomes.    Scale  bar  =  10  m.    (C)  RAW  cells  were  either  left  untreated  (control),  or   treated  with  the  dynamin  inhibitor  dyngo  for  2  h,  or  treated  with  LPS  for  2  h,  and   lysosome  tubulation  was  scored.    Data  are  mean  ±  SEM.    In   A,  data  is  based  on  two   individual   experiments   in   which      25   cells   were   quantified   per   condition,   and   Student's  t-test  was  applied  to  determine  significance,  p  <  0.0001.    In  B,  data  is  based   on  one  experiment  in  which    20  cells  were  quantified  per  condition.                                                

  

123  

                                   

  

124  

                           Conclusion                                                           

  

125  

In  conclusion,  this  work  presents  evidence  that  LPS  increases  the  tubular  lysosome   population   in   macrophages,   which   is   a   significantly   more   dynamic   lysosomal   population   than   "normal"   punctate   lysosomes.      Moreover,   this   work   is   the   first   to   identify   key   machinery   of   lysosome   tubulation   in   macrophages.      This   machinery   includes  the  lysosomal  small  GTPases  Arl8b  and  Rab7,  their  effectors,  SKIP,  FYCO1   and   RILP,   which   collectively   recruit   microtubule-based   motor   proteins   dynein   and   kinesin   to   regulate   this   process.      I   envision   that   lysosome   tubulation   occurs   through   the  concerted  actions  of  these  motors  in  "stretching"  lysosomes  along  microtubule   scaffolds   and   hypothesize   that   increased   membrane   fusion   and/or   decreased   membrane   fission   are   involved   in   providing   the   lysosomal   membrane   needed   to   convert  small  punctate  lysosomes  into  long  tubules.      Furthermore,   this  work   identifies  the  signaling  pathway  downstream   of   the   LPS  receptor  TLR4  that  leads  to  lysosome  tubulation  in  macrophages  and  dendritic   cells.    From  the  data  presented  in  this  thesis,  I  identify  the  TLR4-MyD88-PI3K-Akt- mTOR   pathway   as   being   the   major   signaling   axis   controlling   lysosome   tubulation   in   LPS-stimulated  macrophages.    Thus,  I  place  mTOR  at  the  major  integration  point  of   LPS   signaling   and   the   control   of   lysosomal   morphology   and   trafficking.      To   my   knowledge,  this  is  the  first  description  of  a  signaling  pathway  downstream  of  TLR4   that   controls   organelle   morphology.      I   provide   evidence   that   mTOR   exerts   its   effects   on   lysosome   tubulation   by   regulating   anterograde   lysosomal   transport   likely   by   modulating   the   activation   state   and   membrane   localization   of   the   small   GTPase   Arl8b,   the   key   GTPase   responsible   for   anterograde   lysosomal   transport   by   kinesin   I.     This   signaling   axis   was   identified   to   be   critical   for   LPS-stimulated   antigen   presentation   by   maturing   dendritic   cells,   a   process   previously   shown   to   require   Arl8b  and  MIIC  tubulation.          Finally,   in   exploring   the   physiological   properties   of   tubular   lysosomes,   I   provide   evidence   that   tubulation   may   serve   to   expand   the   lysosomal   lumen   and   homogenize  lysosomal  cargo,  which  could  have  implications  in  antigen  processing,   sampling  and  presentation  in  professional  APCs.      

  

126  

  

Overall,   this   thesis   contributes   to   the   fields   of   intracellular   membrane  

trafficking,   organelle   identity   and   innate   immune   cell   function   by   enhancing   our   existing  knowledge  of  lysosomal  morphology  regulation  in  innate  immune  cells.                                                                                          127  

                             

Appendix                                                        

  

128  

Table   A-1:   Absolute   Values   of   Lysosome   Tubulation   Number   for   Section   3.1.      All   values   under   `replicates'   column   are   average   number   of   tubules   per   cell   per   replicate,  where  each  row  of  values  represents  experiments  conducted  on  different   days.      The   `mean   ±   SEM'   column   shows   the   average   number   of   tubules   per   cell   calculated   by   pooling   all   cells   together   from   all   relevant   replicates.      Square   brackets   indicate   type   of   control   and   type   of   experimental   condition.      Round   brackets   indicate  the  p  value  of  experimental  results,  as  analyzed  by  Student's  t-test.    Under   silencing  conditions,  data  may  be  present  for  an  siRNA  SMARTpool  oligo  mix  or  for   individual  oligos  against  the  target  specified  under  the  `condition'  column.            

  

129  

              

  

130  

Figure   A-1:   MRT67307,   IRAK1/4   Inhibitor   and   PepinhMYD   Inhibit   Pathways   Downstream   of   their   Targets.      (A)   Western   blot   of   RAW   whole-cell   lysates   from   conditions   indicated   above   the   lanes.      Note   that   LPS   induces   phospho-IRF3,   while   pre-treatment   with   the   TBK1   inhibitor   MRT67307   followed   by   LPS   stimulation   blocked  phosphorylation  of  IRF3,  the  downstream  substrate  of  TBK1.    GAPDH  was   probed   as   a   loading   control.      (B)   Relative   expression   of   IL-6   mRNA   in   RAW   cells   treated   with   DMSO   as   control   or   pre-treated   for   20   min   with   DMSO   or   IRAK1/4   inhbitor  followed  by  2  h  LPS.    Note  the  strong  induction  of  IL-6  transcription  with   LPS  and  the  block  in  IL-6  transcription  with  the  IRAK1/4  inhibitor.    Data  are  mean  ±   SEM   from   3   individual   experiments   where   expression   is   relative   to   LPS   condition.     (C)   Western   blot   of   RAW   whole-cell   lysates.      Cells   were   incubated   with   either   Pepinh-Ctrl   or   Pepinh-MYD   for   3   h   followed   by   LPS   stimulation   for   2   h.      MyD88   inhibition   with   Pepinh-MYD   strongly   blocks   phosphorylation   of   Akt   in   response   to   LPS.    GAPDH  was  probed  as  a  loading  control.           

           

  

131  

Figure   A-2:   mTOR   Activity   is   Required   for   Lysosome   Tubulation.      (A)   RAW   cells   were   treated   with   DMSO   or   LPS   for   2   h   followed   by   gluteraldehyde   fixation.      Cells   were  immunostained  for  the  lysosomal  marker  LAMP1  (red)  and  mTOR  (green).    (B)   Multiple   mTOR   inhibitors   block   lysosome   tubulation.      Quantification   of   lysosome   tubulation  in  RAW  cells  either  treated  with  DMSO  as  control,  or  pre-treated  for  20   min  with  DMSO,  1  M  rapamycin,  200  nM  PP242  or  50  nM  WYE687  followed  by  100   ng/mL   LPS   for   2   h   to   induce   lysosome   tubulation.      Data   are   mean   ±   SEM   of   three   independent  experiments  based  on  25-30  cells  per  condition  per  experiment.    Data   was   statistically   analyzed   using   a   one-way   ANOVA,   followed   by   Tukey's   post-hoc   test.      An   asterisk   (*)   indicates   a   significant   difference   (p   <   0.0001)   between   DMSO+LPS   and   DMSO   alone.   (C)   Western   blot   of   RAW   whole-cell   lysates   showing   that   siRNA   suppresses   mTOR   protein   levels   by   at   least   60%   (simTOR)   relative   to   non-targeting   siRNA   oligonucleotides   (siNTP).      GAPDH   was   probed   as   a   loading   control.    (D)  Western  blot  of  RAW  whole-cell  lysates  showing  that  treatment  of  RAW   cells  with  100  M  of  the  AMPK  activator  A769662  inhibits  mTOR.    Note  the  lack  of   pS6K  in  A769662  +  LPS  condition.    Total  S6K  was  probed  as  a  loading  control.  

  

132  

              

  

133  

Figure   A-3:   mTOR   Inhibition   does   not   Affect   Microtubules   or   Basal   Lysosomal   Motility.      (A)   Microtubules   of   RAW   cells   were   stained   by   immunofluorescence   using   antibodies  against  -tubulin.    Cells  were  either  untreated,  treated  with  100  ng/mL   LPS   or   100   nM   torin1   or   both   for   2   h.      (B)   Lysosome   track   length   was   manually   followed   in   control   (DMSO)   and   torin1--treated   cells   over   a   period   of   1   min   and   then  the  lysosome  speed  was  calculated.    Each  dot  is  an  individual  lysosome,  with  a   total   of   55   and   44   lysosomes   from   15   cells   across   three   independent   experiments.     We   could   not   observe   a   difference   in   resting   lysosome   motility   between   control   and   mTOR-inhibited  cells.             

           

  

134  

  

  

  

            References                                                                                      

  

135  

Abrahamson,  D.  R.,  &  Rodewald,  R.  (1981).  Evidence  for  the  sorting  of  endocytic   vesicle  contents  during  the  receptor-mediated  transport  of  IgG  across  the   newborn  rat  intestine.  The  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  91(1),  270­80.   Aeder,  S.  E.,  Martin,  P.  M.,  Soh,  J.-W.,  &  Hussaini,  I.  M.  (2004).  PKC-eta  mediates   glioblastoma  cell  proliferation  through  the  Akt  and  mTOR  signaling  pathways.   Oncogene,  23(56),  9062­69.   Alayev,  A.,  Salamon,  R.  S.,  Berger,  S.  M.,  Schwartz,  N.  S.,  Cuesta,  R.,  Snyder,  R.  B.,  &   Holz,  M.  K.  (2015).  mTORC1  directly  phosphorylates  and  activates  ER  upon   estrogen  stimulation.  Oncogene,  1­9.  doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.414   Anderson,  R.  G.  W.,  Brown,  M.  S.,  Beisiegel,  U.,  &  Goldstein,  J.  L.  (1982).  Surface   distribution  and  recycling  of  the  low  density  lipoprotein  receptor  as  visualized   with  antireceptor  antibodies.  The  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  93(3),  523­31.     Askew,  D.,  Gatewood,  J.,  Olivas,  E.,  Havenith,  K.,  &  Walker,  W.  S.  (1995).  A  subset  of   splenic  macrophages  process  and  present  native  antigen  to  naive  antigen- specific  CD4+  T-cells  from  mice  transgenic  for  an  alpha  beta  T-cell  receptor.   Cellular  Immunology,  166(1),  62­70.   Bagshaw,  R.  D.,  Callahan,  J.  W.,  &  Mahuran,  D.  J.  (2006).  The  Arf-family  protein,   Arl8b,  is  involved  in  the  spatial  distribution  of  lysosomes.  Biochemical  and   Biophysical  Research  Communications,  344(4),  1186­91.   Banchereau,  J.,  &  Steinman,  R.  M.  (1998).  Dendritic  cells  and  the  control  of  immunity.   Nature,  392(6673),  245­52.   Bar-Peled,  L.,  Schweitzer,  L.  D.,  Zoncu,  R.,  &  Sabatini,  D.  M.  (2012).  Ragulator  is  a  GEF   for  the  rag  GTPases  that  signal  amino  acid  levels  to  mTORC1.  Cell,  150(6),   1196­1208.   Barois,  N.,  de  Saint-Vis,  B.,  Lebecque,  S.,  Geuze,  H.  J.,  &  Kleijmeer,  M.  J.  (2002).  MHC   class  II  compartments  in  human  dendritic  cells  undergo  profound  structural   changes  upon  activation.  Traffic,  3(12),  894­905.   Bauerfeld,  C.  P.,  Ruchi,  R.,  Pirockinaite,  G.,  Lee,  I.,  Hüttemann,  M.,  Monks,  B.,   Birnbaum,  M.  J.,  Franchi,  L.,  Nunez,  G.,  Samavati,  L.  (2012).  TLR4-mediated  AKT   activation  is  MyD88/TRIF  dependent  and  critical  for  induction  of  oxidative   phosphorylation  and  mitochondrial  transcription  factor  A  in  murine   macrophages.  The  Journal  of  Immunology,  188(6),  2847­57.   Beemiller,  P.,  Zhang,  Y.,  Mohan,  S.,  Levinsohn,  E.,  Gaeta,  I.,  Hoppe,  A.  D.,  &  Swanson,  J.   A.  (2010).  A  Cdc42  activation  cycle  coordinated  by  PI  3-Kinase  during  Fc   receptor-mediated  phagocytosis.  Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell,  21(3),  470­80.  

  

136  

Beg,  A.  A.,  Finco,  T.  S.,  Nantermet,  P.  V.,  &  Baldwin,  A.  S.  J.  (1993).  Tumor  necrosis   factor  and  interleukin-1  lead  to  phosphorylation  and  loss  of  I  kappa  B  alpha:  a   mechanism  for  NF-kappa  B  activation.  Molecular  and  Cellular  Biology,  13(6),   3301­10.   Behnia,  R.,  &  Munro,  S.  (2005).  Organelle  identity  and  the  signposts  for  membrane   traffic.  Nature,  438(7068),  597­604.   Bellacosa,  A.,  Chan,  T.  O.,  Ahmed,  N.  N.,  Datta,  K.,  Malstrom,  S.,  Stokoe,  D.,  McCormick,   F.,  Feng,  J.,  Tsichlis,  P.  (1998).  Akt  activation  by  growth  factors  is  a  multiple-step   process:  the  role  of  the  PH  domain.  Oncogene,  17(3),  313­25.   Beron,  W.,  Alvarez-Dominguez,  C.,  Mayorga,  L.,  &  Stahl,  P.  D.  (1995).  Membrane   trafficking  along  the  phagocytic  pathway.  Trends  in  Cell  Biology,  5(3),  100­104.   Bertho,  N.,  Cerny,  J.,  Kim,  Y.-M.,  Fiebiger,  E.,  Ploegh,  H.,  &  Boes,  M.  (2003).   Requirements  for  T  cell-polarized  tubulation  of  class  II+  compartments  in   dendritic  cells.  Journal  of  Immunology,  171(11),  5689­96.   Beugnet,  A.,  Tee,  A.  R.,  Taylor,  P.  M.,  &  Proud,  C.  G.  (2003).  Regulation  of  targets  of   mTOR  (mammalian  target  of  rapamycin)  signalling  by  intracellular  amino  acid   availability.  The  Biochemical  Journal,  372(Pt  2),  555­66.   Boes,  M.,  Bertho,  N.,  Cerny,  J.,  Op  den  Brouw,  M.,  Kirchhausen,  T.,  &  Ploegh,  H.   (2003).  T  cells  induce  extended  class  II  MHC  compartments  in  dendritic  cells  in   a  Toll-like  Receptor-dependent  manner.  Journal  of  Immunology,  171(8),  4081­ 88.   Boes,  M.,  Cerny,  J.,  Massol,  R.,  Op  den  Brouw,  M.,  Kirchhausen,  T.,  Chen,  J.,  &  Ploegh,   H.  L.  (2002).  T-cell  engagement  of  dendritic  cells  rapidly  rearranges  MHC  class   II  transport.  Nature,  418(6901),  983­8.   Boucrot,  E.,  Henry,  T.,  Borg,  J.-P.,  Gorvel,  J.-P.,  &  Meresse,  S.  (2005).  The  intracellular   fate  of  Salmonella  depends  on  the  recruitment  of  kinesin.  Science,  308(5725),   1174­78.   Bucci,  C.,  Thomsen,  P.,  Nicoziani,  P.,  McCarthy,  J.,  &  van  Deurs,  B.  (2000).  Rab7:  a  key   to  lysosome  biogenesis.  Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell,  11(2),  467­80.   Burkhardt,  J.  K.,  Echeverri,  C.  J.,  Nilsson,  T.,  &  Vallee,  R.  B.  (1997).  Overexpression  of   the  dynamitin  (p50)  subunit  of  the  dynactin  complex  disrupts  dynein- dependent  maintenance  of  membrane  organelle  distribution.  Journal  of  Cell   Biology,  139(2),  469­84.  

  

137  

Burkhardt,  J.  K.,  Hester,  S.,  Lapham,  C.  K.,  &  Argon,  Y.  (1990).  The  lytic  granules  of   natural  killer  cells  are  dual-function  organelles  combining  secretory  and  pre- lysosomal  compartments.  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  111(6),  2327­40.   Burns,  K.,  Janssens,  S.,  Brissoni,  B.,  Olivos,  N.,  Beyaert,  R.,  &  Tschopp,  J.  (2003).   Inhibition  of  Interleukin  1  Receptor/Toll-like  Receptor  signaling  through  the   alternatively  spliced,  short  form  of  MyD88  is  due  to  its  failure  to  recruit  IRAK-4.   The  Journal  of  Experimental  Medicine,  197(2),  263­8.   Cantalupo,  G.,  Alifano,  P.,  Roberti,  V.,  Bruni,  C.  B.,  &  Bucci,  C.  (2001).  Rab-interacting   lysosomal  protein  (RILP):  the  Rab7  effector  required  for  transport  to   lysosomes.  EMBO  Journal,  20(4),  683­93.   Cantley,  L.  C.  (2002).  The  phosphoinositide  3-kinase  pathway.  Science,  296(5573),   1655­7.   Cella,  M.,  Engering,  A.,  Pinet,  V.,  Pieters,  J.,  Lanzavecchia,  A.  (1997).  Inflammatory   stimuli  induce  accumulation  of  MHC  class  II  complexes  on  dendritic  cells.   Nature,  388(6644),  782-7.   Cella,  M.,  Sallusto,  F.,  &  Lanzavecchia,  A.  (1997).  Origin,  maturation  and  antigen   presenting  function  of  dendritic  cells.  Current  Opinion  in  Immunology,  9(1),  10­ 6.   Chavrier,  P.,  &  Goud,  B.  (1999).  The  role  of  ARF  and  Rab  GTPases  in  membrane   transport.  Current  Opinion  in  Cell  Biology,  11(4),  466­75.   Chow,  A.,  Toomre,  D.,  Garrett,  W.,  &  Mellman,  I.  (2002).  Dendritic  cell  maturation   triggers  retrograde  MHC  class  II  transport  from  lysosomes  to  the  plasma   membrane.  Nature,  418(6901),  988­94.   Chung,  J.,  Kuo,  C.  J.,  Crabtree,  G.  R.,  &  Blenis,  J.  (1992).  Rapamycin-FKBP  specifically   blocks  growth-dependent  activation  of  and  signaling  by  the  70  kd  S6  protein   kinases.  Cell,  69(7),  1227­36.   Cordonnier,  M.-N.,  Dauzonne,  D.,  Louvard,  D.,  &  Coudrier,  E.  (2001).  Actin  filaments   and  myosin  I  alpha  cooperate  with  microtubules  for  the  movement  of   lysosomes.  Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell,  12(12),  4013­29.   Cresswell,  P.  (1996).  Invariant  chain  structure  and  MHC  class  II  function.  Cell,  84(4),   505-7.   Cuervo,  A.  M.,  &  Dice,  J.  F.  (2000).  When  lysosomes  get  old.  Experimental   Gerontology,  35(2),  119­31.  

  

138  

Datta,  S.  R.,  Brunet,  A.,  &  Greenberg,  M.  E.  (1999).  Cellular  survival:  a  play  in  three   Akts.  Genes  and  Development,  13(22),  2905­27.   Dazert,  E.,  &  Hall,  M.  N.  (2011).  mTOR  signaling  in  disease.  Current  Opinion  in  Cell   Biology,  23(6),  744­55.   Echeverri,  C.  J.,  Paschal,  B.  M.,  Vaughan,  K.  T.,  &  Vallee,  R.  B.  (1996).  Molecular   characterization  of  the  50-kD  subunit  of  dynactin  reveals  function  for  the   complex  in  chromosome  alignment  and  spindle  organization  during  mitosis.   The  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  132(4),  617­33.   Falcón-Pérez,  J.  M.,  Nazarian,  R.,  Sabatti,  C.,  &  Dell'Angelica,  E.  C.  (2005).  Distribution   and  dynamics  of  Lamp1-containing  endocytic  organelles  in  fibroblasts  deficient   in  BLOC-3.  Journal  of  Cell  Science,  118(Pt  22),  5243­55.   Feldman,  M.  E.,  Apsel,  B.,  Uotila,  A.,  Loewith,  R.,  Knight,  Z.  A.,  Ruggero,  D.,  &  Shokat,  K.   M.  (2009).  Active-site  inhibitors  of  mTOR  target  rapamycin-resistant  outputs  of   mTORC1  and  mTORC2.  PLoS  Biology,  7(2),  e38.   Fitzgerald,  K.  A.,  Rowe,  D.  C.,  Barnes,  B.  J.,  Caffrey,  D.  R.,  Visintin,  A.,  Latz,  E.,  Monks,   B.,  Pitha,  P.  M.,  Golenbock,  D.  T.  (2003).  LPS-TLR4  signaling  to  IRF-3/7  and  NF- kappa  B  involves  the  toll  adapters  TRAM  and  TRIF.  The  Journal  of  Experimental   Medicine,  198(7),  1043­55.   Flannagan,  R.  S.,  Jaumouillé,  V.,  &  Grinstein,  S.  (2012).  The  cell  biology  of   phagocytosis.  Annual  Review  of  Pathology:  Mechanisms  of  Disease,  7(1),  61­98.   Frasa,  M.  A.,  Maximiano,  F.  C.,  Smolarczyk,  K.,  Francis,  R.  E.,  Betson,  M.  E.,  Lozano,  E.,   Goldenring,  J.,  Seabra,  M.  C.,  Rak,  A.,  Ahmadian,  M.  R.,  Braga,  V.  M.  (2010).  Armus   is  a  Rac1  effector  that  inactivates  Rab7  and  regulates  E-cadherin  degradation.   Current  Biology,  20(3),  198-208.   Gahl,  W.  A.  (1989).  Lysosomal  membrane  transport  in  cellular  nutrition.  Annual   Review  of  Nutrition,  9,  39-61.  DOI:  10.1146/annurev.nu.09.070189.000351   Garg,  S.,  Sharma,  M.,  Ung,  C.,  Tuli,  A.,  Barral,  D.  C.,  Hava,  D.  L.,  Veerapen,  N.,  Besra,  G.   S.,  Hacohen,  N.,  Brenner,  M.  B.  (2011).  Lysosomal  trafficking,  antigen   presentation,  and  microbial  killing  are  controlled  by  the  Arf-like  GTPase  Arl8b.   Immunity,  35(2),  182­93.   Gary,  J.  D.,  Wurmser,  A.  E.,  Bonangelino,  C.  J.,  Weisman,  L.  S.,  &  Emr,  S.  D.  (1998).   Fab1p  is  essential  for  PtdIns(3)P  5-kinase  activity  and  the  maintenance  of   vacuolar  size  and  membrane  homeostasis.  The  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  143(1),   65­79.  

  

139  

Grosshans,  B.  L.,  Ortiz,  D.,  &  Novick,  P.  (2006).  Rabs  and  their  effectors:  achieving   specificity  in  membrane  traffic.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,   103(32),  11821­7.   Gwinn,  D.  M.,  Shackelford,  D.  B.,  Egan,  D.  F.,  Mihaylova,  M.  M.,  Mery,  A.,  Vasquez,  D.  S.,   Turk,  B.  E.,  Shaw,  R.  J.  (2008).  AMPK  phosphorylation  of  raptor  mediates  a   metabolic  checkpoint.  Molecular  Cell,  30(2),  214­26.   Hardie,  D.  G.,  Ross,  F.  A.,  &  Hawley,  S.  A.  (2012).  AMPK:  a  nutrient  and  energy  sensor   that  maintains  energy  homeostasis.  Nature  Reviews  Molecular  Cell  Biology,   13(4),  251­62.   Harrison,  R.  E.,  Bucci,  C.,  Vieira,  O.  V.,  Schroer,  T.  A.,  &  Grinstein,  S.  (2003).   Phagosomes  fuse  with  late  endosomes  and  /  or  lysosomes  by  extension  of   membrane  protrusions  along  microtubules:  role  of  Rab7  and  RILP.  Molecular   and  Cellular  Biology,  23(18),  6494­6506.   Hartmann,  B.,  He,  X.,  Keller,  F.,  Fischereder,  M.,  Guba,  M.,  &  Schmid,  H.  (2013).   Development  of  a  sensitive  phospho-p70  S6  kinase  ELISA  to  quantify  mTOR   proliferation  signal  inhibition.  Therapeutic  Drug  Monitoring,  35(2),  233­9.   Heuser,  J.  (1989).  Changes  in  lysosome  shape  and  distribution  correlated  with   changes  in  cytoplasmic  pH.  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  108(3),  855­64.   Hirokawa,  N.  (1998).  Kinesin  and  dynein  superfamily  proteins  and  the  mechanism   of  organelle  transport.  Science,  279(5350),  519­26.   Hirokawa,  N.,  Noda,  Y.,  Tanaka,  Y.,  &  Niwa,  S.  (2009).  Kinesin  superfamily  motor   proteins  and  intracellular  transport.  Nature  Reviews  Molecular  Cell  Biology,   10(10),  682­96.     Hochreiter-Hufford,  A.,  &  Ravichandran,  K.  S.  (2013).  Clearing  the  dead:  apoptotic   cell  sensing,  recognition,  engulfment,  and  digestion.  Cold  Spring  Harbor   Perspectives  in  Biology,  5(1),  1-20.   Hoffmann,  E.,  Marion,  S.,  Mishra,  B.  B.,  John,  M.,  Kratzke,  R.,  Ahmad,  S.  F.,  Holzer,  D.,   Anand,  P.  K.,  Weiss,  D.  G.,  Griffiths,  G.,  Kuznetsov,  S.  A.  (2010).  Initial  receptor- ligand  interactions  modulate  gene  expression  and  phagosomal  properties   during  both  early  and  late  stages  of  phagocytosis.  European  Journal  of  Cell   Biology,  89(9),  693­704.   Hofmann,  I.,  &  Munro,  S.  (2006).  An  N-terminally  acetylated  Arf-like  GTPase  is   localised  to  lysosomes  and  affects  their  motility.  Journal  of  Cell  Science,  119(Pt   8),  1494­1503.  

  

140  

Hollenbeck,  P.  J.,  &  Swanson,  J.  A.  (1990).  Radial  extension  of  macrophage  tubular   lysosomes  supported  by  kinesin.  Nature,  346(6287),  864­66.   Hurley,  J.  H.,  &  Meyer,  T.  (2001).  Subcellular  targeting  by  membrane  lipids.  Current   Opinion  in  Cell  Biology,  13(2),  146­52.   Husebye,  H.,  Halaas,  Ø.,  Stenmark,  H.,  Tunheim,  G.,  Sandanger,  Ø.,  Bogen,  B.,  Brech,  A.,   Latz,  E.,  Espevik,  T.  (2006).  Endocytic  pathways  regulate  Toll-like  receptor  4   signaling  and  link  innate  and  adaptive  immunity.  The  EMBO  Journal,  25(4),   683­92.   Ikonomov,  O.  C.,  Sbrissa,  D.,  &  Shisheva,  A.  (2001).  Mammalian  cell  morphology  and   endocytic  membrane  homeostasis  require  enzymatically  active   phosphoinositide  5-kinase  PIKfyve.  The  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry,   276(28),  26141­7.     Inaba,  K.,  Inaba,  M.,  Romani,  N.,  Aya,  H.,  Deguchi,  M.,  Ikehara,  S.,  Muramatsu,  S.,   Steinman,  R.  M.  (1992).  Generation  of  large  numbers  of  dendritic  cells  from   mouse  bone  marrow  cultures  supplemented  with  granulocyte/macrophage   colony-stimulating  factor.  The  Journal  of  Experimental  Medicine,  176(6),  1693­ 1702.   Inoki,  K.,  Li,  Y.,  Xu,  T.,  &  Guan,  K.-L.  (2003).  Rheb  GTpase  is  a  direct  target  of  TSC2   GAP  activity  and  regulates  mTOR  signaling.  Genes  and  Development,  17(15),   1829­34.   Inoki,  K.,  Li,  Y.,  Zhu,  T.,  Wu,  J.,  &  Guan,  K.-L.  (2002).  TSC2  is  phosphorylated  and   inhibited  by  Akt  and  suppresses  mTOR  signalling.  Nature  Cell  Biology,  4(9),   648­57.     Inoki,  K.,  Zhu,  T.,  &  Guan,  K.-L.  (2003).  TSC2  mediates  cellular  energy  response  to   control  cell  growth  and  survival.  Cell,  115(5),  577­90.     Isotani,  S.,  Hara,  K.,  Tokunaga,  C.,  Inoue,  H.,  Avruch,  J.,  &  Yonezawa,  K.  (1999).   Immunopurified  mammalian  target  of  rapamycin  phosphorylates  and  activates   p70  S6  kinase  alpha  in  vitro.  The  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry,  274(48),   34493­8.   Johansson,  M.,  Rocha,  N.,  Zwart,  W.,  Jordens,  I.,  Janssen,  L.,  Kuijl,  C.,  Olkkonen,  V.  M.,   Neefjes,  J.  (2007).  Activation  of  endosomal  dynein  motors  by  stepwise  assembly   of  Rab7-RILP-p150Glued,  ORP1L,  and  the  receptor  III  spectrin.  Journal  of  Cell   Biology,  176(4),  459­71.   Jordens,  I.,  Fernandez-Borja,  M.,  Marsman,  M.,  Dusseljee,  S.,  Janssen,  L.,  Calafat,  J.,   Janssen,  H.,  Wubbolts,  R.,  Neefjes,  J.  (2001).  The  Rab7  effector  protein  RILP  

  

141  

controls  lysosomal  transport  by  inducing  the  recruitment  of  dynein-dynactin   motors.  Current  Biology,  11(21),  1680­5.   Jung,  C.  H.,  Jun,  C.  B.,  Ro,  S.  H.,  Kim,  Y.  M.,  Otto,  N.  M.,  Cao,  J.,  Kundu,  M.,  Kim,  D.  H.   (2009).  ULK-Atg13-FIP200  complexes  mediate  mTOR  signaling  to  the   autophagy  machinery.  Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell,  20(7),  1992-2003.   Jung,  C.  H.,  Ro,  S.  H.,  Cao,  J.,  Otto,  N.  M.,  Kim,  D.  H.  (2010).  mTOR  regulation  of   autophagy.  FEBS  Letters,  584(7),  1287-95.   Kaniuk,  N.  A.,  Canadien,  V.,  Bagshaw,  R.  D.,  Bakowski,  M.,  Braun,  V.,  Landekic,  M.,   Mitra,  S.,  Huang,  J.,  Heo,  W.  D.,  Meyer,  T.,  Pelletier,  L.,  Andrews-Polymenis,  H.,   McClelland,  M.,  Pawson,  T.,  Grinstein,  S.,  Brumell,  J.  H.  (2011).  Salmonella   exploits  Arl8B-directed  kinesin  activity  to  promote  endosome  tubulation  and   cell-to-cell  transfer.  Cellular  Microbiology,  13(11),  1812­23.   Kardon,  J.  R.,  &  Vale,  R.  D.  (2009).  Regulators  of  the  cytoplasmic  dynein  motor.   Nature  Reviews  Molecular  Cell  Biology,  10(12),  854­65.     Katzmann,  D.  J.,  Babst,  M.,  Emr,  S.  D.  (2001).  Ubiquitin-dependent  sorting  into  the   multivesicular  body  pathway  requires  the  function  of  a  conserved  endosomal   protein  sorting  complex,  ESCRT-I.  Cell,  106(2),  145-55.   Kawai,  T.,  Adachi,  O.,  Ogawa,  T.,  Takeda,  K.,  &  Akira,  S.  (1999).  Unresponsiveness  of   MyD88-deficient  mice  to  endotoxin.  Immunity,  11(1),  115­122.   Kawai,  T.,  Takeuchi,  O.,  Fujita,  T.,  Inoue,  J.,  Mühlradt,  P.  F.,  Sato,  S.,  Hoshino,  K.,  Akira,   S.  (2001).  Lipopolysaccharide  stimulates  the  MyD88-independent  pathway  and   results  in  activation  of  IFN-regulatory  factor  3  and  the  expression  of  a  subset  of   lipopolysaccharide-inducible  genes.  Journal  of  Immunology,  167(10),  5887­94.   Khatter,  D.,  Raina,  V.  B.,  Dwivedi,  D.,  Sindhwani,  A.,  Bahl,  S.,  &  Sharma,  M.  (2015).  The   small  GTPase  Arl8b  regulates  assembly  of  the  mammalian  HOPS  complex  on   lysosomes.  Journal  of  Cell  Science,  128(9),  1746­61.   Kimura,  S.,  Fujita,  N.,  Noda,  T.,  &  Yoshimori,  T.  (2009).  Monitoring  autophagy  in   mammalian  cultured  cells  through  the  dynamics  of  LC3.  In  J.  N.  Abelson  &  M.  I.   Simon  (Eds.),  Methods  in  Enzymology  (Vol.  452,  pp.  1­12).  California,  USA:   Elsevier  Inc.   Krajcovic,  M.,  Krishna,  S.,  Akkari,  L.,  Joyce,  J.  A.,  &  Overholtzer,  M.  (2013).  mTOR   regulates  phagosome  and  entotic  vacuole  fission.  Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell,   24(23),  3736­45.  

  

142  

Laird,  M.  H.  W.,  Rhee,  S.  H.,  Perkins,  D.  J.,  Medvedev,  A.  E.,  Piao,  W.,  Fenton,  M.  J.,  &   Vogel,  S.  N.  (2009).  TLR4/MyD88/PI3K  interactions  regulate  TLR4  signaling.   Journal  of  Leukocyte  Biology,  85(6),  966­77.   Lamb,  C.  A.,  Yoshimori,  T.,  Tooze,  S.  A.  (2013).  The  autophagosome:  origins   unknown,  biogenesis  complex.  Nature  Reviews  Molecular  Cell  Biology,  14(12),   759-74.   Laplante,  M.,  &  Sabatini,  D.  M.  (2013).  mTOR  signaling  in  growth  control  and  disease.   Cell,  149(2),  274­93.   Lin,  S.  X.  H.,  &  Collins,  C.  A.  (1992).  Immunolocalization  of  cytoplasmic  dynein  to   lysosomes  in  cultured  cells.  Journal  of  Cell  Science,  101(Pt  1),  125­37.   Liu,  Q.,  Chang,  J.  W.,  Wang,  J.,  Kang,  S.  A.,  Thoreen,  C.  C.,  Markhard,  A.,  Hur,  W.,  Zhang,   J.,  Sim,  T.,  Sabatini,  D.  M.,  Gray,  N.  S.  (2010).  Discovery  of  1-(4-(4- propionylpiperazin-1-yl)-3-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl)-9-(quinolin-3- yl)benzo[h][1,6]naphthyridin-2(1H)-one  as  a  highly  potent,  selective   mammalian  target  of  rapamycin  (mTOR)  inhibitor  for  the  treatment  of  cancer.   Journal  of  Medicinal  Chemistry,  53(19),  7146-55.   Loewith,  R.,  Jacinto,  E.,  Wullschleger,  S.,  Lorberg,  A.,  Crespo,  J.  L.,  Bonenfant,  D.,   Oppliger,  W.,  Jenoe,  P.,  Hall,  M.  N.  (2002).  Two  TOR  complexes,  only  one  of   which  is  rapamycin  sensitive,  have  distinct  roles  in  cell  growth  control.   Molecular  Cell,  10(3),  457­68.   Luzio,  J.  P.,  Pryor,  P.  R.,  &  Bright,  N.  A.  (2007).  Lysosomes:  fusion  and  function.   Nature  Reviews  Molecular  Cell  Biology,  8(8),  622­32.   Lye,  R.  J.,  Porter,  M.  E.,  Scholey,  J.  M.,  &  McIntosh,  J.  R.  (1987).  Identification  of  a   microtubule-based  cytoplasmic  motor  in  the  nematode  C.  elegans.  Cell,  51(2),   309­18.     Mantegazza,  A.  R.,  Zajac,  A.  L.,  Twelvetrees,  A.,  Holzbaur,  E.  L.  F.,  Amigorena,  S.,  &   Marks,  M.  S.  (2014).  TLR-dependent  phagosome  tubulation  in  dendritic  cells   promotes  phagosome  cross-talk  to  optimize  MHC-II  antigen  presentation.   Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  111(43),  15508­13.   Melkonian,  K.  A.,  Maier,  K.  C.,  Godfrey,  J.  E.,  Rodgers,  M.,  &  Schroer,  T.  A.  (2007).   Mechanism  of  dynamitin-mediated  disruption  of  dynactin.  The  Journal  of   Biological  Chemistry,  282(27),  19355­64.     Michelet,  X.,  Garg,  S.,  Wolf,  B.  J.,  Tuli,  A.,  Ricciardi-castagnoli,  P.,  &  Brenner,  M.  B.   (2015).  MHC  class  II  presentation  is  controlled  by  the  lysosomal  small  GTPase,   Arl8b.  Journal  of  Immunology,  194(5),  2079­88.  

  

143  

Miller,  K.,  Beardmore,  J.,  Kanety,  H.,  Schlessinger,  J.,  &  Hopkins,  C.  R.  (1986).   Localization  of  the  epidermal  growth  factor  (EGF)  receptor  within  the   endosome  of  EGF-stimulated  epidermoid  carcinoma  (A431)  cells.  The  Journal  of   Cell  Biology,  102(2),  500­9.     Mizushima,  N.  (2007).  Autophagy:  process  and  function.  Genes  and  Development,   21(22),  2861-73.   Mizushima,  N.,  Yoshimori,  T.,  &  Levine,  B.  (2010).  Methods  in  mammalian  autophagy   research.  Cell,  140(3),  313­26.     Mrakovic,  A.,  Kay,  J.  G.,  Furuya,  W.,  Brumell,  J.  H.,  &  Botelho,  R.  J.  (2012).  Rab7  and   Arl8  GTPases  are  necessary  for  lysosome  tubulation  in  macrophages.  Traffic,   13(12),  1667­79.   Muta,  T.,  &  Takeshige,  K.  (2001).  Essential  roles  of  CD14  and  lipopolysaccharide- binding  protein  for  activation  of  toll-like  receptor  (TLR)2  as  well  as  TLR4:   Reconstitution  of  TLR2-  and  TLR4-activation  by  distinguishable  ligands  in  LPS   preparations.  European  Journal  of  Biochemistry,  268(16),  4580-9.   Nakae,  I.,  Fujino,  T.,  Kobayashi,  T.,  Sasaki,  A.,  Kikko,  Y.,  Fukuyama,  M.,  Gengyo-Ando,   K.,  Mitani,  S.,  Kontani,  K.,  Katada,  T.  (2010).  The  Arf-like  GTPase  Arl8  mediates   delivery  of  endocytosed  macromolecules  to  lysosomes  in  Caenorhabditis   elegans.  Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell,  21(14),  2434­42.   Nakamura,  N.,  Lill,  J.  R.,  Phung,  Q.,  Jiang,  Z.,  Bakalarski,  C.,  de  Mazière,  A.,   Klumperman,  J.,  Schlatter,  M.,  Delamarre,  L.,  Mellman,  I.  (2014).  Endosomes  are   specialized  platforms  for  bacterial  sensing  and  NOD2  signalling.  Nature,   509(7499),  240­4.     Neefjes,  J.  (1999).  CIIV,  MIIC  and  other  compartments  for  MHC  class  II  loading.   European  Journal  of  Immunology,  29(5),  1421­5.     Neefjes,  J.  J.,  Stollorz,  V.,  Peters,  P.  J.,  Geuze,  H.  J.,  &  Ploegh,  H.  L.  (1990).  The   biosynthetic  pathway  of  MHC  class  II  but  not  class  I  molecules  intersects  the   endocytic  route.  Cell,  61(1),  171­83.   Ni,  Y.,  Wang,  L.,  Zhang,  J.,  Pang,  Z.,  Liu,  Q.,  &  Du,  J.  (2015).  PKD1  is  downregulated  in   non-small  cell  lung  cancer  and  mediates  the  feedback  inhibition  of  mTORC1- S6K1  axis  in  response  to  phorbol  ester.  The  International  Journal  of   Biochemistry  &  Cell  Biology,  60,  34­42.  doi:  10.1016/j.biocel.2014.12.018.   Nordmann,  M.,  Cabrera,  M.,  Perz,  A.,  Brocker,  C.,  Ostrowicz,  C.,  Engelbrecht-Vandre,   S.,  Ungermann,  C.  (2010).  The  Mon1-Ccz1  complex  is  the  GEF  of  the  late   endosomal  Rab7  homolog  Ypt7.  Current  Biology,  20(18),  1654-9.  

  

144  

O'Neill,  L.  A.,  &  Bowie,  A.  G.  (2007).  The  family  of  five:  TIR  domain-containing   adaptors  in  Toll-like  receptor  signaling.  Nature  Reviews  Immunology  7(5),  353- 64.   Pankiv,  S.,  Alemu,  E.  A.,  Brech,  A.,  Bruun,  J.  A.,  Lamark,  T.,  Øvervatn,  A.,  Bjorkoy,  G.,   Johansen,  T.  (2010).  FYCO1  is  a  Rab7  effector  that  binds  to  LC3  and  PI3P  to   mediate  microtubule  plus  end  -  directed  vesicle  transport.  The  Journal  of  Cell   Biology,  188(2),  253­69.     Pause,  A.,  Belsham,  G.  J.,  Gingras,  A.-C.,  Donzé,  O.,  Lin,  T.-A.,  Lawrence,  J.  C.  J.,  &   Sonenberg,  N.  (1994).  Insulin-dependent  stimulation  of  protein  synthesis  by   phosphorylation  of  a  regulator  of  5'-cap  function.  Nature,  371(6500),  762-7.   Peralta,  E.  R.,  Martin,  B.  C.,  Edinger,  A.  L.  (2010).  Differential  effects  of  TBC1D15  and   mammalian  Vps39  on  Rab7  activation  state,  lysosomal  morphology,  and  growth   factor  dependence.  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry,  285(22),  168814-21.   Peters,  P.  J.,  Borst,  J.,  Oorschot,  V.,  Fukuda,  M.,  Krähenbühl,  O.,  Tschopp,  J.,  Slot,  J.  W.,   Geuze,  H.  J.  (1991).  Cytotoxic  T  lymphocyte  granules  are  secretory  lysosomes,   containing  both  perforin  and  granzymes.  The  Journal  of  Experimental  Medicine,   173(5),  1099­109.   Poteryaev,  D.,  Fares,  H.,  Bowerman,  D.,  Spang,  A.  (2007).  Caenorhabditis  elegans   SAND-1  is  essential  for  Rab7  function  in  endosomal  traffic.  EMBO  Journal,  26(2),   301-12.   Pu,  J.,  Schindler,  C.,  Jia,  R.,  Jarnik,  M.,  Backlund,  P.,  &  Bonifacino,  J.  S.  (2015).  BORC,  a   multisubunit  complex  that  regulates  lysosome  positioning.  Developmental  Cell,   33(2),  176­88.     Rink,  J.,  Ghigo,  E.,  Kalaidzidis,  Y.,  &  Zerial,  M.  (2005).  Rab  conversion  as  a  mechanism   of  progression  from  early  to  late  endosomes.  Cell,  122(5),  735­49.   Robinson,  J.  M.,  Chiplonkar,  J.,  &  Luo,  Z.  (1996).  A  method  for  co-localization  of   tubular  lysosomes  and  microtubules  in  macrophages:  fluorescence  microscopy   of  individual  cells.  Journal  of  Histochemistry  &  Cytochemistry,  44(10),  1109­14.     Robinson,  J.  H.,  &  Delvig,  A.  A.  (2002).  Diversity  in  MHC  class  II  antigen  presentation.   Immunology,  105(3),  252-62.   Roche,  P.  A.,  &  Cresswell,  P.  (1990).  Invariant  chain  association  with  HLA-DR   molecules  inhibits  immunogenic  peptide  binding.  Nature,  345(6276),  615-8.   Rosa-Ferreira,  C.,  &  Munro,  S.  (2011).  Arl8  and  SKIP  act  together  to  link  lysosomes   to  kinesin-1.  Developmental  Cell,  21(6),  1171­8.    

  

145  

Saitoh,  M.,  Pullen,  N.,  Brennan,  P.,  Cantrell,  D.,  Dennis,  P.  B.,  &  Thomas,  G.  (2002).   Regulation  of  an  activated  S6  kinase  1  variant  reveals  a  novel  mammalian   target  of  rapamycin  phosphorylation  site.  The  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry,   277(22),  20104­12.     Sancak,  Y.,  Peterson,  T.  R.,  Shaul,  Y.  D.,  Lindquist,  R.  A.,  Thoreen,  C.  C.,  Bar-Peled,  L.,  &   Sabatini,  D.  M.  (2008).  The  Rag  GTPases  bind  raptor  and  mediate  amino  acid   signaling  to  mTORC1.  Science,  320(5882),  1496­1501.   Sarbassov,  D.  D.,  Guertin,  D.  A.,  Ali,  S.  M.,  &  Sabatini,  D.  M.  (2005).  Phosphorylation   and  regulation  of  Akt/PKB  by  the  rictor-mTOR  complex.  Science,  307(5712),   1098­1101.     Scheffzek,  K.,  Ahmadian,  M.  R.,  Kabsch,  W.,  Wiesmuller,  L.,  Lautwein,  A.,  Schmitz,  F.,   Wittinghofer,  A.  (1997).  The  Ras-RasGAP  complex:  structural  basis  for  GTPase   activation  and  its  loss  in  oncogenic  Ras  mutants.    Science,  277(5324),  333-8.   Schiefermeier,  N.,  Scheffler,  J.  M.,  de  Araujo,  M.  E.  G.,  Stasyk,  T.,  Yordanov,  T.,  Ebner,   H.  L.,  Offterdinger,  M.,  Munck,  S.,  Hess,  M.  W.,  Wickstrom,  S.  A.,  Lange,  A.,   Wunderlich,  W.,  Fassler,  R.,  Teis,  D.,  Huber,  L.  A.  (2014).  The  late  endosomal   p14-MP1  (LAMTOR2/3)  complex  regulates  focal  adhesion  dynamics  during  cell   migration.  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  205(4),  525­40.   Sengupta,  S.,  Peterson,  T.  R.,  &  Sabatini,  D.  M.  (2010).  Regulation  of  the  mTOR   complex  1  pathway  by  nutrients,  growth  factors,  and  stress.  Molecular  Cell,   40(2),  310­22.     Settembre,  C.,  Fraldi,  A.,  Medina,  D.  L.,  &  Ballabio,  A.  (2013).  Signals  from  the   lysosome:  a  control  centre  for  cellular  clearance  and  energy  metabolism.   Nature  Reviews  Molecular  Cell  Biology,  14(5),  283­96.   Settembre,  C.,  Zoncu,  R.,  Medina,  D.  L.,  Vetrini,  F.,  Erdin,  S.,  Erdin,  S.,  Huynh,  T.,   Ferron,  M.,  Karsenty,  G.,  Vellard,  M.  C.,  Facchinetti,  V.,  Sabatini,  D.  M.,  Ballabio,  A.   (2012).  A  lysosome-to-nucleus  signalling  mechanism  senses  and  regulates  the   lysosome  via  mTOR  and  TFEB.  The  EMBO  Journal,  31(5),  1095­1108.     Shimazu,  R.,  Akashi,  S.,  Ogata,  H.,  Nagai,  Y.,  Fukudome,  K.,  Miyake,  K.,  Kimoto,  M.   (1999).  MD-2,  a  molecule  that  confers  lipopolysaccharide  responsiveness  on   Toll-like  receptor  4.  Journal  of  Experimental  Medicine,  189(11),  1777-82.   Shpetner,  H.  S.,  Paschal,  B.  M.,  &  Vallee,  R.  B.  (1988).  Characterization  of  the   microtubule-activated  ATPase  of  brain  cytoplasmic  dynein  (MAP  1C).  Journal  of   Cell  Biology,  107(3),  1001­9.    

  

146  

Silver,  K.  E.,  &  Harrison,  R.  E.  (2011).  Kinesin  5B  is  necessary  for  delivery  of   membrane  and  receptors  during  FcR-mediated  phagocytosis.  Journal  of   Immunology,  186(2),  816­25.     Sloan,  V.  S.,  Cameron,  P.,  Porter,  G.,  Gammon,  M.,  Amaya,  M.,  Mellins,  E.,  Zaller,  D.  M.   (1995).  Mediation  by  HLA-DM  of  dissociation  of  peptides  from  HLA-DR.  Nature,   375(6534),  802-6.   Stambolic,  V.,  Suzuki,  A.,  De  la  Pompa,  J.  L.,  Brothers,  G.  M.,  Mirtsos,  C.,  Sasaki,  T.,   Ruland,  J.,  Penninger,  J.  M.,  Siderovski,  D.  P.,  Mak,  T.  W.  (1998).  Negative   regulation  of  PKB/Akt-dependent  cell  survival  by  the  tumor  suppressor  PTEN.   Cell,  95(1),  29­39.     Steinman,  R.  M.,  &  Hemmi,  H.  (2006).  Dendritic  cells:  translating  innate  to  adaptive   immunity.  Curr  Top  Microbiol  Immunol,  311,  17-58.   Steinman,  R.  M.,  &  Swanson,  J.  (1995).  The  endocytic  activity  of  dendritic  cells.  The   Journal  of  Experimental  Medicine,  182(2),  283­8.   Stephen,  T.  L.,  Fabri,  M.,  Groneck,  L.,  Röhn,  T.  A.,  Hafke,  H.,  Robinson,  N.,  Rietdorf,  J.,   Schrama,  D.,  Becker,  J.  C.,  Plum,  G.,  Kronke,  M.,  Kropshofer,  H.,  Kalka-Moll,  W.  M.   (2007).  Transport  of  Streptococcus  pneumoniae  capsular  polysaccharide  in  MHC   class  II  tubules.  PLoS  Pathogens,  3(3),  e32.     Stromhaug,  E.  E.,  Berg,  T.  O.,  Fengsrud,  M.,  Seglen,  P.  O.  (1998).  Purification  and   characterization  of  autophagosomes  from  rat  hepatocytes.  Biochemical  Journal,   335(Pt  2),  217-24.   Sun-Wada,  G.-H.,  Tabata,  H.,  Kawamura,  N.,  Aoyama,  M.,  &  Wada,  Y.  (2009).  Direct   recruitment  of  H+-ATPase  from  lysosomes  for  phagosomal  acidification.  Journal   of  Cell  Science,  122(Pt  14),  2504­13.     Suzuki,  N.,  Suzuki,  S.,  Duncan,  G.  S.,  Millar,  D.  G.,  Wada,  T.,  Mirtsos,  C.,  Takada,  H.,   Wakeham,  A.,  Itie,  A.,  Li,  S.,  Penninger,  J.  M.,  Wesche,  H.,  Ohashi,  P.  S.,  Mak,  T.  W.,   Yeh,  W.-C.  (2002).  Severe  impairment  of  interleukin-1  and  Toll-like  receptor   signalling  in  mice  lacking  IRAK-4.  Nature,  416(6882),  750­6.     Swanson,  J.  A.,  Locke,  A.,  Ansel,  P.,  &  Hollenbeck,  P.  J.  (1992).  Radial  movement  of   lysosomes  along  microtubules  in  permeabilized  macrophages.  Journal  of  Cell   Science,  103(Pt  1),  201­9.     Swanson,  J.  A.,  Yirinec,  B.  D.,  &  Silverstein,  S.  C.  (1985).  Phorbol  esters  and   horseradish  peroxidase  stimulate  pinocytosis  and  redirect  the  flow  of   pinocytosed  fluid  in  macrophages.  The  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  100(3),  851­9.    

  

147  

Swanson,  J.,  Burke,  E.,  &  Silverstein,  S.  C.  (1987).  Tubular  lysosomes  accompany   stimulated  pinocytosis  in  macrophages.  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  104(5),  1217­ 22.     Swanson,  J.,  Bushnell,  A.,  &  Silverstein,  S.  C.  (1987).  Tubular  lysosome  morphology   and  distribution  within  macrophages  depend  on  the  integrity  of  cytoplasmic   microtubules.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  84(7),  1921­5.     Swiech,  L.,  Blazejczyk,  M.,  Urbanska,  M.,  Pietruszka,  P.,  Dortland,  B.  R.,  Malik,  A.  R.,   Wulf,  P.  S.,  Hoogenraad,  C.  C.,  Jaworski,  J.  (2011).  CLIP-170  and  IQGAP1   cooperatively  regulate  dendrite  morphology.  The  Journal  of  Neuroscience,   31(12),  4555­68.     Tanaka,  Y.,  Kanai,  Y.,  Okada,  Y.,  Nonaka,  S.,  Takeda,  S.,  Harada,  A.,  &  Hirokawa,  N.   (1998).  Targeted  disruption  of  mouse  conventional  kinesin  heavy  chain,  kif5B,   results  in  abnormal  perinuclear  clustering  of  mitochondria.  Cell,  93(7),  1147­ 58.     Thomas,  J.  A.,  Allen,  J.  L.,  Tsen,  M.,  Dubnicoff,  T.,  Danao,  J.,  Liao,  X.  C.,  Cao,  Z.,   Wasserman,  S.  A.  (1999).  Impaired  cytokine  signaling  in  mice  lacking  the  IL-1   receptor-associated  kinase.  The  Journal  of  Immunology,  163(2),  978­84.   Tjelle,  T.  E.,  Lovdal,  T.,  &  Berg,  T.  (2000).  Phagosome  dynamics  and  function.   Bioessays,  22(3),  255­63.     Tooze,  S.  A.  &  Yoshimori,  T.  (2010).  The  origin  of  the  autophagosomal  membrane.   Nature  Cell  Biology,  12(9),  831-5.   Vale,  R.  D.  (2003).  The  molecular  motor  toolbox  for  intracellular  transport.  Cell,   112(4),  467­80.     Vale,  R.  D.,  Reese,  T.  S.,  &  Sheetz,  M.  P.  (1985).  Identification  of  a  novel  force- generating  protein,  kinesin,  involved  in  microtubule-based  motility.  Cell,  42(1),   39­50.     Vieira,  O.  V.,  Bucci,  C.,  Harrison,  R.  E.,  Trimble,  W.  S.,  Lanzetti,  L.,  Gruenberg,  J.,   Schreiber,  A.  D.,  Stahl,  P.  D.,  Grinstein,  S.  (2003).  Modulation  of  Rab5  and  Rab7   recruitment  to  phagosomes  by  phosphatidylinositol  3-kinase.  Molecular  and   Cellular  Biology,  23(7),  2501­14.   Von  Manteuffel,  S.  R.,  Gingras,  A.-C.,  Ming,  X.-F.,  Sonenberg,  N.,  &  Thomas,  G.  (1996).   4E-BP1  phosphorylation  is  mediated  by  the  FRAP-p70s6k  pathway  and  is   independent  of  mitogen-activated  protein  kinase.  Proceedings  of  the  National   Academy  of  Sciences,  93(9),  4076­80.    

  

148  

Vyas,  J.  M.,  Kim,  Y.-M.,  Artavanis-Tsakonas,  K.,  Love,  J.  C.,  Van  der  Veen,  A.  G.,  &   Ploegh,  H.  L.  (2007).  Tubulation  of  class  II  MHC  compartments  is  microtubule   dependent  and  involves  multiple  endolysosomal  membrane  proteins  in   primary  dendritic  cells.  Journal  of  Immunology,  178(11),  7199­210.   Wang,  T.,  Ming,  Z.,  Xiaochun,  W.,  &  Hong,  W.  (2011).  Rab7:  role  of  its  protein   interaction  cascades  in  endo-lysosomal  traffic.  Cellular  Signalling,  23(3),  516­ 21.   Watts,  C.  (1997).  Capture  and  processing  of  exogenous  antigens  for  presentation  on   MHC  molecules.  Annual  Reviews  in  Immunology,  15,  821-50.   Wullschleger,  S.,  Loewith,  R.,  &  Hall,  M.  N.  (2006).  TOR  signaling  in  growth  and   metabolism.  Cell,  124(3),  471­84.     Wurmser,  A.  E.,  Sato,  T.  K.,  &  Emr,  S.  D.  (2000).  New  component  of  the  vacuolar  class   C-Vps  complex  couples  nucleotide  exchange  on  the  Ypt7  GTPase  to  SNARE- dependent  docking  and  fusion.  Journal  of  Cell  Biology,  151(3),  551­62.   Yamamoto,  M.,  Sato,  S.,  &  Hemmi,  H.  (2003).  Role  of  adaptor  TRIF  in  the  MyD88- independent  Toll-like  receptor  signaling  pathway.  Science,  301(5633),  640­3.   Yamamoto,  M.,  Sato,  S.,  Hemmi,  H.,  Uematsu,  S.,  Hoshino,  K.,  Kaisho,  T.,  Sanjo,  H.,   Takeuchi,  O.,  Sugiyama,  M.,  Okabe,  M.,  Takeda,  K.,  Akira,  S.  (2003).  TRAM  is   specifically  involved  in  the  Toll-like  receptor  4-mediated  MyD88-independent   signaling  pathway.  Nature  Immunology,  4(11),  1144­50.   Yamamoto,  M.,  Sato,  S.,  Mori,  K.,  Hoshino,  K.,  Takeuchi,  O.,  Takeda,  K.,  &  Akira,  S.   (2002).  Cutting  edge:  a  novel  Toll/IL-1  receptor  domain-containing  adapter   that  preferentially  activates  the  IFN-beta  promoter  in  the  Toll-like  receptor   signaling.  Journal  of  Immunology,  169(12),  6668­72.     Yamamoto,  M.,  &  Takeda,  K.  (2010).  Current  views  on  toll-like  receptor  signaling   pathways.  Gastroenterology  Research  and  Practice,  2010,  1-8.  doi:   10.1155/2010/240365.   Yang,  J.,  &  Shen,  M.  H.  (2006).  Polyethylene  glycol-mediated  cell  fusion.  In  S.  Pells   (Ed.),  Nuclear  Reprogramming  (pp.59-66).  Totowa,  New  Jersey:  Humana  Press.   Yrlid,  U.,  &  Wick,  M.  J.  (2002).  Antigen  presentation  capacity  and  cytokine   production  by  murine  splenic  dendritic  cell  subsets  upon  Salmonella  encounter.   Journal  of  Immunology,  169(1),  108­16.     Yu,  K.,  Toral-Barza,  L.,  Shi,  C.,  Zhang,  W.  G.,  Lucas,  J.,  Shor,  B.,  Kim,  J.,  Verheijen,  J.,   Curran,  K.,  Malwitz,  D.  J.,  Cole,  D.  C.,  Ellingboe,  J.,  Ayral-Kaloustian,  S.,  Mansour,   T.  S.,  Gibbons,  J.  J.,  Abraham,  R.  T.,  Nowak,  P.,  Zask,  A.  (2009).  Biochemical,      149  

cellular,  and  in  vivo  activity  of  novel  ATP-competitive  and  selective  inhibitors  of   the  mammalian  target  of  rapamycin.  Cancer  Research,  69(15),  6232­40.   Yu,  L.,  McPhee,  C.  K.,  Zheng,  L.,  Mardones,  G.  A.,  Rong,  Y.,  Peng,  J.,  Mi,  N.,  Zhao,  Y.,  Liu,   Z.,  Wan,  F.,  Hailey,  D.  W.,  Oorschot,  V.,  Klumperman,  J.,  Baehrecke,  E.  H.,   Lenardo,  M.  J.  (2010).  Autophagy  termination  and  lysosome  reformation   regulated  by  mTOR.  Nature,  465(7300),  942­6.   Zoncu,  R.,  Bar-Peled,  L.,  Efeyan,  A.,  Wang,  S.,  Sancak,  Y.,  &  Sabatini,  D.  M.  (2011).   mTORC1  senses  lysosomal  amino  acids  through  an  inside-out  mechanism  that   requires  the  vacuolar  H-ATPase.  Science,  334(6056),  678­83.     Zoncu,  R.,  Sabatini,  D.  M.,  &  Efeyan,  A.  (2011).  mTOR:  from  growth  signal  integration   to  cancer,  diabetes  and  ageing.  Nature  Reviews  Molecular  Cell  Biology,  12(1),   21­35.       

  

150  

