FIBER TO THE HOME (FTTH) AND COMPETITION: DEVELOPMENTS IN THE NETHERLANDS & CANADA

Annemijn van Gorp & Catherine Middleton, Ryerson University [avangorp; catherine.middleton]@ryerson.ca

Context
 FTTH

as the "final broadband service" due to high speeds?

 Japan

& Korea: >40% of residential broadband connections  Europe < 1%, U.S. ~3%

Many questions & uncertainties
  

High upfront investments Technological superiority? Replacement of other last mile infrastructures?

Should FTTH be regulated?  Incentives for investor to recoup investment  Stimulate competition


If open access (service based competition): Opening at certain conditions



Relation to technology?


PON vs. PtP


Costs, complexity of enabling open access, sharing of fiber between subscribers

Questions
1.

2.

How is FTTH changing the competitive landscape of broadband markets? What factors underlie the growth of FTTH networks?

Developments in the Netherlands
 

Early 2009: 4% of broadband connections are FTTH Projections: > 70-80% FTTH coverage by 2020-2030

Currently:  349.000 homes passed  62% ready for service  139.000 active subscribers  61 ongoing FTTH projects (in different areas)

The three layered access model
Regulatory Requirements
Service Provider(s) No Wholesale Broadband Access (WBA) requirements
KPN, BBNed, Reggefiber, Solcon, Teleplaza, OONO

Active Infrastructure (Wholesale) Operator(s)

Reggefiber is regulated: Unbundling Passive Infrastructure Provider
Reggefiber

Amsterdam Citynet


Problems with the 3-layered model:
 Who

is responsible for marketing to end-users?



Experience: Pure service provision is not highly desired; entrants want to act as active operators Result: Exclusivity period ­ couple active operator and service provider together
 @Amsterdam



Citynet all major CLECs expected to collocate

New Market Entrants


Teleplaza (Intermezzo, Tilburg)
 Active

operator in Tilburg; passive provider in few projects  Provides Internet access services, resells Ziggo's RTV services


OONO (Red Apple, Rotterdam)
 1st

GPON network in NL  Active operator  Claims first structurally separated network
different providers for Internet, telephony & TV  Wireless Campus acts as service broker  Lease tariff: 0, subscribers get discount on triple play services

 3

Both no interest in Reggefiber's networks

Effects: Infrastructure Competition


Cable providers sticking with cable & upgrading
 DOCSIS
 UPC

3.0

in Amsterdam to offer 120 Mbps service (Fiber Power broadband service), Ziggo is advertising to follow  Heavy advertising, including localized


The future of FTTC/VDSL?
KPN not very active anymore?  Tele2 to start offering VDSL2 from CO, under the name Fiberspeed
 Incumbent

`Conclusion' NL
 Even

though extent of service based competition remains unclear,  Market growth stimulated by:
 Proactive

regulator with regulation that requires unbundling  Competitive market in general  facilities based competition  Investment not so much by telcos but municipalities, social housing agencies, etc.

A Different Story: Canada
0% footprint  Mostly very small, rural, projects  Unregulated  Mostly use of GPON architecture, one project with dark fiber  Problems:


 Backhaul  Finding

a service provider  Investment

`Conclusion' Canada
 Growth

impeded by:

 Limited

competition in the market -> oligopoly leads to limited activity by incumbents, independents afraid to invest for fear of bankruptcy  Small providers having difficulty obtaining funds  Problems with backhaul (FTTH = very high speed? Nope ­ 5 Mbps)

Summary & Conclusion


Prospects for service based competition remain questionable
 At

what level will competition take place?





FTTH to stimulate infrastructure competition in competitive markets So what about markets where competition is limited?
 Regulatory

priority: stimulate investment



Clear direction by the regulator is needed: with uncertainties no investments

Questions?

