MPC MAJOR RESEARCH PAPER

TITLE: The (Un)sustainable Game: An Exploration of rhetorical strategies and risk communication in sustainable seafood campaigns

Brigitte Dreger-Smylie

Supervisor: Dr. Jessica Mudry

     

1  

The Major Research Paper is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Professional Communication

Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada

September 9, 2015

     

2  

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper and the accompanying Research Poster. This is a true copy of the MRP and the research poster, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research paper and/or poster to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP and/or poster by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP and/or my MRP research poster may be made electronically available to the public.

     

3  

Abstract
In the 1990s, following the Newfoundland Grand Banks cod fishery collapse along Canada's East Coast, the first seafood sustainability certification organization was formed to address this widespread crisis. Two notable campaigns were formed shortly thereafter, both programs the projects of marine aquariums along the West Coast, and have gained significant attention: Vancouver Aquarium's Oceanwise provides seafood recommendations to restaurants on the most sustainable choices and Monterey Bay Aquarium's Seafood Watch, creates and disseminates consumer guides. This MRP examines the communication strategies of Seafood Watch and Ocean Wise used to encourage the consumption of sustainable seafood and promote ocean conservation. More specifically, this MRP analyzes the organizations' use of environmental rhetoric, particularly in terms of framing and topoi, and how they communicate risk and urgency. How sustainable seafood campaigns establish credibility and rationale in the public sphere to communicate urgent, technical information surrounding fishery mismanagement is examined. This research will help inform future guidelines for social marketing campaigns to improve strategy and encourage consumer change. Recommendations for future research include the creation of evaluative programs to measure campaign effectiveness as well as an analysis of the niche markets established through the rising sustainable seafood market.         

  

     

4  

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Dr. Jessica Mudry, for her insight and guidance in developing this MRP. Her knowledge of food and science and their intersection with communication was invaluable to my research. Thank you for helping me explore this topic in great detail, which I am deeply passionate about. I would also like to thank my second reader, Dr. John Shiga, whose keen eye for detail and thorough review of my work allowed me to streamline and focus the entirety of this MRP.         

     

5  

Table of Contents
AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION   ABSTRACT   LIST  OF  FIGURES  &  APPENDICES   INTRODUCTION   LITERATURE  REVIEW   CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND SOCIAL MARKETING   COMMUNICATING RISK AND URGENCY   ENVIRONMENTAL RHETORIC   CRITICISMS OF ENVIRONMENTAL RHETORIC   METHODOLOGY   DATA  COLLECTION   SOCIAL MEDIA   WEB   ANNUAL REPORTS   METHOD  OF  ANALYSIS   TEXT ANALYSIS   VISUAL ANALYSIS   RESULTS   RISK  COMMUNICATION   SOCIAL MEDIA   WEB CONTENT   ANNUAL REPORTS   ENVIRONMENTAL  FRAMES/TOPOI   SOCIAL MEDIA   WEB   ANNUAL REPORTS   VISUAL  ANALYSIS   VANCOUVER AQUARIUM   MONTEREY BAY   DISCUSSION   COMMODIFICATION   FRAMES   CONCLUSION   LITERATURE  CITED   APPENDIX  I   3   ERROR!  BOOKMARK  NOT  DEFINED.   7   8   12   12   14   17   19   21   21   21   21   22   23   23   27   28   28   28   30   33   33   33   35   37   38   38   39   39   39   43   51   56   60  

     

6  

List of Figures & Appendices
Table 1. Web pages selected for analysis. Table 2. Subjects identified from social media content and their definition. Table 3. Environmental frames used in the social media strategies of Seafood Watch and Ocean Wise. Table 4. Risk assessment tools and their definitions. Table 5. Visual analysis categories and definition. 21 23

23 25 26

Figure 1. Communication of Risk and Urgency using personalization, uncertainty, scientific knowledge, or qualitative judgment statements. 28 Figure 2. Communication of risk and urgency in web content using personalization, uncertainty, scientific knowledge, and qualitative judgment statements. 30 Table 6. Subjects in social media data. Figure 2. Environmental frames used in social media content. Table 7. Posts demonstrating the commodification of nature and records of reference to a consumer benefit. Table 8. Posts demonstrating the commodification of nature and records of reference to a consumer benefit. Figure 3. Environmental frames used in web content.       33 34

34

36 36 7  

Introduction
Northern cod was once one of the most numerous fish stocks on the planet (McGrath, 1911). For over 400 years, the cod fishery was a vibrant, plentiful staple in Canada's maritime provinces. In the early 1950s, commercial fishing technology began to advance rapidly, increasing yearly landed catch and bringing apparently limitless success to the industry. Within a decade, yearly catch had increased from 250,000 tonnes to over 800,000; the fishery, and Canada's maritime economy, was thriving. The fishery was so strong that an article published in National Geographic in 1988 declared the "almighty Cod" as a resource immune to depletion. But management of the industry was poorly regulated, and the amount of fish being removed from the ecosystem eventually exceeded the amount of breeding adult fish required to maintain a healthy population. Only two years after the Almighty Cod article was published, a follow-up article appeared in the same magazine spelling out significant losses for the industry; yearly catch had fallen to 1,700 tonnes, a fraction of the industry's historical greatness, and fisherman were pulling up empty nets all over Atlantic Canada. A moratorium was placed on cod fisheries in 1993, banning all commercial fishing along the coast in an effort to provide opportunity for cod to rebound, but populations failed to recover. By 1995, the cod fishery had collapsed. By the time of the Grand Banks disaster, sufficient evidence had been collected by scientists, governments and NGOs to realize that this trend was not unique to Canada's East coast: fisheries around the world were collapsing due to overexploitation (Cooke et al., 2011, p. 912). Today, the trend of fishery collapse continues to be seen around the globe; in 2005, 76 per cent of UN-monitored fish stocks had been "fully       8  

exploited, over-exploited, depleted, or recovering from depletion" (Davis and Rangeley, p. 92, 2010). Overfishing is not only putting one of the most globally important sources of human protein at risk, but also degrading the ecological health of world oceans (Davies and Rangeley, p. 92, 2010). Coupled with rising global consumer demand for seafood and a growing human population, fish populations around the world face severe threats, including the release of invasive species, warming ocean temperatures, and irreversible destruction of habitat (Jacquet & Pauly, 2007, p. 308). This evidence led to collaborative efforts between industry and NGOs to establish programs with the goal being to slow and ultimately reverse extensive marine damage (Cooke et al., 2011, p. 912; Jacquet & Pauly, 2007, p. 309). The Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) was one of the first of such organizations to be formed (Kaiser and Edwards-Jones, 2006, p. 393), and was established shortly after Newfoundland's cod fishery collapse (Gien, 2000, p. 121). The MSC, a partnership between Unilever, a multinational consumer goods company heavily involved in the commercial fishing industry, and World Wildlife Fund (WWF), the largest, private, non-profit conservation organization in the world (Constance & Bonanno, 2000, p. 125), was formed with the goal of linking market incentives to consumer preference through certification and ecolabeling (Constance & Bonanno, 2000, p. 125). The formation of the MSC in the wake of such an internationally impactful ecological and economic event helped the organization to quickly gain favour amongst consumers, industry employees, and environmental activists around the globe (Hamilton et al., 2004, p. 196). Over the next decade, many more ocean conservation programs were formed, many of which were corporate initiatives or research ventures of aquariums and non-

     

9  

profits in the developed world. Examples of such campaigns include Monterey Bay Aquarium's Seafood Watch and Vancouver Aquarium's Ocean Wise, both of which were established to educate consumers on ocean issues and encourage the consumption of sustainable seafood. Seafood Watch was founded in 1999 to evaluate the sustainability of farm- and wild-caught seafood sold in the U.S. The program determines sustainability based on a species' ability to "exist into the long term by maintaining or increasing stock abundance" while preserving the surrounding ecosystem (Stevens, 2004, p. 2). Sustainability data is gathered from academic, peer-reviewed journals whenever possible and based on current fishery and ecosystem science, after which it is separated into categories: "best choice", "good alternative" and "avoid" (Stevens, 2004, p. 2). External scientists then review the data (though they may not necessarily endorse the program or its conclusions) and final recommendations and rankings are made by a team at Seafood Watch (Stevens, 2004, p. 2). Seafood Watch then distributes its information widely to consumers through downloadable guides, promotional materials, social media, and outreach events (Stevens, 2004, p. 2). Vancouver Aquarium's Ocean Wise, which is also a recommendation program, targets Canadian restaurants. Established in 2002, the program is tasked with helping restaurants improve the sustainability measure of the seafood they serve (Ocean Wise, 2015). Their criteria are tailored to suit each restaurant individually, and the program's recommendations are based on species that are abundant and resilient to fishing pressures, well-managed based on current research, and caught using practices that limit by-catch and damage to marine environments (Ocean Wise, 2015). The data is based on

     

10  

current scientific literature as well as standards set forth by Seafood Watch. Ocean Wise communicates directly with stakeholders and restaurant partners, as well as publicly through social media, annual reports, their website, and promotional materials. This MRP examines the communication strategies of Seafood Watch and Ocean Wise used to encourage the consumption of sustainable seafood and promote ocean conservation. More specifically, this MRP analyzes the organizations' use of environmental rhetoric, particularly in terms of framing and topoi, and how they communicate risk and urgency. I examine how sustainable seafood campaigns establish credibility and rationale in the public sphere to communicate urgent, technical information surrounding fishery mismanagement. Currently, environmental rhetoric research exists, but there is little research surrounding its relationship with risk communication, and even less so with seafood sustainability campaigns, as this area is so new. Ocean Wise and Seafood Watch consistently use particular words, phrases and tropes. As such, my research will use these patterns of communication to ask the following questions: 1. How are Ocean Wise and Seafood Watch communicating risk and urgency surrounding ocean conservation and sustainable seafood? 2. How are these organizations using rhetorical techniques such as environmental frames and/or topoi to communicate this urgency? 3. If so, are there significant differences between the organizations' use of these strategies?

     

11  

Literature Review
In order to establish rationale for environmental rhetoric and its uses in seafood sustainability campaigns, I will first explore corporate social responsibility (CSR) initiatives, which hinge on the principles of social marketing and risk communication. I will subsequently address rhetorical strategy specifically within the environmental sphere, including the commodification of nature, the blending of the public and technical spheres, and environmental framing, after which I will explore some criticisms of environmental rhetoric. Corporate Social Responsibility and Social Marketing As introduced above, the MSC was one of the first sustainable seafood organizations to be formed, aimed at reducing and reversing extensive marine damage and fishery mismanagement. The MSC's establishment alluded to the irrevocable ecological damage that had been done to one of Canada's most prominent long-term industries (Gien, 2000, p. 121), and signaled the need for vast changes to the rest of globe's commercial fishing practices. Unilever's involvement indicated the corporation's particular responsibility to protect both existing and future fisheries along Canada's East coast and around the world (Hale and Held, 2011, p. 310). This type of involvement, in which a corporation demonstrates ethical, social, or moral involvement through initiatives that parallel their business mandate, is known as corporate social responsibility (CSR). Increasingly, companies are engaging in CSR initiatives "that appear to further some social good, beyond the interests of the firm and that which is required by law" (McWilliams and Siegel, 2001, p. 117). CSR campaigns can help corporations to increase

     

12  

market share and improve positive reputation among the public (McWilliams and Siegel, 2001, p. 117). To be effective, CSR initiatives must be congruent with the mandate of the organization, and consumers must be able to easily connect the company with its interest in the initiative (Sen and Bhattacharya, 2001, p. 227). The MSC demonstrated high congruency with Unilever's involvement in commercial fishing, in that it promoted the health and longevity of the fishing industry (Hale and Held, 2011, p. 309). The formation of the MSC also helped Unilever to mitigate reputational risk at a time of significant negative press, while entering a new market for which to increase their consumer base (Sen and Bhattacharya, 2001, p. 227). Similarly, Seafood Watch and Ocean Wise demonstrate congruency with the mandate of their organizations: both are ventures of aquariums in the developed world, and social marketing initiatives may help aquariums appeal to consumers with varying environmental, ethical, social, and economic interests (McWilliams, et al., 2005, p. 8). These initiatives make intuitive sense to consumers, while promoting a company's positive reputation within the consumer body (Sen and Bhattacharya, 2001, p. 227). CSR initiatives face the unique challenge of having to provide both quantifiable deliverables to stakeholders while maintaining an appearance of social involvement to consumers (Jacquet & Pauly, 2007, p. 309). Social marketing ventures are not intended to generate profit; however, such initiatives are dependent on stakeholder engagement, and must therefore demonstrate clear benefits to investors. One way of achieving this is through the creation of niche markets, in which consumers pay a higher price for a certified item or one that offers some perceived benefit to consumers, such as organic

     

13  

food's purported health benefits (Kaiser and Edwards-Jones, 2006, p. 393). Appeal for business stakeholders can also be created by proposing to maintain a company's positive image in the public sphere (Maignan, 2004, p. 7), or by increasing market share, as social initiatives can widen the pool of potential customers (Jacquet & Pauly, 2007, p. 309). Yet challenges abound in translating moral or ethical benefits into true profit, particularly when the initiative is attempting to promote a shift in consumer purchasing habits: consumers prioritize "performance, value, safety and reliability" (Young, 2006, p. 1446) over perceived moral or ethical benefits. Consumers prioritize their health and finances above the sustainability of fish (Kaiser and Edwards-Jones, 2006, p. 393), and campaigns promoting a moral or ethical product without demonstrating any direct benefit to the consumer may be ineffective, even among consumers that identify as proenvironment. Even the specific issues campaigns communicate are of utmost importance: connecting social initiatives to timely events can increase altruistic views of the corporation, while advocating an ongoing cause, such as overfishing or climate change, may cause consumers to be skeptical of a corporation's motives (Becker-Olsen et al., 2006, p. 50). CSR initiatives are thus subject to the priorities and values of humans and, to be effective, must take this into account (Bates, 2010, p. 93). Communicating Risk and Urgency Chief among the issues faced by CSR initiatives in the sustainable seafood realm is the appropriate communication of risk and urgency without affecting the economic value of the promoted product. Within the sphere of food marketing, there is also a distinct dichotomy between risk, which is associated with and determined by science, and food, which is associated with pleasure. The content of the risk message must be       14  

perceived as both valid and relevant by its audience, and overcome challenges in environmental messaging related to inherently uncertain risk levels and outcomes that extend forward for many centuries at a time (Leiss, 2004, p. 401). Humans are, by nature, not successful at managing risks with these types of characteristics, and as a public, we are often unsure of what to think and what actions to take in response to environmental claims (Ferreira, 2007, p. 861). This is particularly relevant when we consider the oceans, where environmental concerns are not easily seen. We are inherently detached from marine life that bears little to no resemblance to ourselves, and the marine ecosystem is one in which we have little understanding. Further, there is significant uncertainty among consumers regarding the true environmental and economic concerns of current fishing practices, as the shifting veracity of overfishing makes it difficult for consumers to intuit the need for immediate and substantial change in industry behaviour (Faulkner and Ball, 2007, p. 75). This can partially be attributed to the difficulty in communicating and translating scientific models and uncertainties for a lay audience (Ciapuscio, 2003, p. 209), and the complexity of scientific information surrounding fishery mismanagement requires significant technical understanding to communicate appropriately. Scientists communicate with one another using technical language, presenting arguments and research in a formal manner that is understood only by that group (Sovacool, 2008, p. 341). This communication strategy must be adapted to be successful within the public sphere - in other words, to be understood by non-experts (Cox, 2012, p. 366). Yet a certain degree of technicality must be maintained in order to demonstrate a scientist's authority on a topic. Media exacerbates this sensitive challenge by portraying scientific

     

15  

findings and outcomes as definitive statements, without accompaniment of uncertainty, risk, statistics, and previous knowledge and theory (Cox, 2012, p. 356). Uncertainty, a lack of relevance, and competition with portrayal of science in the media has played into the public's inherent lack of trust in science experts. The sheer number of competing frames and narratives has made it difficult for non-experts to trust expert opinions, and caused scientific communication to often appear contradictory. The general public is asked to trust in the credibility of complex data with little to no understanding of how the data was determined and what the outcome of their actions will be. Further, consumers are asked to balance a number of risks and benefits associated with eating seafood, including exposure to mercury and other toxins, the health benefits of eating seafood, ethical concerns for how the fish is farmed or caught, and the environmental impact on marine ecosystems. The hierarchy of information, as it is determined by the public, will influence the perceived value of the fish item, and will determine subsequent widespread consumption choices. Primarily, there are two methods through with food risk is communicated: alarmist, in that the communicative act is meant to change consumer behaviour through fear or urgency, or educational, where the purpose is simply to inform consumers of the risk (Ferreira, 2007, p. 851). Certain tactics can be employed to create lasting ties with an audience, including personalization of the issue, as humans feel more comfortable assigning value to a risk that's directly impactful to them (Lindenfield et al., 2014, p. 120). Consumers are also more likely to feel empathy towards a cause that's humancentric and over which they have control (Ferreira, 2007, p. 851). Further, humans respond more positively to clear, qualitative statements; for example, telling a consumer

     

16  

that something is "safe" or "not safe" makes clear the intended action and helps consumers to manage risk that is technically complex. Combining risk communication strategies with rhetorical techniques can aid in the uptake of information and increase the likelihood of intended actions being taken by consumers. Environmental Rhetoric Environmental rhetoric can be better understood by discussing topoi. Topoi, or commonplaces, can be used to develop a perspective surrounding an argument. Contentlesss by nature, topoi can be applied to any argument, and encourage an audience to consider new perspectives. This helps to persuade an audience to make a subsequently recommended decision. One such example of environmental topoi is arguing the danger of oil spills on marine animals and ecosystem health to advocate for investment into renewable energy (Ross, 2013, p. 92). Topoi "aid memory [and] catalyze frames of understanding", which can be effectively visualized in the contrasting heuristics that are invoked when an audience hears the term "global warming" versus "climate change" (Ross, 2013, p. 92). Such rhetorical tools can assist organizations to actuate an audience's pre-existing understanding of a topic, particularly in the sciences, when evidence might be complex and data uncertain. Not only is it important for topoi to fit into the larger cultural narratives of a society, but also to be applied to the local context; when an argument is timely and has a clearly defined audience, it resonates more effectively with its audience (Ross, 2013, p. 94). Special topoi, which are situation-specific rather than generic, resonate more strongly with their audience, though this also means topics have a shelf life, and will lose their effectiveness over time (Ross, 2013, p. 97). In a capitalist society, topoi in       17  

environmental messaging often include one of economic relevance. Thus, arguing the economic disadvantages of fishery mismanagement would require a discussion of the local context, including major fishing corporations, the amount of people employed in the industry, and how much revenue fisheries generate for the economy each year. These topoi would be further refined depending on the audience and their unique values. The use of topoi therefore help audiences to create cultural, social, and economic relevance for potentially complicated ideas (Ciapuscio, 2003, p. 209). Thus, topoi allow an audience to place the message into a hierarchy, a larger narrative that fits into what they already know; topoi also aid in the translation of scientific data for a lay audience, and technical detail can help support the notion that the speaker or organization has credibility. Supporting this technique is framing, which helps to "situate humans in relation to natural environments, create and maintain hierarchies of importance, reinforce extant values and beliefs, justify action or inaction, suggest heroes and villains, [and] create past contexts and future expectations" (p4). The types of frames used will vary depending on the target audience and their subsequent beliefs and values (Lewicki et al., 2003). Bujis (2011) identified three factors that mark the effectiveness of an environmental frame: i) salience of beliefs and values; ii) how well it resonates with daily experiences; and iii) the extent to which if fits within the dominant narratives of the culture (p. 330). In the developed world, social or cultural relevance often translates into the commodification of nature. In other words, nature is assigned a use-value as a commodity for consumption (Buell, 2009, p. 6). Western culture tends towards the belief that humans have complete "dominion over earth" (Buell, 2009, p 44) and nature assumes a utilitarian

     

18  

role (Meister and Japp, 2002, p. 6). This is evident in the dialogue that surrounds fishery mismanagement, in which fish and the ocean serve a utilitarian purpose as human food or in ecotourism; very rarely is marine life in mass media portrayed as having a value aside from its role in the human food chain (Meister and Japp, 2002, p. 7). Seafood awareness campaigns, then, may market the economization of sustainably sourced fish or their desirability as a food item through the employment of well-known chefs or restaurateurs who publicly endorse sustainable practice and encourage the public to adopt said behaviour, either by purchasing only certified items or becoming accustomed to fish of smaller sizes and different species (Sawe & Hultman, 2014, p. 512). Employment of chefs, restaurateurs, and otherwise defined experts in a field can also help establish credibility in the message. Criticisms of Environmental Rhetoric Environmental movements face a number of challenges in crafting effective rhetoric, and, as such, their dominant means of establishing credibility, relevance, and rationale have been criticized for their failure to effect change on a large scale (Meister and Japp, 2002, p. 155). At the centre of this debate is the environmental sphere's inability to fit into the dominant narratives among society, thus failing to create "lasting communicative links with the public," (Sovacool, 2009, p. 341). So far, society has yet to appreciate the magnitude of current environmental problems, and is unaware as to the actions they should be taking to instill change (Leiss, 2004, p. 403). It is increasingly difficult for the public sphere to apply meaning to environmental problems in general, as problems have become distinct, and each with a distinct solution; issues have become       19  

"too complicated for the general public to understand" (Astbury, 1996, p. 8). This has diminished the capacity for ordinary citizens to feel as though they can effect change, and environmental messaging has been criticized for promoting inaction (Lindenfield et al., 2013, p. 121). Within the public sphere, issues of environmental importance have often been portrayed in one of two ways: as a "green oasis" or as a "world without refuge from toxic penetration" (Buell, 2009, p. 38). Environmental issues are often portrayed as dramatic, irreparable, apocalyptic events, dulling the audience to the urgency of the message and removing their ability to make informed decisions (Buell, 2009, p. 38). These types of arguments are easy to refute or ignore, particularly when they are not accompanied by uncertainty and risk and are inconsistent with the overarching narratives within society. The challenges associated with environmental messaging create significant challenges for environmental initiatives in effecting change and resonating with their audience, and further obstructs the ability to meaningfully protect and conserve the planet.

     

20  

Methodology
Data Collection
Data was collected during 2015 from publicly available sources. This section will outline the data collection method used for social media, web, and promotional content. Social Media Social media data was collected over a three-month period from February 1, 2015 to June 1, 2015. Data was collected from the Facebook pages of Seafood Watch and Ocean Wise using Netlytic. Only content authored by Ocean Wise and Seafood Watch was included in the dataset; comments, shares, and posts by external users were excluded. Data was imported into Microsoft Excel for analysis. A total of 178 posts were collected, with data significantly skewed towards Ocean Wise (Ocean Wise had 134 posts, Seafood Watch had 44). Only posts containing original content were analyzed; for example, photo updates or event postings were excluded if no original content accompanied the update. No images, external links, or comments were analyzed. Web Web content was collected from both organizations' websites during June (seafoodwatch.org and oceanwise.ca). Both text and images were collected. Content was collected from the first five accessible pages from each website. The pages collected are listed in Table 1 below.

Table 1. Web pages selected for analysis.       21  

Seafood Watch Home About Us (Landing Page) Recommendations (Landing Page) Ocean Issues (Landing Page) Consumers (Landing Page) Businesses & Organizations (Landing Page) FAQ

Ocean Wise Home About (landing page) Recommendation Policy Why Sustainable Seafood? Fishing Techniques Aquaculture Techniques FAQ

Content was recorded directly into TextEdit (Apple) and converted to plain text so that it could be analyzed using AntConc. Content was then placed into Microsoft Excel so that individual sentences could be analyzed. In all, 121 lines of content were recorded for the Oceanwise website and 132 lines of content were recorded for the Seafood Watch website. Statements that could not be coded were removed; this included section titles, contact information, and other miscellaneous text. Annual Reports Annual reports from both aquariums were selected. The most recently available reports were from 2013 and both were available online. Text content was recorded directly into TextEdit and converted to plain text so it could be analyzed using AntConc and Voyant software. Documents were also saved to analyze visual components. Next, text content was separated by sentence into Microsoft Excel. In all, 154 lines of content was recorded for the Oceanwise annual report and 151 for the Seafood Watch annual report. Content discussing features of the aquarium, new building additions, partner names, and financial information was excluded from the analysis. In short, anything not relevant to Oceanwise or Seafood Watch, ocean issues, or fishing methods were not analyzed.       22  

Method of Analysis
The method of analysis was structured and multimodal. Analysis spanned both manifest content (social media, web) as well as visual and text analysis (annual reports). Data was analyzed during May and June 2015. This section of my MRP will provide an overview of the method of analysis. Text Analysis All text posts, including social media, web and annual reports were organized in Microsoft Excel. After data was cleaned, I entered it into AntConc for an initial analysis of word frequency. Word frequency was corrected for "Ocean" and "Seafood" in each category where words reflected discussion of the organizations (i.e. as Ocean Wise or Seafood Watch). A list of stop words was included to remove frequently used words that were not of relevance to this MRP. All data was then entered into AntConc text tool to determine the frequency of words, as well as to determine changes in word and subject frequency over time. After content was analyzed for word frequency, posts were analyzed for subject matter. Each post was identified as either "generic" or "specific" and then identified as one of the categories identified in Table 2. In order to be specific, the post had to reference a recent, timely and/or local event; generic posts referenced sustainable seafood, ocean conservation, or ocean threats in general, with no localization or personalization of content. Table 2. Subjects identified from social media content and their definition. Subject Ocean Economy Definition Any post that referenced the economic benefit of the ocean in general. 23  

     

Ocean Conservation

Sustainable Seafood Ocean Research Specific fish species1 Aquaculture2

Any post that referenced conservation of the ocean in general or a particular ecosystem specifically; the post might reference a conservation event, group initiative, or related. Any post that directly mentioned "sustainable seafood" or discussed a known sustainable species of fish. Posts pertaining to current, past or future research in ocean conservation. Whenever a specific fish species was mentioned, either as a food source (commodity) or as an animal. Any reference to fish farming and/or the aquaculture industry.

Once subjects were identified, posts were coded for environmental frames, which were determined earlier in a pilot study. Table 3 defines all frames identified in the content.

Table 3. Environmental frames used in the social media strategies of Seafood Watch and Ocean Wise. Frame Human Interest Definition

Reporting the issue using a human or emotional angle; personalizing, dramatizing, or emotionalizing the content. E.g. "I think people have to start to realize the true cost behind the dirt-cheap seafood that they are buying is human trafficking." Teddie from Ocean Wise speaks with reporter Nikki Bayley on the importance of promoting local, sustainable seafood options like spot prawns. Economic Value Presenting an issue in terms of the value assigned to its continued existence or consequence to economy should it be threatened. e.g. New investments and attention might flow into the ocean economy that could finally move conservation from a niche activity to a mainstream priority -- recognizing that we all, indeed, need nature. Responsibility Attributing responsibility to an individual or group (past) or assigning responsibility to the consumer (present; do more, use less). e.g. Groundbreaking decision: U.S. Pacific Fishery council moves to protect                                                                                                                  1  Fish  species  were  recorded  to  identify  issue-specific  posts.     2  Aquaculture  was  recorded  to  identify  issue-specific  posts.     2  Aquaculture  was  recorded  to  identify  issue-specific  posts.           24  

forage fish. Backed by Science Future Earth Presenting an argument in technical terms (use of jargon, scientific phrases) or attributing credibility based on scientific data. e.g. Salmon ear bones (otoliths) act as a record of their life history and help scientists to study their migratory patterns. Presenting the argument in such a way as to denote the future of our planet due to human action or inaction; for example, presenting the future earth as a "green oasis" or "doomed." e.g. Teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime. But teach a man to olive oil poach a dover sole, and you just might save the planet. Presenting the argument in such a way that an action is condemned/approved for its effect on animal populations or wellbeing, or discussed the impact to environment. e.g. How do you remove sea lice from farm-raised salmon? Get other fish to eat them.

Animal Rights/Ethics/En vironmental Impact

After the posts were coded for frames, posts were identified for the promotion of nature as a commodity; posts either received a "1" or a "0" in this category. A post was considered to demonstrate the commodification of nature if it met the following criteria: i) If a marine animal was referred to as "seafood" or in a manner that identified it solely as a food product; ii) If a marine animal was referred to in such a way that it was identified as an economic resource; or, iii) If a marine ecosystem, climatic event, or animal population was referred to in such a way that demonstrated use-value, whether for tourism, fishing, or a related industry. Posts that were identified as commodifying nature were then further categorized for whether they reflected a benefit to consumer/partner, including taste, cost, health, or benefit to business. In order for a post to receive a "1" in any of the categories, the post had to directly reference one of the categories through the use of adjectives, verbs, or subject matter.       25  

Finally, method of establishing credibility was determined. To demonstrate or assert credibility, the post had to do one of the following: i) Refer to self (the organization) in such a way as an authority on the subject of sustainable seafood through reference from a notable public figure or company; ii) Discuss sustainable seafood or ocean conservation/economy from the perspective of a notable chef, restaurateur, food writer, or similar; iii) Support a point through use of a notable science figure or research study. Next, risk and urgency were assessed for both social media and web content. Posts/sentences were coded as "educational" or "alarmist". Next it was determined whether the statement was personalized, a qualitative judgment (ie. gave the consumer a yes/no option), and/or communicated uncertainty.3 Table 4 defines each of the risk assessment categories. Table 4. Risk assessment tools and their definitions. Risk Assessment Tool Educational Definition A statement meant to inform consumers of the risk e.g. Sustainable seafood can be defined as species that are caught or farmed in a way that ensures the long-term health and stability of that species, as well as the greater marine ecosystem. A statement directly aimed at changing consumer behaviour through the use of apocalyptic narratives, storylines or otherwise dramatizing the content. e.g. A recent scientific study predicted a world-wide fisheries collapse by 2048. If the risk is framed in terms that directly relate it to a quantifiable risk to the audience; risk the audience can relate to (ie. household risk).

Alarmist

Personalized

                                                                                                                 3  Posts  might  have  fallen  into  multiple  or  none  of  the  categories.           26  

e.g. Guess what everybody? Surprise, you care about what you're eating. Check out the National Restaurant Association's 2015 culinary trends. Environmental sustainability ranks at #3 and sustainable seafood comes in at #8. Uncertainty Qualitative Judgment Visual Analysis Visual analysis was carried out only for annual reports, as these were the only sources of data that made significant use of imagery to communicate their message; social media also used images and videos, however, due to time constraints, these were not analyzed. Visual analysis was conducted using a format adapted from the University of Washington (Hattwig, 2015). The following table denotes the characteristics of visual images that were recorded. Table 5. Visual analysis categories and definition. Category Content Analysis Visual Analysis Data recorded What the image was about; Whether people were present and how/what they were doing; Effectiveness of image as a visual message. Composition (background, foreground); Most important visual elements of the photo; Use of colour; Meanings conveyed by design choices. Information that accompanied the image; Whether this changed how the image was viewed; Informational/factual or influential; Context provided (who, what, where, when, why, how). A statement that communicates scientific uncertainty of a statement. A statement that offers an action in qualitative term. e.g. "eat" or "avoid"

Contextual Information

Once images were analyzed, major themes were identified using environmental framing and risk communication strategies determined in the text analysis of this MRP. Both Vancouver Aquarium and Monterey Bay Aquarium were assessed separately.       27  

Commodification was confirmed in images if they met the criteria listed above for the text analysis. Major themes or underlying messages were recorded, and means of commodification in the images was recorded. Risk communication in images was identified as either educational or alarmist only; certainty and science were not recorded, as they could not be definitively identified from the images alone. However, these qualities were noted for text content.

Results
Risk Communication
Social Media Posts were most often educational for both organizations (93/116 posts). Qualitative judgment statements were common when referring to consumer recommendations, such as the following: "Choose ocean-friendly seafood ­ on Earth Day and every day! Share this infographic and let others know you care how your seafood is fished or farmed. Thanks for making choices that keep the ocean healthy and for asking, "Do you sell sustainable seafood?" See full size atblog.seafoodwatch.org." These types of statements were not present in other areas (e.g. when discussing an environmental problem, such as ocean warming) even when consumers were noted as having responsibility over the outcome. For example, the following Facebook post from Seafood Watch shows that an endangered marine species is endangered, and that illegal fishing is to blame; however, it is not accompanied by anything telling Western consumers how to help, donate, or avoid purchasing fish that might impact this species:

     

28  

"Illegal fishing of the endangered totoaba has caused bycatch of Mexico's vaquita and is driving the species towards extinction. Hopefully enforcement of the new 2-year ban on gillnet use over 5000 square miles will help the species to rebuild."

The following graph shows the number of posts that communicated risk in some way and how this was achieved.
25   20   15   10   5   0   Personalized   Uncertainty   Science   Qualitative   Judgment  

Figure 1. Communication of risk and urgency in social media content using personalization, uncertainty, scientific knowledge, and qualitative judgment statements. Risk message effectiveness might have been obstructed by inconsistencies that existed in the social media strategy of the campaigns. For example, one post discussed seaweed as being so sustainable that all species were Oceanwise-recommended; however, a later post discussed the impact climate change was having on Japan's seaweed industry: "'Seaweed is so sustainable that all species of seaweed grown anywhere in the world are Ocean WiseTM recommended.' Learn more about the latest sustainable seafood trend with the Water Brothers tonight on TVO at 7 pm."; "Rising temperatures are affecting Japan's seaweed industry."       29  

Other inconsistencies that may have challenged or obstructed efficacy of risk messaging included sharing recommendations that promoted the consumption of large, predatory fish, even though both web and social media content explicitly describe up to 90 per cent of large predatory fish as extremely endangered: "This month's new and updated seafood recommendations have been posted: capelin, swordfish, tilefish, tuna, yellow perch and more." These might have been aided through the use of science to assert credibility. However, science was infrequently used to communicate risk and urgency: only 23 posts of 105 credited a scientific expert or research study. Further, technical details were not often communicated and only four posts in total demonstrated uncertainty surrounding marine conservation or sustainable seafood. The majority of posts shared generic concerns, such as ocean warming, illegal, unreported, unregulated (IUU) fishing, or aquaculture concerns, but did not discuss how these had been determined and what the specific concerns were: "Aquaculture has suffered a very bad reputation for very correct reasons," Béné said. "Like any new industry, they were booming everywhere with a very serious impact. But a lot of people have been working hard to see how we can improve it." Web Content As found in the social media data, web content from both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch was constructed primarily as educational statements; however, alarmist content was much more frequent than in social media, and occurred in 27 per cent of all content. Qualitative judgment statements were made consistently when referring to recommendations or types of fish to eat, and were frequently made when the audience       30  

was restaurant owners. Qualitative judgment statements through web content were framed in a "do more" rather than "use less" way (i.e. choose or eat this, not "avoid" or "don't eat" this; this will be discussed in the framing section of my analysis). The following chart shows the breakdown of risk communication in web content.4

Figure 2. Communication of risk and urgency in web content using personalization, uncertainty, scientific knowledge, and qualitative judgment statements. Though recommendations were accompanied by a statement reflecting their scientific credibility, very few were accompanied by a description of uncertainty, methodology, or links to the research studies used to inform the recommendations. For example: "A recent scientific study predicted a world-wide fisheries collapse by 2048. (Why Sustainable Seafood, Oceanwise website, 2015); or "Sustainable seafood can be defined as species that are caught or farmed in a way that ensures the long-term health and stability of that species, as well as the greater marine ecosystem." (Recommendation Policy, Oceanwise, 2015).                                                                                                                  4  Note that a total of 159 statements were coded in this section, while only 32 statements showed risk communication in some form.         31  

Often, impact to the ocean was framed in such a way as to denote an absolute risk or outcome should one path or another be taken, without accompaniment of rationale or a credible scientific source: "The only solution is to turn back from the brink, and to begin consuming seafood in a sustainable manner." (Why Sustainable Seafood?, Oceanwise, 2015); "Through better practices, we can create healthy, abundant oceans for everyone." (About Us, Seafood Watch, 2015). Alarmist statements were also more frequently used in web content than social media. Alarmist statements generally discussed marine ecosystems or the ocean broadly, and did not assign personalized risk. Inconsistencies existed in web content, and, similar to social media, were particularly pertaining to large, predatory fish. There were also some challenges in the presentation of scientific data: for example, this statement was presented in web content: "a recent scientific study predicted a world-wide fisheries collapse by 2048" (Oceanwise, 2015). The cited study was controversial, in that it did not account for a large proportion of fish stocks that were, in fact, replenishing, as well as for extrapolations to populations where the data was not sufficient (de Vrieze, 2012). Other studies explicitly stated population sizes of large, predatory fish, though this data is uncertain (de Vrieze, 2012). Other inconsistencies in messaging included the use of a qualitative judgment statement without a clear benefit to the consumer; for example, consumers were encouraged to eat local seafood with the benefit of improving "global ocean health."

     

32  

Annual Reports Annual reports were similar to social media and web content in terms of communication of risk and urgency. Almost all content was educational (115/130). Very little personalization, uncertainty, science, or qualitative judgment statements were present. Though there were a number of statements that discussed environmental impact, very little was backed up with scientific fact. Many statements about impact were vague; most definitive statements regarding the health of specific populations existed without supporting research to ascertain how it was determined: "The status of key species­sea otters, white sharks and bluefin tuna­reflects the underlying health of ocean ecosystems." Similarly, the status of endangered shorebirds like snowy plovers reflects how people interact with critical coastal habitats. We and our partners both rescue and study wildlife to help threatened populations recover and to advance scientific understanding of species so important to the future of our ocean planet." (Seafood Watch Annual Report, 2014).

Environmental Frames/Topoi
Social Media Word/Subject Analysis The most common words that appeared were "sustainable" and "seafood". Other frequent words were "chef/chefs", "fish", "partners", "ocean" and "salmon", in order of frequency. The entire list of subjects can be found in Appendix I. The most common subject was "sustainable seafood." Next to this was ocean conservation, followed by specific fish species. Subject data is shown in Table 7.       33  

Table 6. Subjects in social media data. Subject Sustainable Seafood Ocean Conservation Specific fish/marine species Aquaculture Ocean Economy Ocean Research 86 41 21 8 6 0 Number of Posts

Frames/Topoi A total of 85 out of the 179 posts collected were issue specific; the rest shared generic news surrounding sustainable seafood. The most commonly used frames were economic value (62/179 posts) and responsibility (30). The majority of responsibility frames were oriented to consumers as "do more" (18). Human interest was the least used frame. Commodification of nature occurred in 164 posts; commodification data is shown in Table 8.

     

34  

Economic  Value   Responsibility   Human  Interest   Backed  by  Science   Animal  Rights/ Environmental  Impact   Future  Earth  

Figure 2. Environmental frames used in social media content. Table 7. Posts demonstrating the commodification of nature and records of reference to a consumer benefit. Commodification Posts 125 39 164 Taste 14 3 17 Cost 2 0 2 Health 0 0 0

Oceanwise Seafood Watch Totals

The organizations most often used notable chefs/authors/restaurateurs to assert credibility. Credibility was also frequently framed as self-assertion; for example, posts discussed that a person of note used "seafoodwatch recommendations to make a helpful list". A lot of posts showed a chef's opinion surrounding the movement, demonstrating a sustainable recipe, or their faith in either the Oceanwise or Seafood Watch program. Web

     

35  

Frames/Topoi Web content was found to be similar to social media data; however, there were significantly more animal rights/environmental impact framed content. Backed by science was also significantly more popular in web content; economic value posts were directed at consumers. Figure 3 shows the most common environmental frames used in web content.

Economic  Value   Human  Interest   Responsibility   Backed  by  Science   Future  Earth   Environmental  Impact/ Animal  Rights  

Figure 3. Environmental frames used in web content. Commodification of nature occurred frequently as well. Unlike social media data, commodification was framed more often as a business value than taste, cost, or health.

Table 8. Posts demonstrating the commodification of nature and reference to consumer benefit. Commodification Posts 160       Taste 0 Cost 0 Health 0 Business value 7 36  

Annual Reports There were some significant differences between annual reports and other content studied in the MRP. The majority of frames employed in annual reports were of animal rights/environmental impact (53) and responsibility (57). Human interest was asserted significantly more frequently than in other data collected from web and social media (38). Commodification was apparent, though benefit to consumer/business was infrequently mentioned; the most common mentioned benefit was business value, which was to be expected as the audience was stakeholders and interested parties (Table 8). The "Future Earth" frame was portrayed frequently in posts to demonstrate rationale for endeavors. Figure 4 shows the most commonly used frames in annual reports.

Table 8. Commodification in annual reports. Commodification Posts 29 Taste 0 Cost 0 Health 0 Business value 7

Figure 4. Environmental frames used in annual reports.

     

37  

Economic  Value   Human  Interest   Responsibility   Backed  by  Science   Animal  Rights/ Environmental  Impact   Future  Earth  

Visual Analysis
Vancouver Aquarium The majority of differences between Oceanwise and Seafood Watch were identified in annual reports than any other content analyzed; the Vancouver Aquarium annual report primarily contained photos that spoke to the nature of their research. Images were significantly skewed towards marine invertebrates and nursery habitats, and denoted educational or research endeavours. In contrast to the Monterey Bay annual report, there was a stronger focus on research than education. The main focus of images was environmental impact, animal rights, and ethics. Animals were presented in their natural environment, in contrast to Monterey Bay Aquarium's annual report, which contained images that primarily denoted the intersection of humans and animals in controlled environments.

     

38  

Monterey Bay The images here were heavily focused on children interacting with or observing marine life in the MBA exhibits. Along with accompanying text, images denoted the importance of the educational programs at MBA to inspire students to conserve the ocean and become stewards of the blue planet. The images were primarily framed as "future earth", where children and education are the stewards of ocean conservation. Each of the images instilled a sense of learning, education and exploration in the Monterey Bay Aquarium. The intersection of nature and humans is also very clear in the photographs: in each image, humans were either present, or a mark of their presence (e.g. infrastructure, buildings) existed. Almost every image portrayed animals in such a way that denoted their economic value, which differed from the Oceanwise annual report. This also gave the sense of humans having dominion over the animals: animals were either behind glass in an exhibit, being observed and/or handled by children, measured by biologists, helped by people, or as seafood.

Discussion
Commodification One of the most intriguing findings from the data was the explicit commodification of nature. Commodification spanned general discussion of the ocean as an economic resource to highly localized issues, such as new Oceanwise restaurant partners on the West coast. Though this was expected from the data, as commodification is aligned with dominant cultural narratives of capitalism in North America, it was still

     

39  

relied on more often than expected in the data set. Interestingly, commodification was often presented in such a way that it did not demonstrate a benefit to the consumer. As discussed by Meister and Japp, commodification should be accompanied by a clear benefit so that it resonate with the consumer and provides them with sufficient rationale to make the proposed change (2002, p. 8). Examples of benefits that can be marketed to consumers in food communications include better taste, lower cost, or improved health; benefits to a stakeholder might include increased market share or maintenance of a positive reputation within the public sphere. Yet neither Oceanwise nor Seafood Watch accompanied commodification with a relevant consumer or stakeholder benefit through any of their channels; out of the 179 commodification posts, only 19 specifically referenced taste or cost, and none of the posts advocated a health benefit.5 The website data demonstrated a similar finding: of 160 statements relating directly to use-value, only 16 discussed a direct consumer benefit. Failing to demonstrate a tangible benefit to consumers when the aim is a shift in consumer purchasing behaviour is problematic: by presenting an item as a commodity without similarly demonstrating its superiority over other similar items, consumers would have no rationale for purchasing sustainable seafood over any other item. As identified by Young (2006) and Kaiser and Edward-Jones (2006), consumers prioritize health, finances, and basic needs over sustainability or moral or ethical benefits. In the case of sustainable seafood, consumers are effectively being asked to purchase a product that has no perceivable benefit to them over a similar product, save that it is the more sustainable choice. Without appealing to a consumer's priorities, campaigns are more likely to be                                                                                                                  5  This  aligns  with  content  found  on  Oceanwise's  FAQ,  which  states  that  Oceanwise  is   not  a  health  recommendation  program.           40  

ineffective, even among consumers that identify as pro-environment (Kaiser and Edwards-Jones, 2006, p. 393). Though commodification was clear through all channels, value propositions were asserted more frequently in web content when compared with social media, and were of a different nature, specifically statements geared towards prospective restaurant partners; value was asserted as media exposure through multiple channels and the opportunity to increase a restaurant's consumer base by offering products that appealed to a broader group of consumers. Oceanwise asserted this statement primarily by advocating their strong social media network, access to Open Table, and opportunity for the restaurant to showcase its partnership with the organization to improve its reputation (Oceanwise, 2015). When commodification was applied, it often referenced the local context: both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch advocate delicious or cost-friendly sustainable seafood options within their local region (Vancouver and California, respectively). These posts would have only been specific to a very small proportion of seafood eaters, and an even smaller subset (those that followed either of the groups on social media, read the post, and then subsequently went out to try new seafood). Oceanwise and Seafood Watch both heavily promoted the consumption of local, sustainable options; both organizations seemingly aim to drive pressure away from charismatic, overfished animals such as tuna, swordfish and cod towards smaller, less popular seafood such as rockfish, spot prawns, and seaweed. However, as discussed by Jacquet and Pauly (2006), eating smaller, previously unpalatable options may have significant ­ but predictable ­ impacts on seafood industry in the future, as human taste is

     

41  

"essentially a reflection of the changes in marine ecosystems" (p. 308). This calls into question the effectiveness of the strategy, and whether pressure will simply be shifted to a new species rather than removed or reduced. The products being promoted by these organizations also have an appeal that's incredibly localized: food items, such as spot prawns, were discussed heavily through social media, though these animals are available almost exclusively on the West coast of Canada. This makes it difficult for consumers from the global ecosystem to intuit the action they should take, specifically if the products being promoted are not ones specific to their local area. Messaging such as this runs the risk of lacking relevance amongst the consumer body, and many may be more likely to ignore the messaging completely. A point of interest was how recommendations for local or sustainable seafood consumption were framed; recommendations were always posted as food items described as a "good choice", and all recommendations focused on the fish consumers should be eating. In contrast, fish that are significantly threatened due to fishery mismanagement, such as Bluefin tuna or Atlantic cod, were not discussed, and consumers were not recommended to avoid such species. Thus, all qualitative judgment statements were framed as "do this" and never "avoid this." Yet its important for consumers to understand that some fish truly should be avoided as they are highly endangered. For example, at least five of the eight species of tuna are at risk of extinction, yet the non-expert consumer would likely be unable to tell the difference ­ without help from an app or printed guide ­ to tell apart an endangered species from a non-endangered one from a list. Oceanwise and Seafood Watch printing recommendations with tuna as a "best choice" can be confusing for the consumer. Similarly, the lack of statistical data, uncertainty, and

     

42  

credibility to back up recommendations and social media statements makes it increasingly hard for consumers to intuit need for change. Particularly for audiences that are less familiar with seafood sustainability and ocean conservation, leaving out critical information such as this might be misleading. Frames Within social media, both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch largely avoided framing environmental arguments as "apocalyptic" or "green oasis" scenarios, a common tactic of environmental messaging. However, this was not similarly present in web content. Here, both organizations relied heavily on future-oriented rhetoric that shifted between visualizing an empty ocean to one that was bountiful far into the future ­ the "apocalyptic" versus "green oasis" rhetorical model. This can be impactful if used infrequently and when accompanied by specific details. On the website, apocalyptic metaphors were more common than optimistic ones. For example, the following paragraph was pulled from the Oceanwise website: "Overfishing is the greatest threat to our oceans today. The world's marine life is quickly being depleted. An estimated 90% of all large, predatory fish are already gone from the world's oceans. A recent scientific study predicted a world-wide fisheries collapse by 2048. The only solution is to turn back from the brink, and to begin consuming seafood in a sustainable manner." This paragraph was interesting for a number of reasons. First, it demonstrated an overwhelmingly apocalyptic view of the future of marine life as a result of human action. Second, it assumed charismatic animals or large predatory fish as being the only animals in the ocean that mattered ­ "the world's marine life is quickly being depleted" refers to predators including tuna, dolphins, and large sharks, and overlooks marine invertebrates, crustaceans, small skates and rays, and a number of other fish species that are not in       43  

immediate danger and, in some instances, actually increasing in number. Further, the content cited a highly controversial study that received significant negative media attention as well as fire from the scientific community for projecting a study into the long term; the extrapolation made by the researchers cannot be confirmed in scientific study and does not hold up to analysis. Perhaps most interestingly, however, is that this paragraph declares that consumption, or commodification, is the only way to save the future of the ocean from overfishing, saying that the only way to save the oceans is to consume seafood. This is altogether misleading, illogical, and paints a picture of an empty ocean should the consumer choose not to eat more sustainable seafood. As stated by Jacquet and Pauly (2007): "perhaps NGOs should even consider a `no fish' campaign that encourages boycotting fish altogether and distribute bumper stickers reading, `Save the Oceans! Eat a Chicken.'" (p. 312). Throughout each channel, the most commonly used frame was economic value. Oceanwise and Seafood Watch relied on the use-value of fish supposedly to help consumers assign meaning to the issue, and assist them in placing the information into a hierarchy of importance. Theoretically, consumers can then assign a value to protecting and conserving the marine environment. Examples of economic value frames were primarily general and overarching, though some demonstrated localization of context: "New investments and attention might flow into the ocean economy that could finally move conservation from a niche activity to a mainstream priority -- recognizing that we all, indeed, need nature."; ""The monetary value of the world's oceans has been estimated at US$24tn in a new report that warns that overfishing, pollution and climate change are putting an unprecedented strain upon marine ecosystems."

     

44  

Promoting the economic value of one choice over another makes intuitive sense when appealing to consumers, as it establishes a connection with the attitudes and values of the target audience (Bates, 2010, p. 73). However, general, overarching statements are often shown to be less effective than local or situation-specific ones, as it is more difficult for a consumer to identify with a problem that does not have a clear connection to their life. That said, both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch relied on primarily generic statements surrounding economic value, and these statements could have been more impactful with their audience if the context had been localized. The "responsibility" theme was also used regularly in all channels, and was sometimes assumed to a particular industry or group, such as government (e.g. many of the Obama administration's policies on illegal, unreported fishing were cited to support the sustainable seafood industry). Most notable of the responsibility frame, however, was references to the aquaculture industry: responsibility was assigned in such a way as to accept wrongdoings of the industry in the past, and paint a picture of the aquaculture industry as the future of the "blue revolution": "Aquaculture has suffered a very bad reputation for very correct reasons," Béné said. "Like any new industry, they were booming everywhere with a very serious impact. But a lot of people have been working hard to see how we can improve it." Responsibility was also assigned to government and conservation groups, mostly in ways that were positive and denoted how positive changes were happening for the fishing industry due to the work of conservation groups and government action. When responsibility was assigned to the consumer in an active way (i.e. to encourage the consumer to assume responsibility and effect change in fishery management), it was

     

45  

often assigned as a "do more" frame: "When purchasing swordfish from Atlantic Canada, choose harpoon-caught swordfish over those caught by longline." Interestingly, this tactic has been shown to be the least effective frame amongst consumers, as they are being asked to work harder to make the better choice for no increase in value. If combined with a clear yes/no statement, this might be effective; however, if there is no clear qualitative judgment statement or the value of the proposed choice over the other is not clear, there is a strong likelihood this will not be effective. Another way of achieving resonance with the audience is by demonstrating credibility through science or local authorities. Both organizations demonstrate significant blending of the public and technical sphere; the "Backed by Science" frame was the most commonly used, after "Economic Value" and "Responsibility" in all content analyzed, and this is in line with what is previously known of environmental framing. Both organizations made positive use of encompassing "informal language used for more general audiences" (Sovacool, 2009, p. 341) while presenting technical data. This is effective because scientific rhetoric is inherently based on expertise. Both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch find a balance between user-friendly language and technical comprehensiveness. Another important aspect of environmental rhetoric is tying into the dominant narratives of our time. I previously discussed the presentation of environment as economically valuable. Other dominant narratives include climate change, ocean warming, oil spills, and food security and availability. Both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch, when referencing dominant environmental narratives, most often referenced ocean warming. However, warming was always presented in a manner that was objective,

     

46  

unaccompanied by tangible detriment, and removed responsibility from an individual, organization, or group. For example: "An increase of up to 3C in water temperature could hurt migrating Pacific salmon."; "Rising temperatures are affecting Japan's seaweed industry." These posts were written quite dissimilarly from the other posts that appeared on both social media accounts: words such as "hurt" and "affecting" were used, which made it unclear what the detriment would be, on what timescale, and what the relevance of the information was. From a risk communication perspective, this is often ineffective, as humans are not successful at managing risks with ambiguous risk and timelines (Ferreira, 2007, p. 861). The organizations' attempts to establish urgency surrounding their claims should have been evident in these posts discussing ocean warming; yet urgency wasn't established, and no action could be intuited from this. It was also contradictory, as Oceanwise also published a number of posts advocating that all species of seafood were Oceanwise-certified and recommended for consumption. Conflicting messages from groups is another challenge that environmental messaging encounters, one that can lead to their failure to create lasting ties with their audience (Lindenfield et al., 2014, p. 120), as they are unable to intuit need, action, and to make informed opinions. Further, the discussion of the larger, more dominant frames were some of the only content shared by each organization that were localized: they advocated general issues such as climate change, rather than discussing specific effects they were having on industry, fisheries, and marine ecosystems. Risk was most often communicated in an educational manner, rather than alarmist, and qualitative judgment statements, which provided consumers a clear set of

     

47  

options, were made most often when referring to recommendations (fish that were marked as "eat" or "avoid"). Such statements did not often accompany messaging that had to do with overarching or widespread ocean problems; this information was most often presented in a passive, non-assuming way. There was also little personalization of messaging from both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch, even though personalization of the message is shown to be more effective. Most often, risk and urgency was presented in an educational way, where no intended action or consequence was discussed, and the direct effect on the consumer was not evident. For example: "Because the oceans seem so vast and their resources limitless, these threats are often "out of sight, out of mind." But overfishing issues are not just for future generations to endure; they're very real problems threatening our current seafood supply and the health of our oceans. The good news is that there is much we can do--if we act now." This content went on to discuss that consumers had access to regularly updated guides to inform their seafood purchasing habits. However, there is an issue in the paragraph above as it a) does not directly discuss issues for the current consumers; b) does not fit into the dominant narratives of Western society and c) would not be consistent with what the consumer faces each day in the supermarket. If the problems don't feel real for the consumer today, it would be hard to intuit the need for vast shifts in behaviour and purchasing decisions. As discussed previously, it is imperative in environment and science for credibility to be asserted through the message to be seen as a valid source of information by the consumer. In the channels of Oceanwise and Seafood Watch, credibility was most often asserted in three ways. Most common was the use of well-known chefs,

     

48  

restaurateurs or food writers endorsing the consumption sustainable seafood: "EcoWatch used our recommendations to make this helpful list."; "Celebrity chefs and culinarians from our Blue Ribbon Task Force ­ Michael Cimarusti, Susan Feniger, Chef Kerry Heffernan, Ed Kenney, Chef Nathan Lyon, Chef Rick Moonen, Jonathon Sawyer and Virginia Willis ­ talk about the Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch program, why choosing sustainable seafood matters for the ocean and how you can help." This is a strategy in food marketing that is often relied on in order to create rationale for making a certain decision, and is particularly important as chefs are seen as authorities on subjects involving taste, cost, and health. Both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch asserted their own authority by discussing themselves in the context of how other public figures or members of the chef community endorsed their practice. Another way the organizations used chefs or restaurateurs to spread their message was to communicate the importance of eating sustainable fish: ""Seaweed is so sustainable that all species of seaweed grown anywhere in the world are Ocean WiseTM recommended." Learn more about the latest sustainable seafood trend with the Water Brothers tonight on TVO at 7 pm."; "I think people have to start to realize the true cost behind the dirt-cheap seafood that they are buying is human trafficking." Teddie from Ocean Wise speaks with reporter Nikki Bayley on the importance of promoting local, sustainable seafood options like spot prawns." Scientific credibility was the second-most common means of asserting authority. Both Seafood Watch and Oceanwise endorsed their own practices or employees by discussing them as "Ocean research expert..." or something similar, or endorsing their programs through their use of well-known chefs or restaurateurs. However, this was not

     

49  

often reflected in the web content, and though studies were sometimes referred to, their statistics were taken out of context and often framed in dramatic, deliberative manners.

     

50  

Conclusion
This MRP focused on the rhetorical strategies and risk communication techniques employed by sustainable seafood campaigns in North America, Seafood Watch and Oceanwise. Throughout all of the research, there were several findings that were particularly noteworthy, including: o The commodification of nature (i.e. application of economic value to marine species or the ocean more generally) without accompaniment of benefit to the consumer and/or stakeholder; o Conflicting messaging in different areas of publicly available communication, such as the presentation of predatory species of fish as "good choices" while documenting their dangerously low population levels in other content; o The employment of well-known chefs, food writers, or restaurateurs to endorse the practice of consuming sustainable seafood options; o The lack of scientific credibility to support claims; o The presentation of responsibility of consumers in the fishery mismanagement problem in a "do more" frame; and, o The presentation of the future ocean as something that can only be saved through increased consumption (albeit of sustainable seafood products). Most striking from the research was the explicit commodification of nature, where fish was presented as a commodity with a use-value only as food. Contrary to this, however, commodification was not accompanied by a perceivable consumer benefit, such as improved taste, reduced cost, or associated health benefit; sustainable seafood was marketed to consumers with the benefit being improved ocean health, and the benefits       51  

that consumers prioritize (taste, cost, and health) were infrequently addressed, if at all. This was further confused by unclear or inconsistent messaging, either in that it contradicted itself by promoting an ocean item in distinctly different ways, or without accompanying the statement with a clear action for the customer to follow. Since consumers are shown to react most positively to statements that have discrete options, Oceanwise and Seafood Watch could benefit from tailoring their messages in such a way as to clearly demonstrate to consumers the appeal of sustainable seafood and discrete courses of action. Both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch also demonstrated significant inconsistency in their messages, which is problematic for consumers. It is often challenging for consumers to discern the relevance or credibility of scientific information in media, and when messaging is inconsistent or contradictory from a single scientific body, this can make it particularly hard to encourage consumer change. For example, recommended marine food items were often later contradicted by messages that declared challenges in that specific industry, such as tuna or seaweed. This can lead to consumers either ignoring the message completely, or believing that the organization or body sharing the message lacks credibility; either way, this can be detrimental to organizations trying to promote a particular course of action. Though credibility was not effectively promoted through the use of science, both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch capitalized on the employment of chefs, restaurateurs, or well-known food bloggers to demonstrate credibility, specifically through social media. Chefs and food writers were used to assert the importance and rising popularity of sustainable seafood, while creating rationale for the sustainable seafood movement. This

     

52  

is in line with what is known to be effective in food communication strategies. Chefs are often noted in food marketing as having significant power over consumer choices, as they are authorities on the subject of food; however, in both the Oceanwise and Seafood Watch strategy, resident chefs were local and thus likely would not have resonated far beyond the West coast. Communicating risk can often be a challenge in environmental movements, particularly ones relating to the ocean. This is due to the fact that we know very little about the marine environment, and lack attachment to sea life, as it bears little resemblance to ourselves. Risk communication, then, often hinges on the use of commodification, and the loss of a precious food resource should the ocean not be protected. Both Oceanwise and Seafood Watch primarily shared risk through the use of educational statements over alarmist ones, choosing to focus on sharing knowledge with the public surrounding ocean issues. Interestingly, negative statements, such as ocean warming, were often present in non-descript, neutral means, and most risk was presented as something that could be avoided through action or responsibility. For example, discussion of threats to the ocean was usually followed by a means of reversing or slowing the negative trend, most often through consuming more sustainable seafood. When issues being shared through the different channels were beyond the level of a specific fish species, such as an overarching climate or environmental issue like ocean warming, responsibility was removed. Often, responsibility-framed posts were asserted to demonstrate that it was the consumer's responsibility to make lasting, positive change for oceans. This included such content as encouraging the consumer to choose a specific sustainable option over another, or encouraging them to ask restaurants if they serve

     

53  

sustainable seafood. Education and the future of the earth were heavily promoted, particularly within web content. However, there was little difference in the strategy between how marketing was carried out to consumers versus how to stakeholders, even though these groups have theoretically different interests. From this, there are a number of potential future research areas that would be of interest to pursue; for example, commodification, which was highly relevant in this research, was often specific to the local content: it would be interesting to identify whether it is effect in its local context (in this case, California and Vancouver), as well as if these strategies reach beyond that. As well, research could be done into how these organizations expect to generate interest from anyone outside of their audience, which already identifies as pro-environment. Coupled with this, audience members could be polled on a number of different topics, including whether or not they know what species of fish are sustainable, which they should always avoid, and whether or not they identify as making positive ocean changes. While many of the findings in this MRP demonstrate the need for significant improvements to the communications strategy to be effective, it must be noted that the sustainable seafood industry is quite young: the first certification organization was formed in the late 1990s, and there has not been sufficient time to evaluate and adapt strategies to create lasting communicative links with their audience. It is still also uncertain whether sustainable seafood campaigns can be effective at effecting change on a large scale, and whether this change would simply lead to shifting the target from one species to another. It can be said, though, that as awareness grows surrounding overfishing, many individuals, groups and organizations are working to change the

     

54  

industry, and sustainable seafood awareness campaigns will continue to have a central place in this movement.

     

55  

Literature Cited
Ahern, L., Bortree, D. S., & Smith, A. N. (2012). Key trends in environmental advertising across 30 years in National Geographic magazine. Public Understanding of Science. doi:10.1177/0963662512444848 An, S. K., & Gower, K. K. (2009). How do the news media frame crises? A content analysis of crisis news coverage. Public Relations Review, 35, 107­112. doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2009.01.010 Bates, C. H. (2010). Use of Social Marketing Concepts to Evaluate Ocean Sustainability Campaigns. Social Marketing Quarterly, 16, 71­96. doi:10.1080/15245000903528357 Becker-Olsen, K., Cudmore, B., & Hill, R. (2006a). The impact of perceived corporate social responsibility on consumer behavior. Journal of Business Research, 59, 46­ 53. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2005.01.001 Becker-Olsen, K., Cudmore, B., & Hill, R. (2006b). The impact of perceived corporate social responsibility on consumer behavior. Journal of Business Research, 59, 46­ 53. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2005.01.001 Buijs, A. E., Arts, B. J. M., Elands, B. H. M., & Lengkeek, J. (2011). Beyond environmental frames: The social representation and cultural resonance of nature in conflicts over a Dutch woodland. Geoforum, 42, 329­341. doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2010.12.008 Cathy Wessells, Robert Johnston, H. D. (1999). Assessing Consumer Preferences for Ecolabeled Seafood: The influence of Species, Certifier, and Household Attributes. American Journal Agr. Econ, 81, 1084­1089. doi:10.2307/1244088 Ciapuscio, G. E. (2003). Formulation and reformulation procedures in verbal interactions between experts and (semi-)laypersons. Discourse Studies. doi:10.1177/1461445603005002310 Constance, D. H., & Bonanno, A. (2000). Regulating the global fisheries: The World Wildlife Fund , Unilever , and the Marine Stewardship Council. Agriculture and Human Values, 17, 125­139. doi:10.2110/palo.2005.P05-74e Cooke, S. J., Murchie, K. J., & Danylchuk, A. J. (2011). Sustainable "Seafood" Ecolabeling and Awareness Initiatives in the Context of Inland Fisheries: Increasing Food Security and Protecting Ecosystems. BioScience. doi:10.1525/bio.2011.61.11.10

     

56  

Cox, R. (2010). Environmental communication and the public sphere. The Environmental Communication and the Public sphere. Retrieved from http://www.worldcat.org/isbn/1412972116 Cunningham, P. A., Huijbens, E. H., & Wearing, S. L. (2012). From whaling to whale watching: examining sustainability and cultural rhetoric. Journal of Sustainable Tourism. doi:10.1080/09669582.2011.632091 Davies, R. W. D., & Rangeley, R. (2010). Banking on cod: Exploring economic incentives for recovering Grand Banks and North Sea cod fisheries. Marine Policy, 34, 92­98. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2009.04.019 Dórea, J. G. (2008). Persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic substances in fish: Human health considerations. Science of the Total Environment, 400, 93­114. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2008.06.017 Hastings, G. (2003). Relational Paradigms in Social Marketing. Journal of Macromarketing. doi:10.1177/0276146703023001006 Jacquet, J. L., & Pauly, D. (2007). The rise of seafood awareness campaigns in an era of collapsing fisheries. Marine Policy, 31, 308­313. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2006.09.003 Kaiser, M. J., & Edwards-Jones, G. (2006). The role of ecolabeling in fisheries management and conservation. Conservation Biology. doi:10.1111/j.15231739.2006.00319.x Kirby, K. J. (2003). Woodland conservation in privately-owned cultural landscapes: The English experience. Environmental Science and Policy. doi:10.1016/S14629011(03)00037-6 Konefal, J. (2012). Environmental Movements, Market-Based Approaches, and Neoliberalization: A Case Study of the Sustainable Seafood Movement. Organization & Environment, 26, 1086026612467982­. doi:10.1177/1086026612467982 Kotler, P., & Zaltman, G. (1971). Social marketing: an approach to planned social change. Journal of Marketing, 35, 3­12. doi:Retrieved from EBSCO HOST Lakoff, G. (2010). Why it Matters How We Frame the Environment. Environmental Communication: A Journal of Nature and Culture. doi:10.1080/17524030903529749 Lefebvre, R. C. (2012). Transformative social marketing: co-creating the social marketing discipline and brand. Journal of Social Marketing. doi:10.1108/20426761211243955

     

57  

Maignan, I., & Ferrell, O. C. (2004). Corporate Social Responsibility and Marketing: An Integrative Framework. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science. doi:10.1177/0092070303258971 McWilliams, A., Siegel, D. S., & Wright, P. M. (2005). Corporate Social Responsibility: Strategic Implications. Journal of Management Studies, 43, 1­18. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6486.2006.00580.x Neff, M. R., Bhavsar, S. P., Arhonditsis, G. B., Fletcher, R., & Jackson, D. A. (2012). Long-term changes in fish mercury levels in the historically impacted EnglishWabigoon River system (Canada). Journal of Environmental Monitoring. doi:10.1039/c2em30324h Orlitzky, M., Siegel, D. S., & Waldman, D. A. (2011). Strategic Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Sustainability. Business & Society. doi:10.1177/0007650310394323 Phills, J., Deiglmeier, K., & Miller, D. (2008). Rediscovering social innovation. Stanford Social Innovation Review, Fall, 34­43. doi:10.1111/j.1369-7625.2010.00656.x Pitcher, T. J., & Pauly, D. (1998). Rebuilding ecosystems, not sustainability, as the proper goal of fishery management. In Reinventing Fisheries Management, Fish and Fisheries Science (23) (pp. 311­329). Ross, D. G. (2012). Common Topics and Commonplaces of Environmental Rhetoric. Written Communication (Vol. 30). doi:10.1177/0741088312465376 Wong-Rieger, D., & Rieger, F. P. (2013). Health coaching in diabetes: empowering patients to self-manage. Canadian Journal of Diabetes, 37, 41­4. doi:10.1016/j.jcjd.2013.01.001

     

58  

Ferreira, C. (2006). Food Information Environments: Risk Communication and Advertising Imagery. Journal of Risk Research. doi:10.1080/13669870601065536 Leiss, W. (2004). Effective risk communication practice. In Toxicology Letters (Vol. 149, pp. 399­404). doi:10.1016/j.toxlet.2003.12.050 Lindenfeld, L., Smith, H. M., Norton, T., & Grecu, N. C. (2013). Risk communication and sustainability science: lessons from the field. Sustainability Science, 9(2), 119­ 127. doi:10.1007/s11625-013-0230-8 Seabert, T. A., Pal, S., Pinet, B. M., Haman, F., Robidoux, M. A., Imbeault, P., ... Blais, J. M. (2014). Elevated contaminants contrasted with potential benefits of -3 fatty acids in wild food consumers of two remote first nations communities in Northern Ontario, Canada. PLoS ONE, 9. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0090351 Semetko, H. a., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2000). Framing European Politics. A Content Analysis of Press and Televison News. Journal of Communication, 50, 93­1009. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2000.tb02843.x Sen, S., & Bhattacharya, C. B. (2001). Does Doing Good Always Lead to Doing Better? Consumer Reactions to Corporate Social Responsibility. Journal of Marketing Research. doi:10.1509/jmkr.38.2.225.18838 Sheehan, M. C., Burke, T. A., Navas-Acien, A., Breysse, P. N., McGready, J., & Fox, M. A. (2014). Global methylmercury exposure from seafood consumption and risk of developmental neurotoxicity: a systematic review. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 92, 254­269F. doi:10.2471/BLT.12.116152 Sovacool, B. K. (2008). Spheres of Argument Concerning Oil Exploration in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge: A Crisis of Environmental Rhetoric? Environmental Communication: A Journal of Nature and Culture. doi:10.1080/17524030802396745 Tlusty, M. F. (2012). Environmental improvement of seafood through certification and ecolabelling: Theory and analysis. Fish and Fisheries, 13, 1­13. doi:10.1111/j.14672979.2011.00404.x Young, R. (2006). Sustainability: from rhetoric to reality through markets. Journal of Cleaner Production, 14, 1443­1447. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2005.11.021

     

59  

Appendix I
   Table  9.  All  subjects  identified  from  Seafood  Watch  and  Oceanwise  web  content,   social  media,  and  annual  reports.      Subject Definition IUU Illegal, Unreported, Unregulated Fishing Ocean Economy Statements depicting the economic value of the ocean through tourism, fishing, or a related industry Sustainable Seafood Statements explicity referring to fish as a food item, and one that is sustainable; this also extends to statements that discuss avoiding unsustainable seafood. Ocean Research Statements discussing Oceanwise, Seafood Watch, or a thirdparty research study done on ocean health. Salmon Fish Species Dover Sole Fish Species Spot Prawns Fish Species Halibut Fish Species Aquaculture Any content discussing the fish farming or aquaculture industry. Ocean Conservation Statements discussing movements on individual, group, or government effort to protect marine habitat, species, or related. Seaweed Fish Species Human Trafficking Statements discussing the impact of fishing on human trafficking. Humboldt Squid Fish Species Caviar Fish Species Shellfish Fish Species Sturgeon Fish Species

     

60  

Raw Data
   Seafood  Watch  Raw  Data  (Social  Media  -  Rhetoric)          

               61  

                       

  

  

     

62  

   Oceanwise  Raw  Data  (Social  Media  ­  Rhetoric)             

                                             63  

                                                                                 64  

                                                      65  

                                                                        66  

SFW/OW  Raw  Data           

                          

  

     

67  

              

  

     

68  

        

  

     

69  

                                       70  

  

           

                                                                                               

                    

  

     

71  

Oceanwise  Raw  Data  ­  (Web  ­  Rhetoric)        

     

72  

        

73  

Seafood  Watch  Raw  Data  (Web  ­  Rhetoric)        

               74  

  

               75  

Seafood  Watch  and  Oceanwise  (Web  Cntent    -  Risk)        

                    

   76  

                          

   77  

  

                           78  

                                                                                                                                                79  

Oceanwise  Raw  Data  (Annual  Report)     

                                         

     

80  

                                                                                                                                                81  

   Seafood  Watch    Raw  Data  (Annual  Report)  

                  82  

  

  

  

     

83  

  

     

84  

