 MPCMAJORRESEARCHPAPER     THECORPORATEBLOGASATOOLFORSTRATEGICCOMMUNICATION      JASONCASSIDY  500444875   Supervisor:DR.IRA.LEVINE   TheMajorResearchPaperissubmitted inpartialfulfillmentoftherequirementsforthedegreeof MasterofProfessionalCommunication    RyersonUniversity Toronto,Ontario,Canada 

August28,2012

   
1 

AUTHOR'SDECLARATIONFORELECTRONICSUBMISSIONOFAMAJORRESEARCHPAPER  IherebydeclarethatIamthesoleauthorofthisMajorResearchPaperandthe accompanyingResearchPoster.ThisisatruecopyoftheMRPandtheresearchposter, includinganyrequiredfinalrevisions,asacceptedbymyexaminers.  IauthorizeRyersonUniversitytolendthismajorresearchpaperand/orpostertoother institutionsorindividualsforthepurposeofscholarlyresearch.  IfurtherauthorizeRyersonUniversitytoreproducethisMRPand/orposterby photocopyingorbyothermeans,intotalorinpart,attherequestofotherinstitutionsor individualsforthepurposeofscholarlyresearch.  IunderstandthatmyMRPand/ormyMRPresearchpostermaybemadeelectronically availabletothepublic.

         
2 

Abstract:
This major research paper investigates the corporate blog as a tool for strategic communication. Using Erving Goffman's SelfPresentation Theory, it draws parallels between the use of a blog and the strategic presentation of self as outlined in The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life and the communication tactics used by Rogers CommunicationandRadian6.Itultimatelyconcludesthateachcompanycommunicateskey messagingdifferentlybasedontheirpresumedobjectivesforthemedium.

           
3 

TableofContents

1)Introduction........................................................................p.3 2)LiteratureReview...............................................................p.6 TheBlog SelfPresentationTheory Newmedia 3)Methodology........................................................................p.16 4)Results&Discussion............................................................p.21 Balance  Frequency|Contributors Hyperlinks Multimedia Themes SearchEngineOptimization Giving&Sharing Quantityvs.Quality ContentMarketing Engaging|Commenting NatureoftheBusiness 5)Conclusion...........................................................................p.41 6)Appendix..............................................................................p.44 7)Bibliography.........................................................................p.47
4 

Chapter1:Introduction
Asmainstreamcommunicationchannelsbecomemorefocusedondigitalplatforms, organizations are finding ways to improve their digital reputation. Having a company website was once thought to be enough to ensure that prospective customers had ample information to research a potential purchase beforehand. The Internet has turned what used to be controlled, oneway messages into realtime dialogue with millions (Sacks, 2010), which has dramatically shifted the media landscape, allowing users to choose the lineupofnewstotheirliking.Throughthisonewaycommunicationwebsites,brandscould onlypublishtheinformationthatwasbeneficialforthecompanyanditsreputation;butas emergingtechnologieslikeblogsandsocialmediahavebecomemoreprevalent,consumers nowhavetheabilitytoactivelypursuetheproductsthatinterestthem,ratherthanserveas passiveconsumerssubjectedtomessagesfromcompanies.Bloggingisanimportantaspect ofacommunicationsplanthatdeliversnewinformationfrequently.Infact,companiesthat blogget55percentmorewebsitetraffic(Hubspot,2010)thanthosewhodonotandmore than half of all Internet users read blogs at least monthly (eMarketer, 2010).  Unlike traditional forms of outbound marketing like direct mail, telemarketing, and mainstream mediaadvertisements,thecorporateblogreliesonverydifferenttactics.TheInternetuser iscompletelyincontrolofthewebpagesheorsheviews,andthetimethathe/shespends 5 

onaparticularwebsite.Theuserhasnoobligationtoviewamessageinitsentiretyorwait for the commercial advertisement to end. In order to gain and maintain the user's attention, the corporate blog tries to "pull" the user in with interesting and engaging content,likeblogposts,videos,interviews,andotherformsofdigitalcontent. Anderson(2010)arguesthat,"marketershavegainedentirelynewadvertisingand marketingplatforms,butconsumershavesimultaneouslygainedanunprecedenteddegree ofempowermentinmarketingrelationships,beginninginthedotcomeraandculminating in the present social media era," (Anderson, 2010 p. 2). This means consumers have the technologytoresearch,contact,compareproductsandmakecontactwithanorganization attheirconvenience,thusalmostrelegatingthecompaniestoapassiverole.Inresponse,it has become increasingly important for companies to monitor, interact, and engage consumers on these channels and the conversations around their brand. Brands are now realizing an opportunity to leverage these new platforms to communicate with their potential audience not at them, as they could not before with traditional means like newspapers,radio,television,andthecompanywebsite.Thisraisesthequestion:Howare organizationscommunicatingthroughthesedigitalplatforms?Whattacticsaretheyusing on twoway channels, like a blog, to enhance their reputation, while managing the risks involvedinpublicdiscourse? 6 

This study will assess the blog as a communications platform and explain how organizations use the platform to publish outbound messages to a mass audience. The research will examine how the blog is used to strategically communicate to specific and broad publics, and how that might affect the organization's reputation. It will also investigate the aesthetics of two companies' blogs, the team that manages each, and the topicsthoseteamswriteabout.TheresearchwillbegroundedinSelfPresentationTheory as outlined by Erving Goffman in The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (1959).  Using SelfPresentation Theory, this research will analyze the corporate blog and explain how organizationstailormessagestoconveydifferentmeaningstotheiraudience.Additionally, this paper will investigate the strategic tactics used within each post to communicate information that not only interests the enduser but also adds value to the brand or productthecompanyispromotingandprovidesareturnontheirblogginginvestment.       7 

Chapter2:LiteratureReview
TheBlog
Shortforweblog,Herringetal(2004)definetheblogasa"frequentlymodifiedweb page,inwhichdatedentriesarelistedinreversechronologicalsequence,"(Herringetal., 2004).Blogsareviewedasfundamentallydifferentthanotherformsofcomputermediated communications (CMC) such as email and personal websites (Herring, Scheidt, Wright, & Bonus,2004.Justoneelementofnewmedia,theblogbecamepopularintheaftermathof several historic events and natural disasters over the last 12 years, such as the 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in New York. These incidents served as a catalyst for people to share their grief, express their anger, and debate their ideas and opinions through web blogs or "warblogs," as they were known at the time (Catalano, 2007). Other events, such as the 2004 tsunami in Indonesia and Hurricane Katrina have given rise to the blog as a medium to publish one's thoughts and opinions. These events have demonstrated how private citizens, organizations and government can "successfully disseminateinformation;raiseawareness;engageinpublicdialogue;influenceormanage reputations,crises,andissues;andbuildcommunities,"(Catalano,2007p.249). Today,morethanathirdofU.S.companiesuseblogsformarketingpurposes(Um, 2010)andaccordingtothe2011StateoftheBlogosphereReport,threemillionnewblogs 8 

comeonlineeverymonth.Blogswereonceconsidereddiariesbuthavenowmorphedinto beingusedforanassortmentofdifferentpurposesincludingthetransmissionofthoughts, opinions and ideas (MarketingProfs, 2008, p.6). Journalists see them as alternative news sources (Lasica, 2001), educators and business people view them as an environment for knowledgesharing(Festa,2003;Ray,2003),andindividualsusethemasvehiclesforself expressionandempowerment(Blood,2002).Thepowerbehindblogsistheconversation thatensuesinthecommentsection.Frequentupdatesgivetheaudienceincentivetoreturn to the page, unlike traditional static websites. The power and reach of a blog is endless becausebloggersoftenlinktootherblogs,whichmeanstheyhavethepotentialtoreachan audiencenotpossiblewithtraditionalmarketingvehicles(MarketingProfs,2008p.6).

Whoisblogging?
To understand who is doing the blogging, we turn to the 2011 State of the Blogosphere report conducted by Technorati, an Internet search engine that indexes and ranks112millionblogsand250millionpiecesofsocialmediacontent.Thestudyhasbeen conductedannuallysince2004.Thereporthighlightsfivetypesofbloggers: 1)Hobbyiststhatblogforfun 2)Parttimeprofessionalsthatblogtosupplementtheirincome 3)Fulltimeprofessionalswhoconsiderbloggingtheirfulltimejob 4)Corporatebloggerswhoblogonbehalfofacompanyororganization 9 

5)Entrepreneurswhoblogforacompanyororganizationtheyown The report indicates that 60 per cent of respondents consider themselves hobbyists and blog "for fun." This means they do not report any income, spend less than three hours a week blogging and 70 per cent of them blog to express their opinion. Both full and part time professional bloggers represent 18 per cent of all bloggers and corporate bloggers makeupeightpercentoftheblogosphere.70percentofcorporatebloggersdoittoshare expertise, 61 per cent to gain professional recognition, and 52 per cent to attract new clients(Technorati,2011).Entrepreneursmakeupthefinal13percentoftheblogosphere and76percentofthemsaytheyblogtoshareexpertise,70percentsaidtheyblogtogain professional recognition, and 68 per cent to attract new clients. 20 per cent of people writingthepostshavebeenbloggingformorethansixyearsand35percentofcorporate bloggers worked in a journalism, media or professional writing role before writing for a blog (Technorati, 2011). As of 2010, there were approximately 900,000 new blog posts added to the blogosphere every 24 hours (Anderson, 2010 p. 169) and that number has presumablyincreased.

Corporateblogginginthelargerschemeofmarketing
Atitsmostfundamentallevel,bloggingprovidesamechanismforanorganizationto communicatedirectlywithitscustomers(MarketingProfs,2008p.11).Marketingwasonce 10 

a oneway form of communication, whereby companies projected messages onto the consumer.Messageswerebroadcastedthroughtraditionalformsofmediaincludingprint, radioandtelevisionusingpublicrelationstacticsordirectmarketing.TheInternetchanged allofthatwithitsabilitytotargetgeographicallydispersedaudiencesenmasse.Apotential customer just like a potential critic can be in the same region or somewhere across the globe. "Blogging takes marketing advances one step further by transforming marketing into a twoway conversation. It allows the organization to initiate conversation with the audience and provides a platform for the audience to respond;allofwhichismarketingintelligenceinitself."(MarketingProfs,2008 p.11). Blogs come in many shapes and sizes. The type of blog affects how a prospective audienceviewsit.ItcanbeaCEOblog--writtenbyhighlevelexecutives;oranaggregate blog, authored by several people using different voices and perspectives; or a staff blog, which allows companies to show their human side by letting employees speak honestly abouttheirdailychallengesandsuccesses.Itcouldbeaspecialistblog--whichislikeaCEO blog, but tends to provide alarger scope of topics and a venue for a company to develop conversationswithcustomersaboutspecificsubjectsbycreatingaspacewherecustomers can discuss what is important to them. One of the last forms of blogs is a customer 11 

evangelistblog--whichiswrittenbyanorganization'scustomersabouttheirproducts.An effectiveexampleofthisisStarbuckshttp://starbucksgossip.typepad.com. This research investigated the use of multimedia including images, videos, whitepapers, case studies and informational graphics (hereafter referred to as an infographic)to accompany blog posts. Additionally, it will look into how organizations attachappropriatetagsandcategoriestotheirblogposts.Theyoftenincludethenameof companies,products,andevents,aswellasindustryterms.

Advantagesanddisadvantagesofblogging
Oneobviousconstraintpreventingsomeorganizationsfromadoptingtheblogasa toolforstrategiccommunicationisthetimeandeffortorcommitmentrequired.Depending on the size of the organization, operating a blog can require a fulltime position or more. Blogs have the potential to negatively affect the reputation of a company if managed improperly. There is always an element of risk when a company exposes itself to the potential for criticism and public displeasure. Alternatively, blogging can be a beneficial waytocommunicatewithcustomers,prospectsandstakeholders.Thereciprocalnatureof bloggingofferstheorganizationalimitlessvirtualspaceforthesharingofnewinformation and customer updates, and a venue for hosting contests. Additionally, the blog also provides individuals and organizations with a publishing mechanism that eliminates the 12 

gatekeepingpowersofthemassmediaandenablestheorganizationtobethemainpoint ofcontactwiththeconsumerregardingconcerns,complaints,andsuggestions.Acorporate blogoffersconsumersaplatformforreciprocalcommunicationwithacompany. Search Engine Optimization (SEO) refers to the methods used to boost the ranking or frequencyofawebsiteinresultsreturnedbyasearchengine,inanefforttomaximizeuser traffictothesite(Dictionairy.com,2012).Ifacompanyhasawebsite,theywantpeopleto visit it. Whether its function is to disseminate information, promote shopping or other commercialtransactions,orgenerateadvertisingrevenue,asitewon'tbeeffectiveifnoone sees it (Russell, 2007 p. 2). "Since most Internet users rely on search engines to find websites, good search listings can dramatically increase site traffic," (Russell, 2007 p. 2). SearchengineslikeGoogle,Yahoo!andBing`crawl'thewebandlookforthingslikepage titles, body copy, inbound/outbound hyperlinks, keywords, clickthrough rates, and authenticandrelevantcontent.OnGooglealone,10.3billionsearchesareconductedevery month(comScore,2010)sorankinghighonsearchenginescouldhaveapositiveeffecton sales.ToquantifythepowerofSEO,ForresterResearchpublishedthefollowingstatistics froma2006study: 
·

93percentofallinternettrafficisgeneratedfrominternetsearchengines 13



· · · ·

99percentofInternetsearchersdonotsearchbeyondthetop30results 97percentofthemneverlookbeyondthetopthreeresults Top10positionsreceive78percentmoretrafficthanthoseinpositions1130 65percentofonlinerevenueisgeneratedfromwebsitesinthetopthreepositions onsearchengineresultspages

·

93percentofglobalconsumersusesearchenginestofindwebsites

SEO is something this research will analyze to understand how organizations tag and categorizeeachblogposttoensurethelargestpossibleaudiencediscoverseachblogpost. One concern for marketing executives is the risk of a blog bringing more negative publicity to the company than positive, but Anderson (2010) argues that the existenceof the communication tool is more important than the contents that occur on it. By cooperating and providing a blog for its customers where the good and the bad can be thoroughlyhashedout,thecompanyreducesitschancesofcustomerdefectionintoforums wheretheycoulddomoreharmandlessgood(Anderson,p.10).Alsosaidcompanymight havenomoderationcontrolonremoteonlineforumsanddiscussions. An effective blogging presence can humanize a brand. People increasingly distrust bigcompanies(Israel&Scoble,2006)soablogisausefultooltobuildtrustandmakea person feel connected to the organization in a way that a marketing brochure cannot (Wright, 2006 p. 28). The platform itself, compared to other forms of controlled

14 

publication, is a relatively costeffective, easily accessible channel that can broaden the reachofanorganization'scommunicationinitiatives. "Onemaynothavemillions,oreventhousands,ofcustomers,butintheworldof blogging, everyone has an equal voice. No matter how big or small your business, or how many people are interested in your products, blogging provides a unique opportunity for you to talk to your potential customers--at least those who happen to be online and reading--and for them to talk to you"(Wright,2005p.25). After delivering consistent information to an audience, blogging can position a brand as a thoughtleader in its respective industry. Having a highranking staff member writeablogpostisjustaseffectiveaswritingacolumninthenewspaperorspeakingata professional conference. The blog is an additional vehicle to market a company, its products,anditspeople. Tounderstandhowblogging--thoughtofbymanyasaseeminglyendlessstringof casualconversationorjournalentries--canbebeneficialtoacompany,thispaperturnsto ErvingGoffman's(1959)ThePresentationofSelfinEverydayLife.Granted,ablogcanbean individual's personal diary, but it can also be much more. It can represent the work of a teamthatcomposesstrategicpoststhatprovidetheaudiencewithsomethingthatinterests and engages them as well as bringing some added value back to the company by way of

15 

customer service, brand awareness, or increased revenue. While Goffman does not speak directly to corporate blogging, some of his principles in The Presentation of Self can be appliedtobetterunderstandthestrategicuseoftheplatform.Thispaperwillfirstoutline the theory, new media and the landscape, and the blog as a communications platform. Then, it will draw correlations between how organizations leverage a corporate blog to communicatekeymessagingtotheirtargetaudience.

Dramaturgy
SelfpresentationstemsfromGoffman'stheoryofDramaturgy,whichistheideathat social interaction can be analyzed in terms of how people live their lives like actors performingonastage.Goffmanpositsthat, "all actions are perceived to be social performances with the aim of not only achieving whatever the inherent purposes the action may have had, but also that of giving off and maintaining certain desired impressions of the self to others"(Goffman,1959p.4). Each conversation, then, is an individual's performance of presenting himself or herself to leave specific impressions on others.  Goffman outlines several aspects that defineaneffectiveperformancethatcanalsobeappliedtocorporateblogging.Anaudience must

16 

"believe that the character they see actually possesses the attributes he/she appearstopossessandthatthetasktheyperformwillhavetheconsequences that are implicitly claimed for it, and that, in general, matters are what they appeartobe"(Goffman,1959p.18). Similarly,someonereadingablogpostmustbelievethatthepersonororganizationthatis communicatingkeymessages actuallypossesses theattributesandexpertisetheyclaimto. Actors must be fully taken by their roles,believein themand present a showofrealness (Goffman, 1959 p.40), similar to corporate bloggers. If not, the audience or potential customer might dismiss the performance as insincere or the organization as untrustworthy. Goffman argues that actors must dramatically highlight and portray key factsthatmightbeunapparentinconversation.Whencontributingtoablog,thecompany must portray certain information so that it is clear to the audience that the claims are legitimate. During conversation or in outbound messages, the company must convey importantinformationandkeymessagingsoasnottoconfusetheaudience.Actorsmust have a realization that all aspects that are included in the dramatic performance-- includinginformationthatrequiresquickjudgments--assurestheaudienceofthestrength of the performance (Goffman, 1959 p. 42). The corporate blog is an open communication channelbutorganizationsshouldbeawarethatanythingtheypublishonthechannelisa `scene'intheirperformance.Similartowritersandbloggers,actorsoftenrelyonaudience 17 

cuestogaugethestrengthoftheirperformanceandviceversa.Inblogging,apostcanbe assessed by the number of times it is shared on other social networking websites or the numberofcommentsapostreceives.Sentimentofcommentsandotherformsoffeedback providecuesintothesuccessorfailureofagivenperformance.Feedbackisanimportant featureindramaandcorporatebloggingbutthelattershowcasesthatfeedbackforallto seeontheInternet.Finally,Goffman'sanalysisofperformanceindicatesthatanactormust use appropriate levels of misrepresentation. Goffman argues that many performers have ample capacity and motive to misrepresent the facts; only shame, guilt, or fear prevents themfromdoingso(Goffman,1959,p.59). There are several parallels between Goffman's understanding of social interaction, dramatic performance, and the use of a corporate blog as a tool to facilitate those digital performances. As a platform, a blog affords the audience the ability to join or observe a publicinteraction.Theinherentriskofcommittingtosuchconversationshasresultedina verystrategicapproachtowritingblogposts,promotingabrand,andfieldingcomments. Thisresearchlookstorelatecorporatebloggingtothestrategicpresentationofself.

SelfPresentationTheory
SelfPresentationTheoryisawayofcommunicatingimagestoothers(Baumeister, 1982;Goffman,1959;Leary&Kowalski,1990)andtheactofconveyingone'sselfconcept 18 

toothersbyvariousmeansaccordingtosituationaldemands(Goffman,1959).Thetheory is often used to study how people tailor the messages they send to convey different meanings to their audience. It has also been called impression management, which emphasizespeople'sattemptstocontrolhowtheselfispresented(Schlenker,1980).Face toface,individualspresentanimageofthemselvesthroughvariousverbalandnonverbal expressionslikefacialgesturesandbodylanguage.Virtualexchangesoftendonotallowfor those nonverbal cues so selfpresentation can sometimes be subtle, very deliberate, or some hybrid of the two. In essence, selfpresentation and impression management are about strategically building an image to portray who we want others to think we are (Goffman, 1959). For example, instead of wearing a certain article of clothing, one might writeablogpostendorsingthebrandorstyle,whichhasasimilareffectontheimageof thebrandandthepersonpromotingit(Schau&Gilly,2003).Failingtoconveytheintended imagecanbedetrimentaltoanindividualoranorganization'sreputationandcredibility, butsuccessfullypresentingthedesiredimagemightleadtoanenhancementofself(Swann, 1987).

NewMedia
The way consumers communicate with each other has changed dramatically over thelastdecadeandthesameistrueforhowconsumersgatherandexchangeinformation 19 

about products (HennigThurau et al., 2010). The plethora of new media platforms has given access to a wider audience. Deighton and Kornfield (2009) argue that "the digital innovations of the last decade made it effortless, indeed second nature, for audiences to talk back and talk to each other'' (2009, p. 4). New media enables users to create and distribute their own information while also partaking in the promotion and engagement around that information. Just as they browse websites like eBay, Amazon, and Kijiji they also have the ability to create a profile and sell products of their own; they are as much retailersastheyareconsumers.Theevolutionofnewmediapresentsseveralopportunities for communication between the organization and the consumer because it, "offers companies multifarious ways to reach consumers, communicate with them, and measure their communication, browsing or purchaserelated behaviors," (HennigThurau et al., 2010). HennigThurau et al. (2010) describe five defining features of new media in The ImpactofNewMediaonCustomerRelationships: Digital: which means that there is no extra cost for producing multiple copies so digitalcommunicationsiseasilydistributedwithoutthetraditionalgatekeeperslike publishers. Anyone with an Internet connection can be a blogger, reporter, or recordingartist. 

20 

Proactive: users contribute valuable actions to new media such as commenting, writing reviews, and testing new products. This feature differentiates from television,wheretheuserislargelypassive.  Visible: new media channels allow the user to view the actions of others and vice versa.Entriesonblogs,communityformsandsocialnetworksleavepapertrailsthat provideinsightsintothehabitsoftheuser.  Realtime and memory: interaction on new media is instantaneous and the conversations,goodorbad,areleftavailableformanyyears.  Ubiquitous: by joining new media, users and organizations make a commitment to bepresentandwithinreachatalltimes,oftenthroughamobiledevice.  These five features affect how organizations leverage a corporate blog to strategically communicateandprovideinsightintowhytheplatformmayormaynotbesuccessfulinan organizational setting. The blog, SelfPresentation Theory and new media work interchangeably to influence the results of this research. This paper will now introduce a methodology for conducting primary, qualitative research on the corporate blog in a professional setting. It will seek to understand how concepts of SelfPresentation theory canbeappliedtothestrategiesandexecutionofacorporateblog.

 
21 

Chapter3:Methodology
To evaluate the strategies of corporate blogging, I will use a Grounded Theory approach as defined by Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss in Awareness of Dying (1967). GroundedTheoryisasystematicwayofdevelopingatheorybasedonasetofdocuments (Glased and Stauss, 1967). It involves the open coding, defining and categorizing of informationthatultimatelyderivesageneraltheoryfromthatinformation.Thisresearch willuseaqualitativeapproachtoinvestigatingtheblogsoftwocorporations:Radian6and Rogers Communication.  While the study is qualitative in nature, it does include some quantitativeitemsthatsimplyprovideadditionalinsightstotheresults.Togatherdata,this research collected 30 blog posts--15 from each company that were published between JanuaryandFebruaryof2012.Italsotookintoconsiderationthefunctionalityoftheirblog, theaesthetics,andthefeaturesthateachcommunicationplatformhasaffordedtheuser. Eachcompanywasselectedbasedoncertaincriteria.BothcompaniesareCanadian, fall within the technology industry, and operate a blog. Radian6 has roughly 600 employees, has been in business for five years, and targets a global audience. Rogers has 28,000employees,wasfoundedin1960,andisfocusedalmostexclusivelyontheCanadian market. Radian6 sells a social media measurement tool and targets businesses small and large. Rogers sells a wide range of telephone, Internet, and cable television products and 22 

services and targets both the individual consumer and businesses. There are a sufficient amountofsimilaritiesbetweenthetwocompaniestodrawmeaningfulconclusionsfroma comparativeanalysis. Thisresearchinvolvestheopencodingoffourkeycommunicationtacticsthatwere discoveredinthedatabeforetheywereformallydefined.Thispaperwillfirstidentifyeach tactic, then it will highlight the results, explain the implications, and identify some conclusions and areas for further research. It will also track statistics for the number of authors each organization uses, the use of hyperlinking between websites, the use of multimedia, Search Engine Optimization (SEO), and social networking shares. All of this information should bring some additional insights that will enhance this paper's understanding of the corporate blog as a tool for strategic communication. The four noticeabletacticsthatsurfacedwithinthedataareasfollows: 1) Informational sentences: defined as "to impart or communicate knowledge to another," (MerriamWebster). For the purpose of this research, the working definitionwillbeanysentencesthatteachoreducatetheaudienceonaparticular idea or suggest that they take a particular action. For example, Rogers Communicationmightinformtheiraudiencethat"over150,000gadgetloverswere inLasVegaslastweektocheckoutthelatestgear,softwareandtechnologyatthe 23 

world'slargestconsumertechnologytradeshow:CES2012."Radian6mightteach, "the term primary network reach refers to the total number of followers to whom you can directly push your message." Informational content is a common pattern among blog posts and this research will seek to understand how that affects the company'sstrategicpresentationofself. 2)Sentencesthatconstructarelationshipwiththereader:whichcanbedefined as "an aspect of quality that connects two or more things or parts as being or belonging or working together or as being of the same kind" (MerriamWebster). Theworkingdefinitionwillbeanysentencesthatspeak to theaudiencenot at the audience, such as conversing with the audience or posing a question. Each relationshipconstructingsentenceindicatesthattheorganizationiswritingapost with theaudiencenot at them,whichdifferentiatesitfromawebsiteortraditional oneway marketing methods. It leaves the reader feeling as though corporate blogging is something he/she does in collaboration with an organization. For example,Rogerspublishedtheline,"Weknowtechnologyhelpskeeppeopleclose, but did you know Canadians don't really worry about family due to technology advances helping to keep us connected?" This line speaks to the audience and the questions serves to activate the reader. Radian6 published this line: "What do you 24 

believeyou'llneedtohelpyoualongtheway?Whattoolswillcomeinhandy?"This againdifferentiatestheblogfrommostotheronewaycommunicationchannels. 3) Engagingsentences: whichis,"toinvolveinactivityortoshowgreatinterest," (MerriamWebster). This research paper will summarize the coded sentences that hyperlinkorconnecttodifferentsourcesofinformationonthewebandsentences thatencouragetheaudiencetotakeaparticularactionotherwiseknownasa"call toaction". For example, "To catch up on all the news from CES 2012, check out Connected Magazine's extensive coverage." The term `check out' indicates that the company is calling the audience to take a particular action that will ultimately benefit them in some way. Radian6 wrote, "Take a look at this video which highlightsClemson'snewsocialmedialisteningcenterandsomeoftheirstudents' innovative projects." This had a calltoaction, which engaged the audience by encouraging them to view another hyperlinked source. Engaging the audience is veryimportantinblogging.Itnotonlygivestheaudiencesomethinginteractiveto dothatothertraditionalformsofcommunicationdonotofferbutitalsoindirectly promotesthebrand. 

25 

4) Selfpromoting sentences: which outwardly "contribute to the growth or prosperity, to present merchandise for buyer acceptance through advertising, publicity, or discounting," (MerriamWebster). In blogging, this means publishing sentencesthatmentiontheorganization,productorserviceandhowtheymightbe usefulfortheaudience.Italsoincludeshyperlinksthatdriveaudiencemembersto other areas of the website or to other promotional company pages. For example, "Rogers has been a proud sponsor of this event for the last 7 years and with over 1,200 guests celebrating it's sure to be a night to remember." This is a very direct way of promoting the company within a blog post. Another example might be pointing the audience to additional information within the company website, "For more cable and wireless deals in the spirit of Chinese New Year, check out www.Rogers.com/cny," or, "the Radian6 widgets helps you determine when you havethemostbrandmentions,"Bothofthesesentencesarenoticeableinstancesof selfpromotion. They also promote their brand in more subtly ways by directing audience members to an additional piece of content: "If you're interested in the topic,herearesomemorepostsaroundit." 

26 

Using Erving Goffman's SelfPresentation Theory, I will analyze how each organization injects strategic messaging within the overall structure of their blog post.  Informing, constructing relationships, engaging and selfpromoting are all elements of corporate blogging that serve to cater to the user. This study will investigate how the text does or does not utilize those themes to communicate with their audience and if any resulting dialogue between the performing and the audience through comments and social media sharesoccurs.Intheend,theresearchresultswillshowthelengthofposts,thenumberof authors, the frequency of posts, the general theme of each post, how each sentence contributestopromotingthebrand,andultimatelywhethercommunicatingthroughablog helps enhance an organization's reputation and returns the company's blogging investment.TheresearchquestionsIusetoframethestudyare: RQ1:Howdoorganizationsuseablogasatoolforstrategiccommunication? RQ2:Howdotheycomposeblogpoststoportrayafavorableimageoftheirbrand? RQ3:Whatelementsofcorporatebloggingaresimilartoaperformanceorstrategic presentation?

  
27 

Chapter4:Results&Discussion
After scanning and coding all 30 documents, the results (see chart 1: Communications Tactics)highlightsomenoticeabledifferencesinthewayeachorganizationcommunicates through the use of a blog. The balance between informing, constructing relationships, engaging and selfpromoting highlights some interesting aspects of each company's strategyasseenintable2.LargeportionsofRadian6postswerefocusedoninformingthe audience; they averaged eight informative sentences per blog post that taught a concept, educatedtheaudienceorsuggestedthattheytakeaparticularaction.

 SlightlymorethanfivetimesineachpostRadian6hadnoticeableinstancesofspeaking to theaudiencenot at them,whichwasdefinedasrelationshipconstruction.Radian6didso

28 

byframingtheirsentencesasacollaborativeefforttomutuallyserveboththereaderand the writer. For example, Radian6 once ended a blog post with this farewell, "best of luck identifying influencers, engaging networks, and building your fans and followers!" This shows a clear concern for the user and their success.  Another strategy for constructing relationships with the audience appeared to be asking questions and speaking with the audience."Sowhatisyourpotentialsocialmediareach--andhowmuchisitworth?"or "What are the metrics that spell success for you?" Radian6 averaged three instances of engaging the audience by hyperlinking to another source or positioning a calltoaction withinthepost.AnotableobservationwasthatRadian6onlymentionedtheirbrandname, linkedtoaninternalsourceofinformation,orwroteabouttheadvantagesoftheirproduct twiceperpost.Alloftheseweredeemedselfpromotional.Instead,Radian6spokemoreto informingandconstructingrelationshipswiththeaudience. ThecontentwithintheRogersRedboardBloghadamuchmoreprominentfocuson promoting their brand and constructing relationships with the audience. The tone was extremely conversational and gave the impression that blogging was a collaborative initiative. Rogers said things like, "These videos were not your typical demo video or unboxing­quitetheopposite(andalittlemoreentertainingifyouaskme!)"andtheyoften posed questions like "What feature of the Samsung Galaxy Note are you most excited 29 

about?Morethansixandahalftimesperpostthecompanymentionedtheirbrandname or product or hyperlinked to an inbound source of information, which serves to further promote the company. For example, in one post they wrote, "The Sierra Wireless AirCard330U model of the LTE Rocket stick is now available from Rogers," and "Contact Rogerstosubscribetotheservice.BlackBerryandAndroiduserscandownloadtheVisual Voicemail Plus app from Rogers Mobile Internet Portal." There were only four and a half instances of Rogers Communication publishing informative sentences per post. Engaging theaudience,measuredbyhowoftenablogpostdirectedtheusertoexternalhyperlinks orhadspecificcallstoaction,wereveryuncommonwithonlyoneandahalfperpost.

Table1:AdditionalItems

Category
Totalpostspermonth Averagepostlength Totalnumberofauthors Totalnumberofhyperlinks Average number of social shares perpost Average number of comments per post
30 

Radian6
68/month 415 16/month 69 275/post 7/post

Rogers
11/month 453 6.5/month 84 33/post 28/post

Someadditionaldifferences(asseeninTable1:AdditionalItemsbelow)weremost notable in the frequency of posts, the number of people communicating, the use of multimedia,thestrategyforoptimizingpostsforsearchengines,andthebalancebetween eachofthefourthemespreviouslyintroduced.Thischarthighlightstheaveragenumberof times each post contained a sentence with one of the four themes that were previously defined.

Frequency|Contributors
The more often a company publishes a blog the more visible the brand is to prospective customers. A recent Overblog study (2012) argued that updating a blog frequentlywasthemosteffectivewaytodrivetraffictoawebsite,moresothanpromoting postsonsocialmediaandsearchengineoptimization.Thestudyshowedthat33percentof bloggerspublishedtwotothreetimesperweekand24percentonceaday.Thefrequency aloneindicatedthatbothRadian6andRogershaddifferentapproachestoblogging.Inthe twomonthtimeframethatthisresearchanalyzed,Rogerspublished22posts(11/month) and Radian6 published 136 posts (68/month). Companies that blog at least 20 times per month generate five times more traffic than those that blog only a few times per month (Hubspot,2012)onlyRadian6achievedthisnumberofposts.

31 

Onepossibleexplanationisthenumberofauthorsthatcontributetotheblog(see Blogging Strategies chart below) Rogers averaged six and a half different authors that published at least one articleeachmonthduring January and February 2012.Radian6averaged 16 authors each month, despitebeingamuchsmallercompanyintermsofthenumberofemployeesandyearsin business. Digital communications appears to play a larger factor in the overall marketing strategy of the company. Radian6 has more than double the amount of contributors than Rogers,yetonlyafractionoftheoverallemployees.Withmorecontributorscomesmore content. Radian6 appears to be implementing a strategy known as inbound marketing or contentmarketing,whichwillbeexplainedinthecomingsections.

Hyperlinks:Inbound&Outbound
The tactic of hyperlinking, the ability to electronically link to another web page by embeddingaURL,isanimportantaspectofblogging(Blood,2002).Hyperlinksencourage thereadertoviewanothersourceofinformationthatmighthelpexplainaconcept,posea contrasting viewpoint, or simply extend the conversation to another web page. It is very 32 

useful for both the reader and writer because it affords the technology something traditionalmediadoesnot. Each company used hyperlinks very differently. Radian6 averaged 4.6 hyperlinks per blogpost,whileRogersCommunicationaveraged5.6perpost.Themajorityofhyperlinks in a Radian6 blog post were outbound links, meaning they brought the reader to an externalsource,concept,orreferencemadeinthepost.Rogersutilizedhyperlinksalmost entirelytopromotethemselves.Asopposedtothe42percentofRadian6hyperlinksthat linkedtoaninternalcompanypagetopromotethemselvesortheirproduct,95percentof Rogers' hyperlinks directed the audience to an inbound, or internal page within their companywebsiteoraffiliatecompanies.Theywereusuallyannouncingserviceupdates,a thirdparty product launch, promoting another blog post, or repurposing a press release. Forexample: "Visit www.rogers.com/lumia900 for more information and to register for updatesontheupcomingpreorder."  "Today,we'reintroducingthenextbigthinginTVfromRogers:NextBox2.0"  "If you haven't already signed up for Rogers One Number, visit the site to get started." 

33 

WhenRadian6embeddedhyperlinkstheywerealmostentirelypositionedattheendofa post and usually suggested another piece of content that the reader might want to investigate--beitaneBook,ablogpost,orsomethingonanothersocialnetworkingprofile. Forexample: "AnystepsI'veleftout?Commenthereortweetus"  "While you're at it, see our latest ebook for great ways to use social media in 2012."  "Jenntweets,talksandblogsaboutTravel,EntertainmentandLeisure.Followher onTwitterandcheckouthermostrecentpostshere."  Therearealotofbenefitsinhyperlinkingablogposttoanotherwebpageandthe potentiallinkingofinformationislimitless.IfapieceofinformationisontheInternetitcan behyperlinkedandreferencedwithinablogpost.Thisisauniquefeaturetobloggingbut when95percentofthehyperlinksRogersusesareinbound(meaningdirectedtoanother page the company operates), the audience might perceive it as selfcentered or boastful. Radian6hyperlinkedtoinboundsourcesonly40percentofthetime,whichisenoughto include other digital sources in the conversation but also to promote their brand at the sametime.Somemightargueonlylinkingtoinboundsources40percentofthetimeisnot enough. They might question the practice of driving website traffic to other pages and

34 

riskingtheusernotcomingbacktotheirpage.Afterall,theremustbesomegainfromthe company'scorporateblogginginvestment.

Multimedia
The use of visuals to accompany a written message is common among almost all blogs. RogersandRadian6averagedjustslightlymorethanoneimage(seechartbeside)perpost and both used a range of multimedia including videos, graphs, charts, slideshows, and information graphics. The two graphs below highlight then total number of visuals each organizationusedontheirblog:

 Videosareaveryeffectivemethodforcommunicatingamessage.Professionallyproduced video content and usergenerated product videos are highly synergistic and drive higher levelsofsaleseffectivenesswhenusedintandem(comScore,2012).Theresourcesneeded toproduceanoriginalvideoaremuchhigherthanabasictextbasedblogpost.Rogersonly includedavideoin20percentoftheirposts(SeeAppendix1)andRadian6injustseven 35 

percent(SeeAppendix2).Intermsofthecontentsharedinthevideos,Rogersleveraged their television department and used four videos that promoted a product sold in their stores. Radian6 included a video created by one of their customers that showcased their socialmediameasurementtool. Bothorganizationsperiodicallycommunicatedinformativecontentthroughcharts, graphs, and infographics containing original research. Radian6 has access to their main product, a social media measurement tool, which they often utilized by providing their audience with informative and educational graphs and charts. In one blog post they published an eightpage slideshow containing a wide array of key insights and useful information. Similarly, Rogers published an annual "Innovation Report" containing valuable information about the role of technology in relationships. Not surprisingly, this informationrich content was of all Rogers' posts the most widely shared on social networking websites like Facebook, Twitter and Google+.  These original research documents bring substantial publicity to an organization because they add new and authenticinformationtothegeneralconversationontheInternetandserveasacatalystto conversation.

 
36 

Themeofposts
The theme of the blog posts that each organization publishes highlights their very different approach to communicating through a blog.  Of the 15 Radian6 blog posts, six werebasedoninformingoreducatingtheaudience.Thegoalofthesepostsappearstobe togiveinformationtothereaderandaskforverylittle,ifanything,inreturn.Theyoften includedoriginalresearchviachartsandgraphicsandinvitedtheaudiencetoparticipatein the discussion by sharing a post or commenting. Four of the posts had a theme of entertainingtheaudience.Radian6oftenwroteaboutinterestinganalogiesofsocialmedia suchas"20WaysSocialMediaislikeYourCrazyEx."Thistypeofpostpromotesthebrand becauseofitslongshelflifeandsharingpotential.Inaddition,funandentertainingposts donotaskanythingfromtheaudienceinreturn,outwardlypromotethecompany,orgive the audience any reason to avoid reading that post. Radian6 had two posts that were customer case studies that served to inform the audience of how other respected companiesareusingtheirproductandseeingpositiveresults.Theyalsohadtwopoststhat wererelatedtoindustrynewsandevents,whichhelptobuildrelationshipsandsolidifythe company's membershipamongst other industry professionals.Radian6alsohad onepost thatwasentirelyselfpromotingotherorganizationalcontent.Thestrategyappearstobea mixture of different themes that have the goal of maintaining the attention of a wide 37 

audience and ensuring that they remain on the company website. Rogers published only four posts that were entirely based on informing and educating. Unlike Radian6, they publishedthreepoststhatwereproductlaunchesandtwothatwereserviceupdates.

RogersThemes
Informative
13% 27% 13%

Contests+events Productlaunches Serviceupdates

20%

27%

Selfpromotion


Sometimes a post was entirely based on the announcement of extended wireless service, whileothertimespostsfocusedonanewpieceof

Radian6Themes
Informative
7% 13% 40% 13%

Entertaining Industrynews Casestudies
27%

Selfpromotion
 38 

hardwarethatoneoftheirproviderslaunched,whichhappenedtobesoldinRogersstores. Rogershadfourpoststhatwereentirelyfocusedoncommunityeventsorcontests.Thisisa greatwaytoengageanaudience,givebacktotheiraudienceandsubtlypromotethebrand. Theremainingtwopostswereentirelyselfpromotional. Thedifferencebetweeneachorganizationwastheratiobetweengivingandtaking. SixtysixpercentofpostsbyRadian6gavetheaudienceeitherinformativeorentertaining content while only 27 per cent of Rogers' posts did; however, Radian6 did not host any contests, while Rogers had four. The most noticeable difference between the themes of eachorganization'sblogpostswastheuseofproductlaunchesandserviceupgrades.Given the size of Rogers Communication and the twoway capabilities the blog affords, it is not surprisingthattheblogwasusedtoannounceproductlaunchesandserviceupgradeson theplatform.Itallowstheconsumertoprovidearesponseorconcerntothecompanythat will likely receive an answer. However, it appears that Rogers is using the blog as an extensionoftheirmainwebsiteandrepurposingpressreleases.Thiscanbeviewedasan advantageoftheplatformoradisadvantage.Itisadvantageousbecauseitgivesthebrand's loyalfollowerstheinformationtheyneedandwouldliketoknow.

 
39 

SearchEngineOptimization,Tags&Categories
Properpagelabelingclearlyindicatesthesubjectandtopiccoveredinaparticularpostand helps readers and search engines discover, categorize, and index particular posts. The bettersearchenginescandiscoverandcategorizeawebsite,thehigheritranksonsearch engines. Both companies labeled their posts very differently using the tag and category featuresontheirblogs.HereisanexampleofthebottomofaRogers'blogpost:

 AndhereisanexampleofthetagsatthebottomofaRadian6post:

 Forcorporatebloggingtobeaneffectivemeansofstrategiccommunication,postsmustbe optimizedsothatsearchengines,andthusInternetusers,canfindthem.Themorepages that are properly labeled the higher it will be ranked amongst similar pages on the Internet. Companies that blog have 434 per cent more indexed pages, and companies with more indexed pages get far more leads (Hubspot, 40 

2011). Once companies have attained a lead from search engine traffic, one study found that those leads have a 14.6 per cent rate of achieving a business transaction, while outboundleads(suchasdirectmailorprintadvertising)havea1.7percentrate(Search EngineJournal,2012). Onaverage,Radian6labeled(asseenintheworldcloudabove)eachpostwithone categoryandsixdifferenttagsthatdescribethepost.Rogersaveragedthreecategoriesand 20 tags per posts. In theory, the more a post is taggedthemoreitislikelytobefoundbysearch engines. Rogers had four times the number of tags(asseeninthewordcloudbeside)perpost; however,fewerofthosewordswerepositioned intheheadlineandopening160charactersofthepostthanwasthecasewithRadian6.25 per cent of Rogers's tags and categories were found within the headline or opening 160 characterstheexactlocationsearchenginescrawlforkeywords.Radian6,althoughmuch lower in terms of the overall number of tags and categories labeled, had a higher percentage of those words strategically positioned in the headline and opening 160 characters--51 per cent of words to be exact.  This means that although Rogers labeled theirpostsveryheavily,theydidnotproperlyleveragethosewordsbypositioningthemin 41 

themostimportantlocations.Oneshouldbeabletolookatawordcloud(seenabove)and clearlydeterminetheorganization'sspecialties.Basedonthesizeofthe`social',`media'and `strategy',itisreasonabletobelievethatistheirniche.Howeverthatsameanalysisisnot abundantlyclearwhenreviewingRogersCommunication'scloud.

KeyTakeaways
From a distance, it appears that both Radian6 and Rogers communicate in very similarways.Comparedtoordinaryfacetofacesituations,bloggershaveagreaterability to strategically develop and edit selfpresentation, enabling a selective and optimized presentation of themselves to others (Chen, 2010 p. 29).  Both companies use about 400 words per post, one form of multimedia, and several hyperlinks to craft a message. They categorizeeachpost,tagitwithkeywordsthatwillallowsearchenginestofindthecontent, index it and rank it amongst similar content.  Every post has the option to be shared on varioussocialnetworkslikeFacebook,Twitter,LinkedIn,andGoogle+andeachcompany invites the audience to leave a comment, concern or question underneath the post-- somethingtraditional,onewaycommunicationdoesn'tafford. As the data illustrates, both organizations use the corporate blog to communicate verydifferently.Eachposthasanunderlyingmotivethatbringssomeformofgaintothe organization. Radian6 provides informative and useful content and asks very little in 42 

return.Theirgoalistokeepusersbrowsingtheirblogorwebsiteaslongaspossible.They are deemed knowledgeable and trustworthy and have a large digital following that promotes the brand throughout their networks as a result. Rogers publishes new posts muchlessoftenbutoutwardlypromotescertainproductsandservices.Theirbrandgains in product awareness in each and every post. However, because their posts are shared much less on social networking websites that could be viewed as missing out on an opportunitytoreachnewaudiences. Brandsareheldresponsibleforwhattheyportrayinonlinemarketingmaterials. In one case, Motorola was launching a new phone and Rogers published a blog post with videosofthephonebeingshotthroughacanonandpenetratingvariousformsoffoodand drinks.OnecommenterthenraisedthequestionaboutRogershonouringwaterdamageon phones. The company quickly responded and later added a disclaimer to the post (see Appendix 4). Communicating through a corporate blog can be very beneficial but it also exposesthebrandtopotentiallydetrimentalconversations.Whilecompaniesdon'talways have the solution to the customer's problem, they are offering a place for customers to voicetheiropinionandpossiblyapublicdisplayofdispleasure,whichshouldimprovethe customer's experience with the organization. This brings the audience one step closer to theanswertotheircommentorconcern. 43 

Companieshavebloggingpoliciesandaresometimesrestrictedfrommakingcertain unwarrantedclaimsonablog(seeAppendix5).Onemustnotbeblindedbytheeaseofuse and easy accessibility to people within the organization; they are not always allowed to provide certain answers because of strict rules and guidelines. For the most part, Rogers andRadian6areopenaboutwhattheycanandcannotdiscloseovertheblog. Bothbrands are actively engaged in dialogue with comments. Rogers had a reply rate of 28 per cent, meaningtheyprovidedapersonalizedresponseto28percentofcommentsontheirblog. Radian6 had a response rate of 40 per cent. Generally, the higher the response rate the moreavisitorfeelsvaluedandengagedintwowaydialogue.

Giving|Sharing
There appears to be a correlation between the number of informative sentences a blog post contains and the amount of times it is shared throughout the various social networking websites. Informative sentences teach, educate, or instruct the audience on a particular concept or action. Radian6 averaged eight informative sentences per post and 275 social networking shares on websites like Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Google+. Rogersonlyaveragedfourandahalfinformativesentencesand33socialsharesperpost. Totakethisevenfurther,onemightconsiderthefactthat27percentofRadian6postshad an overarching theme of `fun and entertaining', which might have also contributed to the 44 

amount of social shares that result from a blog post. The theme of giving humanizes a brandbecausepeopleincreasinglydistrustbigcompanies(Israel&Scoble,2006).Ablogis agreatwaytobuildtrustandmakeapersonfeelconnectedtotheorganizationinaway thatamarketingbrochurecannot(Wright,2006p.28).Ifonecombinesallofthepoststhat aredeemed`giving'totheaudience,meaningwithoutanoticeableselfpromotionelement, then67percentofRadian6postsweregivingsomethingtotheaudience. Theopposite,then,wouldbe`taking'or`receiving'fromtheaudience,whichisnot uncommon in corporate blogging. After all, the organization must find ways to promote theirproductorserviceandreceivesomebenefitfromtheirblogginginitiative.But46per centofRogers'blogpostswouldbeconsidered`receiving'fromtheaudiencethroughself promotionalpostsandproductupdates.Itissafetosaythatthereisacorrelationbetween informativepostsandahighrateofsocialnetworkingshares.Thisisnottosuggestthata highnumberofsocialnetworkingsharesisindicativeofasuccessfulblog.Ifthegoalofthe blogistopromoteanorganization'sproductsorservicesthensocialnetworkingsharesare notasimportant.Thisresearchwasunabletogainaccesstothestrategyandpreparation thatoutlineshoweachorganizationdefinessuccess.

 
45 

QuantityVs.Quality
The quantity of posts mentioned in the results section shows a clear difference in the blogging strategies used by each company. Rogers published only 22 posts in two monthswhileRadian6published136inthesameperiodoftime.Rogersseemedtopublish onlywhensomethingveryimportantneededtobecommunicatedtotheiraudience,while Radian6 appeared to have regular contributors that published on particular days of the week.Rogersusedtheblogasamegaphoneorextensionoftheirwebsite,pressreleases, andothermarketingchannels,whileRadian6leveragedtheirblogasamuchlargerpieceof theirmarketingstrategy.Theirstrategyisbasedonthenotionofinboundmarketing,which meanstheyaremarketingthecontenttheyarecreatingwiththegoalofdrivingaudience trafficinboundtotheirwebsite.

Pushvs.PullMarketing
As a result of digital, twoway the

communication

channels

empowering

consumer, organizations have started to find a morecosteffectivealternativetotraditionalpush marketing. The blog is one channel that is contributingto 46 

theriseof`pullmarketing',whichconsistsofcreatingstrategiccontent(blogposts,videos, contests, infographics, whitepapers, case studies, etc.) to pull prospective customers to their website. The goal, then, is to craft strategic content that entices the user to visit a company's website. According to Hubspot, a leading industry specialist in inbound marketing,thisformofmarketingcostsroughly60percentlessthantraditionaloutbound, paid marketing (Hubspot, 2011). Instead of pushing information at the audience through televisioncommercials,Internetpopups,orjunkmail,pullmarketingattemptstodrawthe userintothecompanywebsitelikeamagnet.Itcreatesuseful,informativeandentertaining content that benefits the consumer and promotes the blog posts using the social media channels like Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and Google+. Both organizations appear to be implementing an inbound marketing strategy. They both write very similar style posts, they otimize them for search, they present readers with the opportunities to share each post, and they use the platform to bring new traffic `inbound'. There are three key componentstoinboundmarketing:content,thecoreofanyinboundmarketingcampaign; SEO,orhowapieceofcontentisorganicallycompiledwithsearchtermsandphrases;and socialmedia,thepromotionalmegaphoneofthestrategy.Whilebothorganizationswrite posts very differently, it is clear that each of them is leveraging the communications mediuminthesamefashion. 47 

Engaging|Commenting
Unlike Radian6, Rogers has no difficulty in getting their audience to comment on blog posts because the few posts they have usually involve some form of announcement. They average 28 comments on each blog post, while Radian6 averages seven. People are presumably visiting the Rogers Redboard blog to find out information on the company, whichisaformofstrategiccommunicationthatgivestheiraudienceachancetoengagein dialoguewiththebrand.

NatureoftheBusiness|UseoftheBlog
Oneofthemostimportantfactorstoconsiderinthisanalysisisthemakeupofeach organizationandtheimagestheyareattemptingtopresentofthemselves.Visitorstothe Radian6SocialStrategyblogarepresumablygoingtothewebsitetolearnsomethingnew orbeentertained.Asaresult,thosevisitorstypicallysharethepostwiththeirnetworksof family, friends, and industry colleagues. Each company strategically crafts blog posts to communicatetotheiraudiencecertainkeymessagesabouttheirbrand.Rogersisaservice basedbusinesswithalotofcustomersthatrelyonthefunctionalityoftheirproductstoget television,Internet,andtelephoneservice.Theypresentanimageofstabilityandrelyon moreoneway,asynchronousformsofcommunicationtomarkettheirbrand,butusethe blogtoofferthechanceofdialoguewiththeiraudience.Infact,inoneRogers'blogpost,the 48 

commentsectionwasclosedoff.Thiscontradictsthebenefitsofusingablogbutillustrates thecontrolfactorRogerswantstohave.Radian6isamuchyoungercompanythatisstillin the phase of educating people about the benefits of implementing social media into the workplace as a promotional tool. They present themselves as fun and engaging, but very knowledgeable about the best way to apply metrics and analysis to social media usage. Bothstrategiescommunicateverydifferently,bothreceivedifferentresultsfromeachpost, andeachstrategyhasmanyadvantagesanddisadvantages.          


49 

Chapter5:Conclusion
This research demonstrates that there are many strategies for communicating through a corporate blog. Some of the common objectives include informing, educating, entertaining, updating consumers on new product features, hosting contests, and promotingthebrand.Ifdonecorrectly,corporatebloggingshouldenhancethereputation and promote the brand, but the term "correctly" should be used loosely, as there are so manyfactorsthatdeterminewhatexactlythatis.CharlesCatalano's(2007)positionsums uptheblog'spositionamongstotherformsofcommunication.Hepositsthatregardlessof whatbloggingproponentsassert,blogswillnotrendertraditionaltoolsofcommunication obsolete nor will they usher in a new era of corporate communications (2007, p. 258). However, just like websites became a permanent, fully integrated and vital part of the medialandscape,sowillblogs."Thefactthattraditionalformsofcommunicationstillexist reinforces the importance of the content or message as opposed to the technology or medium,"(Catalano,2007p.258).Socialmediamarketingwill,fortheforeseeablefuture, exist alongside traditional marketing and the established media models it supports ­ sometimesasachallengetoit,butoftenasacomplementtoit,andnocompleteanalysis can ignore this interplay (Anderson, 2010, p. 8). In this case, the blog is one tool that extendsthereachofcommunicationbetweenorganizationsandtheiraudience.Itoffersa 50 

placefororganizationstoinformtheiraudienceandconstructrelationshipswiththem.But italsoenablesthemtopositionstrategicmessagingwithinblogpoststhatservetopromote the brand and position themselves as industry thoughtleaders. As a consequence, when theconsumereventuallyhasintentionsofpurchasingwhateverproductorserviceitisthat thecompanysells,itisreasonabletoexpectthattheyaretheobviouschoice.Why?Simply because they have demonstrated their expertise, they have developed a relationship, and theyhavepresentedahumanizedimageofthebrand. Radian6 enhanced their reputation by informing their audience in an entertaining and friendly manner. Rogers presented an image of stability with a hint of generosity through contests and giveaways. Radian6 made it clear they specialize in social media measurement while Rogers portrayed an image of experience in television, Internet and telephoneservice.Thesuccessofacorporateblogdependsonthenatureofthecompany, theaudiencetheyaretargeting,andthestrategytheyimplement.Contentmarketingisan elaboratestrategythatRadian6implementstoensuretheirbrandnameiseverpresentin themindsofprospects.Theyareayoungercompanythattargetsaglobalaudience.Rogers isaveryestablishedbrandinonecountry,sosuccessislinkedtomanagingthatreputation. Nevertheless,bothorganizationsusedthesamecommunicationsplatforminverydifferent

51 

ways, to target very different audiences. They were both successful and achieved very differentresults. While this study did yield some key insights into the strategies of corporate blogging, I must acknowledge that the findings are only preliminary and further study is neededtomakeanydefiniteclaims.Onelimitationofthisstudywasthatthisresearchwas unable to consider the backstage or preparation aspects of each organization's blogging strategy.Significantinsightswouldhavebeengainedifthisstudycouldhavehadaccessto bloggerstounderstandtheorganizationalstrategyandtheinnerworkingsoftheblogging team. Given more time, I would expand the research to look into companies that vary in size and in different industries. How companies present themselves online will vary dramatically based on their revenue streams. For example, a large company like Rogers wouldcommunicatedifferentlythanapublicallyfundedcompanyoranonprofit. 

 

  
52 

Appendix
1.RogersCommunication:theuseofvideoinapost




2.Radian6:theuseofvideoinapost

 
3.RogersCommunication:theuseoforiginalresearchinaninfographic  53 



    

  
4.RogersCommunication:a28%responseratetocomments .

  
  

54 

5.RogersCommunication:a28%responseratetocomments

          
55 

Bibliography
Anderson,Eric.(2010).Socialmediamarketing:gametheoryandtheemergenceof collaboration.(Heidelberg;NewYork),Springer.  Baumeister,R.F.(1982).Aselfpresentationalviewofsocialphenomena. PsychologicalBulletin,91(1),3­26  Blood,R.(2002).Thewebloghandbook:Practicaladviceoncreatingandmaintainingyour blog.Cambridge,MA:PerseusPublishing.  Catalano,C.(2007).MegaphonestotheInternetandtheWorld:TheRoleofBlogsin CorporateCommunications,InternationalJournalofStrategicCommunication,1(4),247­ 262.  Chiu,Eric.(2012).24EyePoppingSEOStatistics,SearchEngineJournal.Accessedfrom http://www.searchenginejournal.com/24eyepoppingseostatistics/42665/onJune10, 2012.  comScore.(2012).ProfessionallyProducedVideoContentAndUserGeneratedProduct VideosExhibitStrongSynergyinDrivingSalesEffectiveness.NewYork,NY.Accessedfrom http://www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/2012/3/comScore_Study_Finds_ ProfessionallyProduced_Video_Content_And_User

56 

Generated_Product_Videos_Exhibit_Strong_Synergy_in_Driving_Sales_EffectivenessonJune 25,2012.  Corbin,J.,Strauss,A.(1990).BasicsofQualitativeResearch:groundedtheoryprocedures andtechniques.NewburyPark,California:SagePublications  Deighton,JohnA.(2007),Dove:EvolutionofaBrand.Boston,MA: HarvardBusinessSchoolPress.------andLeoraKornfeld(2009),``Interactivity's UnanticipatedConsequencesforMarketersandMarketing,''JournalofInteractive Marketing,23(1),212.  EmarketerDaily.(2010).TheContinuedRiseofBlogging:morethanhalfofwebuserswill readblogsthisyear.Retrievedfrom http://www.emarketer.com/%28S%28hyezjifgz1szwkmqcfycpl55%2929/Article.aspx?R= 1007941onMay20,2012.  Festa,P.(2003).BloggingcomestoHarvard.CNETNews.com.Retrievedfrom http://news.com.com/20081082985714.html?tag¼fd_nc_1.  Friedman,E.(2001).TheSocialCostsofCheapPseudonyms.JournalofEconomicsand ManagementStrategy,10.2,173199.  Glaser,B.,Strauss,A.(1967).TheDiscoveryofGroundedTheory:StrategiesforQualitative Research,Chicago,AldinePublishingCompany. 57 

 Goffman,E.(1959).PresentationofSelfinEverydayLife.GardenCity,NewYork: Doubleday.  Hampton,K.,Goulet,L.,Purcell,K.,Rainie,L.(2011).Socialnetworkingsitesandourlives. PewInternetandAmericanLifeProject.Retrievedfrom http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Technologyandsocialnetworks/Part 2/Demographics.aspxonJune2,2012.  HennigThurau,T.,Malthouse,E.,Friege,C.,Gensler,S.,Lobschat,L.,Rangaswamy,A.,etal. (2010).Theimpactofnewmediaoncustomerrelationships.JournalofServiceResearch, 13(3),311330.  Herring,S.C.,Scheidt,L.A.,Bonus,S.,&Wright,E.(2004).Bridgingthegap:Agenre analysisofweblog.Proceedingsof37thHawaiiInternationalConferenceon SystemSciences,Hawaii,BigIsland.  Herring,S.C.,Kouper,I.,Scheidt,L.A.,&Wright,E.(2004).Womenandchildrenlast:The discursiveconstructionofWeblogs.InL.Gurak,S.Anotnijevic,L.Johnson,S.Ratliff,&J. Reyman(Eds.),Intotheblogosphere:Rhetoric,communityandcultureofWeblogs. Retrievedfromhttp://blog.lib.umn.edu/blogosphere/women_and_children.html. 

58 

Hubspot.(2012).It'stimetoTransformyourMarketing,Retrievedfrom blog.hubspot.com/blog/tabid/6307/bid/4416/InboundMarketingtheNextPhaseof MarketingontheWeb.aspxonJune4,2012.  Israel,S.,Scoble,R.(2006).NakedConversations:HowBlogsareChangingtheWay BusinessesTalkwithCustomers  Lasica,J.D.(2001,May24).Bloggingasaformofjournalism.USCAnnenbergOnline JournalismReview.Retrievedfromhttp://www.ojr.org/ojr/workplace/1017958873.php.  Leary,M.R.,&Kowalski,R.M.(1990).Impressionmanagement:Aliteraturereview andtwocomponentmodel.PsychologicalBulletin,107(1),34­47.Schau,H.J.,&  Lee,M.,Min,J.(2011).ThechangeinuserandITdynamics:BlogsasITenabledvirtualself presentation.BusinessSchool,KoreaAdvancedInstituteofScienceandTechnology,207 43.  MarketingProfs.(2008).MarketingHowtoGuide:YourTemplateforCreativeBlog Marketing.Retrievedfromhttp://www.slideshare.net/Vinaytosh/blogmarketingguideon June12,2012.  Overblog.(2012).BloggersSayFrequentUpdates,SocialPromotionKeyTrafficDrivers, MarketingCharts.Rrtrievedfromhttp://www.marketingcharts.com/topics/behavioral

59 

marketing/bloggerssayfrequentupdatessocialpromotionkeytrafficdrivers 22452/overblogmosteffectiveblogtrafficdriversjune2012png/onJune8,2012.  Papacharissi,Z.(2004,May).Thebloggerrevolution?Audienceasmediaproducers.Paper presentedattheannualconferenceoftheInternationalCommunicationAssociation,New Orleans,LA.5  Ray,T.(2003).Whyblogshaven'tstormedthebusinessworld.ECommerceTimes. Retrievedfromhttp://www.ecommercetimes.com/perl/story/21389.html.  Russell,K.(2007).Searchengineoptimization.Computerworld,41(23),4040. http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/216115497 ?accountid=13631  Sacks,D.(2010).TheFutureofAdvertising,FastCompany.Retrievedfrom http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/151/mayhemonmadisonavenue.htmlonJune 4,2012.  Schau,H.J.,&Gilly,M.C.(2003).Wearewhatwepost?Selfpresentationinpersonalweb space.JournalofConsumerResearch,30(3),385­404.  Schlenker,B.R.(1980).Impressionmanagement:Theselfconcept,socialidentity,and interpersonalrelations.Monterey,CA:Brooks/Cole.  60 

Swann,W.B.Jr.,(1987).Identitynegotiation:Wheretworoadsmeet.Journalof PersonalityandSocialPsychology,53(6),1038­1051.  Technorati.(2011).StateoftheBlogosphere.RetrievedonMay26,2012from http://technorati.com/socialmedia/article/stateoftheblogosphere2011introduction/  U.S.Searchenginerankings(2010).comScoreResearch.Retrievedfrom http://www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/2010/9/comScore_Releases_Au gust_2010_U.S._Search_Engine_RankingsonMay27,2012.  Wright,Jeremy.(2006).BlogMarketing:TheRevolutionaryNewWaytoIncreaseSales, BuildYourBrand,andGetExceptionalResults.McGrawHill,Volume1,p.1346.  YiNingKatherineChen(2010):Examiningthepresentationofselfinpopular blogs:aculturalperspective,ChineseJournalofCommunication,3:1,2841

61 

