Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Evil doers from the 'hood or disenfranchised citizens? A critical analysis of the media representation of the MS-13 gang
Elena Megas
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Criminology Commons Recommended Citation
Megas, Elena, "Evil doers from the 'hood or disenfranchised citizens? A critical analysis of the media representation of the MS-13 gang" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 533.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

EVIL DOERS FROM THE 'HOOD OR DISENFRANCHISED CITIZENS? A CRITICAL

ANALYSIS OF THE MEDIA REPRESENTATION OF THE MS-13 GANG

by

Elena Megas, Hon. BA, York University, 2007

A Major Research Paper

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts in the Program of

Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 Е Elena Megas 2009

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY OF

Author's Declaration

EVIL DOERS FROM THE 'HOOD OR DISENFRANCHISED CITIZENS? A CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF THE MEDIA REPRESENTATION OF THE MS-13 GANG
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.

Elena Megas Master of Arts, 2009 Immigration and Settlement Studies Ryerson University

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the
purpose of scholarly research.

ABSTRACT

SigiSaturБ

In the past decade and a half, the criminalization of MS-13 gang members in public discourse has operated to further marginalize and criminalize underprivileged urban youth, a segment of the
populace already ridden by high levels of socio-economic exclusion. Using Fairclough's critical

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of
scholarly research.

discourse analysis method, this study explores the social construction MS-13 gang affiliated
youth in mainstream media in Canada, the United Sates, and El Salvador. This study indicates

that while the current gang research is becoming more critical, conceptualizing gangs as a
Signaturi

crystallization of broader societal problems, the social construction of MS-13 gang members as permanent criminals is still predominant, as it circulates through all of the selected media. The criminalizing representation of MS-13 gang members has significant implications, as it justifies
increasingly punitive policing strategies, which in turn validate the vilified construction of gang-

affiliated youth, thus creating a vicious cycle in which gang members are deemed irremediable
criminals.

Keywords:

MS-13; gang; youth; criminalization; Mara Salvatrucha.

ii

m

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE PAGE..... AUTHOR'S DECLARATION i ii

I would like to thank my supervisor, dr. Henry Parada and my second reader, dr. Vappu Tyyska
for their ongoing support and encouragement in pursuing this research topic.

ABSTRACT...

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS

iv
v

Thank you to my friends and family for always supporting and encouraging me in this endeavour.

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW

1
6

Evolution and Institutionalization of the MS-13 Gang
Development and Organization ,

6
7

Causes of Evolution
Criminalization of the MS-13 Gang

9
12

Scapegoating
Terrorism and the MS-13 Gang ...;.

12
16

Violence and Brutality Responses to the MS-13 Gang

18 21

Gaps
Theoretical Framework

25
27

Conclusions
CHAPTER 3: RESEARCH DESIGN

29
32

Research Purpose Research Objective Specific Objectives Theoretical Framework Methodology Data Data Collection Data Analysis Findings Presentation
CHAPTER 4: FINDINGS MS-13 Violence, Vilification, and Terrorism

32 33 33 33 35 35 36 37 38
38 38

Canada
United States

38
40

El Salvador (Video) MS-13 and Migration Canada United States

43 44 44 46

iv

El Salvador (Video)

....48

Chapter 1: INTRODUCTION

Responses to MS-13 Canada United States El Salvador Video Article CHAPTER 5: ANALYSIS Summary of Findings. Power Relations The CriminaPOther'



ииии

48 48 49 иии49 -49 49
ииииии

In this day and age, we are constantly warned by sensationalist media that criminal
organizations are thriving, and that they constitute a crime and national security issue in many global cities around the world. At the same time, politicians adhere to the fear ofthe criminal
'Other' and base their campaigns on accusations that laws are too weak in the face of crime and

Common Sense in the Name of Power Exceptions to the Pattern of Representation

Criminalizing Depictions

50 50 52 54 54
58 61

on promises of repressive, anti'Crime strategies (Chevigny, 2003). As such, the criminal gang
MS-13 has recently become especially prominent in North and Latin American media. In the past decade, and particularly in the post 9/11 era, public representations of the MS^ 13 gang as responsible for escalating crime rates, extreme violence, and even terrorism have proliferated in the Americas. These representations have been reproduced and given meaning through the

CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Agency and Omissions Colonial Hybridity

и

62 64
и 71 71 72

67

APPENDIX 1: DATA TRANSCRIPTS Canada: Global National News United States: Fox News

discursive practice of academies, international organizations, states, and journalists.
Such popular representations have operated to regulate and normalize the image of the

El Salvador El Diario de Hoy Diario Co Latino BIBLIOGRAPHY

иии

иии иииииии --и

73 73 73 75

criminal 'Other' and have consequently legitimized increasingly punitive policies. For instance, the U.S has adopted measures such as the 'zero tolerance' policy, the Street Terrorism Enforcement Prevention Act (STEP), and increasingly repressive anti-gang policies, which have resulted in the increasing detention, deportation, and association with terrorism of many racialized, immigrant youth (Hume, 2007). Similarly, Central American countries have readily adopted the 'Mano Dura' ('Tough Hand') anti-gang strategy in 2003, mirroring the STEP legislation in the United States, which promotes an extremely repressive anti-gang tactic, such that it almost eliminates the possibility of prevention, rehabilitation, and social reintegration (Boerman, 2007). In addition, Canada has started to follow the steps of its Southern neighbours and has amended its Criminal Code in February 2009 to increase incarceration time for gangrelated crimes and create new offences punishable by maximum penalty (Parliament of Canada,

VI

2009). Thus, rather than conceptualizing the expansion of the MS-13 gang across national
borders as an outgrowth of perpetuated structural violence and inequality and as a part of the
broader internationalization of the economy under the current neoliberal regime, increasingly
retaliatory discourses have transpired (Hayden, 2005).

holistic manner have all contributed to the expansion of MS-13 throughout the Americas (Boerman, 2007). Nowadays, MS-13 is ubiquitous in the urban areas of El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala, Mexico, the United States, and is attempting to establish a base in Canada (Boerman,
2007).

The MS-13 gang is also known as the Mara Salvatrucha. The word 'mara' is a slang term for "gang" and is derived from the name of a fierce type of ant (Manwaring, 2007). The expression
'trucha' means 'trout' and is also a slang term for 'shrewd' or 'astute' (Manwaring, 2007). Therefore, 'Mara Salvatrucha' or 'MS-13' means a gang of shrewd Salvadorans. Lastly, the

When examining the scholarly literature on this topic, a number of themes recur. One of
the main themes in gang research is the evolution of the MS-13 gang, particularly the

development, organization, and causes of this gang's proliferation. Most scholarly literature points out that growing global inequalities, structural exclusion, deportations, and globalization
constitute critical factors in the proliferation of the MS-13 gang. The level of organization of the MS-13 gang is however, highly contested, as some scholars (Arana, 2005; Manwaring, 2005, 2006, 2007; Papachristos, 2005; Sullivan, 2006) argue that the gang is highly organized and

number 13 was included in the gang's name to pay homage to the Californian prison gang, the
Mexican Mafia, 'm' being the thirteenth letter in the alphabet (DeCesare, 2003).

The MS-13 gang was formed in the 1980s in Los Angeles, California among refugees fleeing the civil war in El Salvador (Boerman, 2007). Approximately thirty percent of the Salvadoran

constitutes a significant international threat, while others suggest that the organizational sophistication is overestimated (Hagedorn, 2005, 2007, 2008;
Rodgers, 2008) . Another prominent theme found in gang literature is the criminal character of the MS-13

population was forced to migrate to other countries and the majority of them sought refuge in the
United States (Landolt, 2003). Feeling alienated, living in poverty, and marginalized by other immigrant groups, many Salvadoran youth started the MS-13 gang or became involved with

Hayden, 2005; Rocha and

other pre-existent gangs (Boerman, 2007). In response to the increasing levels of gang activity,
the U.S implemented severe anti-gang laws in 1992 and began mass deportations of youth back

gang. While many researchers consider the MS-13 gang to constitute a criminal organization, others focus on the social, economic, and political conditions that have helped shape MS-13 as a

to Central America. Between 1992 and 1996, 9,497 Hondurans, 7, 276 Guatemalans, and 9,767 Salvadorans living in the United States were deported back to their homelands (Rocha and Rodgers, 2007). These mass deportations had the counter-effect of escalating the organization, sophistication, and proliferation of MS-13 in Central America (Boerman, 2007). Since then, the lack of social support for these deportees, globalization, persistent poverty arising from the imposition of neoliberal policies, and the absence of political will to address this issue in a

criminal group. The gang's link with terrorist organization has also been the focus of much
research, as some scholars (Arana* 2005;Breve, 2007; Manwaring, 2005, 2006, 2007; Johnson
and Muhlhausen, 2005) make such allegations the focal point of research, while others (Hume,

2007;

Hagedorn,

2008;

Hayden,

2005;

Rocha

and

Rodgers,

2008)

dismiss

them

as

unsubstantiated rumours. Moreover, the kind and level of gang violence and the context in which
it occurs constitutes an important theme in gang research.

Finally, the current literature on gangs is preoccupied with finding the suitable solution

Some findings of this research indicate that all of the selected Canadian, American, and Salvadoran media employ criminalizing language when referring to MS-13 gang members, which signifies that media producers are drawing from a traditional criminology discourse. Additionally,

for the gang problem. While most scholars agree that current approaches have been largely

ineffective, the appropriate combination of preventive and suppressive measures to be
implemented to solve the gang problem is highly contested (Ribando, 2005).

the frequency and confidence of using such incriminating language suggests that the producers of
the media and its audience, the Canadian, U.S, or Salvadoran society share the same normative ideology. While the Canadian broadcast stresses the gang's unprecedented violence and

In conducting this study, newspaper articles and TV news clips from regional media in
the United States, Canada, and El Salvador will be analysed. More specifically, one broadcast

from Canada, one from the United States, and one broadcast and a newspaper article from El Salvador will be employed. The selected TV broadcasts from Canada and the United States will be downloaded from YouTube and the Salvadoran newscast and chosen newspaper articles will
be collected from the newspapers' online archives onto my computer.

criminality, the main preoccupation of the U.S media seems to be with MS-13's potential terrorist
link and the security threat they pose to the nation. Additionally, Salvadoran media further reinforces the image of MS-13 gang members as the main blameworthy actors through numerous

criminalizing images and language.
When addressing the topic of the MS-13 in relation to migration, the selected Canadian broadcast highlights the presence of MS-13 gang members in Canada as a threat to the host

The media representation of MS-13 gang members will be analyzed and compared using

Fairclough's critical discourse analysis method (CDA) and a postcolonial theoretical framework. More specifically, Edward Said's (1978) concept of positional superiority will be utilized to
highlight the way in which the Canadian and U.S media support of repressive anti-gang policies

society and considers the act of migration to be an ominous activity. Deportation of gang

members is conceptualized as a just consequence of criminal activity and is ignored as a factor
contributing to the continuation of such actions. The American newscast stresses the MS-13 members' immigrant status and their perceived ethnic and national difference. Furthermore, the
producers of this media establish a link between the gang's criminality and its members' immigrant status. Also, the American newscast does not recognize Salvadoran migrants as

enables the West to maintain the upper hand and legitimize an interventionist style of international relations and forms of neo-colonial domination under the disguise of fighting crime
and terrorism. Moreover, this study will employ Said's (1978) standpoint regarding the representation of the 'Other' in order to emphasize how representations of the Central American gang MS-13 operate to perpetuate hegemony through the vilification of MS-13 gang members.

refugees and their immigration to Canada is automatically associated with their gang affiliation. Additionally, the selected Salvadoran broadcast utilizes language that implies the producers'

Finally, Bhabha's (1983) concept of colonial hybridity will be will be integrated in the analysis of
the Salvadoran media discourse on MS-13 in order to reveal how it is mirroring its Northern neighbours by adopting the construction of MS-13 gang members as a principal security threat
within the regional discourse.

approval of the U.S Homeland Security Department' deportation of MS-13 gang member Saul
Turcios Angel from the United States.

In regards to the media's interpretation of the responses to the MS-13 gang, the Canadian
newscast indicates that current measures too 'soft' and tougher responses are necessary to stop

constructions of the gang in the Canadian, American, and Central American contexts is better
suited to study this phenomenon.

the gang's expansion. The U.S broadcast reinforces the idea that the MS-13 gang should be
Evolution and Institutionalization of MS-13

treated as an international security threat. Finally, the Salvadoran news clip and article advocate
that the most appropriate way of dealing with the MS-13 gang is through repressive law enforcement measures such as Mono Dura (Hard Hand).
Development and Organization The level of development and organization of transnational gangs such as MS-13 has been questioned by several researchers. Writing from a criminological standpoint, Papachristos
Chapter 2: LITERATURE REVIEW

(2005) states that some gangs, such as MS-13, Crips, Bloods, and the Latin Kings have expanded
and evolved significantly from small, disorganized, and impermanent street gangs involved in petty crime to well-organized, permanent, transnational criminal gangs that engage in organized

Research on the MS-13 gang is a topic surrounded by much controversy. Researchers on

this

topic

have developed two
and representatives

different viewpoints.
of law enforcement

On the one
and national

extreme,
security

traditional
construct

criminologists

crime, an increased level of violence and brutality, and even terrorist activities. A similar, although more alarmist explanation of the expansion of MS-13 is provided by Manwaring, who
suggests that the MS-13 gang has evolved significantly in its internationalization and

transnational gangs as a major international security threat and describe gang members as

irrevocably

immoral,

wicked

and

violent.

On

the

other

end,

critical

criminologists,

anthropologists, and non-profit organizations conceptualize the MS-13 gang as a reaction to increasing global inequalities and as a symptom of greater contemporary societal issues in the age
of neoliberal globalization.

sophistication, from a first generation gang, with loose leadership and engaging mostly in opportunistic and petty theft, to a second generation transnational criminal organization with a hierarchical and centralized leadership engaging in mercenary, drug, and human trafficking

However, only a few scholars (e.g. Hagedorn, 2008; McDonald, 2003; Zilberg, 2007) go beyond the conceptualization of gangs as criminal organizations of disaffected youth to recognize
the gang phenomenon as a form of cultural resistance against socio-economic marginalization.

activities, and possibly to a third generation status gang, which can transform into "a state within
a state", and pose a serious threat to the authority and sovereignty of a government. Mawaring (2005, 2006, 2007), warns against the destructive and growing potential of the MS-13 gang members, which he elevates to the level of insurgents interested in commercial profit and a
national security.

Thus, the concepts of agency and resistance as impetus for the MS-13 gang are generally
overlooked in the current research on gangs. Moreover, the growing presence of MS-13 gang

members in Canada has been largely ignored by scholars. Furthermore, due to the transnational character of the MS-13 gang, a more flexible, wide-angle lens that is able to compare the social

On the other side, Sullivan (2006) challenges Manwaring's centralized gang organization

hypothesis and maintains that a shift in the organization of transnational gangs has occurred,
from centralized hierarchies to network forms of organization utilized to enable netwar, "an

6

emerging form of conflict (and crime) at societal level, involving measures of short war, in which

institutional continuity independent of the gang's membership. As such, the persistence of institutionalized gangs is due in part to the cultural beliefs handed down through generations, rather then an expansion in leadership or revenue form drug sales, as criminologists such as
Arana and Manwaring suggest.

protagonists

use...

network

forms

of organization"

(p.

489).

From

a

civil-military,

counterinsurgency outlook the author establishes a typology of gangs that he suggests progress

along a 'generational continuum', from first generation, to second generation, to third generation

status. Sullivan estimates that MS-13 has increased significantly both in its reach and
sophistication, from "turf-based entities, to drug oriented enterprises... to complex organizations

Furthermore, Hume (2007) and Hayden (2005) have also criticized Manwaring's works for lacking sufficient evidence to substantiate his arguments and for basing the proposal
regarding the evolution of MS-13 to "third generation status" on mere assumptions regarding the potential of MS-13 to "take, control, or neutralize political power to guarantee the kind of environment they want" rather then facts (Manwaring, 2007, p. 21). In accordance, Jose Luis

controlling entire housing projects, schools, an blocks, that conduct overt political activity while
actively seeking to infiltrate and co-opt local police and contract security forces" (p. 492). He

attributes this evolution to the information revolution, which enables small groups to quickly

expand their reach (Sullivan, 2006). Due to the transnational reach of such networks, Sullivan
(2006) and Arana (2005) elevate MS-13 to the status of "substantial security threats" (Sullivan,
2006, p. 494).

Rocha (2008) argues that Manwaring's articles are written with particular interests in mind and
grossly exaggerate the evolution and connections between the gang and organized crime
networks (p. 139).

The construction of gangs as hierarchical, efficient criminal organizations with members

Causes of Evolution

serving different positions constitutes in fact a negative reflection of law enforcement bodies.
In explaining the causes of the evolution of MS-13, two theoretical positions prevail. On

However, much research and scholarship of organizational theory contradict such suppositions (Hagedorn, 2008). Addressing the issue of gangs from a sociological perspective, Hagedorn
the one side, some scholars (Arana, 2005; Papachristos, 2005; Sullivan, 2006) highlight socioeconomic changes caused by globalization and immigration as essential factors to the gang's

contends that the notion of the centralized authority of a few principal gang leaders is a myth and
that the organization of transnational gangs such as MS-13 is rather based on loose networks
between different neighbourhoods (Hagedorn, 2008). The development and growing permanency

evolution. For instance, Papachristos (2005) suggest that the proliferation of the MS-13 gang is
due not only to the socio-economic isolation and the increased mobility of gang culture and

of contemporary gangs can be attributed to what Hagedorn (2008) calls 'rationalized myths', i.e.

activity caused by globalization, but was also fuelled by the mid 1990s U.S immigration policy,
through which thousands of MS-13 gang members were deported to their homelands in Central America after committing a crime (Papachristos, 2005, p. 53). Having little or no connection to

ideas that gang members create about their structure and identities in order to inculcate in their
members a belief in the group (p. 11). Rodgers (2007) further consolidates Hagedorn's argument

their 'homeland', many gang members either returned to United States illegally, or joined other

by suggesting that the warns, provide a source of identity for their members and exhibit an
deported gang members and recruited other youth to join MS-13. According to Sullivan (2006),

9

El Salvador has at least 10,000 gang members and approximately 20,000 associates, a significant
proportion of El Salvador's 6.5 million population. As such, globalization and U.S deportations
have facilitated gang members to establish transnational connections throughout numerous states

authorities and thus were denied legal status (Boerman, 2007, DeCesare, 2003). Finding themselves in a context of social and economic insecurity, many of them joined the MS-13 gang as a way of adaptation to a hostile environment (Boerman, 2007). Furthermore, it is deportations that need to be problematized rather than immigration, as the reinsertion of deportees into 'homelands' that are foreign to them is highly problematic. Ziiberg (2004) notes that for

in the Americas (Boerman, 2007; Montaigne, 1999; Papachristos, 2005; Rocha and Rodgers,
2008).

Ziiberg (2007), Hagedorn (2008), and Hayden (2005) add that MS-13 is in fact an

Salvadoran deportees, notions of 'home' and 'abroad' are ambiguous and unstable, having been

American creation formed in the neighbourhoods of Los Angeles by the children of Central
American immigrants after they fled the US-sponsored civil wars in the 1980s. Thus, MS-13 has developed to a transnational level not because of links with larger criminal or terrorist organizations, but rather due to the interventionist U.S style of relations with Central America, which exacerbated violence through military and economic aid during the civil wars, and then established policies of deporting those the U.S forced to move in the first place (Hagedorn, 2008; Hayden, 2005, Ziiberg, 2007). The U.S deportations of Central American gang members back to their homeland appears to be a significant factor in the proliferation of maras in Central America. The link between deportations and the expansion of MS-13 would also partly explain their

rejected from both. Furthermore, Ziiberg (2004) finds certain commonalities between Salvadoran deportees' negotiation of their relationship between home and abroad, and Said's postcolonial analysis of how the relations between the colonizer and the colonized are produced in relation to each other (Said, 1993).
On the other side, Rocha (2006) cautions against treating globalization and immigration

as the sole factors that contributed to the development of transnational gangs. Such an

overemphasis is inappropriate as gangs are not a new phenomenon and actually predate
globalization, a fact which unsettles theories that associate the beginnings of MS-13 with

immigration and globalization (Hagedorn, 2008; Rocha and Rodgers, 2008). Rocha (2006) asserts that a multitude of gangs, such as Tigresa (the Tigress), Angeles Infernales (Infernal
angels), Escorpion (Scorpion), Zope (Vulture), and numerous others have long been a feature of the Central American society, before migration amplified during and after the civil wars. Consequently, no straightforward explanation can elucidate such a complex phenomenon

absence in Nicaragua, which has different migration patterns (Nicaraguan migrants settle mostly
in Costa Rica), higher naturalization rates in the United States, and consequently significantly
fewer deportees (Rocha, 2006).

According to Rocha (2006), the link between immigration flows and the expansion of MS-13 should not be used to criminalize migration. Such simplistic suppositions overlook the

(Hagedorn, 2008). While socio-economic changes associated with globalization, such as increasing global inequalities and exclusion, urbanization, immigration, and corrupt and weak states are evidently relevant to the propagation of MS-13 in Latin America, the increasing
presence of MS-13 in the United States and now Canada, where the states are more efficient,

roots of the problem, which are adaptation problems and xenophobic attitudes towards immigrants in the United States. Many of the MS-13 gang members had arrived in the United
States in the 1980s, at a young age, but were not recognized as refugees by U.S immigration

10

11

complicates simplistic explanations that associate the proliferation of MS-13 with the 'Third
World'. As Rocha (2006) illustrates, the expansion of Mara Salvatrucha is not a direct by

conditions of structural inequality and violence in Central America, including circumstances of
radicalized poverty, high levels of youth unemployment, minimal access to basic social, educational, and other public services, ineffective and corrupt justice systems, and easy access to

product of poverty and exclusion, but has occurred due to the combination of a variety of political and social conditions, including migration, cultural mixing between the U.S and Central America, the availability of arms, labour insecurity, the de-legitimization of the justice apparatus in Central America, and the transnationalization of elites, among others. For example, even though

weapons, Manwaring (2006) maintains his position that the focal point of analysis should be
individual gang members, who are responsible for such violent and criminal acts. A UNICEF (2002) report revealed that since 2002, 83 million Latin American children are living in poverty,

Nicaragua has higher levels of poverty and exclusion then in El Salvador, Guatemala, and
Honduras, MS-13 is absent in the country and Nicaragua's levels of youth violence are lower as
well (Rocha & Rodgers, 2008).

which represents 59 percent of that age group; the rate of poverty for adults between twenty to thirty-four was 44 percent. Thus, Manwaring deliberately minimizes the negative consequences of structural conditions of socio-economic exclusion in which underprivileged Central American
youth grow up in. Furthermore, the author depicts MS-13 gang members as disaffected and holds them responsible for the dramatically increased violence in Central America.

Criminalization of the MS-13 Gang

In accordance to Manwaring's argument, Arana (2005) identifies MS-13 as "the most

The growing level of criminality and violence of the MS-13 gang has become a main
serious challenge to peace since the end of Central America's civil wars" (p. 98). Arana (2005)

concern for numerous academics, governments, and international organizations. This section addresses the three subject matters concerning the criminality of MS-13: the vilification of MS13 gang members, their links with terrorist organizations, and their escalating violence

also highlights the numerous violent crimes of MS-13 and dubs it an "ultraviolent, notorious street gang" (p. 98). Furthermore, the author's portrayal of the Salvadorans deported from the

U.S due to their gang affiliation emphasizes "their outlandish tattoos, their Spanglish, and their
antiauthoritarian attitudes" and implies that their only objective once deported was to re-establish gang connections (Arana, 2005, p. 99). However, Arana (2005) fails to take into consideration that these deportees had no family ties in Central America, were less employable then ever, and

Scapegoating

The USAID 2006 gang assessment asserts that "notorious gangs such as MS-13 and 18th
street" "are international criminal organizations whose criminal activities in the Americas have
damaging effects on national security by increasing domestic crime levels and facilitating drug trafficking" (USAID, 2006, p. 7). Similarly, from a traditional criminology perspective,

were deported without ensuring that local social programs existed to receive and reinsert them into society (Boerman, 2007).
For Papachristos (2005), the MS-13 gang are a dangerous organization that represents a

Manwaring (2006) suggests that the MS-13 gang generates instability and state insecurity and in
turn, should be viewed as a larger national security issue. Despite identifying the perpetuated

worst case scenario of what gangs can become. However, he suggests that the MS-13 is an

12

13

anomaly, and most gangs are no more than petty delinquents.

He also adds that the

Salvador and the USA both need a criminalized alien, a 'contemporary savage' Other" (p. 48).
Furthermore, she contends that the MS-13 gang constitutes the necessary scapegoat to

stigmatization of gang members makes it almost impossible for gang members to successfully reintegrate into society. However, Rodgers (2007) contradicts the sensationalist accounts of

establishing a new social contract with the people of El Salvador, as

numerous scholars and media that link MS-13 to international organized crime, migrant
trafficking, and any other large scale criminal operations. Rather, he asserts that the MS-13 gang
Gang youth has become the repository of fears over and criticisms of the 'liberal excesses' of democracy and anxieties attached to the new political inclusions and
constitutional rights imposed by the Peace Accords (Zilberg, 2007, p. 44).

is mostly involved in survival crime such as petty theft and extortions. Furthermore, most of the violence they assert is actually against rival gangs, as the several prison wars between MS-13 and

Arce, Dominguez, and Cruz (2005) suggest that the vilification of maras in the current

18th street demonstrate (Rodgers, 2007).
scholarly, governmental, and media discourse operates to block critical reflection and to reduce

On the other side, Hagedorn (2008) and Mike Davis (2008) argue against the inhumane
the complexity of the social problem at stake. Instead, the institutionalization of corruption and

representation of gangs as a remote enemy, or as irrational, savage groups of 'damaged' youth
the broad acceptance of impunity and illegality at the state level need to be considered in order to

and instead maintain that transnational gangs such as MS-13 constitute the angry social reaction
contextualize the criminalization of maras. The erosion of state legitimacy and the consequent

to historical inequalities, economic polarization, and free-market capitalism in the age of
loss of faith in the state have established the backdrop for various illicit actions, some of which
globalization.

are highly criminalized, and some of which go unpunished due to the social position of the

Other scholars (Arce, Dominguez, and Cruz, 2005; Hayden, 2005; Roeha, 2006; Zilberg,
person behind them (Rocha, 2006). As Rocha (2006) eloquently suggests, "those processed by

2007) also disagree with the alarmist portrayals of traditional criminologists such as Arana and
the penal system are dangerous to society, unless their social connections prove otherwise" (p.

Manwaring and provide a more sophisticated analysis of the criminality of the MS-13 gang.
164).

Zilberg approaches the gang phenomenon from an anthropological perspective and constructs the
Thereforej an approach that conceptualizes MS-13 as a form of cultural resistance

MS-13 as yet another example of the U.S and El Salvador sharing discourse of illegality. For
generated by structural exclusion and inequality is more relevant. Hagedorn (2005) argues that

Zilberg (2007), the vilification of maras is symbolic of El Salvador's and U.S's efforts to re
institutionalized gangs such as MS-13 should be viewed as social actors reacting to conditions of

establish national sovereignty. The Salvadoran government's stigmatization of gangster deportees,
structural inequality and oppression. These gangs have emerged in order to fill in the vacuum

who were already excluded by the United States, reflects the anxiety over the transnational
created by the retreat of states' social welfare policies. He further proposes that transnational

expansion of MS-13, which fuels the desire for sovereignty of both countries (Zilberg, 2007). As
gangs such as MS-13 are emblematic of "the price we pay for the failure of the modern project",

Zilberg (2007) convincingly suggests, "in the face of their mutual contamination of each other, El
as the vacuum left by the retreat of the state and the consequent loss of faith in modern

14

15

institutions have generated ideal conditions for the development of gangs (Hagedorn, 2005, p. 164). Rather then prescribing to the tendency of other scholars to vilify delinquent youth, Hagedorn humanizes gang members by emphasizing their values of selflessness and solidarity,

terrorist networks" (p. 38). Similarly, it remains unclear why Arana (2005) continues to speculate
on such a link after she states that "Central American officials quickly denied that such a meeting

had taken place" (p. 102). Furthermore, Hume (2007) challenges the linking of the MS-13 gang with global terrorism by pointing out that despite the fact that claims of a meeting between MS13 and al Qaeda operatives have been later denied, such allegations persist and rely on the

and the potential of channelling such qualities into broader social movements rather than into
violence and self-destruction.

creation of a particular image of gangs, rather then being based on actual evidence. Critical of the Terrorism and the MS-13 Gang
Pentagon definition of 'terror' for being all-encompassing and for establishing little distinction

In the post 9/11 context, the fixation with the terrorist threat has led to accusations of
between numerous dissimilar criminal actors, Hume (2007) cautions that before readily accepting

links between al Qaeda operatives and the MS-13 gang. In 2005, Oscar Alvarez, Honduras'

such a construction of the MS-13 gang, closer attention is needed to the way in which the framing
of terrorist threats have been implemented in the Central American discourse on security in order to "reposition the 'seams' between police and military missions" (p. 743).

security minister started rumours of such connections by claiming that MS-13 leaders met in
Honduras with a key al Qaeda leader in order to arrange the smuggling of immigrants into the

United States (Hume, 2007; Zilberg 2007). While asserting that the link of gangs with terrorist organizations is generally overestimated, Papachristos (2005) suggests that MS-13 is one of the few gangs that do hi fact have the transnational reach to commit terrorist acts. Numerous other scholars, including Arana (2005), Breve (2007), Johnson and Muhlhausen (2005), Manwaring (2005,2006,2007), and Sullivan (2006) are also directing attention to a possible link between the MS-13 gang and terrorist organizations. For instance, Manwaring (2006) perceives the MS-13 gang as a "triple threat" to state sovereignty, as it undermines the ability of the state to perform its security and public service functions; destabilizes the exercise of state authority and reinstates it
with their own; and by taking control of neighbourhood territory, the gang has the potential of

Similarly, Hayden (2005) suggests that allegations of a possible link of the MS-13 gang

with terrorist organizations are unsubstantiated, as it is based on unconfirmed sightings and

rumours, but no actual evidence of such meetings. Moreover, Hagedorn's (2005) study further
challenges Manwaring's notion of gangs as a terrorist threat and supports Hume's dissatisfaction with the linkage of MS-13 with global terrorism. The author suggests that such a standpoint, supported by the U.S Justice Department's 'war on terror', is narrow and serves to polarize perspectives and studies on gangs (Hagedorn, 2005). Evidently, the construction of MS-13 gang members as a terrorist threat or as "the new urban insurgency" follows a one-dimensional logic
that separates the world into 'good' and 'evil' and serves to distract from the root causes such as

transforming into an authoritative body that resembles state authority (p. 520).
social exclusion and inequality that motivate youth to join gangs. As Rodgers (2007) asserts

Despite the fact that such suppositions are asserted with certainty, they are based on mere
speculations and have no substantial base. For instance, in spite of their accusatory statements,

"gangs have thus become convenient scapegoats on which to blame the isthmus' problems and through which those in power attempt to maintain a particular status quo" (p. 185).

Johnson and Muhlhausen (2005) mention that "no hard evidence links them (MS-13) with

16

17

Consequently, by generalizing transnational gangs as an international terrorist conspiracy
and by stigmatizing them as permanently violent and hostile, many criminologists exclude the possibility of including marginalized youth into social movements as a possibility to reach out to
them and overcome their violent tendencies (Hagedorn, 2008).

While identifying some of the conditions that perpetuate violence, Manwaring (2006) essentializes gang members as intrinsically violent, accentuating that "it is not poverty, injustice, or misery that willfully kill, maim, and destroy. It is individual men and women--and, sometimes, boys and girls--who are prepared to implement all kinds of horrible and coercive

"intimidations" and "instabilities" in their search for status and well-being" (p. 515).
Violence and Brutality However, Sanchez (2006) disagrees with such a dehumanizing portrayal of youth, and

Gang violence has become the main focus of governments, international organizations,
argues that gang violence constitutes a strategy used as a basic tool for survival, as a way of

and academics, who have reported an upsurge of violence, which is attributed mainly to gangs.
adapting to conditions of structural inequality and deprivation. As such, Sanchez (2006) proposes

Hume (2007) for instance notes that the level of violence in El Salvador is higher now then
an alternative model of conceptualizing violence: Rather than viewing violence as a personal

during the 12 years of civil war. Similarly, Arana (2005) and Sullivan (2006) highlight the
deviation from societal norms, it is more appropriate to consider it a product of structural

increased brutality of MS-13 crimes, providing as an example the 2004 attack in Honduras, when
inequalities, a social phenomenon in which multiple actors resort to the use of violence under MS-13 opened fire in a bus, choosing their victims at random and killing 28 passengers.
similar social circumstances and in mutually reinforcing ways, not as isolated individuals (p.

Additionally, Boerman (2007) draws attention to the increased viciousness of MS-13 gang
181).

members, who left bodies of decapitated victims in the streets with notes warning governments to Evidently, the analysis of the violence oimaras cannot be conducted in a socio-political

cease persecution of gang members. While Arana makes a brief mention that this brutal attack
vacuum, but rather needs to consider the legacy of authoritarianism in El Salvador. Given that

was a reaction to the government's repressive anti-gang measures, Sullivan attributes the attack
young people in El Salvador have been exposed to high levels of social, economic, political, and to the "cross-fertilization of criminal actors that results from internationalization" (p. 494).
personal violence, they've learned to survive by reproducing the cycle of violence (Hume, 2007).

lll i

While several studies agree that the MS-13 gang and its rival 18th street gang have
become increasingly violent, Rocha (2006) and Hume (2007) attribute this shift towards violence

At the risk of essentializing the history of Salvadoran people as intrinsically violent, Hume (2007)
argues that since youth in El Salvador have been socialized into a violent environment, violence

on a major scale to the unregulated availability of fire arms. Additionally, the involvement of
has become normalized "both as a form of political interaction and as an expression of identity"

MS-13 gang members in the drug trade in Central America, which has become the transit route
(p. 742).

for 80% of the total traffic of cocaine between the Andean countries and North America, is an

However, Rocha (2006) notes that "youth violence is neither new, nor has it reached its important contributor to the increasingly violent character of MS-13 gang members (Rodgers,
peak" (p. 144). Instead, youth violence was much more pervasive during the civil wars in the
2007).

18

19

1970s and 1980s, when the military service recruited thousands of young people. Nonetheless, such violence was not conceptualized as 'criminal', as it was part of an institutional setting and had an ideological basis. Thus, the criminalization of gang violence can be attributed the fact that

While Central American youth constitute an easy target for criminalization, it is important

to problematize theories that regard gang violence as greater or more threatening. Rocha (2006)
suggests that such proclamations stem from a middle-class discourse for which violence is legitimate if it operates under certain circumstances and which "sees the epoch of peace as a

it is taking place outside of institutionalized or legitimate channels;

and also to the "de-

ideologization" of youth violence, as it is no longer influenced by political ideologies or conflicts, but is rather characterized by common crime, such as robbery, assaults, street fights, etc. (Rocha,
2006; Hagedorn, 2008). As such, Rodgers (2007) notes that contemporary violence in Central
America is mainly criminal rather then political in nature.

return to normality, the rule of law, where there are precise and unquestionable norms about which behaviors can be qualified as acceptable and which as deviant" (p. 145). However, such a
discourse underestimates the historical continuity and impact of Central American civil wars and view maras as "a transgression of the standards that constitute the re-established normality" (p.
145).

While the media representation of gangs, with their focus on sensationalizing the criminal
deeds and violence of MS-13 has been successful in fuelling the public perception of gangs as

Responses to the MS-13 Gang

ruthless, violent criminals, it is important to shift the focal point to the conditions from which
such gangs originate (Rocha, 2006). Rather than analyzing gang violence in a contextual vacuum,

Most scholars (Arana, 2005; Breve, 2007; Boerman, 2007; Hayden, 2005; Hagedorn,

2005, 2008; DeCesare, 1998, 2003; Papachristos, 2005; Rocha & Rodgers, 2008) maintain that the current anti-gang discursive practice has been largely ineffective. Consequently, traditional
criminologists and government authorities suggest that more repressive measures are necessary in

McDonald (2003) effectively frames the changes in the character and violence exerted by gangs
within a shifting context from industrial capitalism to network capitalism. As McDonald argues,
violence in the world of marginal young people is much more about securing self-esteem in a social world that makes increasingly powerful demands for it, while unequally distributing the resources necessary to achieve it. In this context, the demand for self-esteem sustains a strategy that seeks esteem from the other, and through this, one can achieve esteem in one's own
eyes (p. 71).

order to achieve positive change and to prevent the criminal activities of the MS-13 gang. For example, Arana (2005) attributes the ineffectiveness of anti-gang strategies to Central American

governments, who are accused of lacking political will, funding, and timing in addressing this issue. Arana's portrayal of MS-13 is rather alarmist, as she suggests that with every day that
governments delay the implementation of harsher anti-gang policies, this gang will grow stronger and the danger it poses will spread in more regions (Arana, 2005). The author proposes that the

By situating the present gang violence within a context framed by network capitalism and
increased uncertainty, McDonald (2003) makes a strong case in arguing that contemporary gang

violence constitutes a strategy of securing self-esteem and a sense of belonging in a world that increasingly demands self-identity while simultaneously undermining it through processes of
social exclusion.

U.S should intervene and take charge, as the most effective anti-gang approach comes from Los Angeles. While it is pertinent that Central American states are corrupt and have not dealt with the

issue of gangs effectively, to point out their ineptness in this matter for the purpose ofjustifying

20

21

an interventionist style of international relations is not only deceitful as U.S anti-gang measures

and human security, an unprecedented expansion of prisons and incarcerations of racialized,
alienated youth has transpired. Consequently, Hagedorn (2005) suggests that the impact of the

have also been inappropriate and ineffective, but it also signifies the continuation of imperialist
practices in which the 'civilized' West is considered the sole arbiter and claims authority over

increasingly punitive anti-gang discourse is significant and is representative of a new form of social control and institutionalized slavery.
For Zilberg (2007), harsh anti-gang responses in El Salvador are representative of a rejection of the constitutional and institutional reforms enacted after the 1992 Salvadoran Peace Accords. Such responses reject 'softer' laws emphasizing the protection of human rights as only appropriate for those countries with a history and culture of democracy, not for those just emerging into democracy, such as El Salvador. Adding to Zilberg's argument, Hume (2007) suggests that repressive responses to the gang problem in El Salvador signal the return of authoritarianism in Latin America. Such legislations have had the negative impact of

'backwards' underdeveloped countries. Not only does Arana (2005) justify the interventionist
style of U.S international relations by regarding Central American countries as "tiny", "fragile",

and incapable of addressing this challenge independently; but she also emphasizes that

suppression is not sufficient to curb gang activity. Thus, she advocates for the invigilation of
gang members after apprehension as a necessary measure in order to curb gang activity. In a similar fashion, Manwaring (2006) suggests that anti-gang policies have not had any

considerable

impact

on

preventing the proliferation

of MS-13.

However,

instead

of

acknowledging the faulty logic of this approach, the author attributes the ineffectiveness of such
measures to the fact that suppressive responses were not strong enough (Manwaring, 2006). Furthermore, he validates the lack of attention and funding for preventive programs by contending that a 'get tougher' approach and more law enforcement are the only ways to address the MS-13 gang problem. In his more recent article, Manwaring (2007) also raises accusations

undermining democratic governance not only at the national level, but in the international arena
as well.

Zilberg (2007) adds that El Salvador's appropriation of U.S 'zero tolerance' and anti-

terrorist laws signifies not Only the transnational mimesis and the sharing of discourses of criminality between the two countries, but also the historical continuity and structure underlying the U.S- El Salvador ongoing relations. While the previous collaboration between the U.S and El Salvador was motivated by "fantasies about communists, their contemporary shared fantasies are triggered by the menace of criminals and terrorists" (Zilberg, 2007, p. 44). Whereas suppressive

t11

ll'

that the Central American response to the MS-13 gang has been too 'soft' and condemns Central
American governments for not raising the threat posed by gangs to the level of national security.

He suggests that weak anti-gang approaches have actually had the effect of facilitating the rise of
the MS-13 gang and the potential threat it currently poses. However, Hagedorn's (2005) study contradicts Manwaring and Arana's assertions

responses such as the Mano Dura and the 'zero tolerance' legislations are based on a state of
exception, such forms of state violence are "the most corrupt part of democracy precisely because

regarding the impact of repressive anti-gang approach. Hagedorn (2005) suggests that such a punitive strategy targets racialized, underprivileged youth and operates to legitimize the global re-division of wealth in the wake of neoliberal globalization. Due to the politicization of crime

it places violence in a ghostly space, a space that is hidden, where the law becomes its own
transgression" (Zilberg, 2007, p. 47).

22

23

Furthermore, Boerman (2007) adds that the discourse on MS-13 not only has the negative
impact of undercutting democratic governance, but it also operates to exacerbate the already

resolve the essential conditions that generate gangs and only serve to radicalize the MS-13 gang

and precipitate a vicious cycle of violence. A starting point for developing a more suitable
framework of dealing with the gang phenomenon might be Nicaragua's response to gangs. According to Rocha (2006), the lower level of gang violence in Nicaragua could be attributed at least in part to the non-criminalizing approach of the police, which has contributed to attenuating a vicious cycle of violence.

existing marginalization of youth. Under this rhetoric, youth have become the central security
threat in the Americas, and have consequently become increasingly criminalized. Moreover, Boerman's study suggests that the emphasis on repression and law enforcement has been enacted

by national and international bodies to the extent that prevention and reintegration into society
has become nearly impossible and no assistance is provided for those who intend to leave this

Gaps

lifestyle behind (Boerman, 2007). Indeed, the increasingly repressive responses to the MS-13
gang have only aggravated the problem, as they caused gang members to become more clandestine, savvy, and radical in their actions.

However, in spite of the emergence of richer and more critical research on gangs, the

notion of agency of MS-13 gang members, which is the ideas of possibility, change, and
resistance are largely overlooked in the current research on gangs. As Shahjan (2005) eloquently

While the more violent behaviour of MS-13 gang members has been relentlessly

;

suggests "agency is not just about resistance, but the will to change and hope" (p. 229). Only a few scholars (e.g. Hagedorn, 2005, 2007, 2008; McDonald, 2003; Zilberg, 2004, 2007) go

condemned, less consideration has been accorded to the way in which responses such as the
Mano Dura legislation in Central America and the "zero tolerance" policy in the United States
has in fact intensified the violence of MS-13. Not only have the 'zero tolerance' or Mano Dura

|
j

beyond the conceptualization of gangs as criminal organizations of disaffected youth to recognize the gang phenomenon as a form of cultural resistance against socio-economic marginalization.
Media representations of the MS-13 gang further consolidate the image of gangs as an

(Hard Hand) repressive policies been ineffective, but have also had the effect of promoting

' I

violent methods to resolve conflict. In addition, such hyper-punitive legislations have generated
horrendous responses from MS-13, such as leaving decapitated corpses in the streets with notes

|

irremediable evil that needs to be eliminated with no regard to human rights. A closer analysis of
such media representations will reveal the biases and inaccuracy of such constructions and will

warning governments to cease persecution of gang members (Boerman, 2007; Rocha, 2007). Evidently, a more comprehensive strategy that focuses on reducing global inequalities needs to
be adopted by Central American and U.S governments for dealing with gang-related crime and violence. As Papachristos (2005) argues, even though MS-13 is considered by many as one of the

i j
\ j

contribute to constructing a more holistic conceptualization of the MS-13 gang, one that recognizes that gangs are not static, that they change through time, and that the prospect of gang members creating possibilities for themselves and becoming subjects of change constitutes a real possibility. Furthermore, by analyzing the depiction of the MS-13 gang in the media, my research

largest threats to national security in the Americas, such institutionalized gangs constitute not just
a criminal justice problem, but a social problem as well. Thus, repressive measures cannot

j
[

I

will problematize the socially constructed category of 'gangs'. By focusing on the cultural

24

25

dimension of this gang, this research project attempts to reveal its different nuances and meanings and to consolidate the emerging critical gang studies founded by scholars such as Hagedorn, who see beyond the stereotypes of gangs as groups of irrational youth involved in lucrative drug mafias. The importance of understanding the social construction of gangs in media representations lies in the fact that such depictions help establish and maintain the status quo in society, the boundaries between good and bad, self and the other (Phillips, 1997). As Phillips
(1997) eloquently suggests,

the diversity of environments in which the Mara Salvatrucha has spread, by taking into
consideration how the context of multiculturalism in Canada, the exodus of Central American

refugees to the American "melting pot", and the legacy of authoritarianism and colonialism in El

Salvador has influenced the social construction of maras. This research aims to identify the similarities and/ or differences of the social constructions of the gang in these different contexts in order to determine whether a pattern of representation exists and, more specifically, whether a
process of'Othering'is present, and for what purposes.

We need criminals because they are not us. Crimes are transgressive acts, committed not by normal people but by those We define as outside the norm. It would appear that the systematic reaffirmation of this distinction is fundamental to our society. Our ability to distinguish right from wrong enables us, as responsible citizens, to identify, prosecute, and punish outlaws- individuals who flaunt social values (p 11).

Theoretical Framework

The media representation of MS-13 gang members will be scrutinized by employing the
postcolonial theoretical framework, which suggests that colonialism does not cease with the mere

Additionally, the growing presence of MS-13 gang members in Canada has been largely

fact of political independence and continues in a neo-colonial mode in many societies (Ashcroft, Griffiths, Tiffin, 1997). Thus, all post-colonial societies continue to be subject to overt or subtle forms of neo-colonial domination. This theory also maintains that Western knowledge production
of the colonized has the purpose of consolidating colonial hegemony, portrays the West as

ignored by scholars. While it constitutes a new phenomenon and their numbers are still insignificant in Canada, I suggest that the historical and contextual background of MS-13 indicates that it is not far-fetched to assume that the gang may slowly start to establish a solid
foundation in this region as well. Evidently, the appearance of MS-13 in the Canadian context

superior to the colonized 'Other', and is a sign of imperial power (Shahjahan, 2005). As such,
knowledge production constitutes a site of contention between the interests of the West and those of the 'Other', as the West's instruments of knowledge production are also instruments for

I

needs to be addressed from its inception. Thus, my study aims to help fill in the gap in research on the transnational challenge posed by MS-13 in the Canadian context and to understand the
way in such phenomenon is mediated by discursive practices, mainstream ideology, and power
relations in this region.

legitimizing various colonial practices. As Ashcroft et al., (1997) suggest,
Because language is a discourse of power, in that it provides the terms and the structures

by which individuals have a world, a method by which the 'real' is determined, notions of

Furthermore, the transnational character of the MS-13 gang indicates that a wider-angle lens is needed in the examination of this phenomenon. My research project will satisfy this

universality can, like the language which suggests them, become imperialistic (p. 55).

requirement, as I will integrate, compare, and contrast the current Canadian, U.S, and Salvadoran media representation of MS-13. In addition, this research project will attempt to be responsive to

Thus, language can be employed as an imperialistic mechanism of control to promote certain perspectives and suppress others. Postcolonial writers also point out that with the globalization of

26

27

western knowledge, the West's view of itself as the center, the sole arbiter and source of
legitimate and civilized knowledge is constantly reiterated (Shahjahan, 2005).

media. Rather than emphasizing the violent and criminal acts inflicted by MS-13 gang members,
a theme that has been covered thoroughly, I will scrutinize the media representation of this gang

Postcolonial theorist Edward Said (1979) suggests that Western knowledge production ofthe 'Other' portrays the West as superior to the 'Other', and is ethnocentric, racist, manipulative, and

in order to determine its agenda, its intended and unintended effects.

Conclusions

ideologically embedded. He stresses that such colonial representations are not accounts of

distinctively different people and societies, but rather constitute a mirroring reflection of
European fears and desires under the guise of 'expert' or 'objective' knowledge. For Said (1979),
the concept of Orientalism constitutes a "Western style for dominating, restructuring, and having authority over the Orient" (p. 3). The author introduces the concept ofpositional superiority,

This review indicates that research on the MS-13 gang has developed two different

standpoints.

On the

one extreme,

traditional

criminologists and representatives

of law

enforcement and national security adopt a military, counterinsurgency theoretical standpoint to construct transnational gangs as a major threat to state security and stability and describe gang members as irrevocably immoral, wicked and violent. On the other end, critical criminologists,
anthropologists, and non-profit organizations such as Homies Unidos view gang members as "a symptom, a radicalized expression of contemporary unease, who find 'criminality' to be an ideal

which enables the Westerner to maintain the upper hand in the relations with the 'Other'. Additionally, Said (1979) cautions against misrepresentations and marginalization in the Western
knowledge production.

Moreover, Homi Bhabha (1983) describes colonial discourse as a rhetoric with the purpose of
constructing the colonized as degenerate and inferior by virtue of racial origin, in order to legitimize domination and establish a hegemonic style of relations. Furthermore, he asserts that

vehicle given the lack or inadequacy of languages to be expressed" (Rocha and Rodgers, 2008, p.
140). Regarding the evolution of the MS-13 gang, there is a general agreement among scholars from different disciplines and viewpoints that increasing global inequalities, exclusion,

filil

the colonial discourse is not unidirectional, but rather establishes both a measure of imitation and
a mode of authority, thus controlling the imaginations of the colonized (Ashcroft et al., 1997).

deportations, and globalization have had a decisive impact on the proliferation of the MS-13 gang. On the other side, scholars' findings regarding the gang's level of organization and
transnational reach is surrounded by much disagreement. While Arana (2005), Sullivan (2006),

For Bhabha (1983), it is this ambivalence that ensures the persistency of the colonial discourse in changing contexts. This concept will be integrated in the analysis of the Salvadoran media
representation of MS-13, which mimics the U.S and Canadian portrayal of gang-affiliated youth
and constructs them as a principal security threat within the regional discourse.

Manwaring (2005, 2006, 2007), and official reports such as the USAID 2006 Gang Assessment and Ribando's (2007) "Gangs in Central America" report argue that the MS-13 is highly organized and constitutes a significant international threat, academics critical of traditional

Thus, through the theoretical lens of postcolonialism, I intend to reveal potential misrepresentations and marginalization in the production of knowledge of MS-13 through the

criminology approach to gangs contend that the organizational sophistication and transnational
reach of Mara Salvatrucha are overestimated.

28

29

Additionally, the theme of the criminality and illegality of the MS-13 gang is also

the grounds that they are shaped through federal funding; far from fulfilling standards of being scrupulous and empirical; tangled up in myths; and are heavily influenced by the priorities and
prejudices of law enforcement bodies.

surrounded by much controversy. While most researchers agree that the level and nature of criminal and violent activities has changed with the historical, social, and political context, there

is a tendency of most scholars, law enforcement bodies, and the media to stigmatize and limit
gangs to criminal groups. Such an unbalanced focus overlooks the complexity of gangs, their
history, cultural aspect, and changing forms.

Regarding the appropriate solution to addressing the gang problem, there seems to be a

general agreement between scholars that current approaches have been largely ineffective.
However, there is substantial disagreement as to the reason behind the incapacity of such responses to address the problem and to what combination of preventive and suppressive
measures must be implemented to curb gang activities.

As this literature review indicates, the current research on gangs has become more critical

and developed in different disciplines, outside of the criminal justice domain. While traditional
approaches to gang research, such as the theories of Arana (2005), Breve (2007), Manwaring
(2005, 2006, 2007), and Sullivan (2006) remain highly influential in the academic and policymaking spheres, a more critical school of thought has emerged in different disciplines. By

ll

adopting sociological (e.g. DeCesare, 1998, 2003; Hagedorn, 2005, 2007, 2008, Hayden, 2005),
anthropological (e.g. Zilberg, 2004, 2007; Arce et. al., 2005; Rodgers, 2007), political economy

(e.g. Hume, 2007; Rocha, 2006), and liberation theology theoretical frameworks (e.g. Barrios, 2003) such scholars criticize traditional approaches to gang research for being rooted in Victorian
values, ignoring dramatic structural changes in urban life, and constituting "a fundamentally moralistic critique of poor people's supposed predisposition to crime and disorder" (Hagedorn,
2008, p. xii). Thus, these academics condemn traditional criminological approaches to gangs on

30

31

Chapter 3: RESEARCH DESIGN Research Purpose

expose its powerful impact in order to encourage the development of more accurate and effective
discursive and institutional approaches to the gang problem.

The purpose of this research is to understand the way in which the transnational challenge posed by the MS-13 gang is constructed by mainstream media in Canada, the United States, and
El Salvador. The media representation of the MS-13 should not be undermined and is important
General Objective

This study seeks to explore the social construction youth in the media, as related to the MS-13 gang in Canada, the United Sates, and El Salvador.

for several reasons. Firstly, research on the vilification of MS-13 gang members in public
discourses exposes the duplicity of governments in establishing simplistic and increasingly

Specific Objectives

incompatible dichotomies between legal and illegal, formal and informal, legitimate and criminal, in a time when the shift towards neoliberalism has blurred such boundaries (Sanchez, 2006).
Secondly, the criminalization of MS-13 gang members operates to further marginalize and
1. To explore whether a pattern of construing a criminal 'Other' exists in the selected media.

2.
3.

To determine whether racism and xenophobia are reinforced in the media.
To reveal whether misrepresentations of the MS-13 gang and their purpose and

criminalize underprivileged urban youth, a segment of the populace already riddled by high

levels of socio-economic exclusion (Boerman, 2007). Under this rhetoric, Latino youth growing
up in conditions of radicalized poverty in El Salvador and in poor neighbourhoods in the United States and Canada are managed as a criminal risk instead of being provided with social services

implication are taking place in media.

Theoretical Framework

This study will utilize Said's concept of representation of the 'Other', which asserts that
knowledge production of the 'Other' has the purpose of consolidating colonial hegemony and that ideas, cultures, and histories cannot be studied without considering their configuration of power. For instance, Said (1979) points out that the relationship between the Orient and the

to recuperate from social misery (Rios, 2008). Such responses to the challenge posed by the MS13 gang are powerful, as they create a climate in which underprivileged youth are deemed
permanent criminals, and consequently result in intensified forms of social exclusion,
marginalization, and criminalization.

fl

Occident is one of unequal power relations, which has transpired in the West's discourse of the Orient. Similarly, representations of the Central American gang MS-13 operate to perpetuate

Finally, by focusing on the close relationship between power and representation, and by taking into consideration that power relations cannot be consolidated without the production and

hegemony through the vilification of MS-13 gang members and thus, to normalize the image of
the deviant 'Other'. By scrutinizing Europe's representation of the Orient during the post-

functioning of a discourse, this study aims to reverse the focus away from individual gang
members and towards the accountability of discursive practices in contributing to this problem. As such, this study aims to reveal that representation can be a form of violence in itself and to

Enlightenment period, namely "Orientalism", Said (1979) reveals the West's superior, executive
attitude in the creation of doctrines and thesis about the Orient and its people. Said also cautions
against misrepresentations and marginalization in the Western knowledge production. By using

32

33

Said's approach to postcolonial theory, I will scrutinize the media discourse on MS-13 to identify
questionable arguments, possible omissions, and unfounded statements about the gang. In addition, I will utilize the concept of positional superiority, which constitutes the

Furthermore, Bhabha's (1985) concept of colonial hybridity shows that colonial power is

not fixed but rather circulates, and can be appropriated by the colonized through the mimicry of
discriminatory identities. As Bhabha (1985) eloquently suggests, colonial hybridity

strategy which colonial discourse depends on, as it maintains the upper hand of the colonizer
(Said, 1979). For instance, the discourse of Orientalism was dependant on the unchallenged
centrality of a sovereign and hegemonic West, through the standpoint of which the Orient was

unsettles the mimetic or narcissistic demands of colonial power but reimplicates its identifications in strategies of subversions that turn the gaze of the discriminated back upon the eye of power. For the colonial hybrid is the articulation of the ambivalent space where the rite of power is enacted on the site of desire, making its objects at once
disciplinary and disseminatory (p. 154).

examined (Said, 1979). Said's concept of positional superiority will be integrated to demonstrate

The concept of colonial hybridity will be integrated in the analysis of the Salvadoran
media discourse on MS-13 in order to reveal how is mirroring and subverting its Northern

the way in which the Canadian and U.S media's support of repressive anti-gang policies enables
the West to maintain the upper hand and legitimize an interventionist style of international

neighbours by adopting the construction of MS-13 gang members as a principal security threat within the regional discourse and how the MS-13 epitomize this concept by utilizing violence and
crime as a mechanism of claiming authority.

relations and forms of neo-colonial domination under the disguise of fighting crime and terrorism.
Bhabha (1983) employs the notion of colonial stereotype to assert that stereotype, more

then constituting a false depiction which then becomes the basis for discriminatory practice, it is
Methodology

a much more ambivalent practice which involves " a splitting of 'official' and phantasmatic
knowledges to construct the positionalities and oppositionalities of racist discourse" (Bhbabha, 1983, p. 34). This study will also utilize Bhabha's (1983) interpretation of stereotype in terms of fetishism, which proposes that fetishism circulates in the colonial discourse and shifts between the recognition of cultural and racial difference and its rejection, "by affixing the unfamiliar to something established, in a form that is repetitious and vacillates between delight and fear" (p.
26). According to Bhabha (1983), the fetish allows in an identity which is based on both mastery
Data

I utilized newspaper articles and TV news clips from regional media in the United States,

!

(III

Canada, and El Salvador. I employed one broadcast from Canada, one from the United States,
and one broadcast and a newspaper article from El Salvador. While one media broadcast was to

be originally selected from each of the previously mentioned regions, the lack of accessibility to
online Salvadoran news broadcasts compelled me to select a short broadcast and a newspaper article instead.
This study ensured that the newscasts and the newspaper article are of comparable

and pleasure and on anxiety and defence, "for it is a form of multiple and contradictory belief in
its recognition of difference and disavowal of it" (p. 27). The notion of the colonial stereotype will be applied to analyse the typecasting of MS-13 gang members in media discourse and the
way in which their irreversible difference is construed.

lengths. I only selected media reports publicized within the past six years. Samples were selected
only from mainstream media sources, as the analysis seeks to uncover the ways in which

dominant forces mediate the representation of the MS-13 gang through mainstream media. The
34

35

selected data was chosen from popular news channels and newspapers with a large viewership in order to make certain that the programs are representative of a large segment of the state's

silences, or sudden changes in style that may indicate conflict between different discourses
(Fairdough, 1989).

population, and thus to ensure the trustworthiness of this study. Finally, the study only selected media reports publicized in the past six years as my analysis seeks to generate findings relevant
to the current socio-political context in the Americas. As well, this time limit was imposed with

Analysis
The Canadian, U.S, and Salvadoran media representation of youth as related to MS-13 gang activity were analyzed and compared by using Fairclough's critical discourse analysis

the purpose of addressing the discourse of MS-13 in the aftermath of September 11, when the
concern of security has come to the forefront of the political agenda of the United States, Canada,
and El Salvador, to a certain extent.

method (CDA). This study employed the methodological segment of Fairclough's CDA model and its three methodological steps, namely: description, interpretation and explanation. Linguistic
properties of texts are described (text analysis), the relationship between the discursive practice and the texts is interpreted, and the relationship between discursive practice and social practice is explained (Fairclough, 1995a). In describing the language, this study focused on the vocabulary used, the grammatical features, and textual structures of the selected media (Fairclough, 1989). The focal point when interpreting the data was on the intertextuality and presuppositions present

Using the above mentioned parameters, the following data were selected by the study: from Canada, I utilized a broadcast from Global National News channel, titled "MS-13 Setting Up in Canada", dated May 2007; from the United States, a newscast from the Fox News channel

was picked, entitled "Gangs with Terror Ties", dated June 25th, 2005; finally, I selected the video
titled "El Trece en la Lista de los Mas Buscados" ("El Trece on the Most Wanted List"), dated
February 10,2009 and the article called "Presidente Flores pide a diputados aprobar Ley

in the media, the interpretations the media producers are giving to the events, and the discourse types they draw upon (Fairclough, 1989). Finally, the third methodological step contributed to explain what power relations help shape the discourse on youth as related to the MS-13 gang, and whether this discourse contributes to sustaining or challenging existing power relations
(Fairclough, 1989).

Antimaras" ("President Flores Asks parliament Members to Approve the Anti-gang Law"),
dated August 28,2003, both from the online newspaper Diario Co Latino.
Data Collection

The selected TV broadcasts from Canada and the United States were downloaded from
YouTube and the Salvadoran newscast and chosen newspaper articles were collected from the newspapers' online archives onto my computer. I watched and read the chosen TV broadcasts

The questions that I explored when analyzing the data are the following:
1. How are MS-13 gang members represented?

2.
3.

What themes re-occur when reporting on MS-13 gang activity?
Is the image of the criminal'Other'reinforced? How?

and newspaper articles repeatedly in order to identify themes. When an understanding of a theme
developed, I went back to the material and look for more examples in order to consolidate the

4.

Which discourse type do the visual and print media draw from?

5.

What other choices could have been made from among the options available in the
discourse types which the media producers draw upon?

theme. In the process of identifying themes, I paid attention to the type of language used, images,

36

37

Findings Presentation

"machetes are their favourite weapon"

Research findings were presented thematically. The themes that will be analysed are the

Furthermore, the 3 minute clip contains several significant references to the youthfulness of both gang members and their victims. First, Jim Brown, a retired RCMP officer mentions that in the 2004 bus attack in Honduras, MS-13 gang members "hacked the women and children up with machetes". Secondly, when interviewing Six, an MS-13 gang member of the Toronto chapter, the speaker mentions that "he's not much older then his monitor". Additionally, the reporter states that "kids as young as 11 and 12 are being recruited from the streets and in our schools. Additionally, the newscast mystifies and sensationalizes the MS-13 gang through the

vilification of MS-13 gang-affiliated youth, the evolution of the MS-13 gang, the criminalization
of migration, and responses to the MS-13 gang.

Chapter 4: FINDINGS

Note: The emphasis is mine in all of the following quotations.
MS-13 Violence, Vilification and Terrorism

The Global National newscast words the practices of the MS-13 gang from the perspective of those who oppose them. Vocabulary such as "brutal", "criminal", "bad", "ruthless", and "violent"
are utilized to construct MS-13 gang members as irremediably evil.

superlative "the most violent gang in North America" and statements such as: "They are the brutal, criminal gang other gangs fear" "They earned their reputation through blood and violence" and "(MS-13) uses a blend of street gang justice with Mafia like organization" The implication that other gangs, assumed to be violent and criminal by character, actually fear
MS-13 elevates its status to ultra-violent.

"They are the brutal criminal gang other gangs fear"

"MS-13, the most violent gang in North America" "They don't think they're bad people, they know they're bad" "its (MS-13's) ruthless sophistication"

Depictions of Hispanic, heavily tattooed young men are prominent throughout the newscast. Also, images and videos of police officers arresting and handcuffing gang members are frequent,

Furthermore, the producers' interpretation of the reported event is constructed as factual reality. The following authenticity claims with regard to MS-13 illustrate this fact:
"They are the brutal, criminal gang other gangs fear"

reinforcing the image of MS-13 gang members as hardened criminals. The verbs "fear",
"attacked", "shot", "killed", and "hacked" are mentioned consistently throughout the production. The violent character of MS-13 gang members is further reinforced by emphasizing their usage

"They earned their reputation through blood and violence" "They're here (Canada) and they're serious" "the most violent gang in North America"
"MS-13 is successful"

of machetes as their favourite weapon, which implies not only that they are extremely violent, but also that killing constitutes a sort of hobby or casual play for them, for which they pick a
'favourite' weapon.

However, certain inconsistencies with regards to the vilified character of MS-13 gang

members are also evident in the text. For instance, on the one side, the presenter constructs a solid image of MS-13 gang members as violent criminals through adjectives such as "brutal",

"They are the brutal, criminal gang other gangs fear"

"criminal", "bad", "ruthless" and verbs such as "fear", "attacked", "shot", "killed", and "hacked",
among others. On the other side, when Interviewed, Father Astudillo constructs gang members as

"they attacked a school bus" "they shot and killed 27 people and they hacked the women and children up with machetes"

38

39

victims, stating that "If you have a child, if you have a youth crying in the corner of any street, he or she will be the first victim". While this statement may also construct that image of MS-13

Moreover, this broadcast includes extensive references to MS-13 gang members' links with terrorism.This connection is conveyed through wording such as "fund terrorism and narcoterrorism", "extreme violence", "national security threat", "military background", "national
security concerns", "weapons proliferators", "transnational threats", "threat to our borders",

gang members as predators, it also humanizes them, as it points out to the vulnerability of
adolescents that associate with gangs.

In addition, the issue of agency is significant in this representation. For instance, the speaker states that "MS-13 members are in our jails". According to Fairclough (1989), this is an event

"threat to our internal security", and "may have already begun working with international
terrorists".

sentence. Instead of wording this idea as and action sentence (e.g. "Corrections Canada officials
have arrested MS-13 members"), the broadcast's producers choose to conceal the agency of law

The relation of Mara Salvatrucha with terrorist organizations is further reinforced by the newscast's title, "Gangs with Terror Ties". The newscast also features the recurring caption "ties to terror". A split video exemplifying the MS-13 gang on the left side and terrorist groups on the right side makes the gang's assumed connection with terrorism explicit. The producers' focus on
the violent character of these two groups is made evident by the simultaneous depiction of gang

enforcers in putting MS-13 gang members in jail. What would more appropriately be represented
as an action is represented as an event.

United States

The Fox newscast, entitled "Gangs with Terror Ties", employs an abundance of oppositional
wording. Criminalizing expressions such as "a new enemy for law enforcement", "super-gangs",

members drawing graffiti and being arrested on one side; and of Middle Eastern soldiers training,
and of Osama Bin Laden aiming and shooting a big firearm on the other side.

"and extreme violence", "into drugs", "into violence", "national security threat", "potent criminal organizations", "destabilizing", "criminal threat", "national security concerns", "criminal elements", "transnational threats" are dominant and recurrent throughout the broadcast. Furthermore, the broadcast features a high degree of wording referring to the criminal and
violent nature of MS-13, often involving many words that are near synonyms. For instance,

Numerous superlatives and adjectives that portray MS-13 gang members as out of the

ordinary are used to express the extent to which they represent a threat to the United States:
"a host of super-gangs have infiltrated the United States"
"MS-13, known for its extreme violence"

"Immigration and Customs Enforcement just added an MS-13 gang member to its most
wanted fugitive list"

"David Rivera is the first MS-13 member to be put on the (most wanted fugitives) list"
"the biggest fear to law enforcement is that the MS-13 may have already begun working with

references to the criminal nature of Mara Salvatrucha include numerous expressions such as
"potent criminal organizations", "criminal threat", "criminal elements" "criminal threat" in less then 5 minutes. The criminality of MS-13 gang members is strengthened through continuous illustrations of street fights, arrests, young men drawing graffiti's, Hispanics gesticulating MS-13
gang signs, and men heavily tattooed with MS-13 figures.

international terrorists"
Moreover, Mara Salvatrucha members are portrayed as being essentially violent and criminal

due to their national roots. The statement that "they are born out of a war torn country" and "they
are from areas where drug trafficking and narco-terrorism is active" appoints violence and crime

as intrinsic to Central America and its people.

40

41

The criminal character of MS-13 gang members is also affirmed through categorical modalities, through which reported happenings regarding the MS-13 gang are represented as
absolute truths:

"As we look into MS-13's background..."
"I think we're in a grey area"

"What we do quite well is we understand the psyche, the mentality, the criminal mind" "we understand difference between one group working on greed and the other group working as criminal patriot" In addition, vilifying representations of MS-13 co-occur with expressions referring to law
enforcement. The following statements place the MS-13 gang and law enforcers in direct

"there is... a new enemy for law enforcement" "they (MS-13) fund terrorism and narco-terrorism" "not only are they into drugs heavily, they are into violence"

"(MS-13 members) have a military background" "they are now actual national security concerns"

opposition, suggesting that the two are intrinsically different "enemy for law enforcement"
"MS-13, known for its extreme violence remains a top focus for law enforcement"

While these events are reported as categorical truths, suppositions regarding the link between
MS-13 and terrorism are represented through expressive modalities, such as "may" and "might",
which signify possibility:

"the biggest fear to law enforcement is that the MS-13 may have already begun working with international terrorists"

"(MS-13) may. be providing support to other transnational threats" "the MS-13 may have already begun working with international terrorists" "Osama Bin Laden and Al Qaeda militant groups ... might try to infiltrate to the U.S from the
South"

El Salvador (Video)

Wording such as "most wanted", "the subject", "gangster", "the fugitive", the MS-13 leader", "homicides" predominate in the 55 seconds clip and serve to criminalize Saul Turcios Angel, an MS-13 gang leader and fugitive. Additionally, the representation of the MS-13 gang leader as a violent delinquent is reinforced by three displays of Angel's mug shots, two of which

"they (terrorist groups) may use gangs to help them carry out their plans".
Furthermore, the pronouns "they" and "these" are used for referring to MS-13 gang
members:

:

"they "they 'they 'they

are are are are

into drugs heavily" into violence" born out of a war torn country" from areas where drug trafficking and narco-terrorism is active"

contain the caption "Saul Turcios Angel, El Salvador, MS-13 gang leader, charged with attempted murder, escaped from jail"; a picture of arrested gang members in a court house; three

"they themselves are involved in drugs"
"they are a growing populations"

photos of the Parade magazine's "Who are the world's most wanted?" front cover article, showcasing Angel's picture; two displays of the fugitive list of Bartolinas prison in San Salvador;
and four images of the Bartolinas prison guarded by armed police officers. Moreover, the clip
starts and finishes with the same mug shot of Angel, displaying the caption "Saul Turcios Angel,

"they are now actual national security concerns"
"these criminal elements"

"they may be providing support to other transnational threats" Moreover, the frequent employment of the pronoun "they" serves to establish MS-13 gang-

affiliated youth as markedly different from the "we", i.e. American citizens, who the speakers of
the broadcast claim to speak on behalf of:

El Salvador, MS-13 gang leader, charged with attempted murder, escaped from jail" (own
translation).
Additionally, several grammatical features indicate that the agency of law enforcers is

"we saw an influx of people coming from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras" "the first ones we saw was Mara Salvatrucha"

being concealed:

42

43

"this Salvadoran (Saul Turcios Angel) occupies a spot in the World's Most Wanted list" "El Trece appeared on the cover of Parade magazine close to Al Qaeda leader Osama Bin
Laden".

The above quoted statements highlight MS-13's presence in the United States and Canada
through verbs such as "expanded", "settled", and "are". This information is coupled with the
following assertions:

The first statement suggests that Angel intentionally put himself on the Most Wanted List. The
"they're serious"

latter assertion implies that the MS-13 fugitive deliberately came into view on the front cover of
the Parade magazine, close to Bin Laden's photo. However, these events would be more logically

"experts worry that the violence we've seen south of the border will find its way up here"
"Yeah, it can (get that bad here)"

These assertions, in collocation with the previous quotations, evidently establish the MS-13 gang

conveyed through action statements that identify the role of law enforcers and the media in these
as a threat to the Canadian society. For instance, the sentence "They're here (Canada) and they're

events, such as "Officials included El Trece on the World's most Wanted list" and "Parade
serious" is composed of two main clauses ("they're here", "they're serious") and is linked by the

magazine showcased El Trece on the front cover of their magazine close to Osama Bin Laden's
connector "and", which indicates that both clauses have equal weight. Both clauses contain an
photo".

assertion, the first one indicating the presence of MS-13 in Canada, and the second one pointing
MS-13 and Migration Canada

to the threatening character of the gang. Linked together into one sentence, this statement is

employed to highlight the threat MS-13's migration to Canada represents to the host society.

The expansion of the MS-13 gang in Canada is negatively evaluated as "our (Canada's)

Furthermore, the collocation "migrating threat", which constitutes the title of the map display explaining the spread of MS-13, is ideologically significant as the word "migrating" cooccurs with "threat", thus classifying the act of migration as an ominous activity.

problem". This statement not only has experiential value in terms of a negative representation of the MS-13 gang, but also has relational value, as it portrays the gang as a problem to be managed

and resolved. Wording such as "left unchecked" and "we have to be on top of it" once again
alludes to the notion that the MS-13 gang is something to be managed by Canadian authorities or
'experts'.

The validity of the news is highlighted through the following assertions:
"Gang experts say they've settled in Canada" "Experts worry the violence we've seen south of the border will find its way up here".

The language and images employed in the newscast also indicate preoccupation with the
gang's migration into Canadian territory:

Through references to "experts", the producers of the clip are making an implicit authority claim,
suggesting the broadcast has the capability to provide accurate information about the gang. The broadcast contains two references to the gang members' ethnicity, specifically "their

"The gang expanded through Honduras, Guatemala, Mexico, and eventually 33 U.S
states"

"They've settled in Canada"
"They're here".

native El Salvador" and "they are Latino youth", which indicates that the broadcast's producers
consider the gang members ethnic background to be important. Furthermore, the statement "Most

44

45

are Latino youth who have a hard time fitting into the Canadian society" indicates that
responsibility for not fitting into the Canadian society is attributed to the Latino youth

"ICE, Immigration and Customs Enforcement just added an MS-13 gang member to its
most wanted fugitive list"

"they (MS-13) pose a national security threat: they are born out of a war torn country. they are from areas where drug trafficking and narco-terrorism is active" "these criminal elements (MS-13) are involved in smuggling activities" The criminal- immigration link is further emphasized by the visual aids used in the clip, including an image of the map of the Americas, with the title "International Gang Immigration",
displaying red arrows from Central America to U.S to indicate the gang's migration; a video of a

In addition, Constable's Scott Mills statement, "We have to be on top of it, we can't let
somebodv, a gang like this come into our country and take over" features the inclusive pronoun "we", which is relationally significant in that it incorporates of the speaker, the audience, and the Canadian people. Finally, the verb "take over" indicates the producers' fear that immigrants, in
this case MS-13 gang members, will seize authority from the hands of Canadian 'people'. Finally, the statement "the gang's founders were deported to their native El Salvador where they used what they learned in prison to control the streets"implies that it is the gang

group of Hispanics showing MS-13 gang signs; a list titled "Background of Mara Salvatrucha, with one of the sub-points "born in a war torn country"; and various depictions of illegal border crossing, including two displays of three men jumping the U.S- Mexico border wall, people

members' experience as graduated criminals that motivated them to continue their criminal
activities, rather man any other factors.

walking in the desert, border officer arresting illegal immigrant in the dessert, and border officer
directing illegal immigrant in officer's car.
Additionally, the producers of the newscast depict the country of origin of MS-13 gang

United States

The text contains numerous reminders of MS-13 members' immigrant status and their
perceived ethnic and national difference:

members, El Salvador, as poor, corrupt, and violent. Two images of Central American slums, with kids running with no shirt, in ripped and dirty clothes generate an impression of Central American countries as poor and underdeveloped. Moreover, wording such as "members and associates [of MS-13]... in the country of origin.. .feed them the drugs, help with the drug

"in the country of origin, where they (MS-13 members) are initially from" "before they (MS-13 members) came to the United States" "associates (of MS-13) are not here in the United States"
"(MS-13) have international roots"

"(MS-13) is made up primarily of Salvadorians"

proceeds" and "they are from areas where drug trafficking and narco-terrorism is active" suggests that El Salvador and other Central American countries are first and foremost corrupt. Finally, the expression "born out of a war torn country" and the displayed list "Background of Mara

"influx of people from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras" "the Mara Salvatrucha 13 with links back to El Salvador".

Moreover, the newscast seems to link the criminal aspect of the MS-13 gang with its
members' immigrant status. This linkage is made evident by the following expressions:
"many of these super gangs have international roots"

Salvatrucha: Bora in a war torn country" represents Central American countries as essentially

violent.
Finally, the sentence "some revolutions that were going on in South America" indicates that

"(MS-13) is made up primarily of Salvadorians"

"people coming from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras... a lot of them took up the gang
life"

"Mara Salvatrucha 13 with links back to El Salvador, not only are they into drugs heavily,
but they are into violence"

the newscast's producers do not consider the conflicts in the region to be of much relevance to

46

47

the migration of Hispanics to the United States. The adjective "some" associated with

Mike Drolet (Global National investigator): Do you think we're doing enough right now?
Jim Brown (retired RCMP officer): No.

"revolutions" leaves the event unspecified and undetermined, indicating that the producers of the newscast consider that the event does not deserve further specification. While the cause of
image.

However, the response of the officer is interrupted and the clip quickly moves to the next

Central Americans' migration to the United States remains unspecified, their arrival is
automatically linked with their association with gangs:

United States The DA's statement "prudence requires us to take advantage of the intelligence to make the country safer than it is" in the context of this news subject suggests that law enforcers need to

"they came to East L.A and they settled in the Hispanic community and unfortunately a lot of
them took up the gang life"

El Salvador ("Video)

react to the MS-13 gang, as it is threatening the safety of the United States. This notion is further
reinforced by the assertion that this issue prompted former president Bush and US Secretary

The statement "The U.S Homeland Security Department has taken disciplinary action

against the gang member to avoid his return to the country" indicates that the producers of this
newscast approve of the measures taken by the U.S security department to "avoid" that the MS13 gang member return to the U.S. While this statement could have been more logically phrased as "The U.S Homeland Security Department has taken disciplinary action against the gang
member to ban his entry in the country", the producers of this clip chose to employ the

Roomsvelt to carry out a security visit in Latin America:
"Both President Bush and more recently US Defence Secretary Donald Roomsvelt went

to Latin America for security visits".
El Salvador

Video:

Images of the Centro Judicial Isidro Menendez jail, police officers guarding and conducting investigations, and of handcuffed MS-13 gang members reinforce the notion that the
most appropriate way of dealing with the MS-13 gang is through repressive law enforcement.

euphemism "avoid" in order to steer clear of any controversy that could potentially put the U.S
security department in a negative light.

Responses to MS-13 Canada

Article:

The sentence "Even incarceration hasn't slowed their growth" not only emphasizes the
gang's ferocity, but also implies that tougher measures then incarceration are necessary to stop

This article indicates that the author of this news generally agrees with the Mano Dura

legislation put in place to control the MS-13 gang. The segments "to eradicate the gang problem in the country", "eliminate the gang" and "control these criminals" signify not only that the MS13 is perceived in a negative light, as being primarily a problem, but also that repressive
measures are necessary to eliminate this 'problem'. The choice of wording "eradicate" indicates that tougher measures for dealing with this gang are required:

their expansion. The interview with RCMP retired officer is employed to suggest that the current responses to the MS-13 gang have been insufficient or too 'soft' and to further advocate the idea

48

49

BYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY OF

that the MS-13 is perceived as an entity that is utterly evil, or as the ultimate enemy that needs to
be dealt with in a way that completely exterminates it. Furthermore, the following segment indicates that the Mano Dura legislation is promoted

Canadian broadcast stresses the gang's unprecedented violence and criminality, the main

preoccupation of the tLS media seems to be with MS-13's potential terrorist link and the security
threat they pose to the nation. Additionally, Salvadoran media further reinforces the image of MS-13 gang members as the main blameworthy actors through a criminalizing description of MS-13 gang member and fugitive Saul Turcios Angel. In regards to the theme of migration as it relates to the MS-13 gang, Canadian media emphasize the presence of MS-13 gang members in Canada as a threat to the host society.
Moreover, deportation of gang members is depicted as a fair disciplinary reaction to criminal activity. The American newscast stresses the MS-13 members' immigrant status and their

as the best solution for eliminating the criminal activities of MS-13: "Flores said that the results of plan Mano Dura have been efficient, and this has been
proven by the massive captures of gang associated young men, over 1,300 captures."
(own translation)

Moreover, the use of the verb "urged" when referring to President Flores' speech regarding the Mano Dura law indicates that the producers o f this news approve of the president's
ideas and that the they accord great importance to his statements.

"We need the Legislative Assembly to aprove the anti-gang law", urged the (president's)
representative." (own translation)

perceived ethnic and national difference through several expressions referring to the gang members' Central American roots. Salvadorans in the United States are represented primarily as
immigrants and their and their migration is automatically assumed to result in gang affiliation in

However, a few assertions in the text are indicative of certain contradictions in the

media's representation of the measures that need to be undertaken to address the gang issue. On the one side, the author of this article depicts the Mano Dura law, and repressive anti-gang measures in general as the most appropriate to deal with the challenges posed by MS-13. On the
other side, the author includes one assertion stating that "of all the arrests, the majority of cases have been released due to lack of proof to keep them detained" and that oppositional parties

the U.S. The producers of the U.S media clip also employ several collocations to convey a link
between the gang's criminality and its members' immigrant status. The selected Salvadoran broadcast utilizes language that indicates the approval of the U.S Homeland Security

Department' deportation of MS-13 gang member Saul Turcios Angel from the United States.
Findings regarding the media's interpretation of the responses to the MS-13 gang
communicate that producers of the selected Canadian media consider that tougher responses are

consider the Mano Dura law to be unconstitutional. However, the article does not provide details
to indicate why the Mano Dura law has been criticized as unconstitutional.

necessary to stop the gang's expansion. The U.S broadcast suggests that governmental authorities
Chapter 5: ANALYSIS
Summary of Findings

should treat the MS-13 gang as an international security threat. Finally, the Salvadoran news clip
and article specify that the most appropriate way of dealing with the MS-13 gang is through
repressive law enforcement measures such as Mano Dura (Hard Hand).

The findings of this research study indicate that all of the selected Canadian, American,
and Salyadoran media employ criminalizing language when referring to MS-13 gang members

and construct MS-13 gang members as innately and permanently violent and criminal. While the

50

51

Power Relations

Thus, by representing reported events as categorical truths, the producers of these media
support the construction of MS-13 gang members as essentially and eternally violent criminals as

Some features of the selected media have expressive value. According to Fairclough (1989),

expressive values communicate the producer's evaluation of the reality it relates to, and have to

a categorical, transparent reality, without the need for further interpretation and representation. In addition, the allusions to expert knowledge in the Canadian and U.S media further reinforce the
vilified construction of gang-associated youth as a fixed reality, while also indicating the North American producers' identification with "gang experts". These allusions further place these representations in a colonialist discourse, which also connotes a high-handed, executive attitude
in reporting events regarding the 'primitive', colonized world and its people (Said, 1978).

do with subjects and social identities. Expressive values can be circulated not only through expressive modalities such as "may", "must", "can", "should", but can also be expressed through

verbs in the present tense form. One example of such expressive modalities is that of authenticity
claims, through which reported happenings are represented as uncontested facts (Fairclough,
1989). As revealed in the findings section, the Canadian, American, and Salvadoran media
features numerous authenticity claims.

However, such statements conceal the complex and sometimes contested process of information gathering and interpretation, and the influence of ideologies embedded in the process of news
production (Fairclough, 1989).

"They'rehere (Canada) and they're serious"/ "MS-13 is successful" (Canadian media) "not only are they into drugs heavily, they are into violence" (U.S media) "In order to make the victory against delinquency permanent... we need the Legislative
Assembly to approve the anti-gang law" (El Salvador article)

In addition, the extensive employment of the inclusive pronoun "we" in all of the selected media is also utilized as a mechanism to convey authority. For instance, in the Canadian case,

The verbs in these sentences ("are", "need") are in the simple present tense form. This is a

way of expressing the producer's categorical commitment to the truth of the proposition, and thus
a way of conveying the media's claim to knowledge (Fairclough, 1989).

Constable Mills' usage of the pronoun "we" in the statement "We have to be on top of it, we
can't let somebody, a gang like this come into our country and take over" assimilates him into the

The aforementioned authenticity claims and allusions to expert knowledge are in line with Said's (1978) analysis of colonial discourse. To elaborate, Said (1978) shows that the colonial

Canadian people and to consequently grants him the authority to speak for others, in this case the

Canadian society at large. Furthermore, this statement serves to pit the "we", i.e. the Canadian
people and "somebody", i.e. immigrants directly against each other and to mark them as

system of representation construes the colonized as an absolute reality which is simultaneously
distinct, and yet recognizable and visible:

noticeably different. The employment of the modal auxiliary verb "can't" in this context has

Philosophically, then, the kind of language, thought, and vision that I have been calling orientalism very generally is a form of radical realism; anyone employing orientalism... will designate, name, point to, fix what he is talking or thinking about with a word or phrase, which then is considered either to have acquired, or more simply to be, reality. The tense they employ is the timeless eternal; they convey an impression of repetition and strength. For all these functions it is frequently enough to use the simple copula is (Said,
1978, p. 78).

relational value. The negative modal auxiliary "can't" signals permission and thus indicates the authority of one participant ("we", i.e. Canadian people) over another ("somebody", i.e. MS-13).

Such an outlook is disturbingly close to xenophobia and a concrete signifier of an 'Othering'
process..

52

53

Further indication of asymmetrical power relations is provided by the Canadian media's framing of the presence of MS-13 in Canada as a problem to be managed, which is suggestive of

fails to address the ways in which power relations are articulated in the postcolonial societies of
Central America (Ronsbo, 2004).

a context in which a top-down mentality and unequal power relations between the gang and the
Canadian society predominate.

In addition, the U.S clip features vocabulary and depictions which reinforce the image of MS13 gang members as national terrorists, and show the producers' concern with the national security of the United States and their preoccupation with the violation of law by this gang.

The Criminal 'Other' Criminalizing Depictions
Furthermore, the title of the broadcast "Gangs with terror ties" indicates what the producers

Out of the three selected video clips and article, all of them focus solely on the criminal
and violent aspect of the MS-13 gang. These media entail vocabulary, grammatical features, and

consider to be the most significant aspect of the news, in this case the association of gangs with terrorism. Furthermore, discussions in the U.S clip revolve around the perceived difference of MS-13 gang members from U.S citizens. Such representation reveals the producers' irrevocable faith in law and order and indicates an ideologically specific (and dominant) scheme which divides societal actors between good, law abiding citizens and criminals. However, such a logic
and the conceptualization of MS-13 gang members as a terrorist threat follows a one-dimensional logic that separates the world into 'good' and 'evil' and serves to distract from the root causes of

images that indicate that the broadcast is produced from the perspective of those who oppose the
activities of MS-13 and that its producers identify with the perspective of law enforcement officials. For instance, the Canadian media clip pointed out the increased vulnerability and

innocence of the gang's victims in order to emphasize the gang's ferocity and brutality.

Furthermore, by highlighting the young age of Six, a Toronto MS-13 gang member, and of other
youth targeted for recruitment, the producers suggest that the vilified character of the gang is so
strong, that it overpowers the supposed innocence of youth.

social exclusion and inequality that motivate youth to join gangs (Rodgers, 2007).
The Salvadoran news clip also features the incriminating language and video depictions to

The representation of MS-13 gang members as intrinsically violent is in line with Ronsbo's (2004) findings, which show that Central American subjects during the last three

describe the MS-13 gang and its leader, Saul Turcios Angel, also known as El Trece. The fact that the news clip starts and ends with an image of Angel's mug shot, with the caption "Saul Turcios Angel, El Salvador, MS-13 gang leader, charged with attempted murder, escaped from

decades have been centered around a discourse that conceptualizes violence as inherent to their character and to which the normal reaction is trauma. Hume (2007) also subscribes to this
discourse, by suggesting that the legacy of the civil war in El Salvador has created a violent socio-political context in the region. Hence, youth in El Salvador have been socialized into a

jail" signals that the notion of Saul Turcios Angel as a dangerous, most wanted, escaped criminal

is what the producers of the media want to convey as the main point of the broadcast. The
importance of this information lies in the fact that it is this point, and its presupposition that Saul

violent context and have which consequently adopted violence as an expression of identity. However, the construction of Central American people and their history as intrinsically violent

Turcios Angel is a dangerous, violent criminal, which will be retained in the memory of the
audience, recalled, and alluded to or reported in other newscasts or articles (Fairclough, 1989).

54

55

Furthermore, the Salvadoran clip also establishes a link between MS-13 and terrorism through the assertion that the MS-13 leader appears in the magazine close to Osama Bin Laden's picture. While this connection is more subtle then the one emphasized by U.S news producers, it nevertheless serves as proof of yet another instance of the United States and El Salvador sharing
"discourses of illegality" (Zilberg, 2007, p. 44).

Additionally, the use of vilifying language in the selected media- and the failure to avoid ithas relational value, as it indicates that the producers of the broadcast and its audience, i.e. the American, Canadian, or Salvadoran society, share the same normative ideology. Relational values expose relations and social relationships and signal the ways in which are endorsed
through the text in the discourse (Fairclough, 1989).

The single statement that Angel's photo appears next to that of Bin Laden might have been ignored or dismissed in a different context. However, the inter-textuality of media depictions is
significant here, as visual and print media representations accumulate or alter their meaning when they are understood in the context of other representations (Fairclough, 1989). The fact that the

There also exists a tendency in all of the selected media to mystify and sensationalize the MS13 gang. This is illustrated by statements such as "They earned their reputation through blood and
violence" in the Canadian case, "we understand the psyche, the mentality, the criminal mind" in
the U.S broadcast, and "this Salvadoran (Saul Turcios Angel) occupies a spot in the World's

Salvadoran media clip is read in a context where the gang- terrorist link has already been

Most Wanted list", in the Salvadoran media clip. This supports Rocha and Rodger's (2008) argument that the gang debate often demonizes and mystifies gangs rather then recognizing ambiguity of the phenomenon and the fact that it constitutes a crystallization of wider forms of structural inequality, violence, and hegemonic domination. Furthermore, such sensationalized representations of MS-13 not only serve to embellish the
stereotype of gang members as violent criminals, but also reveals the producers' fascination with

hypothesized and publicly fomented by Honduran and U.S government officials and media adds
meaning and importance to this statement.

The abundance of criminalizing vocabulary in all of the selected media is significant, as it has
both expressive and relational value. According to Fairclough (1989), expressive value refers to
subjects and social identities and indicates the producer's evaluation of the reality he/she relates

to. The criminalizing wording present in the selected media mobilizes expressive values through

the criminal 'Other'. As Phillips (1997) points out, the representation of the criminal 'Other' as a
fetishized object is employed to reaffirm the distinction between responsible, 'normal' citizens

the vilified representation of gang-associated youth in order to reach the persuasive end of
convincing the audience that these youth are irremediably evil and that they constitute a

and outlaws. However, the representation of the vilified 'Other' also involves disavowal, as it allows the producer to indulge in the fascination of the criminal, while simultaneously rejecting it (Bhabha, 1983). Thus, the fetishized representation on MS-13 gang members as the criminal

significant threat to society. The frequent use of such incriminating language when referring to
MS-13 gang members also reveals that the producers of the newscast are drawing from a

traditional criminology discourse which vilifies gang-associated youth and maintain that the focal point of analysis should be individual gang members, who are responsible for such violent and
criminal acts (Manwaring, 2006).

'Other' allows a double focus to be kept, as what is described as perceptibly different, violent,

corrupt, brutal, and cruel is at the same time rejected and enjoyed because of its perceived
difference. As Bhabha (1983) emphasizes, this type of representation "allows for the possibility

56

57

of simultaneously embracing two contradictory beliefs, one official and one secret, one archaic and one progressive, one that allows the myth of origins, the other that articulates difference and
division"(p. 32).

Evidently, this media representation of MS-13 has the effect of establishing an automatic

association of gang members with violence and crime. This confirms Hume's (2007) findings,
which assert that the role of the media in fomenting social panic has been paramount. This panic has been constructed by condensing anxieties around concerns related to youth, poverty, and

Common Sense in the Name of Power
violence into the public imagination in order to create a new threat to society. However, such

The way in which pronouns are used to refer in a reduced form to material previously

associations are not based on evidence, but rather rely on the creation of a particular image of
gangs (Hume, 2007).

introduced in the media also deserves further consideration. The pronoun 'they' is of particular
interest in the present context because it is used extensively employed in all the selected media to
refer to MS-13 gang members. The frequent use of the pronoun "they" to refer to MS-13 gang

The stereotyping of MS-13 gang members as violent criminals and as essentially different, be it through criminalizing language, presuppositions, claims to knowledge, or relational modalities,
is apparent in all of the selected media. The significance of this negative construction of MS-13

members is ideologically significant because the referents are not established textually in the
context, but they are rather presupposed. According to Fairclough (1989), presuppositions can

have ideological functions when what they presuppose is "common sense in the service of power" (p. 154). The MS-13 gang is only briefly introduced, and the presupposition of "gang
members" makes a general appeal to background knowledge or "common sense".
Another example of such presuppositions is provided by the expression "migrating threat",

gang members lies in the fact that it signals the construction of the colonial subject and the
exercise of colonial power through discourse, for which the articulation of difference between the colonizer and the colonized is necessary (Bhabha, 1983). As Bhabha (1983) explains, this

colonial discourse "seeks authorisation for its strategies by the production of knowledges of coloniser and colonised which are stereotypical but antithetically evaluated." (p. 23). The
oppositional evaluation of the law abiding citizen versus the brutal MS-13 criminal is signified by media producers through the construction of the following binaries: perpetrator/ victim, criminal/

used as the title for the map describing the MS-13's proliferation throughout the Americas. The collocation of the word "migrating" with "threat" has an ideological function, as it serves to

naturalize the highly contentious proposition based on the assumption that immigrants constitute
a threat to the Canadian society. Once again, this presupposition is not based on specific texts,

legitimate, citizen/ immigrant, legal/ illegal, North American/ Salvadoran, developed/
underdeveloped, and corrupt/ decent. However, Sanchez (2006) points out that these dichotomies
are simplistic and increasingly incompatible in the context of neoliberalism. Such boundaries

but rather appeals to the audience's 'common sense'. According to Fairclough (1989), such
assumptions are manipulative and have an ideological function, as they help to establish a 'common sense in the name of power" (p. 154). As such, this collocation indicates that this

become blurred, as poverty and structural exclusion leads to radicalized responses, causing

newscast is embedded in a discourse that considers migrants to be agents that threaten human and
national security.

58

59

people and classes to adapt to this situation in multiple ways, through the informal economy,
violence, and crime (Sanchez, 2006).

experiencing conditions of social regression and that immigrants constitute a major challenge to
the security of'developed' countries operate to legitimize U.S hegemonic practices as legitimate
measures of transforming conditions that produce push factors of migration.

Furthermore, the criminalizing media representation of MS-13 gang members indicates gross

inequalities of power. As Said's (1978) concept of positional superiority highlights, the ability to
mark, classify and represent someone or something in a certain way constitutes a key mechamsm

Exceptions to the Pattern of Representation
However, the Canadian and Salvadoran media also present signs of an ideological struggle. In

in the exercise of power. In his study of how the stereotypical image of the 'Orient' was
the Canadian case, Father Astudillo constructs youth who join the MS-13 gang as victims. Thus,

constructed, Said (1978) asserts that representation and the operation of power are deeply

interconnected. He points out that Orientalism was the discourse "by which European culture was
able to manage- and even produce- the Orient politically, sociologically, militarily,

he seems to be drawing from a social justice and human rights discourse and thus contests the
fundamentalist discourse adopted by the producers. However^ the traditional criminology

ideologically, scientifically, and imaginatively during the post Enlightment period" (p. 7).
Similarly, Bhabha (1983) proposes that the purpose of colonial discourse is to construct "the

discourse seems to be predominant, as the newscast's producers employ Father Astudillo's statement to emphasize the potential of the gang, rather then the vulnerability of youth. This is evidenced by the statement that follows the interview with Father Astudillo: ''It's that appeal of

colonised as a population of degenerate types on the basis of racial origin, in order to justify
the street that worries law enforcement officials".
conquest and to establish systems of administration and instruction" (p. 23).

The article from the Salvadoran newspaper Diario Co Latino also presents indications of an

Thus, the stigmatization of MS-13 gang members as immigrant criminals in Canada and as

international terrorists in the United States, and the Canadian and U.S media's emphasis on the
origins and ethnicity of MS-13 gang members could be conceptualized as a hegemonic practice through which North American authorities legitimize and preserve the upper hand in international

ideological struggle. The inclusion of the opposition party's statements referring to the

inefficiency and unconstitutionality of the Hard Hand legislation suggests that an ideological
struggle may be present in the text. However, the article is written predominantly from the president's perspective, who advocates that MS-13 gang members need to be controlled through

relations with Central America under the guise of fighting crime, drug trafficking, and terrorism.
repressive measures. Furthermore, the statement that these assertions regarding the inefficiency

Thus, this rhetoric constitutes a mechanism of power that yields economic and political
and unconstitutionality of the anti-gang law belong to the opposition party operate to dissociate

advantages for the 'First World' over the 'Third World' (Ibrahim, 2005). This imperialist
the writer from these expressions, and make it clear they belong to someone else: the president's,

discourse legitimizes an increasingly dominant style of international rapports, as it establishes a
writer's, and assumed readers'political opponents. ;;

false dichotomy of 'us', the Western, progressive civilization, versus 'them', the barbaric, violent,
uncivilized foreigners. Thus, the imperialist assumptions that 'underdeveloped' countries are
Since the presence of ideological struggles signals that diverse ideologies are at play, it

becomes evident that the predominant ideology in these two cases is that of the traditional

60

61

criminology, while the weaker one is drawn from father Astudillo's and the opposition party's

phenomenon. This way, the numerous root causes behind the emergence and permanence of the
MS-13 gang are easier to dismiss. Another aspect that is not accurately represented is the impact of deportation of gang

sociological, human rights discourse. This indicates that it is the proponents of the traditional criminology stance who have the power to determine which meanings and norms are legitimate,
correct, or appropriate (Fairclough, 1989).

members. In all of the selected media, deportation is ignored as a factor contributing to the continuation of criminal activity. Media producers do not state the fact that MS-13 members were

Agency and Omissions

deported to countries they hardly knew and where they had limited or no family ties. Thus, the

The way in which agency is featured or not in the media is ideologically significant. In the Canadian case, sentences are structured to attribute MS-13 gang members full agency for being present in Canadian prisons, even though partial responsibility would be logically attributed to law enforcement officials. By concealing the agency of law enforcers in putting gang-affiliated

selected broadcasts and article deliberately ignore other conditions that played a factor in

motivating the criminal actions of deported gang members, such as adaptation problems, the
absence of social services to receive them, and high unemployment levels (Boerman, 2007). In a similar fashion, the Canadian newscast' representation of Latino youth as responsible for not fitting in to the Canadian society is utilized to deliberately conceal other factors that may have impeded Latino youth from integrating. Moreover, this statement is also indicative of the producers' assumption that immigrants should eventually assimilate into the Canadian culture,
which suggests the producer's presupposition of Canadian sovereignty and cultural superiority.

youth in jail, the wording of the sentence implies that they have willingly infiltrated in Canadian
jails. Associated with the earlier mention of MS-13's roots in L.A prisons, and the constant

reminders of their delinquent behaviour, this statement implies that MS-13 gang members belong
to prison, that it is their natural environment, and consequently that they are innately and
irremediably criminal.

The interruption of RCMP retired officer when discussing need for more suppressive

Aside from discussing what is being said, it is also important to analyze what is ignored,

legislative measures to combat the gang issue provides yet another case in point of deliberately

inaccurately represented, or wilfully eliminated from the media clips and article. For instance, the
selection of language used in this Salvadoran news clip reveals the producers' intention to
highlight Angel as the main evil doer, while deliberately obscuring the agency of other actors,

eliminating content relevant to the news topic. This interruption could have been employed either
for practical reasons, such as time limitations, or to control the contribution of the officer and
potentially eliminate any content that did not support the producers' ideology.

such as law enforcers and the media. The choice to highlight MS-13 gang members as the main blameworthy actors and the concealing of law enforcers' agency in putting them in jail or on the

Furthermore, the selected media do not include the U.S funded Salvadoran civil war as a contributing factor to the gang problem even though the U.S government, involved through

"Most Wanted" list indicates that the producers of these newscasts are drawing from a traditional
criminology discourse, which reduces gang members to natural criminals. Furthermore, the news

military and economic aid, served to further exacerbate the already present structural inequality

and violence in El Salvador, generating a population traumatized and desensitized to violence and

clip's focus on Angel operates to individualize the problem, rather then to point to acollective

62

63

producing a mss refugee population (Landolt, 2003; Boerman, 2007; Zilberg, 2007; Hagedorn,

This reproduction and endorsement of U.S 'zero-tolerance' anti-gang policing strategies in El Salvador is significant for several reasons. First, the endorsement of punitive policies is

2005; Hayden). Additionally, the Canadian and U.S media do not recognize Central American
migrants as refugees, rather they are represented as immigrants and the causes of their migration
remain unstated. However, these Salvadoran migrants would have been more accurately represented as refugees. Due to the U.S military and economic support accorded to the
Salvadoran state during the civil war, Salvadoran refugees were not recognized as a refugee population in the U.S , since such an acknowledgement would call into question the state's
political involvement in its creation (Landolt, 2003).

indicative of the efficiency of criminalizing representations of MS-13 gang members in
institutionalizing a political and cultural ideology that is discriminatory and detrimental. The stigmatization of MS-13 members as irremediable, cruel delinquents in the public eye has achieved its function of legitimizing a hyper-punitive and discriminatory regime. As Bhabha
(1983) explains, "what is visible is the necessity of such rule which is justified by those moralistic and normative ideologies of amelioration recognised as the Civilising Mission or the White Man's Burden" (p. 35). Secondly, the importation of U.S 'zero-tolerance' policies in El Salvador is indicative of the influence of the United States as a colonial power. The supremacy of U.S suppressive antigang measures is upheld by the selected media, and by scholars such as Arana (2005),
Manwaring (2005,2006,2007), and Sullivan (2006). As Bhabha (1985) suggests, by assuming a

Therefore, while MS-13 gang members are represented as the main wrongdoers, the agency

of legislative authorities in contributing to this problem is largely overlooked. This denial of
responsibility in creating disruptive conditions constitutes another sign of colonial authority at play, as domination is achieved by denying the unsettling presence of colonialist power in order to preserve the myth of evolutionism, in which the 'Other' is deemed inferior to the colonizer by
virtue of its race and ethnicity (Bhabha, 1985).

greater authority then the experience of the colonized people themselves, the prestigious and
powerful imperial culture is able to control the imagination and objectives of the colonised. El

Colonial Hybridity

Salvador's importation of repressive U.S legislation illustrates the hybridity of the colonial

While the Canadian broadcast suggests that more suppressive legislative measures need to be put in place, the U.S news clip reinforces the notion that this gang should be treated as an

discourse, that is

international security threat. Additionally, the producers of the Salvadoran article approve of
President Flores' endorsement of the repressive policies enforced through the Mano Dura plan.

the strategic reversal of the process of domination through disavowal (that is the production of discriminatory identities that secure the "pure" and original identity of authority), the revaluation of the assumption of colonial identity through the repetition of discriminatory identity effects (Bhabha, 1985, p. 154).
Thus, the upholding of repressive anti-gang legislation, as well as the criminalizing

As well, the Salvadoran clip's positive evaluation of U.S anti-gang measures has relational value. This appraisal depends on and helps create social relationships between the two countries
(Fairclough, 1989).

stereotypes perpetuated in Canada, United States, and especially in El Salvador indicates that colonial power is not unidirectional, as it is not possessed only by the colonizer, but by the
colonized as well. To elaborate, the Salvadoran media's adoption of the same criminalizing

64

65

representation of MS-13 gang members and its promotion of similar suppressive anti-gang

gang provides a way of claiming power and prestige in a modern society which puts more and

strategies suggests that it is mimicking the U.S and North American portrayal of gang-associated
youth and thus demonstrates the concept of colonial hybridity (Hume, 2007).

more pressure on individual achievement and belonging to the broader consumer society.

Chapter 6; CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS Due to the scope of this study, I was unable to fully apply the third stage of Fairclough's

Zilberg's (2007) findings further reinforce this notion, as she explains that the United
States and El Salvador have a history of transnational mimicry. While this mimesis was once

organized by the imperialistic, U.S funded Salvadoran civil war, in which Salvadoran and U.S

(1989) critical discourse analysis method, namely the explanation step. The explanation stage of
the CDA method requires the analyst to consider the relationship of discourses to social struggles
and to power relations (Fairclough, 1989). While I partly satisfied the requisite of this step by

governments collaborated closely to develop war strategies that were fuelled by a substrate of
visions about communists, the notion of mimicry is now deployed around the subject of deported
MS-13 gang members, who are considered by both states as criminals and terrorists (Zilberg,

addressing the unequal power relations that help shape this discourse, the time and scope restrains of this research prevented me from folly elaborating on how the media discourse on the MS-13 gang is positioned in relation to struggles at the societal and institutional level.

2007). Thus, "this transnational mimesis, organized once by the Gold War, is now being
reorganized by the War on Terror" (Zilberg, 2007, p. 49).

Investigating this issue would have required the analyst to research the present and past relations

Additionally, the ambivalence of the colonialist discourse of the MS-13 media
between Canada, United States and El Salvador, a task far too multifaceted and extensive for the

representation is demonstrated by the paranoid classification of MS-13 gang members as a

terrifying, excessive entity, apparent in expressions such as "there's just no limits to what they'll
do" (Canadian broadcast), "super-gangs", "extreme violence", and "destabilizing" (U.S media).

scope of this project. Another limitation of this research is posed by the issue of generalization. While the quantity of media is appropriate for this research given the scope of it, an analysis of more then one or two media clips and/or articles from each of the regions of Canada, United States, and El

This is in line with Bhabha's (1985) reading of colonial hybridity as an "ambivalent "turn" of the
discriminated subject into the terrifying, exorbitant object of paranoid classification- a disturbing

Salvador would be necessary in order to take a broad view and to initiate change.

questioning of the images and presences of authority" (p. 155). Thus, the panic surrounding MS-

13's acts of violence and crime could be explained as a shocked response to the MS-13 gang who,
from the position of the colonial 'Other', are articulating power and claiming authority,

Thus, future research should address this topic by using a larger sample of data in order to

draw comprehensive conclusions and to reveal the range of criminalizing media representations
of gang affiliated youth and whether alternative representations or at least more potent

nevertheless through brutal violence and crime. This notion is further reinforced by Davis' (2008) analysis, which suggests that gangs, through their control of urban spaces, forge power for the otherwise powerless. Thus, for radicalized youth who are denied access to other resources, the

ideological struggles regarding the social construction of the MS-13 gang exist in the media.
Additionally, a discourse analysis of blog entries or commentaries of MS-13 related videos and documentaries posted on YouTube would reveal not only the ideology of society at large, but

66

67

also that of individual gang members who post their comments on the web. Finally, I suggest that future investigations should approach the topic of transnational gangs from an anti-racist feminist perspective in order to analyze gangs as a crystallization of machismo and to highlight the

violence and criminality in the Salvadoran media. Unequal power relations and a racist undertone constitute common denominators throughout the analyzed media and confirm the continuation of

colonialist practices through which North American authorities establish a false dichotomy of
'us', the Western, progressive civilization, versus 'them', the barbaric, violent, uncivilized

construction of race and gender as principal factors that influence the formation of gangs (Rocha and Rodgers, 2008). Female gangs constitute a significant, however under-researched topic that
deserves further attention (Hagedorn, 2008).

foreigners and thus justifies an increasingly dominant style of international rapports. Furthermore,
by presenting the endorsement of U.S repressive anti-gang legislation in El Salvador, this study demonstrates the ambivalence of colonial power, which is possessed not only by the colonizer, but by the colonized as well. Based on this research, I conclude that mainstream media continues to draw from a traditional criminal justice discourse, even though it has been criticized by recent gang scholarship for ignoring dramatic structural changes in urban life, being tangled up in myths, and being heavily influenced by the priorities and prejudices of law enforcement bodies (Hagedorn, 2007). The current social construction of gang members and the increasingly punitive responses it generates intensify the already existent forms of social exclusion and criminalization. Such a
perspective is neither accurate nor productive, as the MS-13 gang, and gangs in general cannot be

This research illustrates that in the past decade, and particularly in the post 9/11 era, a

new trend of vilifying gang affiliated youth through public discourse is transpiring at alarming
rates (Hume, 2007, Zilberg, 2007). The criminalizing representation of MS-13 gang members has

broad and significant implications, as it legitimizes increasingly punitive policing strategies, which in turn validate more suppressive anti-gang policies, thus creating a vicious circle in which
MS-13 gang members are deemed irremediable criminals.

While traditional criminology approaches to gangs persist in the academic sphere, the

current gang research, such as the works of DeCesare (2003), Hagedorn (2005,2007,2008),
Hayden (2005), Zilberg (2004,2007), Arce et. al. (2005), Rocha and Rodgers (2008), Barrios
(2003), etc., is becoming more critical, in the sense that it acknowledges the gang issue as more then a criminal justice problem, but rather as a crystallization of broader societal issues. However, this study indicates that the social construction of MS-13 gang members as

analyzed outside their historical, political, and socio-economic context and cannot be reduced to
permanent, violent criminals or international terrorists. Finally, I conclude that the current representation of MS-13 gang members is flawed as it

violent criminals is still predominant, as it circulates through all of the selected media and serves
to legitimize increasingly repressive anti-gang policies, which are also promoted in this media.

fails to consider the significant issues of uneven development, growing inequality, and exclusion, and is characterized by an over-focus on the repression of gang members by law enforcement, to
the degree that it almost denies the possibility of prevention, rehabilitation and social

By unpacking the media representation of MS-13, this research reveals that the gang members'

'Otherness" is reinforced by combining the fear of crime with the fear of the foreign enemy in the Canadian and American broadcasts, and by their assumed association with most forms of

reintegration. Instead of shrouding gang members with criminality and demanding more
repressive measures to reprimand them, I suggest that it is more appropriate to abandon simplistic

68

69

dichotomies such as perpetrator/ victim, illegal/ legal, citizen/ immigrant, developed/ underdeveloped and conceptualize gang affiliated youth as a crystallized reflection of a society

APPENDIX: TRANSCRIPTION OF DATA

Canada: Global National News (May, 2007). MS-13 Setting Up in Canada. (Video) Kevin Newman: Hello there, thanks for joining us. They are the brutal, criminal gang other gangs fear: Mara Salvatrucha 13, more commonly called MS-13. They have spread from prisons in the U.S and Central America at an alarming pace, operating in 33 U.S states, where machetes are their favourite weapon. And now, they are our problem too. Mike Drolet, heading our Global National investigation:

characterized by increasing global inequalities and the inconspicuous persistence of colonial
practices.

Clearly, a more holistic approach to transnational gangs is necessary, one that would
discard the conceptualization of gang members as individual deviants from societal norms, and
would adopt a more pertinent approach which would acknowledge the accountability of Western

states for increasing the stark inequalities between the global North and South. Such an outlook
would entail a reconceptualization of gang members as the threatened rather than the threat,

would discard retaliatory discourses as morally and constitutionally wrong, and would recognize
that the basic rights that are being purchased in the name of the 'war on terrorism and crime' are

Mike Drolet: They earned their reputation through blood and violence. Mara Salvatrucha or MS-13, the most violent gang in North America. Jim Brown, retired RCMP officer: In 2004 in Honduras they attacked a school bus. In the attack, they shot and killed 27 people and they hacked the women and children up with machetes. There were just no rules, no limitations what they'll do. Mike Drolet; MS-13's roots can be traced back to 1970s Los Angeles prisons. The gang's founders were deported to their native El Salvador, where they used what they learned in prison to control the streets. The gang then expanded through Honduras, Guatemala, Mexico, and eventually 33 U.S states. And now, over the last 5 years, gang experts say they've settled in Canada, specifically in Vancouver, Montreal, Toronto and to a lesser extent to Edmonton and
Calgary.

Six (MS-13 Toronto member): They're big enough. Mike Drolet: Six is a member of MS-13's Toronto chapter. He's not much older then his monitor. He won't talk specifics about the gang, other then to say that they're here and they're serious. Six (MS-13 Toronto member): They don't think they're bad people, they know they're
bad. Mike Drolet: Corrections Canada officials say MS-13 members are in our jails. But even

not special privileges but rather universally granted human rights to which both citizens and
immigrants are entitled to.

incarceration hasn't slowed their growth. Kids as young as 11 and 12 are being recruited from the streets and in our schools. Father Fernando Astudillo has seen the gang's recent growth. He says most are Latino youth who have a hard time fitting into Canadian society. Father Astudillo: MS streets is easily (unclear) because if you have a child, if you have a
youth crying in the corner of any street, he or she will be the first victim.

Mike Drolet: It's that appeal of the street that worries law enforcement officials; that and its (MS-13's) ruthless sophistication. MS-13 is successful because it uses a blend of street gang justice with Mafia like organization

Mike Drolet: Do you think we're doing enough right now?
Jim Brown (retired RCMP officer): No.

Constable Scott Mills (Toronto Police/Crime Stoppers): We have to be on top of it, we can't let somebody, a gang like this come into our country and take over. Mike Drolet: How many members are in Canada is unknown. Gang experts believe MS-

13 has 100,000 members worldwide, including 10,000 in the U.S. Left unchecked, experts worry the violence we've seen south of the border will find its way up here.
Mike Drolet: Could you see it getting that bad here? Six (MS-13 Toronto member) It can. Yeah, it can.

Mike Drolet: In Toronto, this is Global National's Mike Drolet reporting.

70

71

United States: Fox News (June 25,2005). Gangs with Terror Ties. (Video)

Reporter: Here, in the United States, there's a new phenomenon at work and a new enemy for law enforcement. They're known as international gangs or super-gangs that fund terrorism and
narco-terrorism here and abroad. John S Fernandes (Drug Enforcement Administration): When they're talking about gangs

those connections, there's no way to support that they exist. But prudence requires as to take advantage of the intelligence to make the country safer then it is. I think that's probably the main reason why our American officials have contacted government officials in Mexico, Central
America and Canada. Reporter: Both president Bush and more recently US Defence Secretary Donald Romsvelt went to Latin America for security visits. With the central and south borders historically known as targets for smuggling and drug trafficking, there is concern Osama Bin Laden and Al Qaeda militant groups or other air tie western militants might try to infiltrate to the U.S from the South and they may use gangs to help them carry out their plans. John S. Fernandes (Drug Enforcement Administration): What we do quite well is we understand the psyche, the mentality, the criminal mind, and as I've said earlier, we understand difference between one group working on greed and the other group working as criminal patriot and the fact that they are certainly capable of relying on them. Our concern, and I think in that region what's important to know, because of the proximity to the United States.
El Salvador

who have members and associates, be they fan members or what have you, in the country of origin, where they are initially from, before they came to the United States, they certainly rely on that network of associates that are not here in the United States to essentially help feed them the drugs, help with the drug proceeds as far as maybe getting some of the drug proceeds back out of
the United States

Reporter 2: In about 1985, we saw an influx of people coming from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and some revolutions that were going on in South America; and they came to East L.A and they settled in the Hispanic community and unfortunately a lot of them took up the gang life. One of the first ones we saw was Mara Salvatrucha and that gang is made up primarily of
Salvadorians.

Reporter: Many of these super-gangs have international roots.

Reporter 1: There are a host of super-gangs have infiltrated the United States, with names like 18th street or the Mexican gang Florence 13, but Mara Salvatrucha, MS-13, known for its extreme
John Torres (Immigration Customs Enforcement): What we see is MS-13, the Mara

El Diariode Hoy (February 10, 2009). El Crazy en Lista de los mas Buscados (Video)

violence remains a top focus for law enforcement.

Salvatrucha 13, with links back to El Salvador, not only are they into drugs heavily, but they are into violence and as we've seen historically, drugs and violence sort of go hand in hand. Reporter: In fact ICE, Immigration and Customs Enforcement just added an MS-13 gang member to its most wanted fugitive list, David Rivera, wanted for questioning and connection for a string of felony convictions and murders in Los Angeles. He is the first MS-13 member to be
put on the list.

El rostro de este Salvadorefio ocupa un lugar en la lista de los mas buscados en el mundo. Se trata del pandillero Saul Turcios Angel apodado El Trece, quien recientemente aparecio en la portada de la revista Parade, que circula en los Estados Unidos, muy de cerca al cabecilla de al Qaeda, Osama Bin Laden. El sujeto se fugo de las bartolinas del centro judicial Isidro Menendez en San
Salvador en Diciembre del 2008. La policfa international a girado ordenes de captura contra el

cabecilla de la MS-13. Las autoridades policiales Salvadorenas han asegurado que el prdfugo
estaria detras del incremento de homicidios registrados en el pais desde Diciembre pasado. En

tanto, el departamento de seguridad interna de Estados Unidos ha abierto un expediente del pandillero para evitar que ingrese al pais.
Diario Co Latino (August 2003). Presidente Flores Pide a los Deputados Aprobar Lev Antimaras. A mas de un mes que fuera presentado al la Asamblea el proyecto de Ley Antimaras y el paquete de reformas a los Codigos Penal y Procesal Penal, el Presidente de la Republica,

Al Valdez (Orange County DA): There are reports from Central America that there could be as many as 80 to 100,000 MS-13 gang members in Central America, between El Salvador and Honduras and the rest of the Central American states there; so it is a big gang, MS-13 is reported in Canada, MS-13 has been reported in Hawaii, MS-13 has been reported in Alaska of all places so they are probably in close to 28, (unclear) suggests 28 to 31 different states. Reporter: As we look into MS-13's background, there are serious concerns that they a pose a national security threat: they are born out of a war torn country and have a military background, they are from areas where drug trafficking and narco-terrorism is active plus they themselves are involved in drugs; and they are a growing populations, settling in America, Canada, and Mexico. Mary Beth Long (Dep. Sec. of Defence, Counter-Narcotics): The criminal organizations represented by these gangs, in particular Mara Salvatrucha, have become so potent and so destabilizing that rather then being a simple law enforcement criminal threat, that they are now actual national security concerns. To the extent that these criminal elements are involved in smuggling activities, those are avenues and networks that are open not only to terrorists and narcotics traffickers, but potentially to weapons proliferators. They may be providing support to other transnational threats that are a threat to our borders and a threat to our internal security Reporter: And the biggest fear to law enforcement is that the MS-13 may have already begun
working with international terrorists.

Francisco Flores, exigio anoche la aprobacion de la misma, en la Sesion Plenaria de hoy.
En un mensaje, en cadena nacional, anoche, el mandatario pidio a los partidos de

oposicion "no dilatar" mas este tema en el congreso y se apruebe de una vez por todas la nueva normativa legal, que de unrespaldo juridico al Plan "Mano Dura" impulsado desde el 23 de julio, para erradicar el problema de las pandillas en el pais, conocidas como "maras". Flores dijo que los resultados del Plan "Mano Dura" han sido eficientes, muestra de ello son masivas capturas de jovenes pertenecientes, que sobre pasan las 1,300 capturas. No obstante, de esta cifra de capturados, en el mayor numero los casos han sido liberados por carecer de pruebas para mantenerlos detenidos. A juicio de Flores, por la poca voluntad de la oposicion al
oponerse a la Ley.

Al Valdez (Orange County DA): I think we're in a grey area. I think there's been reported connections between Middle East terrorist groups and MS-13, but there's now way to confirm

"Para que este triunfo sobre la delincuencia sea permanente y logremos disminuir cada vez mas los crimenes y asaltos, necesitamos que al Asamblea Legislativa apruebe la Ley Antimaras", urgio en su mensaje el mandatario.

72

73

P^ra Flores, el solo hecho de pertenecer a las pandillas criminales "como la Mara 18 y la Mara Salvatrucha... que es prohibido ser miembro de una pandilla criminal, y que el mero hecho de integrar una mara criminal significa arresto, juicio y encarcelamiento". Flores insto a los politicos, en especial a los diputados del FMLN, CDU, PDC y PCN, la aprobacion de la normativa, mfis cuando Estados Unidos "ha anunciado un plan de deportaciones masivas de mareros criminales a El Salvador, sin la Ley Antimaras no tenemos la herramienta legal para controlar estos criminales al llegar al pais... en la Asamblea de Honduras, todos los partidos por unanimidad han aprobado una fuerte Ley Antimaras, propiciando asi una fuga masiva de mareros hacia nuestro pais", puntualizo. "En la Asamblea nemos escuchado muchas excusas para dilatar y postergar las acciones necesarias para respaldar al Plan Mano Dura... los partidos de oposicion quieren mandar al archivo la Ley Antimaras", se quejo Flores. Luego del Foro convocado por el congreso, para analizar el proyecto de Ley, la oposicion, e incluso representantes de instituciones publicas y privadas, recomendaron que el tema fiiera enfocado a estudiar las reformas a los Codigos y mandar al archivo el Anteproyecto de Ley Antimaras, entre otras razones, porque es inconstitucionaL Al respecto, Flores dijo que "necesitamos la Ley Antimaras y reformas hechas para proteger a los pandilleros delincuentes... algunos diputados, que no tienen que vivir esta realidad, pues el estado les proporciona guardaespaldas, estian diciendo que cambios cosmeticos en el Codigo Penal son suficientes para eliminar las maras. Esta es una fantasia que ningun salvadoreno trabajador puede creer". Sin embargo, la oposicion considera que el plan antimaras del ejecutivo es por razones electoreras y cuestionan el hecho del porque hasta ahora el gobierno anuncian un plan agresivo para combatir
un problema que lleva mas de 10 anos en el pals.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Arana,

A.

(2005).

How

the

Street

Gangs

Took

Central

America. Foreign

Affairs, 84(3), 98-110.

Retrieved December 2, 2008, from ABI/INFORM Global database.

(Document ID: 845843971).

Arce, J. M. V., Dominguez, A. N., and Cruz, R. R. (2005). Las Maras. Identidades
juveniles al limite. Mexico: Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana, Iztapalapa

Ashcroft, B., Griffiths, G., Tiffin, H. (1995). The post-colonial studies reader. New York:
Routledge.

Barrios, L. (2003). The Almighty King and Queen Nation and the Spirituality of Resistance: Agency, social cohesion, and liberating rituals in the making of street organizations. In L. Kontos, D. Brotherton, L. Barrios (Eds.) (2003), Gangs and society: Alternative
perspectives, (pp. 119-135). New York: Columbia University Press.

Se conocio que este mediodia el CDU y el PDC habian presentado una pieza de

correspondencia para impedir que el proyecto de ley se fuera al archivo y que ARENA presento
otra para que se prohiban Ids tatuajes.

Bhabha, H. (1983). The Other question... Homi Bhabha reconsiders the stereotype and
colonial discourse. Screen, 24 (6): 18- 36.

Bhabha, H. (1985). Signs taken for Wonders: Questions of ambivalence and authority under a tree outside Delhi, May 1817. Critical Inquiry, 12 (1), 144- 165.

Breve, F. (2007). The Maras. Military Review, 87(4), 88-95. Retrieved December 2, 2008, from Academic Search Premier database.

Boerman, T. (2007). Central American Gangs: An Overview of the Phenomenon in Latin
America and the U.S. Journal ofGang Research. 15 (1), 35- 51.

74

75

Brotherton, D. (2003). Education in the reform of street organizations in New York City.
In L. Kontos, D. Brotherton, L. Barrios (Eds.). (2003), Gangs and society: Alternative perspectives, (pp. 136-158). New York: Columbia University Press.

Hayden, T. (2005). Street Wars. New York: The New Press.

Hume, M. (2007). Mano Dura: El Salvador responds to gangs. Development in Practice,

17(6), 739-751. Retrieved December 2,2008, doi:10.1080/09614520701628121

Creedon, K. (2003). El Salvador: War on Gangs. NACLA Report on the Americas, 37(3),
1-2. Retrieved December 2,2008, from Academic Search Premier database
Johnson, S., & Muhlhausen, D. (2005). North American transnational youth gangs:

Breaking the chain of violence. Trends in Organized Crime, 9(1), 38-54. Retrieved December 2,

Davis, M (2008). Reading John Hagedom. In J. Hagedom (Ed.), A world ofgangs: Armed
young men andgangsta culture (pp. xi- xix). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

2008, from Academic Search Premier database.

Kontos, L., Brotherton, D., Barrios, L. (Eds.). (2003). Gangs and Society: Alternative

DeCesare, D. (1998). The children of war. NACLA Report on the Americas, 32(1), 21.
Retrieved December 2,2008, from Academic Search Premier database

perspectives. New York: Columbia University Press.

Landolt, P. (2003). La construction de comunidades en campos sociales transnacionales:

DeCesare, D. (2003). From Civil War to gang war: The tragedy of Edgar Bolanos. In L. Kontos, D. Brotherton, and L. Barrios (Eds.), Gangs and society: Alternative perspectives, (pp.
283-313). New York: Columbia University Press.

El caso de los refugiados, migrantes, y repatriados de El Salvador. Estudios Migratorios
Latinoamericanos. 17 (52), 627- 651.

Manwaring, M. G. (2005). Street Gangs: The new Urban Insurgency. US Army War

Chevigny, P. (2003). The populism of fear: politics of crime in the Americas. Punishment
& Society, 5(1): 177-96.

College, 1- 47.

Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and Power. UK: Longman Group Ltd.

Manwaring, M. G. (2006). Gangs and Coup D'Streets in the New World Disorder:
Protean Insurgents in Post-Modem War. Global Crime. 7 (3), 505- 543.

Hagedom, J. M. (2005). The Global Impact of Gangs. Journal ofContemporary Criminal
Justice. 21 (2), 153-169.

Manwaring, M. G. (2007). A contemporary challenge to state sovereignty: Gangs and
other illicit transnational criminal organizations in Central America, El Salvador, Mexico,

Hagedom, J. (Ed.). (2007). Gangs in the global city: Alternatives to Traditional
Criminology. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Jamaica, and Brazil. U.SArmy War College, 1- 59.

McDonald, (2003). Marginal youth, personal identity, and the contemporary gang:

Hagedom, J. (2008). A world of gangs: Armed young men and gangsta culture.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

reconstructing the social world?. In L. Kontos, D. Brotherton, L. Barrios, (Eds.) Gangs and
Society: Alternative perspectives (pp. 62- 74). New York: Columbia University Press.

76

77

Montaigne, F. (1999). Deporting America's gang culture. Mother Jones, 24(4), 44.
Retrieved June 3,2009, from Academic Search Premier database.

Rodriguez, R. (2003). On the subject of gang photography. In L. Kontos, D. Brotherton, L.
Barrios, (Eds.) Gangs and Society: Alternative perspectives (pp. 255- 282). New York: Columbia
University Press.

Papachristos, A. (2005). Gang world. Foreign Policy, Retrieved December 2, 2008, from
Academic Search Premier database

Said, E. (1978). Orientalism. New York: Random House.

Phillips, S. S. (1997). Identifying the criminal. In Sandra S. Phillips, M. Haworth-Boot,
and C. (Eds)., Police Pictures: The photograph as Evidence (pp. 11-31). San Francisco:
Chronicle Books.

Said, E. (1993). Culture and Imperialism. New York: Knopf.

Sanchez, M. R. (2006). Insecurity and Violence as a New Power Relation in Latin

America. The Annals ofthe American Academy. 606 (1), 178- 194.

Quesada, C. (2005). Fresh thinking about gangs. Inter-American Development Bank,
http://www.iadb.org /idbamerica/index .cfrn?thisid=3325 Shahjahan, R. A. (2005). Mapping the field of anti-colonial discourse to understand issues

of indigenous knowledges: Decolonizing praxis. McGillJournal ofEducation, 40 (2), 213- 241.

Rios, V. M. (2008). The Hyper-Criminalization of Black and Latino Male Youth in the
Era of Mass Incarceration. Souls,% (2),40 -- 54. Sullivan, J. P. (2006). Maras morphing: revisiting Third Generation Gangs. Global Crime.
7 (3-4), 487- 504.

Rocha, J. L. (2006). Why are there no maras in Nicaragua? In D. Rodgers, J. L. Rocha
(Eds.), Gangs ofNicaragua (pp. 136-166). Trasher, F. (1927). The Gang. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Rocha, J. L. and Rodgers, D. (2008). Gangs of Nicaragua. Envio, the Journal of the
Central American University (UCA), 1-185.

USAID (2006). Central America and Mexico Gang Assessment. USAID Bureau for Latin American and Caribbean Affairs, Office of Regional Sustainable Development.

Rodgers, D. (2007). The gangs of Central America: Major layers and scapegoats. In D.
Rodgers, J. L. Rocha (Eds.), Gangs ofNicaragua (pp. 166-185).

Zilberg, E. (2004). Fools banished from the kingdom: Remapping geographies of gang violence between the Americas (Los Angeles and San Salvador). American Quarterly; 56 (3),
759- 779.

Ronsbo, H. (2004). Decentering Struggle: Traumatizing Central Americans. Psyke &
Logos, 25 (1): 143-155.

Zilberg, E. (2007). Gangster in guerrilla face: A transnational mirror of production
between the USA and El Salvador. Anthropological Theory, 7 (1), 37- 57.

Ribando, C. (2007). Gangs in Central America. Congressional Research Service (CRS)
Reports and Issue Briefs.

78

79

