Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Park-scape infrastructure
Jordan Emmanuel Breccia
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Urban, Community and Regional Planning Commons Recommended Citation
Breccia, Jordan Emmanuel, "Park-scape infrastructure" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 628.

This Thesis Project is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Park . .Scape Infrastructure
by

Jordan Emmanuel Breccia,

A design thesis Iproject

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the

requirements for the degree of

Master of Architecture

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009

©Jordan Emmanuel Breccia 2009

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis Iproject.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis! project to other institutions or individuals for
the purpose of scholarly research.

*Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesislproject by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

*Signature

iii

Park-Scape Infrastructure M.Arch. (2009)

Jordan Breccia Master of Architecture Ryerson University

Abstract
This thesis is predicated on the objectives of Toronto's Official Plan: the cessation of outward suburban development, increased growth in the urban core, increased public amenity space to support this greater density, reduced presence of the car, and the support of public transit, walking and cycling. Recognition of the serious lack of available public domain within Toronto's core to provide the appropriate scale of public space required to support this new level of density, is the subject of this thesis proposaL This thesis proposes a new large scale, north to south linear park for Toronto that integrates a system of bicycle, jogging, and pedestrian paths that connect it into existing mass transit systems, the urban core, and the existing east west park system, the Martin Goodman TraiL It creates this new public space by re-appropriating several vehicular lanes of Jarvis Street, and proposing the integration of new building development, park, sidewalk and street to amalgamate the space needed to accomplish this. Building and landscape, private and public space overlap and interconnect, to complete this new seamless urban park.

v

Acknowledgements
There have been numerous people who have provided me with ongoing guidance and support. I am thankful to all who have given me the strength and encouragement to accomplish this goal.

To Cheryl Atkinson, from the moment you agreed to direct me along this process, I felt safe in knowing I was under compassionate yet strong guidance. You encouraged me to fully express my creativity and your wisdom will always be an inspiration to me. For this, I am forever grateful.

To John Cirka, Kendra Schank Smith, and Mitchell Kosny, thank you for your thoughtful and constructive suggestions. Your knowledge has been greatly appreciated and acknowledged throughout this process.

To the people who have given me unconditional support and encouragement in my graduate studies, I thank you. I have been privileged enough to continue my studies while gaining invaluable experience and for this, I would like to thank Whitney-Bailey Associates Inc.

To my colleagues, I have been blessed by having such supportive and genuine people that I can turn to for assistance, guidance and even enjoyable experiences. I wish only the best for you in your future accomplishments. I would like to give a special thanks to Dave Piatt, Jorge Silva, Leila Mazhari, and Clayton Payer. I am grateful to know that there are still great souls who provide unconditional love and support.

To my friends, Roy Basso, Elmira Yousefi, and Carlo Faria, your belief in me, even when I couldn't see it in myself at times, has given and will continue to keep giving me the strength I need in order to pursue my passions. I have been blessed to have such amazing people in my life.

And to my family, I thank you for providing me with everything I need in order to accomplish my goals and dreams. Your love and support are forever cherished.

vii

Dedication
I dedicate this to my father Sergio, my mother, Gabriela, and my sister, Koleen.

ix

Contents
Park-Scape Infrastructure Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Dedication Contents List of Tables List of Figures list of Appendices iii v vii

ix
xi xiv xiv
XV

1 Introduction
5

1

Chapter 1
Issues of the Modern City
The importance of open public space for generating identity

5
5

5

Globalized Capitalism
Developing a Creative Identity

9
9
13

Visions for a New City: Towards Places of Flow Issues of Public Space The History of Publ.ic Space The Dialectic of Public Space The Privatization of Public Space The Future of Public Space

14
15

16 16

22

Chapter 2
Design Studies
Analysis Framework

25
25
25

The Study of Parks
Understanding the need for Diversirty

26
26

Washington Square Park Tompkins Square Park

32 35

xi

Chapter 3 ... Design Proposal
Central Park
History

37
38
38

Design of Central Park Central Park Mapping Precedents
High Line Project Four Towers Olympic Sculpture Park

40
42 45
45

47

49
51 54

Design Process Toronto Official Plan Velo-city Jarvis History Toronto's Jarvis Proposal Context Analysis The Jarvis Parkway Design
Concept

56
58

60
62

66
66

Design Guideline for Jarvis Street Topography Massing Composition Materiality Structural Composition

66 67
74

75
75

76

Chapter 4~ Providing a Better Future
Conclusion

so
80

Reference List

81
83
83 100
117

Appendices
Bryant Park Washington Square Park Tompkins Sqaure Park

list of Tables
Table 2.1 - Historical Timeline for Washington Square Park Table 2.2 - Historical Timeline for Bryant Park Table 2.3 - Historical Timeline for Tompkins Square Park Table 2.4 -Amenity Chart for New York Parks Table 3.1 -Jarvis Alternative Soultions Matrix Table 3.2 - Jarvis Alternative Soultions Matrix Table 3.3 - Jarvis Alternative Soultions Matrix 27 28 29 30

68 70
72

list of Figures
Figure 2.1 - New York. Credit Google Earth Figure 3.1 - Montage of New York's Parks. Credit: Creating Central Park Figure 3.2 - Map of New York with Parks highlighted. Credit:
Creating Central Park 39

25 39

Figure 3.3 - Fredrick Law Olmsted, 1860. Credit: Creating Central Park Figure 3.6 - Profiles of the Central Park. Credit: Creating Central Park Figure 3.4 - Calvert Vaux 1860 Credit: Creating Central Park Figure 3. 7 - Series of Central Park Bridges. Credit: Creating Central Park Figure 3.8 - Gapstow Bridge 59th Street. Credit: Creating Central Park Figure 3.9- Bridge No VII. Credit Creating Central Park Figure 3.10 - Lake Bridge. Credit: Creating Central Park Figure 3.11 - Pinebank Arch. Credit: Creating Central Park Figure 3.12 - Central Park Pedestrian Routes Figure 3.13 - Central Park Carriage Routes Figure 3.14- Central Park Vehicular Routes Figure 3.15 - Central Park Natural Topography Figure 3.16 - Central Park Built Form 3.17 - Central Park Bicycle Parade. Credit: Creating Central Park Figure 3.17 - Central Parkn Painting. Credit: Creating Central Park 3.18 - High Line Project. Credit: http://www.highlineproject.com

40 40 40 41 41 41 41 41 43 43 43 43 43 44 44 45

Figure 3.5 - Central Park, 1879, William I Taylor Credit: Creating Central Park 40

xiii

Figure 3.19 - High Line Project. Context Plan. Credit: http://www.highlineproject.com Figure 3.20- Four Towers Competition. Credit: http://www.stevenholl.com Figure 3.21 - Four Towers Competition Rendering. Credit: http://www.stevenholl.com Figure 3.22 - Seattle Olympic Park . Credit: http://www.seattleartmuseum.org Figure 3.23 - Seattle Olympic Park . Credit: http://www.seattleartmuseum.org Figure 3.24 - Map of Toronto showing ravines and parks as well as existing paths Figure 3.25 - Diagram indicating overarching principles for the Toronto Official Plan Figure 3.26 - Velo-City Renderings Credit: UTOPIA Figure 3.27 - Historic Jarvis Street Credit: City of Toronto. Figure 3.28 - Historic Jarvis Street Credit: City of Toronto. Figure 3.29 - Jarvis Collegiate Credit: City of Toronto. Figure 3.31 -Proposed Solution Credit: Environmental Study Report Figure 3.30 - Proposed Solution Credit: Environmental Study Report Figure 3.32 - Proposed Solution Credit: Environmental Study Report Figure 3.33 - Proposed Solution Credit: Environmental Study Report Figure 3.34 - Proposed Solution Credit: Environmental Study Report Figure 3.35 - Map of Toronto: Urban Core and Pedestrian Paths Figure 3.36 - Jarvis Street, Existing Parks Figure 3.37 - Jarvis Street, Heritage Buildings Figure 3.38 - Jarvis Street, Open Unused Space Figure 3.39 - Jarvis Street, Existing Buildings to be Incorporated into Proposal Figure 3.40- Jarvis Street, Existing Bicycle Path Routes Figure 3.41 - Jarvis Street, Proposed Bike/Pedestrian Path Network. Figure 3.42 - Jarvis Street, Overlaid with Central Park Figure 3.43 - Design Guidelines for Jarvis Intervention. Figure 3.44 -Exploded Axonometric of Jarvis Parkway 64 64 64 65 66 74 55 57 58 59 59 60 60 61 61 61 62 63 63 63 52 50 49 48 46 47

Figure 3.45 -Typical Transverse Section of Jarvis Parkway. Figure 3.47 -Exploded Axonometric of Focus Area. Figure 3.46 -Beijing National Stadium Credit: http://www. herzogdemeu ron .com Figure 3.48 -Jarvis Parkway Rendering Showing Integration into Existing Context. Figure 3.49 -Jarvis Parkway Rendering showing Open Air Museum Figure 3.450 -Jarvis Parkway Rendering showing Bridging

75

76 76

77 78
79

XV

list of Appendices
A.3. Jarvis Proposal Matrix A.1 . Historical Timeline/ Park Analysis/Context Analysis

68
83

xvi

1 Introduction
8

As a centre in Canada for, finance, medicine, and cultural arts, Toronto is one of the fastest developing cities in the western world (Toronto Facts). An attractive city for international immigration, Toronto has been growing by expanding outwards into suburbs where there is an abundance of open green parks and inexpensive property for young or newly arrived families. In spite of this Toronto is still recognized internationally for its strong urban core supported by a large inner city residential population. The existing residential communities within the city contain the same progressive urban values set forth by such influential thinkers like Jane Jacobs. Her insight into what factors are necessary for active and enjoyable urban communities has resonated in the Toronto Official Plan which is predicated on "Smart Growth." Toronto is unique amongst other North American cities and is enviable for its healthy urban core. Progressive urban design strategies set forth have enabled high residential density within the city, as well as live work opportunities, mixed use development, and supports mass transit. Since Toronto has been an immigration destination, it has continued to grow even as its manufacturing base has left the city. The advantages of living and working in the city are further supported by the existence of several large academic institutions, hospitals, provincial government offices, and financial corridors like Bay Street. While these factors have initiated healthy growth within the urban core, this increased density is occurring without the support of adequate green amenity space in the vicinity of this development. Although it is recognized that there are several new large parks with associated development being planned at the edges of the inner city on abandoned industrial sites, there much available underdeveloped land still in the core. and yet close to the existing subway system. Jarvis street has recently been at the centre of a heated dialogue about the proposed of one of its existing five traffic lanes into a dedicated bicycle lane. It exists as a degraded high-speed traffic artery that feeds north/south commuter traffic into the core from low-density residential neighborhoods to the north, like Rosedale and North Toronto. Despite vocalized support of mass transit and the bicycle as alternatives to car traffic within city, it has been consistently resistant to implementing a connected, comprehensive, and
Uv·...tlv<r;;.t~v·U

bicycle corridor system.

Jarvis's transformation to a traffic artery from a grand tree lined residential street has

1

precipitated the demise of its status, architectural character and urban amenity. Victorian mansions have been replaced by vacant lots, gas stations and low quality rental apartments and motels. This thesis proposes the renewal of this deteriorated street and the creation of a large scale public space to support an invigorated level of mixed use, high density development., but create a large urban park that supports increased residential and commercial development as well as opportunities for a comprehensive and connected bike traffic system, two major intersections away from the Yonge street subway system. This specific proposal identifies an opportunity to reprise public space from the wide berth of the existing street or throughfare in this case. Connectivity and continuity is key to providing an alternative system that promotes nonvehicular transportation in a growing city that already suffers from significant traffic congestion . A more sustainable means of transportation must be encouraged and utilized. Walking, running, cycling, horseback riding, skating or cross country skiing can provide a much safer, cleaner, and cheaper means of transportation when moving throughout the downtown core . What is lacking in Toronto is a system that supports connectivity and continuity of public spaces. Central Park in New York City was studied as a potential model for rethinking public space as both connector and recreational space. This model was appropriate in scale in the consideration of significant future increased density in Toronto. The uninterrupted paths along and inside the park connect distant parts of the city together, allowing one to move throughout the park and into the city by traveling on foot, bicycle or even horseback and enjoying the park's natural features without having to stop for vehicular traffic. By adopting and integrating the connective elements of a large park onto new development, a new typology emerges; one that supports the connective elements of a large park and unifies non-vehicular paths of circulation. The thesis design proposal, The Jarvis Parkway, a model for Park-Scape Infrastructure, provides a vision for how we can re-appropriate public space to accommodate growth and decrease the use of the car in a typical North American city whose infrastructure to date has been predicated on the car. Relevant literature (Sassen, 1998, Frampton, 1983, Lerup, 2001) raises the need for public open spaces in cities that are being negatively influenced by issues of globalization, capitalism, loss of identity and environmental crises. Public space is the medium for the creation of a collective political and social identity for a city and its society.

2

Chapter 1
Issues of the Modern City

The imparlance of open public space for generating identity
For the first time in history, over half of the world's population has now become urban. This phenomenon has placed even more importance on how cities influence culture, politics and the economy. The effects of globalization on capitalism, technology and culture are raising concerns among relevant literature. As cities become more interconnected with one another, the speed of growth has affected the importance of place for defining one's identity. Theorists such as Saskia Sassen (1998), Kenneth Frampton (1983), Lars Lerup (2001) and Marshall Berman (1988) have observed the changing conditions that globalization has had on societies across the world. Sassen investigates how global economical conditions affect local populations. In her book, Globalization and Its Discontents, Sassen explains that political challenges arise with multinational corporations evading the control of the nation-state, thus allowing for strong concentrations of poverty and wealth to co-exist in the global city (p. xii). This gap also produces economic problems between the large investments global cities provide for real estate and telecommunications compared to the lack of expenditures on low-income inner cities. "As the highly educated, leading sections, such as finance, see their incomes rise enormously, the wages of those who clean their offices or do their photocopying stagnate or sink" (p. xiv). Cultural implications arise, too, with this progress, as immigration, which Sassen argues, is one of the constitutive processes of globalization today (p.xxi). The immigrant populations within global cities provide a link between the new corporate world of power and the disadvantaged in these cities through the market labor, or Sassen refers it to the "market for

The phenomenon of globalization has also changed how the built form is being conceived and constructed. Kenneth Frampton (1983) addresses the paradox of the globalization of CIVIIIIZc:ltlcln and its locally derived cultures. In Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six Points for an Architecture of Resistance, he argues that the rapacity of development, brought on by forces of global production and investment, has created places and buildings that lack local cultural or historical significance. This produces a loss of identity and enables monotonous forms places that are placeless. Frampton's outlook on modernization also raises the dangers technological advances providing seemingly utopian futures. He points out how the global economy separates civilization from culture, forcing the commodification of both technology art. Lars Lerup (2001 ), on the other hand, questions the increasing speed of development

3

affecting the formation and sustainment of identity within global cities. In After The City, Lerup voices his concern for the fate of cities, The realization that speed dominates stasis, and the stasis has become mere pause and rest, completely undermines the age-old concepts of permanence and identity in favor of transformation and event. The city is being swept away by the metropolis. This does not just replace one noun with another, but radically turns the state of affairs into a state of perpetual motion (p.77). Finally, Marshall Berman's (1988) critique on modernity as an age of contradiction and ambiguity brings further light on how the progress of civilization is impacting its local cultures. Berman agrees that the age of modernity has brought with it vast progress in science and technology, industry and economics, but it has also come at the price of two World Wars, the alienation of cultures and the gradual destruction of the natural environment. The globalization of economy, technology and culture in the modern era has changed how cities create spaces that allow for local identities to flourish and prosper. Each of these authors raises concerns for how global processes are changing the nature of cities in response to issues of economy, technology and culture. As cities are becoming more prosperous within global networks, their physical spaces are losing their significance for facilitating economical, technological and cultural processes. In response to these issues, all four of these authors look towards the purpose of 'place' as a means of sustaining identity within a global city. In terms of globalized economies, Sassen suggests for more transnational control over political and economic exchanges but of interest is her social approach to linking people to the city as a remedy for breaking down barriers that separate the 'elite' classes and as Sassen argues the immigrants and ethnicities that are too often constituted as 'otherness' (p.xxxi). By re-evaluating how global cities recognize their immigrants and their ethnicities, Sassen provides a new perspective where these groups of people are just as crucial to the development of a global city and this " ... new process of identity formation engenders new notions of community, of membership, and of entitlement" (pg.xxxii). What is essential in this 'identity formation' is a city that enables a multiplicity of cultures to come together. Sassen gives global cities the responsibility of harboring many ethnicities and cultures within places that can establish their identities. The need to establish one's identity in a global city can be elegantly illustrated in Berman's All That is Solid Melts into Air, where he describes what it means to be a modernist in a modern world, To be modern, I said, is to experience personal and social life as a maelstrom, to find one's world and oneself in perpetual disintegration and renewal, trouble and anguish, ambiguity and contradiction: to be part of a universe in which all that is sold

4

melts into air. To be a modernist is to make oneself somehow at home in the maelstrom, to make its rhythms one's own, to move within its currents in search of the forms of reality, of beauty, of freedom, of justice, that its fervid and perilous flow allows (p.345). The need to validate and sustain identity in global cities places architecture as a tool to facilitate this process. As architects are entrusted to design the spaces in cities, it is imperative that these spaces must be designed to facilitate identity formation as a response to the issues of globalization. For example, Frampton suggests mediating the impact of universal civilization with elements derived from the specificities of a particular place. He argues that inspiration attained by the topography of the site, local light conditions, and tectonics that reflect the availability of materials to the place can situate a place or built form within a universal civilization while still reflecting on its local culture. This approach creates what Frampton calls 'Resistant Architecture', whereby the built form maintains its relevance and meaning in a world that is more driven by economic forces than the cultural advancement of the species. Frampton's 'resistant architecture' can also be found contemporary architects like Foreign Office Architects. Considering how connected and instantaneous interactions between individuals can be, FOA (2004) still believe that many feel they are foreigners in a globalized world. FOA state in their book, Phylogenesis, "location matter are the critical factors in the synthesis of identity (p.7)". Similar to Frampton, FOA rely on the significance of place in order to develop identity. While Frampton argues architecture should be used to 'resist' the impact of universal civilization, Lerup suggests this phenomenon by giving architects the responsibility of designing for this new type of society, one that is constantly changing and in motion. By advocating an architecture facilitates liberated movement and encourages free use of space (p.26), Lerup positions as the ones responsible for providing meaningful and successful spaces in global Frampton and Lerup both rely on the design of the built form when trying to understand identity is being contested in global cities. In light of this issue, Bernard Tschumi (1996) provides further validation to how architecture be used to critique and provide solutions to economic, technological and cultural issues globalized cities. In Architecture and Disjunction, Tschumi argues that architectural
... ...,t..., ......... ..,

and the use, or event that takes place within in it, have no cause-and-effect relationship another. Tschumi argues that architectural space prior to use is "politically neutral; an space, for example, (is) no more or no less revolutionary or progressive than

symmetrical one" (p.B). The form and spaces in a building does not carry intrinsic political

5

agendas but the use and meaning assigned to it do. Therefore, if form does not follow function, or use, or socioeconomics, there arises a disjunction. The inherent contradiction places the concept of space and the experience of space as two mutually exclusive terms. The interplay that arises between these two concepts are seen as a gateway towards the role of architecture as a social and political driver (p.16). Opposing the traditional view of stability, solidity, and foundation, Tschumi argues" .. .Architecture's inherent confrontation of space and use and the inevitable disjunction of the two terms means that architecture is constantly unstable, constantly on the verge of change (p.19). In this state of flux, Tschumi believes that architects: ...could function as critics and commentators, acting as intellectuals who reveal the contradictions of society through writings or other forms of practice, sometimes outlining possible courses of actions, along with their strengths and limitations. Finally, we could act as revolutionaries by using our environmental knowledge (meaning our understanding of cities and the mechanisms of architecture) in order to be part of professional forces trying to arrive at new social and urban structures (p.9). This new responsibility enables architects to become liberated from trying to 'design the condition' and allows them through research and process to 'condition the design'. The need for 'places' in cities to foster identity, especially in an age of globalized economies, technologies and culture, positions architects as key proponents of validating and sustaining identity. Through design, architects can begin to investigate how identity is formed and sustained by incorporating elements of typology, climate and materiality. The disjunction of architectural space from use enables architects to develop spaces that can influence social change and provide a freedom of use, especially for people who need physical spaces to validate their identity.

6

Globalized Capitalism
Developing a Creative Identity
The strengthening and progress of capitalism in modern times has influenced a new set of criteria for employment in western society. Richard Sennett (2006), a Professor of Sociology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the London School of Economics, reveals the issues faced with new models of capitalism and its demands on modern citizens. Reflecting similar notions of Saskia Sassen's work, Sennett, investigates how globalization has influenced migratory trends throughout society that has altered the sense of community within institutions and cities. In The Culture of the New Capitalism, Sennett argues this nevv form of capitalism, brought about by the globalization of political, economic and social factors, has demanded a new form of person. This supposed 'ideal' person, Sennett argues, has to address three new challenges that stem from the new models of capitalism. The first is the transition of long-term employment towards short-term, job-to-job, place-to-place employees that institutions now require for their workforce. Richard Sennett addresses this transition by questioning the sustainment for producing a valuable life narrative in this process. Where long-term employment produced a fulfilling sense of meaning in one's life, he argues that a short-term form of employment does not carry with it a sustained sense of self (p.4 ). Another challenge in this model is based on talent and the ability to gain new skills quickly as demands shift. This new social order, Sennett responds, "militates against the ideal of craftsmanship, that is, learning to do just one thing really well" (p.4 ). Finally, another factor concerns the loss of place that institutions impose within their organization, asserting that past service and commitment does not earn them a place within their business. He argues that this model of employment contrasts with many people whom, "need a sustaining life narrative, take pride in being good at something specific, and value the experiences they've lived through" (p.S). The argument presented by Sennett in his book is that some may see the new modeis of work, talent, and consumption as a new form of "fluid
"traJ~rlr\VY'I"

or "liquid modernity" as philosopher Zygmunt Bauman defines it; these new models

not provided the freedom it promises.

7

In The Rise of the Creative Class, Richard Florida (2002) addresses the emergence of a new social class that is taking shape within North American cities. Consisting of scientists, engineers, architects, designers, writers, artists or musicians, the Creative Glass begins to define the growing knowledge based workforce that use creativity as a key factor in work like education, health care, law and other professions. Brought about by economic research investigating the locations of high-tech industries to the number of talented people, Florida has found that these same locations also contain the highest number of gay and bohemian people. His research has concluded that economic growth is not driven by companies, but by the places that are tolerant, diverse and open to creativity. This trend has reversed the common notion of people moving to where there work is and now has companies searching for where creative people live. The sense of place becomes very important in attracting creative people because as Florida explains, What they look for in communities are abundant high-quality amenities and experiences, an openness to diversity of all kinds, and above all else the opportunity to validate their identities as creative people (220). These communities produce a more flexible way of life, allowing creative people to build a wide range of relationships and providing them the freedom to pursue opportunities. According to Florida, place needs to facilitate Lifestyle, Social Interaction, Diversity, Authenticity, and Identity. These factors determine the quality of place cities contain and how creative people use the spaces. The type of lifestyle associated with creative people differs from the traditional way of life where one would work in one place and vacation in another. Florida argues that creative people tend to have unpredictable work schedules and need to have quick access to recreation during a break. Their lifestyle requires a place that can provide a quick escape, providing relaxation and reflection. Social interaction becomes very important to people who do not work on fixed schedules and may not rely on family for security and stability. Using Ray Oldenburg's idea of "third places" (places which are neither considered home or work) Florida argues that urban spaces provide informal acquaintances and reaffirm the necessity for human interaction, especially when interaction at work and with family may be unstable or nonexistent. The djversity a place provides is another important element to how creative minded people need a mix of influences in order to be inspired and motivated. Places that offer stimulation in terms of cultures and ideas provide freedom and a sense of belonging. Authenticity and uniqueness of a place becomes crucial for creative minded people as they seek specific cultural attributes. Florida argues that music is one of the ways a place is authenticated because it

8

easily represents and evokes the true identity of a place. The symbolic character of a place helps attract people as they find its uniqueness important, especially as more franchises go up, the experience becomes similar to many other places and thus creates generic spaces. Without the longevity required to develop identity within the workplace, Florida uses the place one lives in order to generate and sustain identity. As people try to define who they are in society, Florida believes that creative minded people, "actively establish their own identity in places, and also contribute to actively building places that reflect and validate that identity" (pg.230). The shift from whom someone works for to where someone lives has become the defining feature for describing someone's identity. These characteristics illustrate how creative minded people seek out experiences to fulfill their lives. Compared to experiences where one is just a spectator, as found in theme-based chain restaurants, stadiums, or pre-packaged entertainment, Florida argues that the Creative Class seeks out experiences that are dynamic and participatory (pg.232). Having a place that allows the spectator to be part of the scene and contribute to its vitality is key to supporting and engaging creative minded people. In the context of defining society, it may be beneficial to understand previous modes of thought in past civilizations. Investigating how past civilizations understood their environment how they reacted to external conditions such as climate change, threatening enemies, and with other civilizations provides an insight into understanding how their society was Jared Diamond (2006), a professor of geography at the University of California, researched this in Collapse: How Societies Choose To Fail Or Succeed. By studying the
su<~Ce!SSIIOn

of past civilizations, from their origins, through their peak, and finally, to their sudden

Diamond has developed a framework to gain a better understanding as to why some past developed to become advanced societies and yet collapsed into extinction while civilizations continued to the present day. The framework consists of environmental
rl-::t.n"i":lii"''O

that a society created, climate change in their environment, the presence and caused by hostile neighbors, their relationship and dependence on friendly trade and the ability for a society to react to its environmental problems (p.11-14 ). By using

framework as a method for determining why past societies collapsed, Jared Diamond shows it can be applied to modern day civilizations with examples such as United States, Rwanda, Republic/Haiti, Australia and China. He discusses how these countries face the issues as many past civilizations.

9

The ability to react to environmental problems provides an interesting perspective into how a society may directly impact its growth or decline. Diamond sees this factor, as the most difficult for any civilization to deal with. It usually requires a society to reevaluate their ideas, beliefs, and their cultural history to determine whether their current way of life prevents them from further progress and thus collapse as a result. Public spaces in cities have historically provided a forum for public debate and question the status quo. Reflecting on this issue, Diamond proposes the possible choices a society has when trying to combat or prevent sudden collapse. The first choice depends on moving towards long-term thinking and making decisions prior to the point of crisis (p.522). By careful and considerate planning, many modern day societies have been able to change and prevent their civilization's collapse. This perspective seems very understandable yet many governments, businesses, and organizations have depended on reacting to crisis situations in order to pass action or change its course of planning. The second choice that Diamond offers is the capacity and ability for a society to re-examine and question their values when it conflicts with new conditions. This becomes the most problematic for any society that has upheld their core values to progress to their current level and yet, change their state of values, beliefs, ethics, and faith in order to advance to the future. The two choices presented by Diamond provide possible tactics for correcting the path of a society that faces the greatest environmental, economic, and cultural problems, as is being witnessed today. The use of public space as a forum to voice concerns and change is critical in this time and age. A public space that can initiate change will encourage change throughout society.

Visions for a New City: Towards Places of Flow
Another example where the city is being viewed in a new light is Nan Ellin's book, Integral Urbanism (2006). As an Associate Professor of Urban Design at Arizona State University, Ellin provides a model for creating spaces in a city that achieves flow. Characterized by immersion, awareness, harmony, meaning, and purpose, places in flow, Ellin argues, "allow ease of movement of people, goods, and information" (p.6). This flow is accomplished when places include qualities of hybridity, connectivity, porosity, authenticity, and vulnerability (pg.9). In order to advance the cities of the Modern and Post-Modern era, cities that were built to provide clean air and water, stopped at just that, the fundamentals of survival. As cities continue to be influenced by globalization, capitalism, and modernity, it needs to embrace the idea of constant change, the idea of flux that coincides with EHin's goal of producing flow in cities.

10

Where she uses hybridity as a method of intensifying and combining programs into a space, thenotion of flux can support its interchange and relationships. Connectivity occurs, as a space becomes a destination as well as an interchange between other parts of the city. By viewing a space in terms of supporting constant change, it can become a place as well as a connector, directing flow according to the needs ofsociety. Porosity, as defined by Ellin, "preserves the integrity of that which is brought together while allowing mutual access through permeable membranes ... "(p.S). While she argues that porosity in a city is not only manifested through materiality, it must also be applied as a functional, provisional, temporal, historic, ecological, circulatory, experiential, administrative, urban, symbolic, business, and virtual realm, in order to fully accomplish its goal of transparency and permeability (p. 70-80). The idea of being in a state of flux further supports porosity as the exchange that occurs within a given space can only succeed when all elements are visible and aware of one another.
l'l"ht:~n ... ,,,....'l"\l

positions a space within a social, geographical, and political context that validates

its existence and purpose. In order to maintain its authenticity, Ellin argues that "the authenticCity is always growing and evolving according to new needs that arise thanks to a self-adjusting
,v ......... ~H;A. ..... , ,

loop that measures and monitors success and failure"(p.5). Again, by viewing this

condition as a state of flux, a space that embraces constant change will respond accordingly. As society's needs change, a space that is designed to accept and respond to these changes will maintain its relevance throughout time. Finally, the last quality to achieve flow is the ability of a space to accept time, decay, and rebirth. Vulnerability, as described by Ellin, "calls upon to relinquish control, listen deeply, value process as well as product, and re-integrate space time" (p.5). Vulnerability is critical in this time and age, as the definition of permanence has As the rate of change has been accelerating, we can no longer sustain our pretense of permanence. With time more integral to space than ever before, the process becomes as important as the product. .. The journey and the destination become inseparable. As do the means and the ends (p.119). Time was once seen as a destroyer of space, eroding the beauty of its materials, degrading its man-made perfection with the slow but steadily intrusion of nature. Now, it can be viewed in a new light by embracing its temporal aspects and using it as a building block for a space that
exoemencE~s

constant change of flow or in the context of this thesis, flux.

11

Issues of Public Space
Public space in modern society is under attack from pressures of privatization, security, and consumerism. This attack is especially evident in Michael Sorkin's Variations On A Theme Park: The New American City And The End of Public Space (1992). He questions the emerging cities in modern society and argues that they are artificial landscapes growing in similarities to the qualities of a theme park. Sorkin maintains that the desire of consumption and a new globalized capital has produced places that are dislocated from any particular context. Using Macdonald's restaurant as an example, the author argues that its placement on the Boul' Miche creates a place that is fully ageographic. It can be inserted equally in an open field or in the heart of town. Another example provided is the inward-looking atrium hotel. Its components are reduced to a repetitive minimum, space, Sorkin argues, is departicuiarized (p.13). He believes that the obsessions with production and sales are creating this phenomenon and it is sacrificing the idea of the city as the site of community and human connection. The obsession with security becomes another of Sorkin's critique as it aids in the rising levels of manipulation and surveillance over its citizenry and with a proliferation of new modes of segregation (p.13). The author believes that this impulse of segregation has shifted city planning from it historic role as the integrator of communities in favor of managing selective development and enforcing distinction (p.14 ). These issues bring about what Sorkin ( 1992) defines as a city of simulations, television city, the city as theme park (p. 14 ). The problem with this "city" as he describes it, is that while these characteristics may bring about a "theme park" like setting which many may find comforting with pleasure, it strips the troubled urbanity of its sting (the poor, crime, dirt, and work) (p.15). These issues do not get resolved by evading the true causes for the city's problems and may cause further destruction by segregating what is unpleasant in a city. The city that Sorkin describes creates a simulated, safe, and peaceful condition but it comes at a great cost. The placeless, segregated, and simulated city that he illustrates contains public spaces that restrict speech, demonstrations, and free will. Sorkin believes that, 'The fight to reclaim the city is the struggle of democracy itself' (p.15). Richard Sennett (1974) also questions the state of society as a defector of public space. In his publication, The Fall of Public Man, Sennett investigates how privatization, secularism, and commodity fetishism have influenced current beliefs about personality itself (p.43). Sennett argues that due to these issues, modern society has become obsessed with isolation and given strength to 'selfhood', which, according to the author places intimacy and inward-

12

looking attitudes towards one's family yet promotes the erosion of public space as it lacks any significance towards one's sense ofself (pA7). Both authors believe that the state of society has created uninhabitable cities that induce people to isolate themselves and disregard the importance of public space. Yet it is through public spaces that these attitudes can be corrected when the space creates awareness of others and of the city. While these authors may see public space as a hopeless entity in modern society, it may be the use of this space that restores the city and its citizens.

The History of Public Space
The ancient Greek agora can be considered to be one of the first urban public spaces in history. Used as an open public space for assemblies and markets, the agora held legal disputes and public affairs as well as shops that provided a meeting place for strangers, whether citizens! buyers, or sellers. While many have accredited the agora as the first ideal public space, theorists like Don Mitchell (2003) argue that the agora and other actual public spaces have never simply been places of free unmediated interaction but have always also been spaces of

In The Right To The City, Mitchell identifies that the ancient agora only held significance to those with power, legal standing, and respectability (p.132). Non-citizens (slaves, women, and had no political standing in the agora. And while they were formally excluded from any political activities that took place, their labour and money were still accepted and used.

Dialectic of Public Space
Current ideologies of public space shed new light on how urban civic spaces render themselves public through planning and use. Using Lefebvre's distinction in The Production of Space between representational space (appropriated, lived space; space-in-use) and representations (planned, controlled, ordered space), Mitchell argues that public spaces like courthouse squares, monumental plazas, public parks, or pedestrian shopping districts originate through planned design and are 'public' through their designation. These of space become representational when people use the space, giving it purpose its use as a public space. Thus, public space is socially produced through its use as a space (p.129). Mitchell introduces a third view that provides an insight into how public spaces have to used in contemporary cities. By viewing public spaces as spaces for representation, that

13

is, spaces where marginalized groups can represent themselves to a larger population, their identities can be acknowledged and made evident The dialectic of public space raises the contradictory nature of public spaces in democratic cities. As Mitchell points out, public spaces demand a certain disorder and unpredictability in order to function as a democratic spaces, and yet democratic theory relies on a certain level of order and rationality to render it as democratic discourse (p.130).

The Privatization of Public Space
The idea of public space as a place of unmediated interaction is through the vision that its publicness is good in and of itself (Mitchell, 2003). This intrinsic quality, along with its democratic importance is being threatened by the steady promotion of private, rather than democratic, control of space~ Like the ancient agora, modern public space is a hybrid space, composed of commerce and politics (Sennett, 1992). This dualism, Mitchell argues, places the anarchy of the market against the anarchy of politics to create an interactive, democratic public. This hybrid nature has changed in the 20th Century as markets have increasingly been severed from politics, and as Mitchell states, "the latter being banished, fairly completely, from public space" (p.137). The recent trend in marketed public spaces can be witnessed in 'streetscaped' malls and over the past five years there has been an explosion across North America of 'theme park'-like street environments in suburban locations. Referred to as 'lifestyle centers' by Memphis-based developers Poag & McEwen, they have been described as 'malls without walls' (Caute, 2008). Consisting of sidewalks, street furniture, street parking and crosswalks, they resemble the streetscape of a main street but lack any real-world encounters one may have with pan-handlers, homeless people or street kids. While they may appear to be public streets, lifestyle centers are private in nature, just like shopping malls, they are privately managed built on private property. This raises the issue of who can access the mall and if the space can be used for anything other than shopping. By creating the image of a public space, the illusion of an open lively street that is animated with a diversity of people is actually a carefully constructed and contrived diversity that create marketable landscapes (Mitchell, 2003). The 'disneyfication' that occurs in lifestyle centers increases the alienation of people from the possibilities of unmediated social interaction and at the same time increases the control by economic and social actors over the production and use of space.

14

Privatization of public space becomes the main concern in Setha Low's essay in The Politics of Public Space (2006). She focuses on the development of gated communities in North America, and questions whether these developments are providing a false sense of security and are just enhancing the segregation within the city. These communities, Low argues, are not providing the feeling of increased security and the users resent the strict regulations that they generally pertain. Counter to the established communities that the author mentions, her of a new trend of gated communities, 'faux fortresses' located in the Simi Valley reveal absurdity in this issue. Called 'neighborhood entry identities', these communities offer
C\lllr,CinT

signs of gating yet have no one patrolling the gates. The walls, unlocked gates and are enough to provide the sense of feeling special, exclusive, and secure. While

communities provide the same housing and amenities without the additional costs, Low out that many who want to live in a modern-day fortress find the fake model as good as a real gated community (p.1 00). Low, in conclusion, suggests that fake fortresses question whether the costs of privatization and gating will ultimately outweigh their social and political appeal. The privatization of public space erodes qualities of providing a democratic forum that is accessible and multifunctional. In contrast to these gated communities, supporting public spaces can relieve the sense of many people suffer as they become aware of other people and gain an understanding of

While the outlook for public space may seem grim, many contemporary thinkers are
f'ia 1~ann·n·n

public space as it still holds value and meaning in modern society. Setha Low, Sana .

and Suzanne Scheid (2005), founders of the Public Space Research Group (PSRG) at York University, argue that one way to integrate diverse communities and promote social tolerance in this new political climate is through the use of public space. In their book, Rethinking Urban Parks; Public Space and Cultural Diversity, the authqrs agree promoting public spaces in cities creates places for everyone to relax, learn, and recreate. in turn, provides a venue where interpersonal and intergroup cooperation and conflict can be worked out in a safe and public forum. With this belief, the authors have developed a
····· '~'~"':\''r"o'""....

l""' for culturally sensitive decision making in park planning,

management, and design.

framework is composed of six elements: The importance of representing historical significance for the people using the park. Access, not only terms of circulation and transportation, but of economics and cultural patterns; access for different social groups based on income and visitation patterns. Providing spatially adequate territories for diverse groups within the larger space of

15

4)

5) 6)

the overall site. Accommodating the differences in the ways social class and ethnic groups use and value public sites is essential to making decisions that sustain cultural and social diversity. Importance of conserving the facilities and diversions that attract people to a park when restoring its scenic features. And Symbolic ways of communicating cultural meaning are an important dimension of place attachment that can be fostered to promote cultural diversity (p.4 ). This framework provides further reinforcement of public space as a democratic forum that

is accessible to everyone and supports numerous events and activities. The goal of providing public space as a means to support cultural diversity can be related to James Holston's Cities And Citizenship (1999), where he argues that despite the impact of globalization creating a dichotomy between the national and global when rendering national identity, he believes that place remains fundamental to the problems of membership in society (p.3). His refocus from the national to the local in support of developing citizenship situates public spaces in cities as a main forum where this development can occur.

Public Space Theory
Viewing public spaces as paradoxical space provides further insight into how these spaces generate and sustain identity. In Open: New Designs For Public Space, Linda Pollak (2004) considers the evolving role and definition of program in the design of urban spaces. Pollak addresses the difficulty in programming public spaces due to their complexity and the
rta::-artt"\Oi'""C<

inability to accurately control the outcome. Using Henri Lefevbre's analysis of the contradictions of the built environment, which according to Lefevbre, produce a "space of differences", Pollak addresses spaces that are in tension due to the cooperation or conflict between natural and social forces. Despite the difficulty in developing program for public spaces, Pollak argues that one approach to this challenge is through the construction of a spatial heterogeneity, which can support or bring about change within itself. The example of Vito Acconci's Island in the Mur is composed of a playground and a theater and creates juxtaposition that helps construct its dynamic identity. Pollak argues that the disturbance of one space by another creates an intensified energy that is greater than the sum of its parts. The use of two seemingly unrelated activities beside one another create paradoxical spaces that while on their own may provide limited opportunities for creating and sustaining identity, together create a dynamic identity that enhance the vitality of the space. Public spaces that embrace multiple activities either by

16

complimenting one another or through their conflict produce dynamic spaces that are adaptable to change and progress. While many public spaces like Tompkins Square Park in New York have provided places , of protest, revolt, and rebellion throughout history, many authors are also investigating more of its intimate subversive qualities. Margaret Kohn (2004 ), discusses the sympathetic qualities one attains in public space and how public space encourages people to self reflect as they identify with others. In Brave New Neighborhoods: The Privatization of Public Space, Kohn suggests that public space fosters politically salient capacities and identities. Using the Scottish moral philosopher, Adam Smith, Kahn suggests that public spaces provide a forum for ethical judgment. Observing others that are quite different and yet invoking sympathy towards them, especially, someone that is suffering, provides an awareness of both the spectator and the sufferer (p.202). This encourages one to think about oneself as well as the other person when questioning their own perspectives and views towards others. Public space, Kahn argues, facilitates the mutual recognition of strangers. So, while in private, Kohn states, "we choose our companions according to our preferences and in public we learn to share the world with those who are different" (pg.204). Her argument for public space is that it promotes contact between different races, cultures, classes, and ages. While it may seem as an ideal to believe that it can instill sympathy in everyone, it is something worth preserving in a modern society. Frank Cunningham (2008) presents other forms of subversion within public spaces in the forthcoming book by Mark Kingwell and Patrick Turmel, Rites of Way: The Politics and Poetics of Public Space. Cunningham's essay, "Public Spaces and Subversion", discusses the work of anthropologist, Johan Huizinga. Cunningham describes according to Huizinga, that cities "were functionally organized to promote work, informed by an image of a human as a producer~Homo Faber- rather than as a seeker of creativity, pleasure, fun and play -Homo Ludens" (p.4). Using the latter notion of man, Cunningham argues that public spaces can provide 'fun' that is often, perhaps typically, spontaneous and opportunistic (p.4 ). This brings the notion of 'fun' in public spaces into a subversive state as many who live in a city are influenced by the culture of homo faber. This culture according to Cunningham, are further regimented by exigencies of a massmarket, industrialized economy (p.5). Promoting the use of public space has the potential to help erode a culture of work for a culture of fun. The subversion of shifting cultural views has implications on a society that is normally fixated towards industrial and market-driven cycles of work.

17

The second form of subversion that the author presents arises in the form of Trusteeship. Countering the status quo of 'possessive individualism', coined by the Canadian political theorist, C.B. Macpherson, the subversive power of 'trusteeship', Cunningham believes, can retrieve the idea of what he calls, 'developmental democracy', where people cooperate to achieve a society where everyone has the opportunity to develop his or her proper potentials (p.6). The idea of trusteeship can be exhibited in a public space where the people who use space take some responsibility for its maintenance and well-being. By helping to keep apark clean, or defending it against exploitative development, the culture that use public spaces subvert the notions of 'possessive individualism' as C. B. Macpherson stated of modern society, pushing towards a culture of 'developmental democracy' (p.6). As the authors have illustrated, public space is multifaceted with subversive qualities that promote cultural change and shifts state of society towards a more conscience, sympathetic, and potentially less destructive life. The concept of Heterotopia, introduced by French sociologist, Michel Foucault, gives further insight into the nature of private and public spaces. Heterotopia, as defined by Lieven De Cauter and Michie! Dehaene in Heterotopia and the City (2008), is composed of places and spaces that "interrupt the apparent continuity and normality of ordinary everyday space" (pg.4 ). These heterotopias, literally meaning 'other places', can be conceptualized between completely private and public spaces. This third space, as defined by Cauter and Dehaene, is neither political (public) nor economical (private), but hieratic, concerned more with cultural spaces that are required by religion, arts, sports and leisure. Of interest is the association of play to the concept of heterotopia. The authors argue if public space is seen as a medium for action; to force agendas, voice opinions, and private space is used to produce work and labour, then heterotopian space, one that mediates between the public and private, allows for a more creative element of the human condition. The authors reference Johan Huizinga, using his definition of Homo Ludens to associate heterotopian space to a space of play. Huizinga's elements of Homo Ludens describe how play is foundational to the organization of society and the production of culture, 1) Outside the everyday; 2) Without direct purpose or material end 3) that unfolds within a dedicated space and time 4) that is rule-bound 5) often associated with a club or specialized society and 6) often partly hidden or disguised. (pg.95) The looseness of control that play provides places heterotopian space as a threshold

18

between the strict conformity of laws or obedience and its transgression, allowing creativity and liberation. Viewing a heterotopia as a space of play gives further insight into the amount of control or looseness of control in a contemporary public space.

The Future of Public Space
The rise of network technologies such as the Internet has produced unprecedented means of communication and information exchange. This phenomenon has not only influenced how societies are culturally or economically organized but has changed the nature of the physical environment. As the Internet allows for faster means of communication and limitless distance for its exchange, the physical spaces this takes place in are being challenged and re-evaluated. One firm investigating the interaction between the physical and the digital public domain in contemporary urban networks is invOFFICE for architecture, urbanism and design, Amsterdam. Studying Vilem Flusser, philosopher of communication, Elizabeth Sikiaridi and Frans Vogelaar (2006) discuss how the uprising of networks within contemporary cities has changed how cities are being conceptualized. Instead of thinking about cities in their geographical context, Flusser argues that architects and urbanists should think topologically, incorporating the ever-growing interpersonal relationships that take place in cyberspace and how it manifests in physical ·space. Sikiaridi and Vogelaar note that physical spaces such as public spaces in cities or private spaces in homes are interacting with communication networks that dissolve their isolation and move them towards overlapping and interrelated communication spaces (J., & Melis, L, pg.84). With this in mind, Sikiaridi and Vogelaar have developed Soft Urbanism, an interdisciplinary field that explores how information-communication processes can be interwoven into public spaces in order to strengthen their coherence and integrate network systems into the built form. The Neighbours Network City, a project developed by invOFFICE in the city of Essen illustrates the ideas behind Soft Urbanism through strategically using telecommunication networks to reinforce the fragmented public spaces across the city. The project consists of a series of interconnected proposals that address different layers of the urban network and in each intervention they propose different network logic. One of the proposals called 'wir ESSEN FUR DAS RUHRGEBIET' (We're eating for the Ruhr region) exemplifies how network technology can connect isolated public spaces together. Using the aid of an Internet platform and local media, the city of Essen along with the Ruhr region engaged in urban dinners that were held simultaneously across the Ruhr valley." Even though the tables were positioned

19

in neglected spaces throughout the region, theatrical and musical ensembles and other cultural groups roamet;j around providing entertainment and enlivened the spaces. This event brought diverse local institutions and activity groups together using a locally imbedded Internet communication platform that provided them with the necessary interaction to realize this event.

Chapter 2
Design Studies
Analysis Framework
The case studies to be examined provide a forum to test the ideas presented in this thesis. Selection of the case studies is determined by the significance and relevance of the public space to its surrounding context. The case studies are situated in the same city to maintain coherence and to provide the constants of sharing the same history, climate, and social conditions. New York City is selected as the experimental grounds due to its rich history and complexities of urban living. Analyzing public space within New York provides the complexity needed in order to provide enough quantifiable information for this analysis. The parks were selected through their similarity in size, surrounding context, and current state of welfare. The parks, Tompkins Square Park, Washington Square Park, and Bryant Park exhibit similar scales in size and their context and current state provide evidence for the differences these parks exhibit. The structure of this analysis is composed of categorizing these parks in a timeline that illustrates their progression through major historical events and provides photos, plans, and maps as a tools to visually analyze and critique their state. Using Nan Ell in's model for creating successful spaces in the city, each case study will be analyzed for qualities of hybridity, connectivity, porosity, authenticity, and vulnerability. Finally, questioning whether each space can function in a state of flux will provide the necessary information to proceed with a design intervention.

21

The Study of Parks
Understanding the need for Diversirly
One of the first pieces of literature that critically investigated neighborhood parks was Jane Jacobs' The Death And Life of Great American Cities (1969). Upon her study of what makes neighborhood parks successful, Jacobs argues that parks that provide a diversity of uses for a diverse neighborhood surrounding it allows the space to be fully animated and used the day. Jacobs investigates three city parks in Philadelphia in order to see how these spaces physically interact with their neighborhoods. Rittenhouse Square, which Jacobs considers as a success in the city, possess a significant amount of diversity of use as the neighborhood surrounding the square provides a mixture of users that enter and leave the park at different times. Because different people use the at different times~ it supports a diversity of uses that render the space active throughout the day. In contrast, Jacobs looks at Philadelphia's Washington Square, which is predominantly surrounded by office buildings that are used throughout the day. With a low density of ri\AI·OIIIr'\nc.in the area, the main users of the square were mostly office workers who operate on the same daily schedule. Using the square for movement on the way to work, the space was empty until lunch and then again empty once the workers had gone home. Jacobs credits this singularity of use to the deterioration of the park and has since become a space used by illicit groups of people. Franklin Square, the third park Jacobs investigates also has the problem of attracting squatters and this reflects the lack of diversity in the area. The argument central to the analysis of these parks is that without a diversity of users, who use the parks for different reasons throughout the day, produce functional monotony and then fall into the hands of people who have no where else to go. Successful neighborhood parks according to Jacobs, never serve as barriers or as interruptions to the intricate functioning of the city around them. Rather, they help to knit together diverse surrounding functions by giving them a pleasant joint facility; in the process they add another appreciated element to the diversity and give something back to their surroundings ... (pg.1 01)

22

Washington Square Park
Historical Timeline: Comparative Diagram
Legend Significant Periods in lime Pre-1800

1800s Waves of Immigration

1930s Great Depression

1970s Economic Recession

1980-908 Rise of Economy

2000s Present Day

Table 2.1 - Historical Timeline for Washington Square Park

23

Historical Timeline: Comparative Diagram

Bryant Park
legend
Significant Periods in Tme

Pre-1800

1800s WSN88 of Immigration

19308 Great Deprassion

1970s Economic Recession

1980-908 Rise of Economy

20008 Present Day

Table 2.2- Historical Timeline for Bryant Park

24

Tompkins Square Park
Historical Timeline: Comparative Diagram
Legend

Significant Periods in Time Pre-1800

1800s Waves of Immigration

1930s Great Depression

1970s Economic Recession

1980-908 Rise of Economy

2000s Present Day

Table 2.3- Historical Timeline for Tompkins Square Park

25

1760

Chess Tables

II

= =

1770

Carousel

©

=--1780

Viewing Gardens
~

1790

C"'

roI

Cafe

"' ~
)>

0
=
1810 =--1820

1800

3 Cl)
N
0)

Grill/ Restaurant

~
()
Q)

:::::J

::::r

~

Q'
Cl)

Boules/ Bocce Ball Courts

z

~
0

x0"' ...,

Washrooms
'<
QJ

=--1830

~ ;:oo;(/)

""'0

Children's Playgrounds

=--1840

::J
f""t

"'C
QJ

...,

IIIII II II

---

"'

Picnic/Cafe Tables

1850

Mounds Artisan/ Gift Shops

1860

= =

1870

Outdoor Library

1880

-

2030

Washington Square Park
Located in the center of Greenwich Village, Washington Square Park consists of 9.75 acres and is also home to New York University. Undergoing three-phases of renovation, the park will have its main fountain rebuilt and moved to align with Washington Square Arch. The study of this park has shown that it is a very successful public space amongst the local community. The current renovation has raised concerns over the nature of the main fountain as it is being reduced in size and the installation of new water jets will hinder the previous events that took place in the center of the fountain. As a public space in the city, the park satisfies the qualities of hybridity with the capacity to support recreational activities, food-vending facilities, and can host a variety of events that take place in the center of the park. As an event space, the main fountain is used as a focus for local music and theatrical performances while also serving as a space to gather and meet. The park is used by the local community and also serves as a forum for university events such as graduation ceremonies and student rallies. Throughout the park, there are a number of spaces in varying sizes that allow for different events to occur. Providing spaces for bocce ball courts, playgrounds, and seating for chess tables, the park's multifunctional nature successfully supports the quality of hybridity. The park's location provides connectivity between the university, Greenwich Village, and four major subway lines. As a destination, the locals have considered the park as the heart of the community and as it provides a venue for many cultural events. The porous nature of the park can be witnessed along its edges as well as it entrances. The low fencing along the path creates inviting qualities that allows the public to transverse the fence and occupy the lawns. The main entrance at the north end of the park reinforces the accessibility and visibility. Entrances along the corners and intersections provide multiple entry and exit points that allow the public to circulate in and through the park thereby increasing its porosity. Reinforced by the cultural presence in the community, the park also serves a political venue as illustrated by a rally that took place on September 27th, 2007, where Presidential Candidate, Barack Obama, gave his speech to 20,000 spectators (The New York Times, September 28, 2007). The park maintains its authenticity with ongoing events and festivals. The park's vulnerability can be witnessed in its materiality. As the park has aged, the stone fountain has begun to crack and lose its facing. This aging is what has prompted the park renovation. Despite the deterioration of the park's surfaces, Washington Square Park fulfills the qualities required for a successful space in the city. The history of the park illustrates how it has

28

overcome many redesigns and still provides a successful public space for its community and the city. The challenge for this park remains to provide an inviting and pleasant space, as it will be renovated to include two new dog runs and a smaller fountain. This could change the character of the park and shift its purpose. The park's current state of transition puts it in an uncertain future as the successful elements in the park are being changed. This could provide a possible design intervention as the celebrated aspects of the park are being contested.

Bryant Park
With a not distant history of drug abuse and public neglect, the 9.6-acre space known as Bryant Park now supports up to 3,000 visitors a day (Collins, Glenn. New York Times June 5, 2008). This is in response to the renovations that took place in the late eighties. Created by the Rockefeller Brothers Fund in 1980, the goal of the Bryant Park Restoration Corporation (BPRC) was to redesign the park to encourage better accessibility and transparency. The park's original design was composed of a classical large central lawn with flanking formal paths. Trying to rescue the park during the Great Depression, New York's Parks Commissioner, Robert Moses hired architect, Lusby Simpson, to transform the park into a city oasis by isolating it from street activity and providing elevated pedestrian paths through the site. While fairly successful in 1934, the park fell into degradation as the country suffered from the Depression and crime and poverty rose in the area. Readjustment of the park design came following the study that William H. Whyte conducted throughout New York City that concluded that the park lacked accessibility and visibility. In 1988, city agencies approved the plans drafted by Hanna/Olin Ltd. to increase the number of entrances and provide better transparency throughout the park. Now completely funded by the renamed Bryant Park Corporation, its local community once again views the park as a vibrant space. The redesign also included a number of significant enhancements that increased its hybridity.

By replacing the fixed seating with light movable chairs, the users of the park can configure
their own spaces and provides the ability for groups to gather in any part of the park. This enables the park users to have more control over their environment. This allows the park to accommodate events, recreational activities, and promotes its circulation. The steps at each entrance have also become gathering/meeting spaces, providing similar qualities to the Spanish Steps in Rome. The park does lose its hybrid nature while it is overtaken by fashion showsthat take place twice a year. Closed off from the public, the park becomes a fashion venue for

29

private interests. This privatization prevents it from fulfilling its purpose as a public space in the city. Despite the closure, the park's grand lawn transforms in the winter into a skating rink that is sponsored by private corporations. While subject to advertisements, the rink is completely free to the public and gives the park a second life providing recreation, physical exercise and activity during the winter season. Bryant Park is successful in encouraging a number of events and activities that take place although it loses its hybridity when the park is closed to the public for private interests. Located between Grand Central Station and Times Square, Bryant Park provides the connective urban fabric that allows tourists and commuters to stop and relax at the park before continuing towards the commercial and financial districts. The park thus becomes a connector and a destination, fulfi.lling the needs as a buffer space before one approaches the denser parts of the city. With the latest redesign, the park now provides better access and visibility into the site. There, the vegetation is kept very low to provide unobstructed views across the park. This provides greater personal security and allows safe passage for individuals and families. The visibility gives the park a very transparent nature that. contrasts with the problematic design imposed during the Great Depression. Economically, Bryant Park Corporation (BPC) provides an abundance of information to the status of the park. The use of signage, newsletters and a website allows the public to be involved with the issues of the park. This porosity of information has been vital to the locals and those interested with events and activities that take place in the park. The New York Public Library authenticates Bryant Park by providing a square for the Library. The park doubles it functionality as a city space and as an extension of the library. The context surrounding the park provides a unique contrast as the private office towers look onto the Public Library and the park. The park's location provides a unique venue to merge public and corporate cultures, thus enhancing its importance. Throughout its history, Bryant Park has survived three redesigns and stands today as an important part of the city. While the park is very successfully maintained by the BPC, the number of users is estimated to double when One Bryant Park, the new office tower adjacento the site is completed (Collins, Glen. New York Times, June 5, 2008). Along with concerns over the park's private interests, the influx of new users may render the park inaccessible by overcrowding. To survive, the park may need to be reconfigured to handle the new users while maintaining its essential qualities that make it successful.

30

Tompkins Square Park
Tompkins Square Park has a very politically and culturally charged history. The largest of the three parks, at 10.5 acres, it is located in the community neighborhood called the East Village. Also known as Loisaida (a merging of the words: Lower East Side), the park is situated in a more intimate residential neighborhood. The low-rise fabric and distance from major streets surrounding the park provide a quiet and calm atmosphere. Historically, the Lower East Side provided a new home for many immigrants that arrived in New York City. The present condition is stili very similar, as it is home to a variety of ethnic groups consisting of Asian, South American, and European decent. Throughout history, the centrality of the park within the community has provided a venue for a number of protests and rallies. As early as 1874, unemployed workers would assemble in the park and rally against the city for employment. Culturally, the park has painful memories manifested into the Slocum Fountain, which provides a memorial for over a 1,000 German immigrants that died in 1904 with the fire and sinking of the Steamship General Slocum. The controversial protests of the late eighties gave awareness of the conflicts the city had with the neighborhood culture. Homelessness, along with concerns over gentrification created an outcry amongst the community and the city's response came at the cost of severe police enforcement. Despite its conflicted history, the park contains some of the earliest evidence of the playgrounds in New York City and supports the first inter-park athletic championship which hosts over 10,000 spectators at the event. The inclusion of recreational facilities in the park during the 1930s provided handball and basketball courts along with new playgrounds. The construction of a band shell in 1961 provided a venue for many local musical talents and developed a unique culture in the park. The band shell was removed and renovations that took place in the early nineties have drastically changed the character of the park. The park redesign of 1992 has included higher fencing, the removal of the band shell and new playground construction. These changes have removed much of the character of the park. With the loss of the band shell, Tompkins Square Park has lost much of its cultural identity and the musical community has suffered in response to it. The recreational spaces still provide a hybrid quality for the park as it provides spaces for youth sports and activities. The distance to the nearest subway line creates problems for accessing the park. Bus transit is still heavily used in the area and serves the majority of the local community. The park still functions as a connector within the area and serves as a link to provide passage and circulation throughout the park and its context.

31

The edge conditions surrounding the park create an inward looking character as the high black painted iron fencing separates the park from the street Within the park, this fencing continues and gives the sense of separation to many of the parks spaces. The segregation of park spaces creates problems of porosity as visibility and accessibility are constrained. The loss of its musical history, along with lack of gathering spaces due to fenced playground and dog run spaces negates the park of its historical significance and it therefore loses its authenticity as the park segregates and isolates its spaces. While the recreational spaces provide a venue for sports and recreation, they are separated from the rest of the park. The history of the park shows it's troubled past and while the current park design overlooks many of its previous attributes, the location and scale of it may provide opportunities to better serve its community. With the growing recession in the United States·, the park may provide a place of relief and recreation through the difficulties that lay ahead. Preparing for possible economic crises, Tompkins Square Park can prepare itself through possible design interventions that reinforce its recreational and athletic qualities. Education and training can offer opportunities during recessions. The inclusion of a professional athletics facility in the park may provide such encouragement for the community.

32

Chapter 3- Design Proposal

The Jarvis Parkway, an example of Park-Scape Infrastructure, arises out of the body of research into New York's neighborhood and city parks and proposes a new typology onto Jarvis Street. The lack of connectivity and continuity once found on Jarvis has been reduced to a set of isolated and disintegrated neighborhood parks, abandoned and decrepit heritage sites and a nonexistent public realm due to the prominence of vehicular traffic. Research into New York's neighborhood parks reveals that the parks act as connectors, usually becoming the center of a neighborhood by containing amenities for people of all ages. The three neighborhood parks studied in New York each reveal different qualities that help them become a success in terms of use and appreciation. Bryant Park has become a commercial success following the improvements resulting from Whyte's study of the park. By increasing accessibility and visibility, the park is able to support large numbers of visitors while allowing for maximum flexibility of its users once inside. The surrounding office towers around the park provide the necessary density to support constant use and its proximity to Times Square, Grand Central Station, along with the New York Public Library positions the park as a connector of these significant places. Washington Square Park supports institutional development with the New York University using the park for school ceremonies and gatherings. While Tompkins Square Park boasts athletic courts for residential and educational use. Each of these parks becomes central to their neighborhoods, becoming a public yard for the local community to use. These parks work with the established neighborhoods and provide the necessary amenities to support the nature of the community. When the Jarvis street parks are examined, there is an enormous lack of community surrounding the parks. With the prominence of vehicular traffic, the once established community along Jarvis has been reduced to small segregated pockets of neighborhoods that lack any unifying sense of community. The Jarvis Parkway becomes a new approach to integrating the existing parks into a larger network of continuous green open spaces. By expanding the parks into one large system, the project becomes comparable in size to Central Park in New York City. Examining this Park reveals the potentials of creating connective continuous space by understanding how Central Park relates to its context, the city.

33

Central Park
History
The history of Central Park reveals how the inadequacy of small parks in an urban core drove the need for a large-scale intervention that composes six percent of Manhattan at 843 acres. As early as 1833, expansion of development in New York was creating traffic pressures and congestion. During this expansion, the Assistant Board of Alderman's Committee on Lands and Places began securing land for squares and public places for parades and festivals. They believed the parks most important asset was to "serve as ventilators to a densely populated city." They went on and declared "almost every stranger who visits us, whether from our sister States or from Europe, speaks of the paucity of our Public Squares; and that in proportion to its size, New York contains a smaller number, and those few comparatively less extent than perhaps any other town of importance" (Heckscher, pg.9). In response to this condition, Francis Nicholson's montage of individual parks (fig. 3.1) was published along with a map of the City showing how insignificant they really were. (fig. 3.2) The need for a large park came about by the editorials produced by William Cullen Bryant and Andrew Jackson Downing. Bryant's (1794-1878) editorial entitled "A New Park" came about in July 1844, which he called for "an extensive pleasure ground for shade and recreation" and in June 24, 1845 argued against the failure of the city plan to incorporate "a range of parks and public gardens along the central part of the island or elsewhere." Downing (1816-1852), an editor of the Horticulturist, published A Treatise on the Theory and Practice of Landscape Gardening, Adapted to North America in 1841. In a series of public letters, Downing compared London's enormous parks with Manhattan's which he concluded , "What are called parks in New York, are not even apologies for the thing; they are only squares, or paddocks" (Heckscher ,pg.12). The editorials reached out to the masses and became an important topic for mayors to address. In Apri l 1851, Ambrose C. Kingsland issued a statement about the inadequacy of the City's public places; in May, he stated to the Common Council that the time was right for purchasing the land for a park "on a scale which will be worthy of the city" (Heckscher, pg.12). With the Panic of 1857, the economy worsened and the scale of the proposed park came into question. In March 1854, a majority of the Committee on Lands and Places, finding neither need nor justification for Central Park to be so large, voted to remove the southern .twelve blocks (Fifty-ninth to Seventy-second Streets) together with 400 fe. e t from each side. The park was going to be significantly reduced in size until the mayor, Fernando Wood, who was elected

34

in 1854 vetoed the council's park reduction resolution, by stating, "To assert that this park will be too large is entirely unworthy of even the present position of this metropolis, to say nothing of a destiny now opening so brilliantly before us" (pg.17). The scale of the park is a fundamental aspect to how successful it is as a natural open place within a dense urban fabric. blocks (Fiftyninth to Seventy-second Streets) together with 400 feet from each side. The park was going to be significantly reduced in size until the mayor, Fernando Wood, who

Figure 3.1 - Montage of New York's Parks. Credit: Creating Central Park

Ttl.ll.tt . . . TIIW'f

~:

~~ ., /wll(.l ....

Figure 3.2 - Map of New York with Parks highlighted. Credit: Creating Central Park

35

Design of Central Park
Following a public competition, Calvert Vaux, a young architect and Fredrick Law Olmsted , the park's superintendent, proposed the winning design. The proposal divided the site into two distinct areas, separated by the reservoirs. The park consisted of a complex and varied lower park and a bold and open upper park. The concept of the design was based on a study of the City and its patterns of growth. By looking at the city's history, they saw that time and again the extent and rapidity of its growth had been underestimated. They acknowledged that the City would expand dramatically around the park and that eventually heavy-traffic would need to move freely across it. Their solution consisted of first, submerging the four required east-west transverses (thought to be impossible at the time), thereby providing permanently open streets, for non park traffic; and second, to carry the park drives over the transverses, subtly without much elevation, thereby achieving a "unity of effect" for the five separate park sections created by the transverses.

1860. Credit: Creating Central Park

Credit: Creating Central Park
P UO J·' JLJ<:s 1w T m ; {'KX1'H.\I. P.\IUi '"* 7 · .-.- '"«" .... ,_...._~ r~ · ' w ,.... ",...... :::::t"'-::-:-- -: .....

Credit: Creating Central Park

.... ,... ,._ .t ....

Figure 3.6 - Profiles of the Central Park. Credit: Creating Central Park

36

37

Central Park Mapping
The layering of Central Park reveals the intricacies of paths throughout the park. Pedestrian paths make up most of the path system in the park, consisting of natural flowing routes that link to natural features such as lakes ponds, gardens, fields, and rivers. The pedestrian paths meander through the park, taking a more scenic approach as it contours the topography of the land. These paths are at most, no wider than five meters and together create a network of circulation that links to the city sidewalk adjacent to the park. Walkers, runners, cyclist, rollerbladers and skateboarders use these paths. The Carriage path now referred to as Park Drive acts as a secondary road system during peak hours but is closed on weekends and holidays. The maximum speed limit on this drive is 25 miles and hour, which keeps the speed of traffic fairly slow for the safety of cyclist and horse drawn carriages. The path is offset into the park and acts as a large circular route, allowing it to be used to circulate around or through the park. This path also flows naturally along the contours of the topography and is separated from the pedestrian paths through a series of intricate bridges that allow for uninterrupted travel. These bridges become the essential element to the flow of the park. By having uninterrupted path of travel, the user not only moves faster but can remain immersed in the experience of moving through the park. The different speed of movement along with the visual complexity of traversing though the park at different elevations enhances the experience and reinforces the need for uninterrupted paths of travel. The vehicular streets that transverse the park require the most infrastructure in terms of tunneling and bridging over. The four streets divide the park into five sections. The continuity of the park relies on the streets burrowing under the park landscape. This allows the vehicular traffic to move quicker through the park without any hindrance to the natural flow of the landscape. The park's success rests on its connectivity to the surrounding context, giving a person a chance to use the park to travel to different parts of Manhattan whether it be to it's museums, financial district or even Times Square. The continuity of the park allows for this to happen with its consideration to how the paths work together forming a network of circulation and event as they flow smoothly through the park.

38

I
J

I
\

"

, _________ .,.,'

Figure 3.12 - Central Park Pedestrian Routes

Figure 3.13 - Central Park Carriage Routes

Figure 3.14 - Central Park Vehicular Routes

39

Figure 3.17 - Central Park Bicycle Parade. Credit: Creating Central Park

40

Precedents
A number of recent urban developments are beginning to use continuous park systems as a way to connect urban elements such as neighborhoods, public transit, and other existing natural features.

High Line Project
The High Line Project is a recent new park designed on the west side of Manhattan. Designed by landscape architects, James Corner Field Operations with architects Diller Scofidio + Renfro, the park uses a 1930's freight train railway system as a continuous platform that elevates the user above grade and moves northward, passing over existing buildings underneath. When all sections are complete, this project will be a mile-and-a-half-long elevated park, running through the West neighborhoods of the Meatpacking District, West Chelsea and Clinton/Hell's Kitchen. The park consists of weaving pathways that divide natural plantings. Seating and lighting are movable in some areas, which allow for some user flexibility. While the existing railway provides the necessary infrastructure to support the linear park, it does prevent it from being fully integrated back into its surrounding context. The paths on the highline only lead you to the other end of the park. There is no need to use the park as a way to travel across the city unless the final destination is the same as the end of the park. Without linking paths, the elevated platform becomes segregated from the city rather than becoming a part of it. New development along this park should seek to fully utilize the space as a way to incorporate it back into the city. The park must have a connective function along with its continuous elements. If the users have nowhere to go once on the park, then it becomes more like a stage of spectacle rather than a cherished green space within the city.

41

av

Figure 3.19- High Line Project. Context Plan. Credit: http://www.highlineproject.com

42

Four Towers
The winning proposal for the Shenzhen 4 Tower in 1 competition features a continuous park system that unifies 4 high-rise towers to social programs located in an elevated podium base. Steven Hall Architects call their elevated platform the "social bracket" as it consists of public spaces such as art galleries, auditoriums and a cinema. More than a roof top garden the social bracket's roof collects rainwater from all four towers and cleans it with an ultra violet filter system. The bracket's form begins on grade and begins to ascend as it meanders by the four proposed towers. The park located on the roof of the bracket contains a single path that leads up to a vertical green wall. Below the park, a corridor cuts through the interior of the bracket, opening up into the park at various moments along the path. The design illustrates how new development can incorporate both high-density program along with an open green space. This typology creates new development that also provides new open spaces rather than consuming the remaining open spaces in the city. The design of the park along with an internal street suffer similar difficulty as the High Line Project; it produces a park that is continuous but with nowhere to go once you are on the platform. The corridor that runs through the bracket has only one path of travel, through the platform and up the tower. There is a lack of connectivity that could be produced if the corridor branched out and provided multiple paths of travel. The design will need to integrate more with the surrounding context in order to stay active and useful.
OBSERVATION LEVEL

SOCIAL PROGRAMS

Figure 3.20 - Four Towers Competition. Credit: http://www.stevenholl.com

43

44

Olympic Sculpture Park
Responding to a difficult site, Weiss/Manfredi Architects decided to use a continuous invented ground plane that _ wanders from the city to the water's edge, linking three parcels of land as the path bridges over the street with a V-shaped form and 26 feet over the train tracks. Central to this landform is a 2,200-foot path that leads visitors from the pavilion, through a series of outdoor sculpture galleries. The park uses similar elements to Central Park. The different speeds of movement produced by the users on the park, the street traffic below and the trains to the side all combine to form a harmonious interplay of land, movement and form. The Z Path accomplishes two main aspects to the overall design, using the path will provide different views of the city, the streets, and the park while also ascending over it and descending back down onto the city's waterfront. Similarly to Toronto, Seattle's railway and highway divide the city from its waterfront. This approach exemplifies how a continuous landform can connect the city to a natural feature such as the waterfront. The use of a continuous path along a landscape provides an integrated system of infrastructure and park, building and land. The three precedents investigated provide new ways to create open park space in dense urban fabric. The use of a path on a continuous landscape provides the required connectivity that allows for these projects to work harmoniously with the city fabric. Using an uninterrupted park system as a means to connect and unify city elements provides a unique approach to creating more open space and connecting the city to it, establishing a new park network in a dense urban fabric.

seattleartmuseum.org

45

wester

N iNe

N ue

I ege N d

>
·

park entrance z-path a ccesslble

6_

b icycle path

myrtle edwards

pork

Ng c ompa N

Y bicycle path

Figure 3.23 - Seattle Olympic Park . Credit: http://www.seattleartmuseum.org

Design Process
Toronto, like New York, has a collection of neighborhood parks located in the downtown core. The grid pattern layout for vehicular circulation also reflects the grid pattern in Manhattan. Like New York, Toronto also contains a large city park that contains continuous pedestrian/cyclist paths within it. High Park connects to the waterfront and reaches Bloor Street at the northern end. Unlike Central Park, High Park is fairly far from the downtown core, located around lowrise residential buildings, the park remains easily accessible to its local surrounding. Unlike Central Park, High Park does not provide the necessary connectivity to traverse the park to get to any place other than the park itself. While the Ravine systems found in Toronto provide a continuous fabric, they too are located away from the densely populated downtown core. The Don valley parkway begins at the outskirts of the core, once again not able to act as anything other than a recreational path used for local travel or recreation. Toronto Island Park is a major green open space that provides uninterrupted paths of travel yet is only accessible through ferry transportation. Another leisure park, Toronto Island Park cannot influence the downtown core to become a pedestrian/cyclist realm, shifting the importance of natural means of transportation as opposed to vehicular means. Toronto needs a park system that not only provides green open space, but also becomes a crucial aspect to how one can move through the city, providing pedestrian/cyclist connectivity into and around the downtown core. Central Park is more than a park; it unifies districts, culture, infrastructure, and transportation into a natural system that works harmoniously in a dense and complex urban fabric. While Toronto has a plethora of small urban parks and large distant city parks, it requires the connective and continuous elements that a city park can provide once it is located within the urban core. A central park in Toronto can provide the necessary infrastructure to create and connect pedestrian and cyclist paths to a dedicated network and promote non-vehicular means of travel as a push away from its dependence and towards a healthier, more natural and livable city.

47

Figure 3.24 - Map of Toronto showing ravines and parks as well as existing paths

48

/

I

Tbronto
I

Bay ,

\

Lake Ontario

49

Toronto Official Plan
Using the Toronto Official Plan as a framework for the intervention, an architectural response can exist within improving the beauty and connectivity of the city. In turn, its influence on diversity and opportunity within the city will be positively impacted along with creating leadership and stewardship once the built form is established and utilized. Again, using the Official Plan indicates that each element of the city must be considered and incorporated into the design. The Public Realm, Built Form, Heritage and Parks/Open Spaces are all areas that any architectural project must address and therefore integrate into its overall design. The Official Plan acknowledges the negative impacts of vehicular traffic in the city and puts forward policies to encourage pedestrian and cyclist connections, such as discouraging automobile commuting and all day parking, developing street improvements that enhance the pedestrian environment and measures undertaken to make it safer to walk and cycle downtown, and encouraging new development to connect to the PATH system underground. The design intervention must address the aforementioned principles and policies above but do so by proposing a typology that integrates built form with public space/parks and reinforces the existing heritage areas. The outcomes of the proposed intervention will strengthen the public realm, giving citizens stewardship and pride for living and working within a city that gives importance to its cyclist, walkers, runners, rollerbladers and even potentially skaters and cross country skiers.

50

Toronto Official Plan Principles -Diversity, Opportunity -Beauty

-Connectivity

~=============7~ Architecture

-Leadership & Stewardship

C.11

~

Public Realm
-Great cities are judged by the look and quality of their squares, parks, streets and public spaces and the buildings which frame and define them.

Built Form
-Developments must be conceived not only in terms of the individual building site and progra, but also in terms of how that buildingand site fit within the context of the neighbourhood and the City.

~ Heritage
-The Plan focuses on conserving Toronto's remaining irreplaceable heritage resources, including our heritage landscapes, historic cemeteries and buried archaeological sites.

Parks/ Open Spaces
-As Toronto grows and changes, the parks and open space system will need to expand. But our green infrastructure is no different than our roads and sewers. Maintenance and reinvestment is required for city building

Figure 3.25 - Diagram indicating overarching principles for the Toronto Official Plan

Velo ...city
An approach reflecting the goals of the Official Plan can be found in Chris Hardwicke's (2005) project, Velo-city that proposes a cyclist highway for Toronto's commuters. Addressing the need for an established bicycle pathway, Velo-city is composed of a series of tubes enclosed by glass that transport commuters into the city. While at first this project may seem expensive and unrealistic, Hardwicke argues that taking in all expenses to maintain road systems, along with the health risks caused by air quality can offset the costs once the system is up and running. Hardwicke believes that this project is desperately needed in this city as the Toronto Bike Plan set out a goal to double the number of bicycle trips by 2011 while reducing the number of bicycle collisions and injuries. The Bike Plan proposes 1,000 kilometers of bicycle route along existing wide streets and open spaces instead of actively creating a strategic commuter network. Velo-city offers an alternative that parallels existing transit infrastructure. The bikeways are connected to the subway, railway, highway and parking lots, thereby offering more commuting choices. According to Hardwicke, Velo-city simply gives bicycles the same level of dedicated infrastructure that other modes of transit enjoy. As Trains have dedicated corridors, cars have highways and most of the roads, streetcars have tracks, and pedestrians have sidewalks. Velocity provides; 'The environmental conditions that would allow many more cyclist to bike yearround" (Wilcox, A., & Mcbride, J. p.209) This project solves the problem of creating a dedicated bicycle network in the city, but does so along the same lines as all other infrastructural projects. The sole function of Velo-city is to transport bicyclist into and out of the downtown core. This proJect only proposes another highway system, if only to transport cyclist without any other possible functions that could arise from creating a cyclist path. This project does fulfill the need to connect a bicycle network with continuous pathways but does not propose anything other than another single-function infrastructure. The thesis acknowledges that any path system proposed will require significant secondary functions like a park system that not only supports a continuous path but defines it as a park, not another pedestrian/cyclist highway.

52

53

Jarvis History
The history of Jarvis Street begins to reveal the grandeur and prestige the street once had. Composed of some of the oldest buildings in Toronto, Jarvis Street is home to important heritage sites. The Jarvis Collegiate, built in 1807, is the oldest high school in Toronto. The Northfield House, built in 1872, was home to Sir Oliver Mowat, one of the Fathers of Confederation and Premier of Ontario. Along with the McMaster (Massey Family) House built in 1882, now owned by the Keg Mansion restaurant, the street was also home to the Gooderhams, Mosses, Cawthras, and Flavelles. The history of the parks along Jarvis Street also reveals its prestigious character as they were built around prominent churches like St. Andrew's Church and the Jarvis Street Baptist Church. Both these churches were built in the 1870s and required an open space to demarcate its presence along the street. Built in 1858, one of Toronto's oldest greenhouses, the Palm House in Allan Gardens is home to year round vegetation from tropical climates and rare parts of the world. The unifying factor of this street rested on the vegetation that once lined the pedestrian boulevards along the street. Consisting of luscious dual lined mature trees, Jarvis Street provided a natural setting where the trees would drown out the noise from the city and clean the air while providing shade for the pedestrians that enjoyed being on the street as much as using it.

54

55

Toronto's Jarvis Proposal
An opportunity for an intervention arises with the newly proposed Jarvis Street: Streetscape Improvement Environmental Assessment, a report put out by the City of Toronto. Considered by the Toronto Official Plan as a "cultural corridor'' (http://www.toronto.ca/culture/waterfront_ plan.htm ), The Jarvis proposal addresses the degradation of the once prestigious street and analyzes existing conditions to determine what possible outcomes of street interventions can improve the nature of the street. The proposal develops a matrix to determine which solution will fully address all the environmental factors such as the social, natural, economical, transportation, and implementation cost factors. The study concludes that one all factors have been considered, the best solution is to reduce the street by one lane and propose a widened boulevard that consists of tree plantings and streetscape furniture and lighting devices. Using the same environmental factors, the thesis solution has been amended to the matrix in order to analyze the success of implementing the thesis project along with the other solutions. Based on this analysis, the thesis proposal exceeds the proposed solution by completely satisfying each environmental condition.

Drnlnn~tlrt Sol on Credit: Environmental Study Report

56

57

Context Analysis
The Toronto parks and ravines analysis focused on the need for a large park within the downtown core. An overview of the existing street corridors identifies the lack of park connectivity along Toronto's north-south axis streets. Focusing into the downtown core, main corridors have been identified between Spadina Steet and Parliament Street as the area with most density and built form. In each of these corridors, the possibility of intervention was determined by the amount of open, unused spaces, linkage to heritage, linkage to parks corridors, Jarvis Street and linkage to existing pedestrian paths laid out by the city. Of these . proved to contain all of these elements and still be in need of much
improv~ment

as vehicular

dependence on the street has eradicated many of its unifying characteristics required to sustain a strong public realm. The layers of mapping combine and begin to illustrate areas of potential as well as preliminary form. Once all the maps are overlaid, the need for physical continuity is essential to provide connectivity to a new network that reinforces non-vehicular means of transportation. The scale and potential of the site is evident once an image of Central Park is superimposed onto Jarvis Street.

I

of Toronto: Urban Core and Pedestrian Paths

58

;1
~

u; ~

~:

,.,:

~~

~ ~
z
(.)

! ..
"0

.;

Jarvis Sreet

Figure 3.36 - Jarvis Street, Existing Parks

~ a:

(.)

.. ! .. .. z ..
"0

Cl

Jarvis Sreet

Figure 3.37 - Jarvis Street, Heritage Buildings

~
z

~
(.)

! ..
"0

Cl

Figure 3.38 - Jarvis Street, Open Unused Space

59

<.? ~ ,.,;

~~
~~ ~

;;
<>: z u

~

..

! .,
""
Cl

Figure 3.39 - Jarvis Street, Existing Buildings to be Incorporated into Proposal

~~ u;;

~~ ............................... "........

~:

,.,;

~~-···················

r ............. .......... "'
~.L

~~ (/)

_, .,,

;;;

:

i

;;
<>:

~

..

! .,
""
Cl

u

z

Jarvis Sreet

Figure 3.40 - Jarvis Street, Existing Bicycle Path Routes

" ;;;
c
0

: ~ i;~
...........................

..
;;;
c
0
II.

~
u
z

~:

0

.......................................

I:

<>:

.. ..

! .,
"" ..
Cl

c:

~-······················

\

Figure 3.41 - Jarvis Street, Proposed Bike/Pedestrian Path Network.

60

Figure 3.42 - Jarvis Street, Overlaid with Central Park

The Jarvis Parkway Design
. Concept

The architectural proposal is processed through topographical interventions that occur throughout the design. A breakdown of the guidelines set forth by the Toronto Official Plan has been synthesized into 6 over-arching policies that identify key goals for Jarvis but can be modified for the other corridors in the downtown core. The policies are:

Design Guideline for Jarvis Street

..................................
1.
Identify and connect existing public parks .on Jarvis

Street:.::::::::::............................. ...

······::::::::::........................... .

2.
3.

............................ ········... ····· .............. ._....... ................·:::::.·.·.· .. Connect existing built fabric to proposed bike and park netwo~:::::·::.. :::: ... ,:::::······· ·····:::-·:::::·· ·······.:··:,,:: ., ........... . ... ... ....·.·....·.·.· .....
Identify and connect Heritage buildin~s-.·:::::.................... Reduce vehicular traffic and create a Bike/Pedestrian friendly corridor into the cit~········ ·. ::::··: New residential development to reinforce and further enhance the above conditio,a:::::: ..·.···:.:::···:
I

······· .... ....::.,:···· .....

4. 5. 6.

..··::::::: ... ······
.·..·...
····

New development to provide the density to create a residential community on Jarvjs··

Figure 3.43 - Design Guidelines for Jarvis Intervention.

62

Identifying separate architectural elements and integrating them into an overall topography provides a single architectural gesture that can remain continuous and become a link for the separate elements of the site. The architectural elements are composed of:

Topography

.....
.. ··
,~-

Through, ··························································· ··················::-' 1. Bridging Hous1'ng

,.,..,~~::······························· .. ···· ··········· .·.....·....··.·······.·. , ·. ···· ............ ..... ................. ' 2 . ... ............ ...... .... ................. .::::: :,.·::........... .....:::::::··· ................... :::::... ····· ····'··_.,....... 3 ··=::::·;:t···················.,.,: ... ........ .......... ........ ..... ., .· ~ ....... :::~~~,.... . ............................ ... : ....... .., .. .

L d . an scap1ng Integration with exist fabric

..······

·:::::;;;;::;!:---..-~:::..

:::::········

.... ················

...... ....··::::··-::::::::······ ·····. ······ ······· ······· ...... :::::,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,... ... :-.-.-:: .......... . . .. . . . . ....... ......................... .......................... ::,..,............................... .
::,;;;:;····'~::.

..........

········· ········· ··················

...
,~

4.

5.

Linkage

·.. ······ · ·········

............

·············· ········ .. 6.

Definition of boundaries

.........

.........

······ 7.

Accessibility

63

Alternative Solution 1 Do Nothing

Alternative Solution 2 Streetscaping Modification within the Boulevard with no modifications to the curbline

Alternative Solution 2b Streetscaping ImprovementsModifications to the Curbline with Bike Lanes

Social Environment Impacts No improvement to establish}arvis Street as a cultural . . . . ...,~~~·......,~ with an emphasis on heritage and historical sig1u~.u ........uu., ...... from what currently -Limited opportunities for heritage features , tree planting, landscaping and urban design elements. -Limited or no opportunity for improvement to the historic public realm. -Same as Alternative 2.

Transportation Service -Sufficient capacity on intersection operations with acceptable delays at intersections . -No improvement to existing transportation service from what currently exists. -Same as Alternative 1. -Limited opportunities to improve the pedestrian amenities within the existing curb lines. -Modest increase in travel for motorized traffic and -Negligible effects of r<3l1nr"J'. . of reversible lane. -Lower speeds improve safety. -Some opportunities to buffer pedestrians from traffic. -Opportunity for bicycle

Table 3.1 -Jarvis Alternative Soultions Matrix

64

Alternative Solution 3 tscaping Improvementsian Option

Alternative Solution 4 Streetscaping ImprovementsBoulevard Widening

Thesis Solution Integrating New development as a parkway to provide uninteruppted paths and form a pedestri~n/ cyclist network

me opportunities to improve historic public realm by inrating heritage and urban ign elements in the median. "ttle opportunity to develop s of emphasis since median at a distance pedesrealm and

-Greater opportunities to improve the historic public realm by incorporating hieritage and urban design elements. -Greatest opportunity to develop areas of emphasis because ·ty to the

-Full implementation of heritage features by incorporating new development as an open air museum that emphasises and celebrates historic realm. -Full implementation of im-

estrian improvements.

ments that are tailored to the unique environment of Jarvis Street

movement.

odest increase in travel times motorized traffic and transit. median is a physical ·er to left turns to minor acs along Jarvis Street. egligible effects of removal reversible lane. wer speeds improve traffic ety.

-Modest increase in travel times for motorized traffic and transit. -Neglible effects of removal of reversible lane. -Lower speeds improve traffic safety. -Greater opportunities for improvements to pedestrian amenities and will buffer pedes-

-Modest increase in travel times for motorized traffic and future transit. -Lower speeds improve traffic safety. -Greatest opportunities for improvements to pedestrian amenities and parkway will buffer pedestrians from vehicular traffic. ly paths -Increase in bicycle times -High · for pedestrian/cyclist transit.

65

Alternative Solution 1 Do Nothing

Alternative Solution 2 Streetscaping Modification within the Boulevard with no modifications to the curbline Streetscaping I m 'nTr"TPmP,ntCb Modifications to the '"' ..... u ....,.... with Bike Lanes

Natural Environment Impacts -No improvement to the existing environmental sustainability, enhancements to tree canopy and landscaping from what presently exists. -Little to no opportunities for environmental sustainability improvements and landscaping within the existing right-of-way due to space constraints. -No opportunities for planting trees in existing boulevard -Same as Alternative 2.

Economic Environment Impacts -There will be no effect on the economic environment for this alternative from what presently exists. -Same as Alternative 1. -Marginal improvements to economic conditions based on the minor aesthetic improvements to the area.

nor impact to business due to bike lanes.

Table 3.2 - Jarvis Alternative Soultions Matrix

66

Alternative Solution 4 etscaping Improvementsedian Option Streetscaping ImprovementsBoulevard Widening

Thesis Solution Integrating New development as a parkway to provide uninteruppted paths and form a pedestrian/ cyclist network

-Some opportunities for environmental sustainability improvements and landscaping within the median and the existing right-of-way due to space constraints. Such opportunities include using alternative landscaping methods, such as shrubs, grasses ,....-.~::,"""r able landscape -No opportunities trees in existing median.

-Greater opportunities for environmental sustainability improvements and landscaping in the widened boulevard. Such opportunities include using alternative landscaping methods, such as shrubs, grasses or other sustainable landscape materials. -Few plant adboulevard.

-Full implementation of environmental sustainability with increased used of new parkway. The new space along development allows for natural vegetation including trees and smaller bushes and shrubs to grow with little to no maintenance as parksses such ment

-The median will prohibit left turn access to businesses along Jarvis Street. -Marginal improvements to economic conditions based on the minor aesthetic improvements to the area.

-Widened boulevards have minor impact to business accesses. -Improvements to economic conditions due to improvements to pedestrian realm and subsequent increase in pedestrian and cyclists that can frequent businesses. -Opportunity to implement parking bays

-Business access will be readdressed to become fully integrated along parkway and existing roads. -Providing access along parkway and at grade will be fully supported by higher use of pedestrian and cyclists using the new system. -Businesses

winter time.

67

Alternative Solution 1 Do Nothing

Alternative Solution 2 Streetscaping Modification within the Boulevard with no modifications to the curbline

Alternative Solution 2b Streetscaping Lmloro,veJmeJnts. Modifications to the with Bike Lanes

Implementation Costs -Little constrcution cost related to the marginal streetscape improvements within the existing curb line. -The addition of streetscape features may result in a minor increase in maintenance/operation costs. -Minimal construction cos convert existing 5 lane configuration to 4lane with bike lanes .

IIIrtplc~men1tatJ.on

costs for this .~..... . . . . . .. ~ ..... ·ve from what presently

Final Evaluation -The lack of any development will not satisfy or exceed any of the Toronto's Official Plan goals and principles. -Same as Alternative 1. -By adding some streetscape features, the development will not proceed successfully into the future. -Same as Alternative 2 with bike lanes will not provide the necessary infrastructure allow for continuity and self sustainment once constructed

Table 3.3- Jarvis Alternative Soultions Matrix

68

Alternative Solution 3 tscaping Improvementsian Option

Alternative Solution 4 Streetscaping ImprovementsBoulevard Widening

Thesis Solution Integrating New development as a parkway to provide uninteruppted paths and form a pedestrian/ cyclist network

oderate construction costs the removal of part of the and construction of the ian. -Operational costs will increase due to additional streetscape improvements in the median.

-Very high construction costs for the removal of part of the road, relocation of utilities and construction of the widened boulevard. -Operational costs will increase due to additional streetscape improvements in the widened boulevard

-While intial construction costs will be high, the improvements along Jarvis Street can be offset by the profit off the new development and give back the funds to renovate the street conditions. -Operation costs will depend on the the new

-The introduction of the median ill only create further restric. ns as new islands of green ce will only be a visual relief while not addressing pedestrian/cyclist issues.

-The boulevard widening is a possible solution to well defined areas along Jarvis but should not be seen as the only strategy moving forward for this study.

-The parkway with boulevard enhancements along Jarvis Street will provide the most integrated solution by developing the streetscape of Jarvis Street while also providing the necessary pedestrian and cyclist paths needed to connect and develop the character of the street. -The need for along by for

69

Massing
The massing of the form is derived from incorporating the existing fabric, the proportions of the streetscape, and parks and open spaces. The massing rises higher in areas of high potential growth and areas with parks. This is required to facilitate the higher density needed to sustain the new development and parks. Areas of lower density are more sensitive to the existing fabric. Heritage sites and significant buildings reduces the new massing, playing a secondary role where only new park space is proposed consisting of linked pathways. The overall massing of the parkway becomes wavelike, rising up with potential energy and calming down as the energy dissipates into the historic and significant fabric.

Figure 3.44 -Exploded Axonometric of Jarvis Parkway

70

Composition
The Jarvis parkway is envisioned as a natural occurring topography, a landmass that thrusts upward, reaching out to light, air and views and pierced with craters, bringing light, air and views onto the street. The combination of the two elements produces forms that rise up organically while still providing the functional vertical elements required to clad transparent openings and provide sufficient floor to ceiling height requirements. The interplay of the flowing landscape of the roof with the piercing canyons of its opening gives the form a visual unity, allowing for the park-scape to flow under, through and above the form while providing views into its innards where dwellings and shelter lays.

Materiality
The main building material is soil. The goal of providing a new continuous parkway across Jarvis Street requires the use of natural materials that contain all the same qualities that are needed in a temperate-climate. The use of earth along the roof of the parkway combines the natural aesthetics with all the rain retention and thermal properties of undisturbed ground. Where soil cannot be used, especially along vertical faces, the use of stone replicates the natural conditions occurring in mountainous regions, as the earth rises up, the vegetation subsides revealing the bare rock of the mountains.

Figure 3.45 -Typical Transverse Section of Jarvis Parkway.

71

Structural Composition
The general structure of the proposed intervention consists of a concrete slab floor structure, supported at the cut out openings, where the forces will transfer onto a cross ribbed structure that spans the distance of the proposal. The use of fabricated steel beam structural system provides efficient and quick construction as the structure forms a web over the floor plates and solidifies with the overall weave. This concept is similar to the Beijing National Stadium designed by the Herzog & de Meuron firm in China. Using the idea of a woven bowl, or basket, the individual structural members weave together to form a solid whole.

······················· 1.

Landscaped park

························ 2.

Cross ribbed Structure

························ 3.

Floor plates

Figure 3.47 -Exploded Axonometric of Focus Area.

72

Chapter 4- Providing a Better Future
Conclusion
The Jarvis Parkway, a model for Park-Scape Infrastructure, provides a vision for how we can grow out of an auto-centric city. More importantly, the design raises possibilities for addressing issues that plague many modern day cities. Globalization, capitalism, and privatization are contemporary conditions that affect the openness and connectivity of our public spaces. As cities develop and grow, the public spaces in the city become disconnected and isolated, or are of insufficient scale to address this new level of density. Modern Cities must also cope with pollution caused by vehicular transportation. The dependence on the automobile within the city greatly restricts other forms of transportation that could thrive with greater consideration. The need for energy also becomes a great concern in cities as the cost to live and work within the city rise higher each year as gas prices climb and maintenance increases on automobiles. The thesis focuses on connecting the city together with continuous walking and biking paths. By creating a continuous non-vehicular network, in the form of a park; a new typology is created that provides a vision for living in a city that returns to natural sustainable systems. Precious vegetation and fertile soil are returned to the core of the city, creating a connected and adventurous path that is as enjoyable to dwell on as to walk through, and still providing mixed use development that further sustains this new way of living. The introduction of a large park system in the downtown core allows recreation space for a denser city housed in predominantly multi- unit housing and high rises. By connecting pedestrian and cyclist paths to a dedicated park system, and the existing transit systems the city can foster growth in a more sustainable manner. This thesis suggests a means of creating public domain in a city without the lands or public policy available to create new spaces for it. The Jarvis Parkway appropriates what is truly public space in the North American city-- the road and its " right of way'' and trades increased density to private developers for both open space or integrated park space within, between, or over new development.

76

Reference List
Alderfer, Z., & Borden, I. (2006). The Good Life. New York: Van Alen Institute. Berman, Marshall. (1988) All That is Solid Melts into Air. New York: Penguin Books. Bryant Park Historry and Maps. Retrieved October 12th, 2008. www.bryantpark.org. Caute, L., (2008). Heterotopia and the City. New York: Routledge. Collins, Glenn. (2008) Bryant Park Braces for a Tidal Wave of Traffic. New York Times. Accessed on Nov.23rd 2008. Diamond, Jared. (2006) Collapse: How Societies Choose To Fail Or Succeed. New York: Penguin Books. Ellin, Nan. (2006) Integral Urbanism. New York: Routledge. Environmental Study Report. Jarvis Street, city of toronto. Retrieved June25th, 2009. www.toronto.ca/involved/projects/jarvis/ Florida, R., (2004). The Rise of the Creative Class. New York: Basic Books. Four Towers Compitition, Steven Holl Architects. Retrieved August 3th, 2009. http://www. stevenholl.com/news-detail. php?id=61 Foreign Office Architects. (2004). In Institute of Contemporary Arts (London, England) (Ed.), Phylogenesis: Foa's ark. Barcelona: Actar. Frampton, Kenneth, (1983). ''Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six Points fo an Architecture of Resistance", in the Anti-Aesthetic. Essays on Postmodern Culture. Port Townsen: Bay Press. Gastil, R. , & Alderfer, Z. (2004). Open: New Designs for Public Space. New York: Princeton Architectural Press. Glazer, Nathan, Lilla Mark. (1987) The Public Face of Architecture. London: The Free Press. Heckscher, M. , (2008). Creating Central Park. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art. Jackson, T Kenneth. (1995) The Encyclopedia of New York City. New York: Yale University Press. Jacobs, J., (1992). The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York: Vintage Books. Holston, James. (1999) Cities and Citizenship. London: Duke University Press. Kohn, Margret. (2004) Brave New Neighborhoods. London: Routledge Lerup, Lars. (2000) After The City. Cambridge Mass: MIT Press. http://

77

Low Setha. Taplin, Dana. Scheid Suzanne. (2005) Public Space & Cultural Diversity. Austin, Texas: The University of Texas Press. Low, Setha. Smith, Neil. (2006) The Politics of Public Space. New York: Routledge. Mitchell, D., (2003). The Right to the City. New York: Guilford Press. Parks Library, Accessed on October 24th, 2008. Rheingold, H., Sassen, S., Vogelaar, F., Sikiardi, E., Marres, N., Brams, K., Pultau, D., Hamm, M., Andersen, K., Altena, A., Van, D., Kuitenbrouwer, K., Bruinsma, M., Kluitenberg, E., Seijdel, J., & Melis, L. (2007). Open 11: Hybrid Space. Amsterdam: NAi Publishers. Sassen, Saskia. (1998) Globalization and Its Discontents. New York: The New Press. Seattle Olympic Sculpture Park. Retrieved July 23rd, 2009. http://www.seattleartmuseum.org/ visit/osp/ Sennett, Richard. (2006) The Culture Of The New Capitalism. New Haven: Yale University Press. Sorkin, Micheal. (1992) Variations On A Theme Park. New York, NY: Hill and Wang. The High Line Project. Retrieved August 15th, 2009. http://www.thehighline.org/ Toronto Official Plan, http://www.toronto.ca/planning/official_plan/introduction.htm. Retrieved on July 18th, 2009. Toronto City Facts, http://www.toronto.ca/toronto_factslindex.htm. Retrieved on September 6th, 2009. Tschumi, Bernard. (1996) Architecture and Disjunction. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. U.S. Census Bureau, 2000 Census SF1. Retrieved October 23rd, 2008. Wilcox, A., & Mcbride, J. (2005). Utopia: Towards a New Toronto. Toronto: Coach House.

78

Appendices
A.1 . Historical Timeline/ Park Analysis/Context Analysis

Bryant Park

1686 New York's colonial governor Thomas Dongan designates the land now known as Bryant Park as public property. The area is still wilderness, and the hunting grounds of Native Americans. 1776 General Washington's troops race across Manhattan, traversing the future site of Bryant Park after being routed by the British in the Battle of Long Island.

1823 The city establishes a potter's field on the site. The site of Bryant Park is in a part of Manhattan that is countryside well north of the populous city until nearly the middle of the nineteenth century.

Map of the city of New York 1639 (www.worldmapsonline.com)

1840 The city decommissions the potter's field embracing the urban growth nearing the site.

Map of the city of New York 1907 (www.worldmapsonline.com)

79

80

81

82

83

1974 The Landmart<s Preservation Commission designates Bryant Park as a Scenic Landmark, calling it "a prime example of a park designed in the French Classical tradition .. . an urban amenity worthy of our civic pride."

1979 Just five years after designation, Bryant Park falls into degradation as its significance as an urban amenity, as well as a historic site, is lost. During this time William H. ("Holly") Whyte writes in a report solicited by the Rockefeller Brothers Fund: "If you went out and hired the dope dealers, you couldn't get a more villainous crew to show the urgency of the (present Bryant Park] situation."

84

85

86

Opportunities for Communication

87

Cl)

::J

c:
Cl)

..c:

~

co

Limited Functionality Predefined Functionality Semi-defined Functionality Undefined Functionality

88

6th Avenue Line 7th Avenue Line Broadway Line Lexington Avenue Line Flushing Local Line 42 Street Shuttle Tranist Bus Routes

· · · · ·

---

··· ··· · ··· ···
·

Om

200m

~
N

89

Facing Eastward

Facing Eastward Perspective

Facing Northward

90

Knox Hat Building

1095 Avenue of the Americas

Om

100m

e)
N

American Radiator Building

W.R. Grace Building

·

500 Fifth Avenue

Salmon Tower

New York Public Library

Bryant Park Building

91

Residential Land Uses

Non-Residential Land Uses
Commercial/Office Buildings Industrial/ Manufacturing Open Space and Outdoor Receation Public Facilities and Institutions -

Om

200m

November 28th, 2008, The Pnvat1zat1on of

-

One & Two Family Buildings Multi-Family Buildings Mixed Residential and Commercial Buildings . . .

Transportation and Utility Parking Facilities Vacantland

-

All Others

9~

Analysis of Economic Occupations Manhattan Community District 5

36 .3% Professional and Related Occupations 5.7% Service Occupations 31.1% Managment, Business, and Financial Operations Occupations 2.2% Production , Transportation and Material Moving Occupations Source: U.S. Census Bureau , 2000 Census SF1 1.1% Construction , Extraction and Maintenance Occupations 23.5% Sales and Office Occupations

Manhattan Community District 5

Manhattan
34.1% Professional and Related Occupations 12.4% Service Occupations 21 .7% Managment, Business, and Financial Operations Occupations 8.0% Production , Transportation and Material Moving Occupations 2.3% Construction , Extraction and Maintenance Occupations 23.6% Sales and Office Occupations

November 28th , 2008 , The Privatization of Public Space: Towards a State of Flux Jordan Breccia , Dr. lan Macburnie

#

93

94

95

Washington Square Park
Historical Timeline

Natural History Pre 1800 The parkland is once a marsh fed by Minetta Brook. II was located near an Indian village known as Sapokanikan or "Tobacco Field." In 1797 the Common Council acquire the land for use as a Potter's Field or common burial ground.

Ratzer Map 1767, detail, with Modem Street Pattern (Harris 2003)

--

.___...._,..

_.,_....._.....

96

Historical Timline

97

Historical Timeline

98

Historical Timeline

99

Historical Timeline

100

Historical Timeline

Pari( Redesign (1965-1970) The Part<s Department aeates a map in 1962 that documents existing conditions and indicates proposed changes, many of them unrealized until1970. The new plan includes the creation of a playground in t the pari( as well as revamping of the existing playgrounds. Major changes occur in the park such as the elimination of the two remaining "temporary" roadways through the pari(, at Thompson Street and LaGuardia Place, which have endured for almost a century. Pari( plans calls for revamping the 1872 fountain as well as construction of a new comfort station, virtually where the original Women's Cottage had been, an administration building and other existing pari( features.

Part( Survey 1934 Updated to 1939 (Pari(& 1934-1939)

. -_____ . -.--·
·

.--t<N

....

_ .._ 11_,_

1934 Part( Plan with 1970 Part( Plan Overtay (Pari(& Ubrary)

1966 with paft(ed cars New Yoft( Pari(& archive

J fi&~~~. \!:

--------. ___ . -............................
·
0 .......................

Birds eye view march 22 2004 (Geismar-google images)

. ----

,,,

101

Historical Timeline

102

Opportunities for Communication

103

Limited Functionality Predefined Functionality Semi-defined Functionality Undefined Functionality

104

6th Avenue Line 7th Avenue Line Broadway Line Lexington Avenue Line Tranist Bus Routes

· · · ·

· · · ·

· · · ·

· · · ·

Om

200m

()
N

105

Facing Northward

·

Facing Westward

Facing Southward

106

Signficant Historic Fabric

Judson Memorial Church

Om

100m

New York University

Elmer Holmes Bobst Library

Catholic Center at New York University

107

Residential Land Uses

Non-Residential Land Uses
Commercial/Office Building Industrial/ Manufacturing Open Space and Outdoor Receation Public Facilities and Institutions

November 28th, 2008, The Privatization of

-

One & Two Family Buildings Multi-Family Buildings Mixed Residential and Commercial Buildings

-

Om

200m

-

Transportation and Utility Parking Facilities

Vacant land

All Others

108

Analysis of Economic Occupations

Manhattan Community District 2

46.6% Professional and Related Occupations 7.4% Service Occupations 23.3% Managment, Business, and Financial Operations Occupations 4.1% Production, Transportation and Material Moving Occupations 1.6% Construction, Extraction and Maintenance Occupations

Manhattan Community District 2

19.2% Sales and Office Occupations

Manhattan
34.1% Professional and Related Occupations 12.4% Service Occupations 21.7% Managment, Business , and Financial Operations Occupations 8.0% Production, Transportation and Material Moving Occupations 2.3% Construction, Extraction and Maintenance Occupations 23 .6% Sales and Office Occupations

109

110

111

112

Tompkins Sqaure Park
Historical rimeline

Originally part of the largest sail-marsh on Manhattan Island , the area now occupied by Tompkins Square Pari< was once used as a Native American (Lenape Tribe) hunting and fishing ground.

1811 The Commissioners' Plan proposes a large mar1<et on the land encompassing the par1<. Tthe city's planners projects a 55-acre mar1<et place that would comprise the area between 7th and 9th Streets, and 1st Avenue and the East River. Plans never materialize.

1833 rendering of Pari< (Par1<s Library)

113

Historical Timeline

114

Historical Timeline

115

Historical Timeline

1961 Parks Department plan for a softball diamond erupts in neighborhood opposition. Compromise on park renovations reached in 1962. Ball diamond not buih. 1965 An appropriation of $450,000 for park renovation approved by Mayor Wagner. Includes relandscaping, tree planting, and, most signif~eanUy, the bandshell-completed in 1966. 1966-69 The neighborhood and park becomes a haven for the "hippie" movement. Frequent concerts/rallies at the bandshell.

Plan of Park 1965 (Parlts Ubrary)

116

"117

118

Intensity of Circulation
11111111111111111111111111111111111111111

Primary Secondary Tertiary

11111111111111111
111111111111111111111111111111111

119

Limited Functionality Predefined Functionality Semi-defined Functionality Undefined Functionality

120

14 St-Canarsie Line Tranist Bus Routes

····

Om

200m

121

Massing Analysis

Facing Northward

·

Facing Westward

Facing Southward

·

122

· ·

The Boy's Club of New York St. Nicolas Carpatho-Russian Church New York Public Library Charlie Parker House

Christodora House

Om

100m

()
N

Trinity Lutheran Parish

Old Newsboys' Lodging House St. Brigid's Church

123

use/ Lomng IVIap

Residential Land Uses

Non-Residential Land Uses
Commercial/Office Buildings Industrial/ Manufacturing Open Space and Outdoor Receation -

Om

200m

-

One & Two Family Buildings Multi-Family Buildings Mixed Residential and Commercial Buildings

Transportation and Utility Parking Facilities Vacantland

-

All Others

124

Analysis of Economic Occupations

Manhattan Community District 3

28.0% Professional and Related Occupations 20.4% Service Occupations 11.9% Managment, Business , and Financial Operations Occupations 13.7% Production, Transportation and Material Moving Occupations Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2000 Census SF1 3.8% Construction, Extraction and Maintenance Occupations 22 .3% Sales and Office Occupations

Manhattan Community District 3

Manhattan
34.1% Professional and Related Occupations 12.4% Service Occupations 21.7% Managment, Business, and Financial Operations Occupations 8.0% Production, Transportation and Material Moving Occupations 2.3% Construction , Extraction and Maintenance Occupations 23 .6% Sales and Office Occupations

125

l-leld

~tudy:

Kecreat1ona1

~paces

126

Field Study: Context and Culture

November 28th, 2008

127

Field Study: Park Promenade

1~8

129

····························································· 1.

Existing Street Condition on Jarivis

Proposed Street Condition by City of Toronto

Proposed Street Design


