A Probabilistic Approach for Optimal Capacitor Planning in Distribution Systems with Wind Generators
by
Maryam Dadkhah Bachelor of Electronics Engineering, IAU Central Tehran Branch, Iran, 2008

A thesis Presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the program Electrical and Computer Engineering Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2011 ©Maryam Dadkhah 2011

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. Maryam Dadkhah

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. Maryam Dadkhah

ii

A Probabilistic Approach for Optimal Capacitor Planning in DS with WG Master of Applied Science 2011 Maryam Dadkhah Electrical and Computer Engineering Ryerson University

ABSTRACT
This thesis proposes a probabilistic approach based on the Cumulant method for optimal capacitor planning in distribution systems with high penetration of wind generators. To account for the problem uncertainties, the probabilistic behaviour of load forecasts and wind generators are modeled using Probability Density Functions. Once the probabilistic framework is defined, an optimization problem can be formulated to minimize the total costs of the capacitors and of the annual energy losses. The optimization problem is then solved by using the Logarithm Barrier Interior Point Method, which provides a linear relationship between the cumulants of load and wind variables and the cumulants of the system parameters and solution cost. The Cumulant method offers a generous advantage in speed, while maintaining acceptable accuracy, as compared to the traditional Monte Carlo Simulation method. The proposed method is tested on a 7-bus and on a 33-bus systems, and the results are reported and discussed.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my supervisor, Prof. Bala Venkatesh for his continuous guidance, inspiring instruction, encouragement and huge support throughout this research. The financial support represented by the NSERC Discovery grant, Canada awarded to Prof. Bala Venkatesh is gratefully acknowledged. My deepest gratitude and love goes to my beloved family; for their support and endless love, through the duration of my studies. Lastly, my regards to Dr. Alexandre Nassif for his guidance during the completion of this thesis and to all of those who supported me in any respect.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter Title
Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents List of Tables List of Figures List of Symbols List of Abbreviations

Page
iii iv v vii viii ix x

1. CHAPTER1: Introduction 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4

1

Integration of Wind Energy into the Power Systems ..........................................2 Capacitor Planning in Distribution Systems .........................................................4 Capacitor Planning Methods ................................................................................5 Thesis Outline .......................................................................................................7 9

2. CHAPTER 2: Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators

2.1 Random Variables and Probability Distribution Functions ...................................9 2.2 Definition of Moments .........................................................................................10 2.2.1 Moment Generating Function ......................................................................11 2.3 Definition of Cumulants .......................................................................................11 2.3.1 Cumulant Generating Function ...................................................................13 2.4 Probabilistic Characteristics of Annual Load Demand ........................................14 2.5 Probabilistic Characteristics of Wind Energy Systems ........................................15

v

3. CHAPTER 3: Problem Formulation 3.1

18

The Load Flow Solution Method Adapted for RDS ...........................................18

3.2 Capacitor Planning Problem Definition using Proposed Probabilistic Approach ..............................................................................................................................20 3.2.1 Objective Functions .......................................................................................20 3.2.2 The Complete Nonlinear Optimization Formulation...................................22 3.3 The Cumulant Method for Optimizing Power Systems .......................................23 3.3.1 Sensitivity Analysis to Determine the Candidate Buses (Step 1) ................24 3.3.2 The LBIPM Solution (Step 2) .....................................................................29 3.3.2.1 Gradient, Hessian and Newton Step ....................................................31 3.3.3 The Cumulant Method (Steps 3 and 4) ........................................................33 3.3.4 Gram-Charlier Expansion Theory (Step 5)..................................................37 3.3.4.1 Hermite Polynomials.............................................................................38 3.3.4.2 Edgeworth A-Series Coefficients..........................................................38 4. CHAPTER 4: Results and Discussions 4.1 42

7 - Bus System ....................................................................................................42 4.1.1 Comparison of the results of the Cumulant method with those of MCS ......43

4.2

33 - Bus System ..................................................................................................53 4.2.1 Comparison of the results of the Cumulant method with those of MCS ......53

5. CHAPTER 5: Conclusions

65 67

APPENDICES

APPENDIX A: Test Systems Data ..............................................................................67 APPENDIX B: Comparison Results of 33-Bus System ..............................................67 REFERENCES 81

vi

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1: Edgeworth Coefficients Table 2: Parameters of the Weibull PDF for the wind generator ­ 7 Bus Table 3: Load Duration Data Table 4: Optimal solutions and comparison of the two methods ­ 7 Bus Table 5: Total Cost Values ­ 7 Bus Table 6: Mean values of the system variables ­ 7 Bus Table 7: Standard deviation values of the system variables ­ 7 Bus Table 8: Parameters of the Weibull PDF for the wind generator ­ 33 Bus Table 9: Optimal solutions and comparison of the two methods ­ 33 Bus Table 10: Total Cost Values ­ 33 Bus Table 11: maximum error of mean values of the system variables ­ 33 Bus

41 43 44 46 48 51 52 54 56 57 61

Table 12: maximum error of standard deviation values of the system variables­33Bus 61 Table 13: Voltage data: 7-bus RDS Table 14: Feeder data: 7-bus RDS Table 15: Shunt capacitor limits: 7-bus RDS Table 16: Mean values and standard deviation of the loads: 7-bus RDS Table 17: Line data 7-bus RDS Table 18: Voltage data: 33-bus RDS Table 19: Feeder data: 33-bus RDS Table 20: Shunt capacitor limits: 33-bus RDS Table 21: Mean values and standard deviation of the loads: 33-bus RDS Table 22: Line data 33-bus RDS
vii

67 67 67 68 68 69 69 69 70 71

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1: World Total Installed Capacity (MW) Figure 2: Probability Density Function of Load Modeling Figure 3: Weibull distribution function of the wind speed Figure 4: A tree-like generic distribution system Figure 5: A branch model representation in distribution systems Figure 6: Single line diagram of the 7-bus distribution test system Figure 7: Sensitivity Index Solutions ­ 7 Bus Figure 8: Voltage improvement before and after capacitor installation ­ 7 Bus Figure 9: Single line diagram of the 33-bus distribution test system Figure 10: Sensitivity Index Solutions ­ 33 Bus Figure 11: Voltage improvement before and after capacitor installation ­ 33 Bus Figure 12: Reconstructed PDF of Total Cost ­ 33 Bus Figure 13: Reconstructed CDF of Total Cost ­ 33 Bus Figure 14: PDF of Voltage at Bus 8 reconstructed by Gram-Charlier/Edgeworth Figure 15: PDF of real Power at Bus 8 reconstructed by Gram-Charlier/Edgeworth

3 15 16 19 25 42 45 48 53 54 58 59 59 62 63

Figure 16: PDF of capacitor size at Bus 8 reconstructed by Gram-Charlier/Edgeworth 63

viii

LIST OF SYMBOLS
f x F x m k  s  s   t f µ   Z T P , Q
PL

V SD SB S

PW QS nb, NB TPL TC KL KC QC ELC T LF H NQS He Lu  s µ FVX FSX J Lu   L

PDF of random variable x CDF of random variable x n -order moment of random variable x n -order cumulant of random variable x Moment Generating Function Cumulant Generating Function Variance of random variable x Characteristic function of random variable x mean of random variable x Shape Factor of Weibull Distribution Shape Factor of Weibull Distribution Scale Factor of Weibull Distribution impedance of Line l The Tap Setting of Transformer voltage magnitude at i bus Complex Power of Loads at i bus The difference between generation and load at bus i Real and Reactive Power Receiving at i bus Complex Power Receiving at i bus Real Power Output of i WG Reactive Power Injected into the i bus Number of Buses in the RDS Real Power Loss on Line l Total Real Power Loss of RDS
Total cost

i Hermite polynomial Lagrangian function Lagrangian multiplier Slack variable Barrier parameter Voltage drop equation power balance equation Jacobian of the equality constraints, gx, Gradient of the Lagrangian Second derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to x
Number of capacitors ix

Cost of Energy Annual Cost of per unit Capacitor Bank Installed in a RDS Total Cost of Capacitor Banks Installed in a RDS Total Cost of Annual Energy Loss Loading Time Interval Load Factor at D time interval Hessian of the Lagrangian

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

PDF CDF RDS WG SOE MCS LBIPM KKT ND NW

Probability Density Function Cumulative distribution function Radial Distribution Systems Wind Generator Set of Equation Monte Carlo Simulations Logarithmic-Barrier Interior Point Method Karush­Kuhn­Tucker Conditions Number of the load samples Number of the wind generation samples

x

Chapter 1 Introduction

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION
Large scale integration of wind generators has been promoted across the globe in a drive to harness renewable energy. Most of these generators are sources connected to distribution systems. Due to the intermittent nature of wind, these generators introduce uncertainties on power system planning, which is in addition to difficulties associated with the steady state solution of distribution systems. Furthermore, loads are probabilistic in nature as well. Probabilistic and stochastic programming introduces random variables and uncertainty into conventional linear and nonlinear programming [1]. The randomness and uncertainty are generally represented by using probability density functions (PDFs) [2]. Many of the power system components are often modeled as a known constant parameter, such as a wind generator or a customer load. However, these components do not have a constant behaviour, which can be treated as a random variable. As a consequence, the power system model becomes a probabilistic framework and as such, requires a probabilistic approach to deal with the load and generator uncertainties. Due to the probabilistic nature of loads and availability of wind, to achieve a precise and optimum planning, it is necessary to propose an efficient solution method that includes the load and generator probabilistic models. The ultimate goal is to determine the probabilistic density function of typical variables.
1

Chapter 1 Introduction Distribution system optimization is a multidimensional optimization problem [3]. Finding the optimum capacitor size, conductor size, location of substations and the best network configuration are some of such objectives. Capacitor planning in a distribution system must account for forecasted load and planned Wind Generators [4]. In distribution systems with large penetration of wind generators, these sources supply a significant part of the total load on an average. With forecasts of loads and generations being probabilistic in nature with differing PDFs, their proper representation in a capacitor planning exercise is imperative. The objective is to minimize the total cost of the capacitors and the annual energy loss in the system.

1.1

Integration of Wind Energy into the Power Systems

Wind energy is beginning to play an important role in the energy supply in many regions around the world by growing at the rate of 30% annually, with a world total installed capacity of 196 Gigawatts (GW) in 2010 as shown in Figure 1 [5].

2

Chapter 1 Introduction

Figure 1 World Total Installed Capacity (MW)

The integration of wind energy into the electricity grids raises challenges due to its availability and geographical distribution. Wind Energy Generators (WEGs) can be integrated in either the transmission or distribution systems. However, in their traditional configuration, WEGs are mostly connecting to transmission lines and appear much less commonly as embedded distributed generation connecting to distribution feeders. Due to some challenges, such distribution scenarios are not well researched yet. One of the major challenges in using wind energy is the uncertainty in wind speed. Commonly, the probability of wind speed is presented by its PDF. Currently, there are other tools to forecast wind speed but wind speed forecasts errors are inevitable. This thesis deals with these limitations by using a probabilistic approach, as it will be shown in the later chapters.

3

Chapter 1 Introduction Next section introduces the problem of distribution system capacitor planning and provides a review of existing capacitor planning methods.

1.2

Capacitor Planning in Distribution Systems

In power systems, keeping the voltage, frequency, and the amount of power supplied to the loads and their power factor in line with expectations are some of the challenges of distribution system planning. Loads with low power factor draw more current than loads with high power factor for the same amount of active power consumed, increasing the losses in the distribution system. In addition to increased power consumption, the increased current drawn by low power factor loads can reach the limit of the conductors, deteriorating their performances and reducing their useful life. To avoid problems related to the low power factor of loads, utilities typically install reactive power compensators at several locations of a distribution feeder. For example, reactive power can be compensated by using synchronous condensers or capacitor banks. Synchronous condensers have the advantage of being dynamic devices, but they are more complex and require greater amount of electrical components. A more cost-effective and prevalent way to compensate for reactive power is through the use of capacitors banks. In addition to compensating for reactive power and correcting power factor, shunt capacitor banks are also used in distribution systems to improve stability margin, manage voltage profile, and reduce losses.

4

Chapter 1 Introduction 1.3 Capacitor Planning Methods

Substantial research has been carried out on the solution of optimal capacitor planning in the distribution systems for the tasks of power factor correction, voltage profile improvement and loss reduction. In some of the pioneer research works (first category of solutions) the algorithms were formulated using a voltage-independent reactive current model. Using these models, the problem was solved by analytical methods [6-8]. Researchers later proposed a general formulation for the cost function comprising the cost of energy losses with respect to constraints such as the number of fixed or switchable capacitors and the limits on system variables such as the voltage. This set of algorithms can be classified as the second category of planning. In [9-12], iterative methods were applied to select a sequence of candidate nodes among which the optimal node can be determined such that by compensating the bus results in the highest loss reduction. Once the sequence of candidate buses are evaluated, the size of the installed capacitors and the corresponding loss saving are determined by solving the related equations. There is a third category of distribution system capacitor planning that refers to the use of evolutionary and swarm optimization techniques [13-17]. In [13], the author formulated the optimization problem as a mixed-integer nonlinear programming problem. The problem was decomposed into two phases and an evolution search technique was developed for the first phase called master problem. Firstly the location of capacitors was
5

Chapter 1 Introduction determined and secondly the type and size of capacitor was found. The system formulation is solved using a mixed integer nonlinear programming method. Souza et al. [16] applied a microgenetic algorithm combined with a fuzzy logic technique in two steps: a) By using fuzzy logic the optimal locations for the capacitor banks installation was determined, and b) the formulated optimal placement of capacitor banks was minimised using a microgenetic algorithm. In addition to the other conventional algorithms described earlier, Venkatesh et al. [17] proposed a single dynamic data structure for an evolutionary programming (EP) algorithm that handles the problems of siting and sizing of new shunt capacitors simultaneously. This proposed method is very efficient since it considers other system control parameters such as transformer taps, reconfiguration options and existing reactive power sources. However, one may note that these three categories of algorithms discussed above do not consider the integration of wind generators into distribution systems. Furthermore, the probabilistic behaviour of the annual load is not regarded into the modeling. In conclusion, previous problem formulations as well as the obtained solutions are deterministic
in nature and therefore unable to represent the true behaviour of the system in the presence of stochastic wind generators and loads. It can be said that [4] is the pioneer of the fourth and last category of algorithms to take probabilistic behaviour of the wind generation and load into the account. In that work, a Fuzzy stochastic capacitor planning method was formulated to minimize the total costs of

newly sited and sized capacitors, as well as the annual energy loss in a distribution
6

Chapter 1 Introduction system by using probabilistic models of load and wind generation as Normal and Weibull
PDFs, respectively. The load and wind generation PDFs are divided into load and wind generation segments (ND and NW), respectively, to provide ND random load and NW random generation variables. Then the proposed fuzzy stochastic programming method is

linearized to be successively solved using a robust mixed integer linear programming solver while updating the solution. The probabilistic capacitor planning method proposed in this thesis can be classified under the fourth category as it presents a completely probabilistic formulation. It is intended for distribution systems with high penetration of wind generators and uses probabilistic density functions for both wind speed and load consumption.

1.4 Thesis Outline This thesis is structured in following manner: Chapter two presents a detailed explanation provided to identify the probabilistic distributions adapted in this thesis for the load consumption and wind speed. These are the Normal and the Weibull distribution, respectively. In addition, it defines moments and cumulants, as well as their generating functions, which are used to develop the probabilistic models of load a generation variables used in this thesis.

Chapter three formulates the capacitor planning problem to be solved in this thesis. In the first part of the chapter, the distribution system model is presented. In the second part of

7

Chapter 1 Introduction the chapter, the probabilistic formulation of the capacitor planning in distribution systems is given.

Chapter four presents the results of the proposed probabilistic approach tested on a 7-bus and on a 33-bus distribution system with some wind generators connected to the buses. The results are compared with those from Monte Carlo Simulations (MCS). Errors are evaluated and the probabilistic distributions of the variables are re-generated.

Chapter 5 presents the conclusion of this research.

8

Chapter 2 Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators

CHAPTER 2 PROBABILISTIC MODELING OF LOAD AND WIND GENERATORS

This chapter presents the probabilistic background used in this thesis to handle the load behaviour and wind generator speeds. Firstly, the concept of moments and cumulants are introduced. Secondly, the random characteristics of load and wind generators are embodied in terms of Probabilistic Density Functions.

2.1 Random Variables and Probability Density Functions

In probability and statistics, a random variable or stochastic variable is a variable which is obtained from some type of random process and can be defined as a function which maps events or outcomes. The probability of the value of random variable is determined by the probability density function. There are various probability distributions that are used in different applications. Two of the most important ones related to this work are the Normal distribution and the Weibull distribution. The Normal and Weibull distributions have been commonly used to describe the load consumption and wind speed behaviours,

9

Chapter 2 Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators

respectively. While it is widely known that the Normal distribution can be described by its mean and variance (first and second moments), the Weibull distribution can be described by higher order of moments or cumulants. Next sections define moments and cumulants and their relationships with probabilistic distributions.

2.2 Definition of Moments In probability and statistic theory, moments and cumulants are two sets quantities of a random variable x which are mathematically equivalent. The definition of the moments is explained in this section and the definition of cumulants is presented in the next one. Let f x be a probability density function of a random variable x, then the expected Ex  x f xdx.
 

value of x is defined as [2]

(1)

m  Ex     x  f xdx.

Accordingly the n -order moment m is calculated using the following definition: (2) Alternatively, the moments of random variable x can be determined directly by the use of

the moment generating function, which is explained in the next subsection.

10

Chapter 2 Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators

2.2.1 Moment Generating Function

 s  Ee .

Mathematically, the moment generating function  s of a random variable x is (3)

of moment generating function with respect to s and setting s  0. For example the second moment is computed as follows [2]: m 
   

The n order moment of random variable x can be computed by taking the n derivative

which is the second order moment of random variable x. 2.3 Definition of Cumulants

| 

   

|  E 

  

|   Ex  e |   Ex  

(4)

Moments are widely used to describe the distribution of random variables. However, in some cases it is preferable to use cumulants due to their simplicity over using moments. Furthermore, the several orders of cumulants of a random variable x can be calculated by using its several orders of moments. The definition of the cumulant k  is

explained as follows:

 t is defined as: Given a scalar random variable x, its characteristic function f  t  Ee  f (5) The Cumulants k  are defined by:
11

Chapter 2 Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators
  t   ln f ,  k  !


(6)

by the following formula: k   m    

where k  is the cumulant of x. In particular, the cumulants can be related to the moments n1 k m i  1  

(7)

the first six cumulants of the known random variable from its moments as follows: k  m ,

where m is the n -order moment. In this work, we use the above formula to calculate

(8)

k   m  m  ,

k   m  3  m  m  2  m  ,

k   m  4  m  m  3  m   12  m  m   6  m   m  m   24  m 

k   m  5  m  m  10  m  m  20  m  m   30  m   m  60 k   m  6  m  m  15  m  m  30  m  m   10  m   120  m  m  m   120  m  .

 m  m  120  m  m   30  m   270  m   m   360

Alternatively, the cumulants of random variable x can be determined directly by the use of the cumulant generating function, which is explained in the next subsection.
12

Chapter 2 Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators

2.3.1 Cumulant Generating Function generating function  s in the following manner: The cumulant generating function can be written in terms of the moment

 s  ln s

(9)

The n order cumulant is usually denoted as k  . [2].

evaluating s  0, the different order of cumulant of random variable x can be obtained.

successive derivatives from the cumulant generating function with respect to s

In a similar manner as done for the moment generating function, by taking the and

The advantage of the cumulants over moments are evident when the aim is to find different orders of cumulant of the random variable x comprised by a linear combination of some other independent random variables with known cumulants. From the above explanation, it can be shown that the cumulants of the random variable x can be computed easily by using the given cumulants of the other random variables in the linear combination. In the next chapter it will be shown that the proposed solution method takes advantage of this concept to provide a linear combination of the system variables to obtain the cumulants of the unknown variables from the cumulants of the known variables.

13

Chapter 2 Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators

2.4 Probabilistic Characteristics of Annual Load Demand The behaviours of the load buses uncertainties including active and reactive loads have been modeled in different research works. In [18], the authors formulated a probabilistic load flow for power system expansion while the loads were modeled using normal probability distribution. However, in [19] the proposed method was examined while the loads were modeled as the gamma distribution in addition to the normal distribution model for the loads. Furthermore, Billinton et al. [20, 21] pointed out that it is difficult to obtain sufficient historical data to determine the distribution type and therefore, it is appropriate to represent uncertainties in the load forecasts with a normal distribution and a given value of standard deviation. [4] Following the aforementioned ideas, the annual load demand will be modeled in this thesis as a normal distribution. The graph of the associated PDF is depicted in Figure 2.

14

Chapter 2 Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators

Figure 2 Probability Density Function of Load Modeling

The Gaussian function of the system loading is defined as follow: fx   e
 
   

(10)

  0 and   1 is called the standard normal of the system loading. PD 2.5 Probabilistic Characteristics of Wind Energy Systems

 is the mean of the load and  is the variance of the load. The distribution with where PD

As explained earlier in this thesis, a useful way to describe the wind characteristics is by using a probabilistic distribution. Extensive research has been published in the last two decades to describe wind speed distribution. However, the proposed methods should be able to analyze the wind speed statistically since the speed
15

Chapter 2 Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators

of wind is continuously changing. The annual wind speed forecasts can be modeled using Weibull distributions as shown in Figure 3 [22]. The probability density function of the wind forecast for a generator at the   bus is given as [4]
       , w      w . e 

(11)

Figure 3 Weibull distribution function of the wind speed where W is the wind speed in m/s,  and  are the shape and scale parameters respectively. Due to the fact it is reasonable to assume that all WGs installed in a distribution feeder are in the same geographical area, this thesis also assumes that  is

the same for all WGs. The scale parameter  can be determined for the WG , given the   and the shape parameter . mean forecast W

16

Chapter 2 Probabilistic Modeling of Load and Wind Generators

This concludes the load and wind generator probabilistic behaviours as applicable to the capacitor sizing and allocation problem. Chapter 3 presents the distribution system model and the probabilistic approach to deal with the capacitor placement problem.

17

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

CHAPTER 3 PROBLEM FORMULATION
The probabilistic model for the capacitor planning problem formulation in distribution systems is presented in this chapter. The distribution system model used in this thesis is provided in the first part of the chapter, and the complete nonlinear problem, along with the proposed solution, is formulated thereafter. 3.1 The Load Flow Solution Method Adapted for RDS [23]

The accurate voltage solution method for radial distribution systems is developed by formulating a set of equations (SOE) to describe a radial distribution system with high R/X ratio. This SOE comprises 3(N -1) nonlinear equations for an N-bus distribution system. Then the SOE is solved by using the first-order Newton-Raphson technique. These equations are devoid of bus phase angles and can be subsequently solved using the Newton-Raphson method [23]. The SOE is formed by a voltage equation and real and reactive power balance equations at every bus, and is described as follows. A single-line representation of a treelike distribution systems structure is shown in Figure 4.

18

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

k1 i-1 Tl Rl + j. Xl SBi SDi PWi k3 STl k2 i

Figure 4 A tree-like generic distribution system Consider the   bus in Figure 4. It has a wind turbine connected to it that injects only

power injected into this bus is SB  PB  jQB , and it is the difference between The tap setting of this transformer/line is represented by T and it has an impedance

real power equal to PW . Its bus load is represented by SD  PD  jQD . The total

generation and load at that bus. Consider the l line/transformer between buses i-1 and i. Z  R   j. X  . The total apparent power reaching the downstream end of this line
PL  R  . |ST | . V  .

equals ST . The real power loss on this line equals

(12)

The total real power loss in all feeders of the system equals
  TPL    R  . |ST | . V ,

(13)

where Vi is the bus voltage magnitude, nb is the number of buses in the system and nl is the number of lines/transformers.
19

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

In Figure 4, the power balance at the  bus can be expressed as

   P  PD  ,    PT  PW , , R  . P  Q  . V    Q  QD  ,    QT  QS , X  . P  Q  . V

(14)

(15)

 2. V . PT . R   QT . X    . V . T   V  |Z | . |ST | ,

equation across line/transformer l gives


where QS is the reactive power injected into the i bus. Writing the voltage drop

i  2: nb  1.

(16)

For a system with N-buses, the nonlinear SOE will have 3(N-1) equations and 3(N-1) unknowns. Once the SOE is formulated for each bus, a first-order Newton-Raphson Method can be applied to obtain a solution. 3.2 Capacitor Planning Problem Definition using the Proposed Probabilistic Approach In this section the probabilistic formulation of the capacitor planning problem for distribution systems is presented. 3.2.1 Objective Functions The goal of a capacitor planning study is to select the optimal size and location for a capacitor banks in a distribution system in such a way that the sum of the total cost of the newly sited and sized capacitor, as well as the annual energy losses, are minimized
20

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

while the voltage profile remains within a prescribed limit. By siting a capacitor unit at a bus along the feeder, the nodal power and voltages are changed, leading to a reduction in real power loss in the system. This reduction in real power losses is economical and can be obtained by

multiplying the annual energy loss by the average cost of energy (KL). However,

purchasing new unit of capacitor sustains a cost which is in conflict with the financial benefits accrued by the reduction of real power loss. Consequently, the problem comprises multi-objective functions which conflict with each other. The objective functions are: a) minimize the total cost of capacitors ($)

QC  KC.   QS ,

(17)

QS is the size of capacitor located at the bus i .
 ELC  KL.    T . PL, ,

where KC is the annual cost of per unit capacitor bank installed in a RDS ($/kVAR) and

b) minimize the total cost of annual energy losses ($). (18)

where KL is the annual cost of per unit energy loss ($/kWh), T is loading time interval and PL, is the real power loss at the bus i and on load level D.

21

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

3.2.2 The Complete Nonlinear Optimization Formulation The aim is to minimize sum of the total capacitor cost and the cost of the annual energy losses in the system. Since the unit of both objective functions is the dollar value ($), the multi-objective problem can be reduced to a single objective function by summing up two functions. Hence, the complete model including the constraints can be written as a nonlinear programming problem as below:
  Minimize TC  QC  ELC  KC.   QS  KL.   T . PL,

(19)

Subject to

   P  PD  ,    PT  PW , R  . P  Q  . V

(19-1)

   Q  QD  ,    QT  QS , X  . P  Q  . V  2. V . PT . R   QT . X    . V . T   V  |Z | . |ST | 

(19-2)

i  2: nb  1

(19-3)

V  V  V

QS  QS  QS
  S,  S,  S,

D  1: NH

(19-4) (19-5) (19-6)

Equations (19-1) - (19-3) are equality constraints which correspond to the power balance equation and the voltage drop equation across line l, respectively. Equation (19-4) refers

22

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

to the limitation of the bus voltage magnitude. Equation (19-5) corresponds to the limits on output of capacitors at the bus i and (19-6) describes the branches apparent power limits.

The optimization problem described as in (19) is solved using the LogarithmicBarrier interior point method (LBIPM). The LBIPM is an interior point solution method that is able to effectively solve the aforementioned constrained nonlinear optimization problem. It was chosen in this thesis because of its desirable convergence speed and characteristics. It is explained in the next section. 3.3 The Cumulant Method for Optimizing Power Systems The solution strategy for the problem is detailed in this section. The goal of this solution method is to verify the probabilistic behaviour of the problem variables which can be observed by their PDF. Therefore, the first step is to formulate the optimization problem. In order to solve the problem, the LBIPM method is used. After convergence, the cumulants are obtained using some characteristics of the LBIPM. These cumulants are the key parameters to describe the probabilistic distributions. Once obtained, they are used to re-construct the distribution curves by using the Gram Charlier expansion.

23

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

In summary, the main steps in the cumulant-based optimal capacitor planning problem are: 1) Do the sensitivity analysis to find the best locations for capacitor siting 2) Solve the optimization problem assuming the mean value for the loads and wind generations using a LBIPM 3) Find a linear relationship between problem variables and system loads and wind generators using the Hessian of the Lagrangian function 4) Find the cumulants of the problem variables using the linear relationship obtained in step3 5) Reconstruct the PDFs of the problem variables using the Gram-Charlier expansion theory The first step to solve the problem is to determine the candidate buses. This step is presented in the next subsection. 3.3.1 Sensitivity Analysis to Determine the Candidate Buses (Step 1) The solution procedure for minimizing (19) can become computationally difficult and complicated if all variables corresponding to the capacitor, i.e., size, location and switching time of capacitors, need to be determined simultaneously. Consequently, one efficient way to reduce the complexity of the problem is to find the optimal locations (candidate buses) to be compensated which lead to the greatest loss reduction prior to the optimization problem.

24

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

For locating the candidate buses, a sensitivity analysis is used to reduce the search space for the optimization procedure. The sensitivity analysis chooses the buses with maximum effect on the real power losses in the system with respect to the nodal reactive power. Such technique has been widely adapted in capacitor allocation problems. For instance, a novel approach for sensitivity calculations in the radial distribution system was proposed in [24]. In this thesis, we borrow the idea for formulating the sensitivity index from [24] and adapt it to the new power balance equations and the voltage relations described in section 3.1. Consider the model of a branch in radial distribution systems given in Figure 5.

 

  

  

  



  

Figure 5 A branch model representation in distribution systems

Accordingly, the total real power loss is given by:
   TPL    R  . P  Q  . V ,

(20)

25

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

power losses in the system with respect to reactive power injection, one can get the

where P  Q is the complex power reaching bus j. For finding the sensitivity of the real

derivative of the real power loss with respect to reactive power injected at the bus by using the following relationship:     



 

 .       .     










 

 .   .



(21)

Expanding equation (21) yields:
 

   

. . 


    



. . 


    



 . .   





 .  .



(22)

Equation (22) can be written in vector format as follows:
 

a load flow is solved and the value of the nodal power and voltage magnitude are derivative terms of (22) of size 3. NB  1  1, and can be expanded as follows: X     



where the vector A is of size 1  3. NB  1 and includes the coefficient of (22). Once

 A X  ,

(23)

obtained, the vector A can be calculated easily. The vector X   consists of partial


The next step is to calculate the vectorX  . As the expansion of the vector X   is given in (24), the vector X   contains the partial derivative of the active and reactive power flow
26



. . .

 

 , 



 

. . .

 

 , 








. . .

 

  . (24)



Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

partial derivatives, the power balance equations and voltage relationship for this branch model are written as
 P  R  . P  Q  P  PD ,  . V

as well as the voltage relation with respect to Q . Referring to Figure 5, to calculate these

(25) (26) .

 Q  X  . P  Q  Q  Q  QD ,  . V

By taking the derivative of (24)-(26) with respect to Q , we obtain:  
. .   . .  

V  V  2. P . R   Q . X   

      .  

 

(27)

 1 .    



. .  

 .    



 . .   

 

 .       0,







(28)

 .    



. .  

 1 .     



 . .   

 

         1,







(29)  .   



V 

      .  

V .     0,



 

 .    R  



    .

 

 .    X  



    .

 

(30)

where      ,
 




        .






(31)



27

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

following system in a compact format is achieved: B.. . X  
.

Writing equations (25)-(27) for all the lines in the systems, i.e., 3. NB  1 lines, the  C 
.

where C  is a vector of constant value at the right hand side of the equations (27)-(29). By solving (32) for X   and substituting that in (23),
 

,

(32)

of the system can be

determined. The buses with the highest real power loss sensitivity with respect to the reactive power injected into the system are ranked in descending order and can be chosen in the selection procedure. In summary the algorithm of the selection procedure can be adapted to the capacitor planning problem using the following steps: Step 1- Set i=1, NQS=1 (number of capacitor) and find TC (i) from solving the deterministic capacitor planning problem Step 2- Set i= i+1 and find the active power loss sensitivity for reactive power injection using equation (32) and (23) Step 3- Rank the candidate buses with the highest sensitivity found in Step 2 Step 5 - Connect a capacitor in the first ranked bus Step 6- Solve deterministic capacitor planning problem Step 7- if TC (i) < TC (i-1) and min(V) < V , set NQS = NQS+1 and go to Step

2; otherwise exit the loop

By performing the above steps, the best candidate buses for capacitor sitting are selected.

28

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

3.3.2 The LBIPM Solution (Step 2) The Logarithmic Barrier Interior Point Method (LBIPM) is one of the applications of the interior-point methods that have been widely used to efficiently solve large power system constrained optimization problems for many years. However, the application of the LBIPM is not only restricted to the use in nonlinear programming problems, but it can be also efficiently applied to Quadratic programming as well as to linear programming. The method is explained briefly as follows [25]: Consider the following NLP problem model: minimize fx subject to: gx  D x  x x    I   where, for the cost function minimization problem in capacitor planning, this system can be defined as: · ·  consisting of the system variables x   V Q P QS . (33)

relation FVX  0  and the power balance equation FSX  D . D is the a vector of generation and loading (see equations (19-1) and (19-2)).

 comprises the equality constraints separated into two parts: the voltage

29

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

To apply the LBIPM to the above system, firstly all inequality constraints in the NLP problem should be converted to the equalities by adding slack variables as follows: minimize fx s  s  x    x    0 s , s  0 gx  D  0 subject to: (34)

 x  s  x I    0

terms, we get:

By incorporating the slack variables s  0 into the problem using logarithmic barrier
.

minimize fx  µ  subject to: gx  D  0

lns   lns  

(35)

s  s  x    x    0 where µ  0 is a barrier parameter which tends to zero as iterations progress. Using the  x  s  x I    0

method of Lagrange multipliers, the next step is to write the Lagrangian function of the above systems:

30

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation
. . gx  D  Lu  fx  µ  lns   lns         x  s  x z s  s  x    x     z I   

(36)

where  is the Lagrange multiplier, and u is a vector of primal and dual variables in the optimization problem.

Using the system variables, (35) becomes: Lu  fX   gX  D,

(37)

where u  X   is the vector of primal and dual variables.

3.3.2.1 Gradient, Hessian and Newton Step

In optimization theory, the Karush­Kuhn­Tucker conditions (also known as the Kuhn­Tucker or KKT conditions) are necessary for a solution in nonlinear programming to be optimal [26, 27]. Accordingly, an optimal solution of (36) must satisfy the gradient of the Lagrangian function which is known as the first order Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions:   z  0,  Lu  fx  J x   I  Lu  gx  D  0,
  Lu  µs  z  0,

(38)

31

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation
  Lu  µs  z  z  0,

 Lu  s  s  x    x    0, where fx is the gradient of the fx, and J is the Jacobian of the gx. To solve the  x  s  x  Lu  I    0,

nonlinear system of (38) one can apply a Newton-Raphson-based solver which gives the following relationship: Huu  Lu, (39)

and u stands for the Newton step. By expanding (39) the following symmetric system is obtained [25]: 0  µs I I 0 0
 µs

where Huand Lu are the Hessian and the gradient of the Lagrangian, respectively

    

obtain the Newton step from the large system above is to solve for the x and  first from the reduced system represented below:
 N x J    , 0 gx  D 

where   L is the second derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to x. One idea to

0 I 0 0 0

I I 0 0 0 0

0 I 0 0  I 0

0 0 0  I   L J

 µs  z s 0     s   µs  z  z     0  0  z  s  s  x    x       , 0   z     x  s  x I     J   x   fx  J x   I   z   0     gx  D  

(40)

M  J

(41)
32

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

where
     M    L  µI s  s I,

(42) (43)

  z . N  fx  J x   I

computed. Comparing equation (39) with equation (41), one can conclude that the Hessian of the Lagrangian in this system is the matrix terms of (41), i.e. M H J
 J . 0

Once the primal and dual variables of the system are obtained, s , s , z , z can be

(44)

3.3.3 The Cumulant Method (Steps 3 and 4) The cumulant method is adapted to the probabilistic capacitor planning problem to obtain the statistic parameters of unknown variables, which are formulated making use of the statistic parameters of known variables, such as the system loading and WG power output. This relationship is linear, as it will be explained in this subsection. Consider a linear combination of n independent random variable x used to create a new

Y  c x  c x  c x  . . .  c x ,

random variable Y as follows [28]:

(45)

33

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

discussed in chapter 2, the moment generation function of random variable Y , s, can be written as:  s  Ee   Ee   .
. .  

where c is the i coefficient in the linear combination. From the probabilistic definitions

written as

Assuming that x , x , x , . . . , x

  Ee  e   . . . e   

(46)

are independent, the above relationship can be

 s  Ee  Ee   . . . Ee      c s  c s . . .  c s .

the left-hand side of equation (47) can be converted into the summation of them. To achieve that, the natural logarithm (ln) function should be used. By taking the natural logarithm from the above relationship, we get: ln  s  ln c s  c s . . .  c s  

For simplification purposes, the multiplication of the moment generating function of x in

(47)

moment generating function  (s) as follows:  s  ln s.

From chapter 2, the cumulant generating function,  (s), can be written in terms of the

ln c s   ln c s   . . .  ln c s .

(48)

(49)

Consequently, writing (48) in the terms of cumulant generating function gives:
34

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

 s   c s   c s . . .   c s.

(50)

To compute different orders of cumulant, different order derivatives of the cumulant generating function should be taken while setting s = 0. For example, for computing zero, first and second order cumulants, the zero, first and second order derivatives of the cumulant generating function are taken as:  s   sc s   sc s . . .  sc s, (51)

  s  c   sc s  c   sc s . . . c   sc s,

  s  c    sc s  c    sc s . . . c    sc s. Setting s = 0 yields:   s  c    0  c    s0 . . . c    s0. general equation for the n order cumulant of Y is the following: (52)

Cumulants of third and higher order can be computed following the same procedure. A

   0   0   0 k    0  c   c  + . . . + c  .

(53)

the n order cumulant of random variables x and the corresponding coefficients c are problem, and x denotes the known variable with known probabilistic information given
35

In (53), it can be observed that the n order cumulant of Y can be obtained if the value of

known. In conclusion, if a random variable Y denotes an unknown variable of the

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

random variables can be easily obtained from the same order cumulant of the x . Lu with Fu , giving u  Hu Fu,

as the different order of cumulants of x , the different order cumulants of the unknown

Using the aforementioned reasoning, (39) can be rearranged by replacing

(54)

where Fu consists power flow (FS) and voltage drop (FV) equations and N, (42).

With a vector of change in bus generation and loading, the vector of changes in the unknown variables can be linearly mapped with the vector of changes in bus generation and loading, i.e., D, using the inverse of Hessian: u  Hu . Fu  Hu .  0 . D

(55)

While the vector Fu includes power flow and voltage drop equations, the corresponding equation in each row of the power flow equations is replaced by the cumulants of the random loads. Accordingly, the cumulants of the output variables are obtained by using k ,  H    k , , the following relation:

(56)

vector of n -order cumulants for the random bus generation and loading. Consequently, the Hessian contains of the constant multipliers given by:

where k , is a vector of n -order cumulants for the unknown variables and k , is a

36

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

H 

Accordingly, the n -order cumulant for the i in u is computed using the following equation [19]:
   k ,  c, k ,  c, k ,   c, k , ,

c,  c,    c,

c,

c, 

c,

c,

c, 

c,

  ... 

 c,  .    c, 

c,

(57)

where u is the i element in u and k , is the n cumulant for the jcomponent reconstructed using Gram-Charlier/Edgeworth Expansion theory. 3.3.4 Gram-Charlier Expansion Theory (Step 5)

variable. Once the cumulants of the output variables are computed, their PDFs are

According to the Gram-Charlier Expansion, the PDFs of the many distributions can be formed as a series comprised of a standard normal distribution and its derivatives. The proposed solution method makes use of this characteristic to reconstruct the PDFs of the problem variables after their cumulants are defined in terms of the known cumulants (of the known variables). Consider a random variable x with the cumulants of k  . The PDF of x can be written in

distribution, i.e., with µ = 0 and   1. Thus the PDF of x is written as:

terms of the known PDF of . This known PDF is usually chosen as the standard normal

37

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

where  represents the n derivative of the standard normal distribution and c is the is the i Edgeworth series coefficient. The Edgeworth form of the series uses the cumulants new parameter called Tchebycheff-Hermite or Hermite polynomial is introduced: of x to compute the series coefficient. Rearranging the above summation in terms of , a fx  c He x  c He x  c He x  c He x  

fx  x 

 !

 x 

 !

 x 

 !

 x  

(58)

(59)

where He is the i Hermite polynomial. The above series form is called A series [19]. In

the next sections the Hermite Polynomials and the computation of the Edgeworth series coefficient are discussed.

3.3.4.1 Hermite Polynomials In the previous section, it was shown that the Gram-Charlier Expansion series allows to the PDF of random variable x to be constructed in a series form called A series. The series introduces two variables that can be defined in terms of the standard distribution functions and the cumulants of the random variable x. In this subsection one of these two variables, called the Hermite polynomial, is introduced. Comparing the equation (58) and (59), it is showed that i Hermite polynomials are

defined in terms of the i order derivative of the standard normal distribution as follows [29, 30]:

38

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

He x  1 . e .  x  1 e .  e
   

 

 

 

(60)

Accordingly, the first five Hermite polynomials are: He x  1, He x  x, He x  x   1, (61)

He x  x   3x,

He x  x   6x   3

He x  x   10x   15x 3.3.4.2 Edgeworth A-Series Coefficients Recalling equation (58), the probability density function of x can be rewritten in an exponential form as follow when the cumulant of the fx is given. fx  e 


 !

where k  is the i cumulant of the fx and D is the differential operator with respect to x. Expanding (62) gives [29]: fx  1   x.
! !              

 x

(62)

!

!



              ! !

!

!





              ! !

!

!





(63)
39

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

By rearranging (63) the following is obtained: fx  1 
 !

D 

 !

D ­



!

D  

 !



!!

 

 D    x

(64)

The differential operator in (64) can be substituted with the Hermite polynomials obtained in the previous section by the following relationship: He x. x  D x Substituting (65) in (64) yields: fx  1 
 !

(65)

He x 

 !

He x 

 !

He x 

    !

He x  

(66)

Recalling equation (59), the values of the Edgeworth series coefficients can be obtained. Table 1 presents the first six values of these coefficients.

40

Chapter 3 Problem Formulation

Table 1 Edgeworth Coefficients
Coefficient ( )
0

value
1 0

1 2

0    

3

4

5

6

      

   

   

41

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

CHAPTER 4

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The solution method described in the preceding chapter is applied to a 7-bus and 33-bus RDS with one and two wind generators connected to them respectively. In order to assess the accuracy of the solution method, comparison studies have been carried out with Monte Carlo simulations (MCS) consisting of 2500 samples. The absolute percentage errors of the probabilistic information of the system variables are presented. This section presents and discusses the results from the solution method. 4.1 7-Bus System

The methodology described in Chapter 3 is tested on the 7-bus test system with one wind generator shown in Figure 6. The system load and line data are given in the Appendix A.

Substation

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 6

Single line diagram of the 7-bus distribution test system

42

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

4.1.1 Comparison of the results of the Cumulant method with those of MCS In this section the results of the cumulant method are compared with those of MCS using 2500 samples. The loads are modeled using Gaussian distribution with the standard deviation equal to the 10% of the nominal bus loading value. Table 2 gives the statistical parameters assumed for the Weibull distribution representing the wind generator. The data of the system including the mean values of the loads are given in the Appendix A. Table 2
Bus No.

Parameters of the Weibull PDF for the wind generator
Mean Generation(kW) Shape Factor Standard Deviation [%]

5

400

2

55% of the Mean

In the present case, three different load levels, namely light, medium and heavy loads, have been considered with the corresponding time duration given in table 3, which also presents the system cost details. That makes the structure of the Hessian matrix consist of three submatrices such that the inverse of it contains the coefficients for the linear relation between system variables and the input random variables (loads and WGs) in the corresponding load level. Similarly, the cumulant vector of the loads and WGs consists of three subvectors. Equation (67) shows these segments clearly.

43

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

In the inverse of the Hessian matrix and vectors below, the subscripts of the coefficients (C) and Cumulant (k) can be L, M, and H, standing for Low, Medium and High, respectively. k C  ,       k ,    C    k  ,   C C C C C   C   C 


k ,  are the Cumulants of the system loads and WGs in the prescribed load levels. Table 3 Load Duration Data
Variable Capacitor Cost KS ($/kVAr)

medium and heavy load level and (k ,  k , ,( k ,  k ,  and (k , 

Consequently, k , , k , and k , are the Cumulants of the system variables in the light,

0    k ,  k ,   k  k ,    ,   k ,  k , 

(67)

Load Level

Cost of Energy KL
($/kWh)

Low Amount(p.u.) Duration(Hrs)

Medium

High

0.5 1000

0.7 1000

1.5 6760 90 0.06

The sensitivity index calculation corresponding to the procedure detailed in section 3.3.1 is carried out to find the best locations for siting the capacitor banks. These locations are known as the candidate buses. It is assumed that a capacitor switch is connected to all buses except the first bus. The bus bars are sorted in descending order of
44

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

their active power loss sensitivity, which was calculated with respect to the reactive power injection in the corresponding bus. Once the bus with the highest sensitivity is determined, the capacitor switch is closed and a new sensitivity calculation is performed. It can be seen from the step procedure given in section 3.3.1 that a candidate bus can be selected more than once to allow more than one capacitor can to be connected to a bus. Figure 7 shows the active power loss sensitivity value of each bus at the third time interval, before capacitor installation. According to this figure, the best candidate bus for capacitor sitting is bus 7. The sensitivity step procedure is carried out again until all conditions are satisfied.

Figure 7

Sensitivity Index Solutions

Table 4 presents in detail the probabilistic optimal solutions for the real power loss and the cost of energy loss at each time duration, with and without capacitors as per

45

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

cumulant method and MCS solutions. The table also gives the size of capacitors at each candidate bus. A significant decrease in real power loss and consequently in the annual cost of energy loss after capacitor installation can be seen from the table. In addition, the results of cumulant method are in close agreement with those of MCS.

Table 4

Optimal solutions and comparison of the two methods

Capacitors Method Time Duration Bus No. Size (kVAr) 1 Base Case Cumulant 2 3 1 Base Case MCS 2 3 1 Cumulant using OPF 2 7 3 1 MCS using OPF 2 3 7 1738.6 1738.7 0 0

Real Power Loss (kW) 23.757 52.359 327.59 22.847 51.588 326.09 9.9915 25.068

Annual Cost of Energy Losses ($)

4,123,100

4,101,800

2,137,500 170.48 10.785 25.615 170.40 2,139,000

46

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Table 5 presents the probabilistic optimal solutions for the total cost. From this table it can be seen that the mean value of the total cost yields a cost of 2.2940 million dollars using the cumulant method and 2.2964 million dollars using the MCS. It can be seen that the mean values of the optimal solutions of both methods closely match each other with a percentage error of 0.10%. The percentage error of the Standard deviation is 57.23%. This large percentage error is due to the power loss formulation, which adds the errors of the power and voltage values at all buses. Consequently, the existing variance errors at all buses are combined, yielding a total large percentage error. Moreover, there is a two stage procedure to obtain the cumulants of the total costs from the known cumulants of loads and wind generation. Firstly, the cumulants of the system power flow and nodal voltage should be obtained using the method as explained earlier, and secondly the total cost equation should be linearized so that the cumulant of the objective function can be calculated from the cumulant of the system variables. It can be concluded that the cumulant of the total cost is indirectly related to the cumulant of the known variables. This results in a further increased error as well. Note that the total cost of employing capacitors clearly offset the annual energy loss for the uncompensated cases. The savings will be more pronounced after the first year.

47

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Table 5

Total Cost Values

Cumulant Mean value of Total Cost (millions of $) 2.2940 Standard Deviation of Total Cost (millions of $) 0.188 Mean value of Total Cost (millions of $) 2.2964

MCS Standard Deviation of Total Cost (millions of $) 0.441

Error of Mean [%] 0.10

Error of Standard Deviation [%] 57.23

Figure 8 shows the voltage improvement before and after the capacitor installation at the third time interval. From this figure it can be seen that the minimum voltage before installing any capacitor, i.e., at the base case, is 0.86 p.u. which is improved to 0.927 p.u. after capacitor installation.

Figure 8

Voltage improvement before and after capacitor installation

48

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

The probabilistic optimal results for the system variables, voltage magnitude, active and reactive power flow solutions, and capacitor size in all time durations are detailed in table 6 and table 7. These results are divided into two portions. The first portion includes the results for the mean value and the discussion about the percentage error between both cumulant and MCS. The second portion of the results presents the standard deviation values and the discussion about the percent error between both cumulant and MCS. The mean values for the loads and WGs were taken at the nominal value from the 7-bus system. The results of both mean and standard deviation values are discussed as follows: 1) Mean Values: Table 6 contains the results related to the mean values for all system variables in per unit as well as a comparison between the cumulant method and MCS presented as an absolute percentage error in all TDs. The results for the percentage error of the voltage mean value is very small, with the maximum of 0.06% which occurs at TD3 at buses 5 and 6. The percentage errors of the mean value for the other system variables are not as small, but well below 10%. 2) Variance Value: Table 7 contains the results of the standard deviation values for all system variables in per unit as well as a percent error comparison between the cumulant method and MCS in all TDs. From the table it can be seen that the percentage error of the standard deviation of all variables are below 10% .The maximum percentage error for standard deviation of voltage, active and reactive

49

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

power and capacitor size are 2.25% at TD1, 3.01% at TD3, 9.45%at TD3 and 1.46% at TD2, respectively.

50

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Table 6

Mean values of the system variables MCS-2500 samples Mean value TD1
1.000 0.996 0.992 0.990 0.989 0.984 0.983 0.000 0.608 0.483 0.372 0.255 0.677 0.326 0.000 0.283 0.182 0.079 -0.065 -0.068 -0.339 0.591

Bus No.
1

Cumulant Method Mean value TD1
1.000

Error (%) TD1
0.000 0.011 0.025 0.038 0.055 0.055 0.055 0.000 4.097 5.121 6.743 9.951 0.045 0.167 0.000 0.105 0.329 0.489 1.010 0.993 0.007 0.079

TD2
1.000 0.993 0.987 0.983 0.980 0.973 0.972 0.000 1.055 0.877 0.720 0.555 0.948 0.455 0.000 0.399 0.257 0.110 -0.093 -0.098 -0.479 0.831

TD3
1.000 0.983 0.966 0.953 0.942 0.927 0.925 0.000 2.804 2.400 2.044 1.675 2.039 0.975 0.000 0.974 0.644 0.311 -0.139 -0.163 -0.984 1.739

TD2
1.000 0.993 0.988 0.983 0.980 0.974 0.973 0.000 1.029 0.853 0.695 0.530 0.949 0.456 0.000 0.398 0.256 0.109 -0.093 -0.098 -0.478 0.831

TD3
1.000 0.983 0.966 0.953 0.943 0.927 0.925 0.000 2.779 2.376 2.020 1.650 2.040 0.977 0.000 0.972 0.643 0.311 -0.139 -0.164 -0.983 1.739

TD2
0.000 0.012 0.025 0.039 0.056 0.056 0.056 0.000 2.432 2.894 3.594 4.757 0.046 0.167 0.000 0.130 0.315 0.338 0.620 0.618 0.076 0.039

TD3
0.000 0.013 0.027 0.041 0.060 0.060 0.059 0.000 0.906 1.013 1.207 1.482 0.049 0.167 0.000 0.138 0.253 0.114 0.275 0.334 0.152 0.001

2 0.996 3 0.992

Voltage (PU)

4 0.990 5 0.988 6 0.983 7 0.983 1 0.000 2 0.633 3

Active Power (PU)

0.508 4 0.397 5 0.280 6 0.677 7 0.325 1 0.000 2 0.283 3

Reactive Power (PU)

0.183 4 0.079 5 -0.064 6 -0.067 7 -0.339

Capacitor Size(PU)

7

0.590

51

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Table 7

Standard deviation values of the system variables Cumulant Method Mean value TD1
0.000

Bus No.
1

MCS-2500 samples Mean value TD1
0.000 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.005 0.005 0.005 0.000 0.237 0.236 0.235 0.234 0.048 0.033 0.000 0.015 0.012 0.010 0.008 0.008 0.024 0.034

Error (%) TD1
0.000 1.644 1.832 1.841 1.948 2.157 2.255 0.000 2.152 2.418 2.394 2.465 0.154 0.286 0.000 0.552 1.124 0.613 1.171 1.209 1.549 1.329

TD2
0.000 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.005 0.005 0.006 0.000 0.241 0.238 0.235 0.233 0.067 0.046 0.000 0.021 0.017 0.014 0.012 0.012 0.034 0.049

TD3
0.000 0.001 0.003 0.005 0.007 0.007 0.008 0.000 0.297 0.287 0.278 0.269 0.144 0.098 0.000 0.047 0.038 0.030 0.026 0.027 0.072 0.105

TD2
0.000 0.001 0.002 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.006 0.000 0.246 0.244 0.242 0.239 0.067 0.046 0.000 0.021 0.017 0.014 0.012 0.012 0.034 0.048

TD3
0.000 0.001 0.003 0.005 0.007 0.007 0.008 0.000 0.305 0.296 0.286 0.277 0.144 0.098 0.000 0.046 0.037 0.031 0.028 0.030 0.074 0.103

TD2
0.000 1.596 1.842 1.839 1.964 2.145 2.227 0.000 2.312 2.656 2.592 2.652 0.152 0.286 0.000 0.883 0.951 0.865 1.267 1.413 1.466 1.464

TD3
0.000 0.239 0.624 0.550 0.676 0.481 0.356 0.000 2.409 3.020 2.863 2.913 0.124 0.286 0.000 3.233 0.183 3.143 8.697 9.451 2.690 1.073

2 0.001 3 0.002

Voltage (PU)

4 0.004 5 0.005 6 0.005 7 0.005 1 0.000 2 0.232 3

Active Power (PU)

0.230 4 0.229 5 0.228 6 0.048 7 0.033 1 0.000 2 0.015 3

Reactive Power (PU)

0.012 4 0.010 5 0.008 6 0.008 7 0.024

Capacitor Size(PU)

7 0.035

52

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

4.2

33-Bus System The methodology described in Chapter 3 is tested on the 33-bus, 32-branch test

system described in [31]. The system, however, is modified to accommodate two wind generators with a mean capacity equal to 500kW each. The single line diagram of the system is depicted on Figure 9. The system load and line data are given in the Appendix A.

19

20

21

22

26 Substation

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

23

24

25

Figure 9

Single line diagram of the 33-bus distribution test system

4.2.1 Comparison of the results of the cumulant method with those of MCS The cumulant solution method is tested on a 33-bus system with two wind generators connected to it. The standard deviations of the loads are equal to 10% of the nominal bus loading value. The load duration data of the system is same as table 3.
53

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Table 8 includes the statistical parameters of the Weibull distribution used to represent the wind generators. Note both wind generators are assumed to be identical. Table 8
Bus No.

Parameters of the Weibull PDF for the wind generator
Mean Generation (kW) Shape Factor Standard Deviation [%]

2 and 6

500

2

55% of the Mean

Figure 10 shows the active power loss sensitivity value of each bus before capacitor allocation at the third time interval. According to this figure, the best candidate bus for capacitor sitting is bus 33. The sensitivity step procedure is carried out again until all conditions are satisfied.

Figure 10

Sensitivity Index Solutions 54

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

The results obtained using the Cumulant method have been compared with those of MCS consisting of 2500 samples. Table 9 presents the probabilistic optimal solutions for the real power loss and the cost of energy loss at each time duration, with and without capacitors as per cumulant method and MCS solutions. The table also gives the size of capacitors at each candidate bus. A significant decrease in real power loss and consequently in the annual cost of energy loss after capacitor installation can be seen from the table. In addition, the results of the cumulant method are in close agreement with those of MCS.

55

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Table 9

Optimal solutions and comparison of the two methods

Capacitors Method Time Duration Bus No. Size (kVAr) 1 Base Case Cumulant 2 3 1 Base Case MCS 2 3 1 Cumulant using OPF 2 8 18 25 33 722.04 263.30 483.27 1062.4 0 0

Real Power Loss (kW)

Annual Cost of Energy Losses($)

32.56 72.11 434.38 33.36 72.69 434.26 18.39 3,373,300 5,474,900 5,473,900

42.97

3

268.15

1 MCS 2 using OPF 3

8 18 25 33

721.25 263.14

18.87

3,351,500 481.94 1061.6 266.28 43.02

56

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Table 10 represents the probabilistic optimal solutions for the total cost. From this table the mean value of the total cost is 3.6011 million dollars using the cumulant method and 3.5803 million dollars using the MCS. The corresponding percentage error is only 0.57%. The percentage error of Standard deviation, however, is 55.02%. This large error can is due to the same reason to that of the 7-bus system.

Table 10

Total Cost Values

Cumulant Mean value of Total Cost (millions of $) 3.6011 Standard Deviation of Total Cost (millions of $) 0.173 Mean value of Total Cost (millions of $) 3.5803

MCS Standard Deviation of Total Cost (millions of $) 0.386

Error of Mean [%] 0.57

Error of Standard Deviation [%] 55.02

Figure 11 shows the voltage improvement before and after capacitor planning at TD3. The figure shows that the minimum of voltage before installing any capacitor, i.e. base case, is 0.86 p.u., which is improved to 0.91 p.u. after capacitor planning.

57

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Figure 11

Voltage improvement before and after capacitor installation

Figure 12 and 13 show the reconstructed PDF and CDF of the objective function using Gram-Charlier/Edgeworth Series, respectively.

58

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Figure 12

Reconstructed PDF of Total Cost

Figure 13 Reconstructed CDF of Total Cost

59

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

The probabilistic optimal results for the system variables, voltage magnitude, active and reactive power flow solutions and the capacitor size in all time durations are detailed in table 23 and table 24 in Appendix B. However, in table 11 and table 12 the maximum corresponding error are given. From table 11 can be seen that the percentage errors of the mean value for the other system variables are all below 9%. The results presented in table 12 and 24 show that the percentage error of the standard deviation of all variables are below 10% except the percentage error of the standard deviation of the reactive power at bus 2. It should be noted that one of the wind generators is connected at this bus without any reactive loads. Consequently, the reactive power injected to this bus has a small variation, which causes a larger error in absolute percentage error in comparison with other buses. The maximum percentage error for standard deviation of voltage, active and reactive power and capacitor size are 5.37%, 13.87%, 7.96% and 4.67%, respectively, which occur at the first time interval for active power and third time interval for other variables.

60

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Table 11

maximum error of mean values of the system variables MCS-2500 samples Mean value TD1
0.977 0.713 -0.001 0.209

Bus No. Voltage (PU) Active Power(PU) Reactive Power(PU) Capacitor Size(PU)
16,17, 18 2 14 25

Cumulant Method Mean value TD1
0.976 0.776 -0.001 0.209

Error (%) TD1
0.05 8.827 4.415 0.14

TD2
0.964 1.502 -0.002 0.294

TD3
0.908 4.528 -0.006 0.483

TD2
0.964 1.439 -0.002 0.294

TD3
0.909 4.462 -0.006 0.482

TD2
0.052 4.421 4.05 0.164

TD3
0.062 1.49 3.06 0.276

Table 12

maximum error of standard deviation values of the system variables Cumulant Method SD value TD1
0.0039

Bus No. Voltage (PU) Active Power(PU) Reactive Power(PU) Capacitor Size(PU)
18

MCS-2500 samples SD value TD1
0.0038 0.0129 0.0069 0.0078

Error (%) TD1
2.6264 2.2412 2.6173 0.3101

TD2
0.0041 0.0185 0.0101 0.0111

TD3
0.0051 0.0398 0.0242 0.0243

TD2
0.0039 0.0181 0.0097 0.0111

TD3
0.0048 0.0389 0.0212 0.0255

TD2
2.8657 2.2385 4.0918 0.1816

TD3
5.3733 2.2184 13.877 4.6717

31
0.0132

2
0.0071

8
0.0079

61

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

The PDFs of all system variables are reconstructed from their cumulants using Gram Charlier/ Edgeworth series. Figures 14, 15 and 16 show the reconstructed PDFs of the voltage, nodal real power and capacitor size at bus 8 in the first time interval and compare it with those of MCS. In order to illustrate the PDF of capacitor size, bus 8 is selected randomly from other candidate buses. From these figures it can be seen that the PDFs have a non-Gaussian behaviour. That can be seen more clearly in Figure 15, which illustrates the nodal real power at this bus.

Figure 14 PDF of Voltage at Bus 8 reconstructed by Gram-Charlier/Edgeworth

62

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

Figure 15 PDF of real Power at Bus 8 reconstructed by Gram-Charlier/Edgeworth

Figure 16 PDF of capacitor size at Bus 8 reconstructed by Gram-Charlier/Edgeworth

63

Chapter 4 Results and Discussions

To explain the non-Guassian behaviour of the system random variables at this bus, one may note that one of the WGs is connected at bus 6 and since the WGs were modeled as Weibull distributions, the probabilistic behaviour of the systems variables in the buses nearby have a tendency to behave more like a Weibull distribution. The small difference between PDFs of cumulant and MCS in Figure 14 is due to the small error between the standard deviation values obtained from both methods. These results clearly imply that the cumulant method provides results acceptably close to those obtained from MCS. Therefore, the method has been validated. The cumulant method brings the advantage of computational speed and analytical soundness, as opposed to the exhaustive nature of MCS. Next chapter presents the main conclusions of this research work.

64

Chapter 5 Conclusions

CHAPTER 5

CONCLUSIONS
This thesis studied a new probabilistic formulation for the optimal capacitor planning problem in distribution systems with high penetration of wind generators. The probabilistic components of the systems are loads and wind generators which were modeled as Gaussian and Weibull distributions, respectively. The different orders of their cumulants were obtained from their PDFs. To find the best locations to site the capacitor banks, a selection procedure was formulated to identify the buses with highest active power loss sensitivity with respect to the reactive power injection. By selecting the candidate buses beforehand, this task greatly reduces the complexity and variable size of the optimization problem. Once the best locations are determined, the power system is formulated as an optimization problem and solved by using the LBIPM. This solution delivers the Hessian matrix, which is inverted to provide a linear mapping from the cumulants of the system loadings and WGs to those of the unknown system variables (voltage, reactive and active powers). The method was implemented and tested on a 7-bus and on a 33-bus system. Once the cumulants of all unknown system variables are obtained, their PDFs as well as the objective function were reconstructed using the Gram Charlier/ Edgeworth series.

65

Chapter 5 Conclusions

In order to illustrate the efficiency and accuracy of the cumulant method, the results obtained using the cumulant method were compared with those of MCS with 2500 samples. The errors were found to be acceptable. The proposed probabilistic algorithm has much less computational burden and complexity, making it very practical and advantageous. Moreover, the PDFs provided by the proposed solution offer great insight to power system planners when finding the most cost effective solutions for capacitor allocation in distribution systems.

66

Appendices

APPENDIX A
TEST SYSTEMS DATA

7-Bus System Data

Table 13 Voltage data: 7-bus RDS
Slack Bus Voltage (p.u.) 1.00 Maximum Voltage Limit (p.u.) 1.10 Minimum Voltage Limit (p.u.) 0.9

Table 14 Feeder data: 7-bus RDS
PG (MW) 1.00 QG (Mvar) 1.10 QGMAX (Mvar) 1000 QGMIN (Mvar) -1000

Table 15 Shunt capacitor limits: 7-bus RDS
QSMAX (Mvar) 2 QSMIN (Mvar) 0 QSSTP (Mvar) 1.00

67

Appendices Table 16 Mean values and standard deviation of the loads
Mean Bus Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Real Power (kW) 0 0.2465 0.2209 0.232 0 0.701 0.65 Reactive Power (kW) 0 0.197 0.206 0.286 0 0.542 0.503 Standard Deviation [%] 10 10 10 10 10 10 10

Table 17

Line data 7-bus RDS

From Bus

To Bus

R ()

X ()

Rating (MVA)
100 100 100 100 100 100

System Voltage (kV)
12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66

1 2 3 4 5 6

2 3 4 5 6 7

0.7314 0.8411 0.8411 1.0605 1.197 0.8542

0.7158 0.8231 0.8231 1.0379 0.808 0.5766

68

Appendices

33-Bus System Data

Table 18 Voltage data: 33-bus RDS
Slack Bus Voltage (p.u.) 1.00 Maximum Voltage Limit (p.u.) 1.10 Maximum Voltage Limit (p.u.) 0.9

Table 19 Feeder data: 33-bus RDS
PG (MW) 1.00 QG (Mvar) 1.10 QGMAX (Mvar) 1000 QGMIN (Mvar) -1000

Table 20 Shunt capacitor limits: 33-bus RDS
QSMAX (Mvar) 100 QSMIN (Mvar) 0 QSSTP (Mvar) 1.00

69

Appendices

Table 21

Mean values and standard deviation of the loads
Mean

Bus Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Real Power (kW) 0 0 0.09 0.12 0.06 0 0.2 0.2 0.06 0.06 0.045 0.06 0.06 0.12 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.4

Reactive Power (kW) 0 0 0.04 0.08 0.03 0 0.1 0.1 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.035 0.035 0.08 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.2 70

Standard Deviation [%] 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10

Appendices

25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33

0.4 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.12 0.2 0.15 0.21 0.06

0.2 0.025 0.025 0.02 0.07 0.6 0.07 0.1 0.04

10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10

Table 22

Line data 33-bus RDS

From Bus
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2 19

To Bus
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

R ()
0.0922 0.493 0.3662 0.3811 0.819 0.1872 1.7114 1.03 1.044 0.1966 0.3744 1.468 0.5416 0.591 0.7463 1.289 0.732 0.164 1.5042 71

X ()
0.047 0.2511 0.1864 0.1941 0.707 0.6188 1.2351 0.74 0.74 0.065 0.1238 1.155 0.7129 0.526 0.545 1.721 0.574 0.1565 1.3554

Rating (MVA)
100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100

System Voltage (kV)
12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66

Appendices
20 21 3 23 24 6 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 0.4095 0.7089 0.4512 0.898 0.896 0.203 0.2842 1.059 0.8042 0.5075 0.9744 0.3105 0.341 0.4784 0.9373 0.3083 0.7091 0.7011 0.1034 0.1447 0.9337 0.7006 0.2585 0.963 0.3619 0.5302 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66 12.66

72

Appendices

APPENDIX B
RESULT COMPARISON OF THE 33-BUS SYSTEM

Table 23

Mean values of the system variables
MCS-2500 samples Error (%) Mean value Mean value TD3 TD1 TD2 TD3 TD1 TD2 TD3

Cumulant Method

Bus No. TD1 1 1.000 2 0.999 3 0.996 4 0.994 5 0.993 6 0.990 7 0.990 8 0.986 9 Voltage 10 (PU) 11 0.981 12 0.980 13 0.978 14 0.977 15 0.977 16 0.976 17 0.976 18 0.977 19 0.999 0.999 0.996 0.999 0.999 0.996 0.004 0.004 0.004 0.964 0.908 0.977 0.964 0.909 0.050 0.052 0.062 0.964 0.908 0.977 0.964 0.909 0.050 0.052 0.062 0.964 0.908 0.977 0.964 0.909 0.050 0.052 0.062 0.964 0.909 0.977 0.965 0.910 0.049 0.052 0.061 0.965 0.911 0.978 0.965 0.911 0.049 0.051 0.061 0.966 0.913 0.978 0.966 0.913 0.049 0.051 0.060 0.969 0.920 0.981 0.969 0.921 0.049 0.051 0.059 0.970 0.922 0.981 0.970 0.923 0.049 0.050 0.058 0.981 0.970 0.923 0.982 0.971 0.924 0.049 0.050 0.058 0.983 0.974 0.931 0.984 0.974 0.931 0.048 0.050 0.057 0.977 0.939 0.986 0.978 0.939 0.048 0.049 0.055 0.983 0.951 0.990 0.983 0.952 0.047 0.048 0.053 0.983 0.953 0.991 0.984 0.953 0.047 0.048 0.053 0.988 0.968 0.993 0.989 0.968 0.030 0.030 0.033 0.991 0.975 0.995 0.991 0.975 0.022 0.022 0.024 0.993 0.982 0.996 0.993 0.982 0.014 0.014 0.016 0.999 0.997 1.000 0.999 0.997 0.004 0.004 0.004 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 TD2

73

Appendices
20 0.997 21 0.997 22 0.997 23 0.995 24 0.992 25 0.992 26 0.990 27 0.989 28 0.985 29 0.983 30 0.982 31 0.982 32 0.983 33 0.984 1 0.000 2 0.776 3 1.092 4 0.599 5 0.538 6 0.507 Active Power (PU) 7 0.542 8 0.440 9 0.339 10 0.309 11 0.279 12 0.256 13 0.225 14 0.195 15 0.135 0.189 0.407 0.135 0.189 0.406 0.208 0.208 0.208 0.274 0.588 0.195 0.273 0.587 0.060 0.060 0.060 0.316 0.679 0.225 0.316 0.678 0.083 0.083 0.083 0.359 0.774 0.256 0.358 0.773 0.084 0.084 0.084 0.391 0.843 0.278 0.390 0.843 0.071 0.071 0.071 0.433 0.934 0.309 0.433 0.934 0.037 0.037 0.037 0.476 1.031 0.339 0.476 1.031 0.038 0.038 0.039 0.618 1.340 0.440 0.617 1.339 0.069 0.069 0.069 0.762 1.663 0.542 0.761 1.661 0.119 0.119 0.118 0.915 2.587 0.473 0.881 2.553 7.126 3.841 1.347 0.962 2.715 0.505 0.928 2.681 6.636 3.639 1.302 1.048 2.914 0.566 1.014 2.880 5.877 3.305 1.205 1.740 4.422 1.058 1.706 4.386 3.170 1.995 0.822 1.502 4.528 0.713 1.439 4.462 8.827 4.421 1.490 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.974 0.931 0.984 0.975 0.932 0.047 0.048 0.052 0.973 0.928 0.983 0.973 0.929 0.047 0.048 0.052 0.972 0.927 0.983 0.973 0.927 0.047 0.048 0.053 0.972 0.926 0.982 0.972 0.927 0.047 0.049 0.054 0.973 0.930 0.984 0.974 0.930 0.047 0.049 0.054 0.976 0.937 0.986 0.977 0.938 0.047 0.048 0.054 0.981 0.948 0.989 0.982 0.948 0.047 0.048 0.053 0.982 0.951 0.990 0.983 0.951 0.047 0.048 0.053 0.987 0.968 0.992 0.988 0.968 0.014 0.015 0.017 0.988 0.970 0.993 0.989 0.971 0.014 0.015 0.016 0.992 0.978 0.995 0.992 0.978 0.014 0.014 0.016 0.995 0.989 0.997 0.995 0.989 0.004 0.004 0.004 0.996 0.990 0.997 0.996 0.990 0.004 0.004 0.004 0.996 0.991 0.997 0.996 0.991 0.004 0.004 0.004

74

Appendices
16 0.105 17 0.075 18 0.045 19 0.180 20 0.135 21 0.090 22 0.045 23 0.446 24 0.400 25 0.200 26 0.464 27 0.433 28 0.402 29 0.371 30 0.311 31 0.210 32 0.135 33 0.030 1 0.000 2 0.228 3 0.146 4 0.108 Reactive Power (PU) 5 0.067 6 0.051 7 -0.069 8 -0.121 9 0.070 10 0.059 11 0.049 0.069 0.151 0.049 0.069 0.151 0.062 0.063 0.067 0.083 0.181 0.059 0.083 0.181 0.046 0.047 0.051 0.098 0.216 0.070 0.098 0.216 0.070 0.070 0.073 -0.175 -0.350 -0.121 -0.175 -0.350 0.062 0.027 0.194 -0.102 -0.183 -0.070 -0.102 -0.183 0.228 0.069 0.227 0.068 0.226 0.051 0.068 0.227 0.681 0.398 0.095 0.093 0.304 0.067 0.093 0.304 0.216 0.196 0.066 0.150 0.434 0.107 0.150 0.433 0.174 0.196 0.140 0.203 0.709 0.145 0.202 0.708 0.120 0.123 0.049 0.320 0.984 0.228 0.320 0.983 0.022 0.045 0.035 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.042 0.090 0.030 0.042 0.090 0.123 0.123 0.123 0.190 0.407 0.135 0.190 0.408 0.059 0.059 0.059 0.295 0.634 0.211 0.295 0.635 0.159 0.159 0.160 0.436 0.941 0.311 0.437 0.942 0.079 0.079 0.082 0.521 1.125 0.372 0.522 1.126 0.111 0.111 0.114 0.564 1.222 0.403 0.565 1.223 0.085 0.086 0.090 0.609 1.324 0.434 0.609 1.325 0.066 0.067 0.072 0.652 1.418 0.464 0.652 1.419 0.058 0.059 0.064 0.280 0.600 0.200 0.280 0.599 0.092 0.092 0.092 0.561 1.202 0.400 0.560 1.202 0.068 0.068 0.067 0.625 1.346 0.446 0.625 1.345 0.057 0.056 0.054 0.063 0.135 0.045 0.063 0.135 0.314 0.314 0.314 0.126 0.270 0.090 0.126 0.270 0.177 0.177 0.176 0.189 0.405 0.135 0.189 0.405 0.074 0.074 0.074 0.252 0.542 0.180 0.252 0.542 0.098 0.098 0.097 0.063 0.135 0.045 0.063 0.135 0.349 0.349 0.349 0.105 0.225 0.075 0.105 0.225 0.206 0.205 0.205 0.147 0.316 0.105 0.147 0.315 0.268 0.268 0.267

75

Appendices
12 0.034 13 0.016 14 -0.001 15 -0.041 16 -0.046 17 -0.056 18 -0.066 19 0.080 20 0.060 21 0.040 22 0.020 23 0.017 24 -0.009 25 -0.109 26 0.119 27 0.107 28 0.093 29 0.082 30 0.047 31 -0.253 32 -0.289 33 -0.339 8 Capacitor 18 Size 25 (PU) 33 0.359 0.504 1.062 0.359 0.504 1.062 0.047 0.058 0.074 0.209 0.294 0.483 0.209 0.294 0.482 0.140 0.164 0.276 0.086 0.121 0.263 0.086 0.121 0.263 0.064 0.063 0.060 0.242 0.345 0.722 0.242 0.345 0.721 0.018 0.027 0.110 -0.476 -1.002 -0.339 -0.476 -1.002 0.059 0.071 0.088 -0.406 -0.849 -0.289 -0.406 -0.848 0.027 0.041 0.062 -0.356 -0.741 -0.253 -0.356 -0.740 0.056 0.071 0.097 0.065 0.165 0.047 0.065 0.166 0.094 0.005 0.112 0.114 0.272 0.082 0.114 0.272 0.195 0.144 0.057 0.130 0.309 0.093 0.130 0.309 0.188 0.141 0.057 0.149 0.357 0.106 0.149 0.357 0.165 0.122 0.043 0.167 0.396 0.119 0.167 0.396 0.155 0.117 0.045 -0.154 -0.183 -0.109 -0.154 -0.183 0.006 0.042 0.237 -0.014 0.119 -0.009 -0.014 0.119 0.834 0.183 0.209 0.023 0.200 0.017 0.023 0.201 0.109 0.224 0.212 0.028 0.060 0.020 0.028 0.060 0.392 0.392 0.392 0.056 0.120 0.040 0.056 0.120 0.301 0.301 0.301 0.084 0.180 0.060 0.084 0.181 0.129 0.129 0.129 0.112 0.242 0.080 0.113 0.242 0.143 0.143 0.144 -0.093 -0.203 -0.066 -0.093 -0.203 0.095 0.094 0.090 -0.079 -0.173 -0.056 -0.079 -0.173 0.085 0.084 0.079 -0.065 -0.142 -0.046 -0.065 -0.142 0.108 0.107 0.101 -0.058 -0.126 -0.041 -0.058 -0.126 0.132 0.131 0.124 -0.002 -0.006 -0.001 -0.002 -0.006 4.415 4.050 3.060 0.023 0.049 0.016 0.023 0.048 0.202 0.206 0.220 0.048 0.105 0.034 0.048 0.105 0.160 0.161 0.166

76

Appendices
Table 24 Standard deviation values of the system variables
Cumulant Method Bus No. 1 0.00000 2 0.00023 3 0.00106 4 0.00171 5 0.00238 6 0.00383 7 0.00383 8 0.00386 9 0.00387 10 0.00389 11 0.00389 12 Voltage 13 (PU) 14 0.00393 15 0.00393 16 0.00393 17 0.00394 18 0.00394 19 0.00023 20 0.00025 21 0.00025 22 0.00026 23 0.00107 24 0.00111 25 0.00114 0.00123 0.00179 0.00112 0.00122 0.00177 1.53580 1.19030 0.86691 0.00118 0.00161 0.00109 0.00116 0.00159 1.77310 1.46630 1.09330 0.00111 0.00133 0.00105 0.00109 0.00131 2.23660 2.09210 2.10110 0.00029 0.00045 0.00026 0.00028 0.00044 2.45180 2.52680 2.43630 0.00028 0.00042 0.00025 0.00027 0.00041 2.23180 2.32400 2.41770 0.00027 0.00038 0.00024 0.00026 0.00037 2.13240 2.23930 2.47400 0.00023 0.00026 0.00023 0.00023 0.00025 1.63790 1.65020 2.07070 0.00410 0.00510 0.00384 0.00398 0.00484 2.62640 2.86570 5.37330 0.00409 0.00508 0.00384 0.00398 0.00483 2.60980 2.84090 5.31170 0.00408 0.00505 0.00384 0.00397 0.00480 2.56850 2.77830 5.14060 0.00408 0.00501 0.00383 0.00397 0.00477 2.55290 2.75620 5.09730 0.00407 0.00498 0.00383 0.00396 0.00474 2.54030 2.73850 5.06360 0.00392 0.00406 0.00494 0.00382 0.00395 0.00470 2.54800 2.74900 5.08730 0.00390 0.00402 0.00480 0.00380 0.00391 0.00456 2.55220 2.75610 5.14260 0.00401 0.00476 0.00380 0.00390 0.00453 2.54880 2.75240 5.15380 0.00401 0.00475 0.00379 0.00390 0.00451 2.54510 2.74810 5.15680 0.00398 0.00464 0.00378 0.00387 0.00441 2.53510 2.73560 5.16410 0.00395 0.00453 0.00376 0.00385 0.00431 2.53710 2.73910 5.19250 0.00391 0.00436 0.00374 0.00381 0.00419 2.49550 2.60770 4.15170 0.00391 0.00435 0.00374 0.00381 0.00420 2.46760 2.52840 3.56120 0.00243 0.00272 0.00232 0.00237 0.00264 2.47100 2.48120 3.10640 0.00174 0.00196 0.00166 0.00170 0.00191 2.47990 2.47120 3.00830 0.00109 0.00125 0.00104 0.00106 0.00121 2.46080 2.40900 2.75780 0.00023 0.00025 0.00023 0.00023 0.00025 1.54070 1.51180 1.77500 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 TD1 S.D value TD2 TD3 TD1 MCS-2500 samples Error (%) S.D value TD2 TD3 TD1 TD2 TD3

77

Appendices
26 0.00383 27 0.00384 28 0.00387 29 0.00389 30 0.00390 31 0.00390 32 0.00390 33 0.00390 1 0.00000 2 0.39913 3 0.28410 4 0.28181 5 0.28101 6 0.27951 7 0.01824 8 0.01511 9 0.01127 Active Power (PU) 10 0.01082 11 0.01039 12 0.01013 13 0.00963 14 0.00914 15 0.00689 16 0.00619 17 0.00541 18 0.00450 19 0.00902 20 0.00780 21 0.00637 0.00891 0.01910 0.00632 0.00885 0.01897 0.70676 0.70683 0.70713 0.01092 0.02341 0.00782 0.01095 0.02348 0.26404 0.26349 0.26126 0.01264 0.02719 0.00905 0.01269 0.02729 0.37612 0.37525 0.37166 0.00630 0.01350 0.00452 0.00632 0.01355 0.33396 0.33396 0.33396 0.00758 0.01624 0.00544 0.00761 0.01632 0.47712 0.47722 0.47835 0.00867 0.01864 0.00622 0.00872 0.01873 0.48037 0.48017 0.48087 0.00965 0.02076 0.00690 0.00967 0.02080 0.20162 0.20134 0.20226 0.01281 0.02754 0.00898 0.01258 0.02706 1.78490 1.78320 1.77210 0.01350 0.02911 0.00947 0.01328 0.02862 1.70090 1.70020 1.69420 0.01422 0.03090 0.00994 0.01395 0.03032 1.90850 1.90870 1.90750 0.01459 0.03177 0.01024 0.01439 0.03132 1.41640 1.41770 1.42160 0.01520 0.03310 0.01061 0.01490 0.03246 1.98190 1.98090 1.97470 0.01586 0.03478 0.01106 0.01555 0.03411 1.95880 1.95930 1.96140 0.02123 0.04639 0.01509 0.02121 0.04633 0.12500 0.12594 0.13388 0.02569 0.05662 0.01847 0.02600 0.05730 1.20450 1.19940 1.18740 0.28079 0.29077 0.27391 0.27530 0.28592 2.04320 1.99470 1.69540 0.28357 0.29972 0.27513 0.27780 0.29457 2.13720 2.07960 1.74920 0.28504 0.30450 0.27576 0.27908 0.29916 2.19250 2.13290 1.78740 0.28937 0.32156 0.27832 0.28387 0.31749 2.07890 1.94030 1.28240 0.40391 0.43318 0.39343 0.39852 0.42910 1.44900 1.35440 0.94900 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00403 0.00485 0.00380 0.00392 0.00464 2.60700 2.76910 4.42950 0.00403 0.00486 0.00381 0.00393 0.00467 2.53060 2.65010 4.09010 0.00403 0.00486 0.00381 0.00393 0.00467 2.48250 2.57680 3.89320 0.00402 0.00481 0.00381 0.00393 0.00465 2.36170 2.39260 3.39210 0.00400 0.00473 0.00380 0.00391 0.00457 2.38700 2.42650 3.45310 0.00397 0.00458 0.00377 0.00387 0.00443 2.42270 2.47330 3.51880 0.00392 0.00441 0.00375 0.00383 0.00426 2.45720 2.51420 3.53530 0.00391 0.00437 0.00374 0.00382 0.00422 2.46410 2.52370 3.55390

78

Appendices
22 0.00450 23 0.02880 24 0.02832 25 0.02000 26 0.01865 27 0.01838 28 0.01804 29 0.01771 30 0.01663 31 0.01325 32 0.01092 33 0.00300 1 0.00000 2 0.00710 3 0.00577 4 0.00593 5 0.00512 6 0.00501 7 0.00554 Reactive Power (PU) 8 0.00545 9 0.00276 10 0.00262 11 0.00252 12 0.00231 13 0.00207 14 0.00208 15 0.00261 16 0.00263 17 0.00272 0.00380 0.00807 0.00272 0.00381 0.00810 0.11529 0.13631 0.29095 0.00367 0.00776 0.00267 0.00373 0.00791 1.78050 1.80200 1.94050 0.00364 0.00771 0.00265 0.00369 0.00782 1.33200 1.35390 1.48640 0.00292 0.00632 0.00207 0.00290 0.00626 0.66206 0.68795 0.87798 0.00291 0.00632 0.00209 0.00293 0.00636 0.89540 0.86487 0.57730 0.00325 0.00710 0.00238 0.00334 0.00726 2.64790 2.62280 2.28350 0.00354 0.00773 0.00256 0.00360 0.00784 1.65490 1.63080 1.30930 0.00367 0.00803 0.00261 0.00367 0.00799 0.17236 0.19003 0.47858 0.00387 0.00848 0.00276 0.00387 0.00845 0.02501 0.00706 0.34299 0.00768 0.01687 0.00549 0.00781 0.01869 0.61933 1.67490 9.76940 0.00780 0.01708 0.00554 0.00788 0.01864 0.02108 1.03730 8.34110 0.00709 0.01567 0.00503 0.00719 0.01751 0.32531 1.36680 10.55300 0.00728 0.01719 0.00503 0.00708 0.01572 1.86130 2.84640 9.35410 0.00847 0.02021 0.00588 0.00830 0.01823 0.86272 2.12050 10.83200 0.00821 0.01917 0.00566 0.00798 0.01768 1.84870 2.86300 8.45630 0.01019 0.02422 0.00692 0.00979 0.02127 2.61730 4.09180 13.87700 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00420 0.00900 0.00295 0.00413 0.00884 1.78200 1.78200 1.78200 0.01529 0.03278 0.01090 0.01526 0.03271 0.22709 0.22481 0.21101 0.01856 0.03982 0.01296 0.01815 0.03896 2.24120 2.23850 2.21840 0.02331 0.05021 0.01648 0.02309 0.04974 0.94228 0.94394 0.93517 0.02484 0.05368 0.01785 0.02503 0.05409 0.74425 0.74496 0.75997 0.02533 0.05515 0.01808 0.02539 0.05530 0.23163 0.23552 0.26232 0.02588 0.05693 0.01850 0.02604 0.05729 0.62161 0.62309 0.63510 0.02627 0.05794 0.01872 0.02637 0.05816 0.35383 0.35832 0.38292 0.02800 0.06000 0.02000 0.02800 0.06000 0.00159 0.00159 0.00159 0.03966 0.08517 0.02838 0.03975 0.08535 0.21706 0.21675 0.21557 0.04041 0.08745 0.02881 0.04042 0.08747 0.02571 0.02568 0.02504 0.00630 0.01350 0.00447 0.00626 0.01342 0.58930 0.58930 0.58930

79

Appendices
18 0.00287 19 0.00400 20 0.00346 21 0.00283 22 0.00200 23 0.00396 24 0.00370 25 0.00691 26 0.00928 27 0.00923 28 0.00918 29 0.00917 30 0.00931 31 0.02123 32 0.02148 33 0.02203 8 Capacitor 18 Size 25 (PU) 33 0.02212 0.03102 0.06685 0.02207 0.03097 0.06694 0.23159 0.18023 0.13348 0.01216 0.01703 0.03660 0.01222 0.01713 0.03688 0.54787 0.56426 0.76619 0.00350 0.00489 0.01043 0.00349 0.00489 0.01043 0.08274 0.07395 0.00278 0.00790 0.01111 0.02433 0.00788 0.01113 0.02552 0.31018 0.18169 4.67170 0.03090 0.06658 0.02199 0.03085 0.06669 0.20842 0.15612 0.16392 0.03009 0.06457 0.02134 0.02992 0.06441 0.63312 0.57781 0.24650 0.02973 0.06363 0.02109 0.02954 0.06344 0.68335 0.62796 0.30000 0.01307 0.02840 0.00931 0.01306 0.02833 0.02883 0.05311 0.26575 0.01287 0.02804 0.00908 0.01275 0.02770 0.92747 1.00270 1.22130 0.01289 0.02815 0.00907 0.01273 0.02772 1.21740 1.29130 1.54590 0.01297 0.02843 0.00912 0.01281 0.02799 1.23910 1.30780 1.60050 0.01305 0.02861 0.00922 0.01296 0.02832 0.63009 0.70143 1.01530 0.00969 0.02097 0.00698 0.00979 0.02129 0.94828 0.97037 1.53640 0.00524 0.01186 0.00373 0.00529 0.01219 0.74990 0.95576 2.71470 0.00560 0.01256 0.00403 0.00571 0.01294 1.84330 1.90490 2.93760 0.00280 0.00600 0.00203 0.00284 0.00609 1.50750 1.50750 1.50750 0.00396 0.00849 0.00284 0.00398 0.00852 0.38503 0.38471 0.38339 0.00485 0.01040 0.00350 0.00490 0.01052 1.09200 1.09190 1.09170 0.00561 0.01204 0.00399 0.00559 0.01200 0.32482 0.32842 0.34299 0.00401 0.00853 0.00285 0.00399 0.00850 0.50109 0.47854 0.31770

80

References

REFERENCES
[1] A. Schellenberg, W. Rosehart, and J. Aguado, "Cumulant based probabilistic optimal power flow (P-OPF)," in Proceedings of the 2004 International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems, Sept 2004, pp. 506­511. [2] A. Papoulis and S. Pillai, "Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes," 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. [3] S. K. Khator and L. C. Leung, "Power Distribution Planning: A Review of Models and Issues," IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1184­1186, May 1997. [4] A. Dukpa, B. Venkatesh, " Fuzzy Stochastic Programming method: Capacitor planning in Distribution Systems with Wind Generators," IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, 2001,pp. 1 ­ 9. [5] World wind energy association, World wind energy report 2010, April 2011. Available: http://www.wwindea.org/home/images/stories/pdfs/worldwindenergyreport2010_s .pdf (Accessed: July. 2011). [6] H. Dura, "Optimum number, location, and size of shunt capacitors in radial distribution feeders: A dynamic programming approach," IEEE Trans. Power App. Syst., vol. PAS-87, no. 9, pp. 1769­1774, Sep. 1968.

81

References [7] J. J. Grainger and S. H. Lee, "Optimum size and location of shunt capacitors for reduction of losses on distribution feeders," IEEE Trans. Power App. Syst., vol. PAS-100, no. 3, pp. 1105­1118, Mar. 1981. [8] J. J. Grainger and S. H. Lee, "Capacity release by shunt capacitor placement on distribution feeders: A new voltage-dependent model," IEEE Trans. Power App. Syst., vol. PAS-101, no. 5, pp. 1236­1244, May 1982. [9] K. Iba, H. Suzuki, K. I. Suzuki, and K. Suzuki, "Practical reactive power allocation/operation planning using successive linear programming," IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 558­566, May 1988. [10] M. H. Haque, "Capacitor placement in radial distribution systems for loss reduction," Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng., Gen., Transm., Distrib., vol.146, no. 5, pp. 501­505, Sep. 1999. [11] Y. T. Hsiao and C. Y. Chien, "Optimization of capacitor allocation using an interactive trade-off method," Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng., Gen.,Transm., Distrib., vol. 148, no. 4, pp. 371­374, Jul. 2001. [12] S. F. Mekhamer,M. E. El-Hawary, S. A. Soliman, M. A. Moustafa, and M. M. Mansour, "New heuristic strategies for reactive power compensation of radial distribution feeders," IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 17,no. 4, pp. 1128­1135, Oct. 2002. [13] M. E. Baran and F. F.Wu, "Optimal capacitor placement on radial distribution systems," IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 725­734, Jan. 1989. [14] K. N. Miu, H. D. Chiang, and G. Darling, "Capacitor placement, replacement and control in large-scale distribution systems by a GA-based two-stage algorithm," IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1160­1166, Aug. 1997.
82

References [15] M. Delfanti, G. P. Granelli, P. Marannino, and M. Montagna, "Optimal capacitor placement using deterministic and genetic algorithms," IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1041­1046, Aug. 2000.3, pp. 1160­1166, Aug. 1997. [16] B. A. Souza, H. N. Alves, and H. A. Ferreira, "Microgenetic algorithms and fuzzy logic applied to the optimal placement of capacitor banks in distribution networks," IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 942­947, May 2004. [17] B. Venkatesh and R. Ranjan, "Fuzzy EP algorithm and dynamic data structure for optimal capacitor allocation in radial distribution systems," Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng., Gen., Transm., Distrib., vol. 153, no.1, pp. 80­88, Jan. 2006. [18] A. M. L. da Silva, S. M. P. Ribeiro, V. L. Arienti, R. N. Allan and M. B. D. C. Filho, "Probabilistic load flow techniques applied to power system expansion planning," IEEE Transaction on Power Systems, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1047­1053, Nov. 1990. [19] A. Schellenberg, W. Rosehart, and J. Aguado, "Cumulant-based probabilistic optimal power flow (P-OPF) with Gaussian and gamma distributions," IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 773­781, May 2005 [20] R. Billinton, "Effects of load forecast uncertainty on bulk electric system reliability evaluation," IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 418-425, May 2008. [21] R. Billinton and R. N. Allan, "Reliability Evaluation of Power Systems", 2nd ed. New York: Plenum, 1996. [22] I. Y. F. Lun and J. C. Lam, "A study of weibull parameters using long-term wind observations", Renewable Energy, 20: 145-153, 2000.

83

References [23] A. Dukpa, B. Venkatesh and L. Chang, An Accurate Voltage Solution Method of Radial Distribution System, Canadian Journal for Electrical and Computer Engineering, 34 (1/2): 69 ­ 74, Win/Spr 2009. [24] D. K. Khatod, V. Pant, and J.D. Sharma, "A Novel Approach for Sensitivity Calculations in the Radial Distribution System," IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2048-2057, October 2006. [25] G. O. G. Torres and V. Quintana, "An interior-point method for nonlinear optimal power flow using voltage rectangular coordinates," IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1211­1218, Nov. 1998. [26] Kuhn, H. W.; Tucker, A. W. (1951). "Nonlinear programming". Proceedings of 2nd Berkeley Symposium. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 481­492. [27] W. Karush (1939). "Minima of Functions of Several Variables with Inequalities as Side Constraints." M.Sc. Dissertation. Dept. of Mathematics, Univ. of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. [28] A. Schellenberg, W. Rosehart, and J. Aguado, "Cumulant based probabilistic optimal power flow (P-OPF)," in Proceedings of the 2004 International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems, Sept 2004, pp. 506­511 [29] M. G. Kendall and A. Stuart, The Advanced Thoery of Statistics, 4th ed. New York: Macmillan, 1977. [30] J. B. Calvert, "Hermite polynomials" http://www.du.edu/~jcalvert/math/hermite.htm, 2004. (Accessed: July. 2011).
84

References [31] M. A. Kashem, V. Ganapathy, G. B. Jasmon, M. I. Buhari. "A Novel Method for Loss Minimization in Distribution Networks." International Conference on Electric Utility Deregulation and Restructuring and Power Technologies 2000.

85


