Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Factors affecting bridging social capital in on-line professional networks : an exploratory study of social capital formation on LinkedIn
Natalia Gilewicz
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Sociology Commons Recommended Citation
Gilewicz, Natalia, "Factors affecting bridging social capital in on-line professional networks : an exploratory study of social capital formation on LinkedIn" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 507.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Factors Affecting Bridging Social Capital in On-Line Professional Networks: An Exploratory Study of Social Capital Formation
on Linkedln

By
Natalia Gilewicz

A thesis
Presented to Ryerson University

In partial fulfillment of the

Requirements for the degree of
Master of Management Science (MMSc) in the program of

Management of Technology and Innovation

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 © Natalia Gilewicz, 2009

Author's Declaration

Abstract

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson

Factors affecting bridging social capital on Linkedln.com Master of Management Science (MMSc)
Management of Technology and Innovation
Ryerson University © Natalia Gilewicz, 2009

University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of
scholarly research.

Natalia Gilewicz

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by
photocopying or by other means in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or
individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Natalia Gilewicz

This thesis investigates factors contributing to bridging social capital on Linkedln. An online social network is one that allows users to make and share contacts by way of displaying their network (Boyd & Ellison, 2007). The intention of a network such as Linkedln, is to create professional opportunities for its participants. Here, social capital is seen as the resource embedded within the social network, and as such is conceptualized as the benefit associated with online social network participation. Bridging social capital typically exists between weakly tied colleagues. It has been said to be a superior type of social capital for 'getting ahead' (Putnam, 2000). Understanding how to create opportunities to increase bridging social capital in an online environment is useful to potentially overcoming barriers that exist offline. Using the partial least squares approach to structural equation modeling, the thesis analyzes data collected from an online survey (n:167) of Linkedln members. Driven by theory, three constructs are conceptualized as contributing to the variance in bridging social capital. Ease of use, browsing behaviours, and bonding social capital all have a positive relationship with bridging social capital, and together explain 53.8% of this variance. These findings are then extended to explore the broader design implications they have on online social network.

u

m

Acknowledgements

Table of Contents
1 INTRODUCTION 1.1 Research objectives i 3

I strongly believe that everyone we come into contact with, no matter how insignificant the interaction, has an impact on our lives. Then there are those that leave a lasting
imprint of themselves on us for better or for worse.
2

1.2

Epistemological orientation from the functionalist paradigm

5
8

LITERATURE REVIEW

I thank my family who has always supported me through thick and thin. In particular I
thank my mom, Mila Romaniuk, who has sacrificed so much to ensure my success.

2.1

Key concepts in Online Social Networks
2.1.1 2.1.2 2.1.3
2.1.4

8
9 73 /<j
77

I'd also like to thank my amazing friends. Mahshid I could never make YaSoSoYa sauce
without you!

Impression Management Network and network structure Online versus offline networks
Privacy

2.1.5
3

Socio-demographics

20
22

Thank you to the Ryerson community and the Ted Rogers School of Management for the tremendous support throughout this process. Most importantly, thank you to my supervisor, Dr. Ojelanki Ngwenyama who has taught me everything I know about research. I have never met anyone with such a high standard for teaching. Thank you for
challenging me.

FOCUS OF THE STUDY

3.1

KEY CONCEPTS AND DEFINITIONS 3.1.1 Dimensions ofsocial capital

23 23

3.1.1.2
3.1.1.3
3.1.1.4

3.1.1.1

Network View
Synergy View

Communitarian View

Institutional View
,

'.'..'.".'.'.'.'.'..25

24

26
27

3.1.2 Types ofsocial capital 3.1.2.1 Structural and Cognitive
3.1.2.2 Bonding and Bridging

28 29
30

3.1.3

Levels ofsocial capital.

57

3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5

Position of theoretical framework within social capital research The Impact of ICT and the Internet on Social Capital The Impact of online social networks on Social Capital Theoretical Framework for the research
Bonding and bridging social capital. Searching vs. Browsing
Ease of use :

32 33 35 37
38 40
4]

3.5.1 3.5.2
3.5.3

3.6
3.7

operationalization of the concepts
Hypotheses

44
48

3.7.1 3.7.2 3.7.3 4

HI: An individual's bonding capital will impact his/her bridging capital H2: Browsing behaviours will impact an individual's bridging capital H3: Ease ofuse will impact an individual's bridging capital

49 51 51 53
53 53 35 55 57

RESEARCH METHODS AND DATA SOURCES
4.1 Data Collection 4.1.1 4.1.2 4.2 4.3 Background ofLinkedln Data Sources

Data Preparation Data Analysis

4.4
5

Confirmatory Factor Analysis
:

59
61
6i 52

RESEARCH FINDINGS
5.1 CFA Results 5.7.7 Ease of Use

5.1.2 5.1.3 5.1.4

Browsing Behaviour Bonding Capital Browsing Capital

55 53 53

5.2
5.3

Construct Validity and Reliability
Model Fit

65
57

6

DISCUSSION

68

IV

6.1

Limitations and future research

77

7

DESIGN IMPLICATIONS

81

1

Introduction
The release of Bowling Alone by Robert Putnam in 2000 has seemingly

8

REFERENCES

85
95 103 105 115

APPENDIX A: LITERATURE REVIEW TABLE APPENDIX B: SURVEY TOOL/QUESTION CODES APPENDIX D: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS APPENDIX E: ETHICS REVIEW APPROVAL

reinvigorated the research community's interest in Social Capital. In his book, Putnam

articulates his concerns for social capital and civic engagement decreasing in America-- being replaced with forms of solitary entertainment. One aspect of this debate

List of Figures
FIGURE 1: CONCEPTUALIZATION OF SOCIAL CAPITAL
FIGURE 2: MODEL OF FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO BRIDGING SOCIAL CAPITAL

29
49

concentrates on how the Internet affects social capital. However, with the number of uses

it serves, the Internet as a measurement unit is no longer as useful, particularly because
some online activities are social while others are not (Lin, 2001). As such this research specifically investigates online social networks from the theoretical perspective of social
capital.

FIGURE 3: FACTORS AFFECTING BRIDGING SOCIAL CAPITAL FIGURE 4: FREQUENCY OF LINKEDIN USE :

67 69 69
70

FIGURE 5: PERCENTAGE OF NEW CONTACT ACQUIRED THROUGH LINKEDIN
FIGURE 6: NUMBER OF CONTACTS ON LINKEDIN FIGURE 7: NUMBER OF CONTACTS HELD BY INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE MET MORE THAN

10% OF THEIR NETWORK

70

Social capital has very much become a broad concept used in many contexts
List of Tables
TABLE 1: BREAKDOWN OF THE FUNCTIONALIST PARADIGM 6

ranging from studies in family, youth behaviour, schooling, public health, community life, government, economic development and collective action (Adler & Kwon, 2002).

TABLE 2: DIMENSIONS OF SOCIAL CAPITAL
TABLE 3: THEORETICAL CONCEPTS LEADING TO BONDING SOCIAL CAPITAL TABLE 4: THEORETICAL CONCEPTS LEADING TO BRIDGING SOCIAL CAPITAL
TABLE 5: OPERATIONALIZATION OF THE SOCIAL BROWSING AND SEARCHING

23
45 46

The definition used to anchor this thesis posits that social capital can be defined in the
simplest terms as an investment is social relations with expected returns (Lin, 2001). This would indicate that individuals, who invest time and effort to maintain a social network, can then benefit from embedded assets. For example keeping in touch with colleagues

CONSTRUCT
TABLE 6: OPERATIONALIZATION OF THE EASE OF USE TABLE 7: LINKEDIN DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS AS COMPARED TO THE RESEARCH

47
48

SAMPLE
TABLE 8: INITIAL CONFIRMATORY FACTOR ANALYSIS TABLE 9: FINAL CONFIRMATORY FACTOR ANALYSIS..: TABLE 10: COMPOSITE RELIABILITY, AVE AND CRONBACH ALPHA

56
61 64 66

from one's current workplace, can create future opportunities as people leave jobs and
move elsewhere. They can also be used to uncover new information about individuals

TABLE 11: CORRELATION TABLE

66

TABLE 12: ANOVA RESULTS FOR BROWSING BEHAVIOUR AND NUMBER OF CONTACTS....71 TABLE 13: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR SBJO 73

that can help each other. As such one can invest in building social capital, which can be
seen as an asset that one may choose to use in different situations. I will further explore

the ability of certain types of social capital to help people 'get ahead'.

VI

The origin of questions presented by this research stems from the desire to understand why individuals participate in online social networks, and what they receive as a benefit from this participation. The definition of online social networks generally accepted by the research community broadly identifies these sites as allowing members to create a profile, connect with others, and display these connections (Boyd & Ellison,

Meaning, once one understands some of these factors, the network design can move to

successfully facilitate bridging social capital online. Thus I will explore how this research
affects the broader design implications of an online network.

The thesis is divided into 7 chapters. The remainder of Chapter 1 identifies the
research objectives for the study. It also classifies the epistemological perspective of the research. The literature review of current research in online social networks follows, with a look at the different areas of study in the field. Chapter 4 moves to explore social capital, positioning the research within the broad area of social capital study. This allows

2007). This definition however, does not capture any particular benefit of a social
network. This research suggests that one potential way in which to conceptualize this benefit is through the lens of social capital. Given Lin's definition of social capital it can be seen that an investment in the network can have possible returns.

for the operationalization of the proposed theoretical constructs and presentation of a
model along with three hypotheses. Chapter 5 explores the research methods utilized in
the study, as well as presenting the findings. Following the findings, limitations and areas

In this thesis, Linkedln, a professional online social network, is used to test potential factors contributing to social capital. Breaking out this type of online activity allows for a more specific measurement of social capital. Moreover, because social capital is such a broad concept, it is also further dissected, in order to better position the
thesis, into bonding and bridging social capital. Bonding social capital exists between strongly tied individuals such as close friends and kin, while bridging capital exists
between loosely tied individuals such as colleagues (Putnam, 2000). It is the latter that

of future research are discussed in Chapter 6. Lastly, in Chapter 7, we conclude with an investigation of the broader design implications of the finding.

1.1

Research objectives
A study conducted by PEW showed that, in May 2008, 29% of Internet users

reported using a social network.1 On December 14th, 2008, only seven months later, there
were several social network sites listed as the most frequently visited sites in the world.2
Social network sites are a new and immature technology, but growing at exponential speeds. My interest in social networks stems from their popularity and rapid rate of

Putnam suggests can be used to get ahead. Given that Linkedln is a network engineered to grow one's professional contacts, this research will focus on factors contributing to bridging social capital.

Given that social capital can be used as an asset or resource, building social

acceptance. While my initial interest was rooted in trying to understand the benefit of

capital can be positive. While the focus of the thesis is to understand factors that
contribute to building social capital, and more specifically bridging capital, I further extend the finding s to explain how this may impact the design of social networks.

1 http://www.pewinternet.org/trends/Internet_Activities_7.22.08.htm 2 http://www.alexa.com/site/ds/top_sites

such networks, I began to narrow the scope in order to keep my research as empirical as
possible.

within a social network predominantly revolve around the creation of bridging social
capital--particularly in the professional setting offered by Linkedln.

The theoretical background I have chosen to frame the benefits associated with

Thus, in addition to broadly contributing to the new field of online social network research, as well as the measurement of social capital, this thesis has two main objectives. First, I attempt to identify factors that may impact bridging social capital online. Second, I empirically test the predictive value of those factors on bridging social capital using
structural equation modeling. The result is a predictive model that contributes to our understanding of bridging social capital on Linkedln.

online social networks is social capital. Social capital is able to capture the benefit in the
networks themselves. Prior research in the area primarily explores the impact of Internet

use on social capital. Generally, the research identifies three broad schools of thought on this topic; the Internet increases, decreases or supplements social capital (Quan-Haase &
Wellman, 2004). However, online social networks are different than other sites on the

Internet, and even more so different than the Internet as a whole (Wellman, 1997). Few

1.2

Epistemological orientation from the functionalist paradigm
The purpose of this thesis is to identify factors, which influence bridging social

studies looking at social capital and online social networks currently exist. As such this
thesis contributes to a new area of research.

capital formation online. This is done from the perspective of the functionalist paradigm.

Further, social capital research is plagued with many definitions and few studies,
which successfully operationalize and measure it as a phenomenon. As such, this thesis also contributes to the theoretical framework of social capital. Social capital theory informs us that there can be different types of social capital; with one of the most popular

The research is deductive, drawing on existing theoretical frameworks. As such the hypothetico-deductive approach to the knowledge reproduction cycle is applied. The steps involved with this approach include theory formulation, hypothesis generation,
hypothesis testing, and presentation of findings.

typologies identified by Putnam (2000) as being bonding social capital and bridging
social capital. Putnam explains that where bonding occurs between closely tied
individuals, bridging occurs within more weakly tied networks of relationships.

In Sociological Paradigms and Organizational Analysis, Burrell and Morgan

(1979) explore four paradigms illustrated in a 2x2 matrix, with subjectivism/objectivism, and sociology of radical change/sociology of regulation on opposite ends of the spectrum respectively. Within this matrix, functionalists tend toward social regulation and

Given work previously done by Granovetter (1973) on the benefits of weakly tied

networks, I chose to use bridging social capital as the benefit of participating in online
social networks. I chose to use Linkedln, a network for professionals, for the study. Given my own experiences with online social networks, I posit that online interactions

objectivism (Burrell & Morgan, 1979). Table 1 identifies some further details of each
functionalist quadrant.

Table 1: Breakdown of the Functionalist Paradigm
Sociology of Regulation
Objectivism

of the theoretical claims inherent in the chosen framework. Thus the framework is operationalized and support for the hypotheses can be tested. The method used to test the
research questions depends on the type of data collected. Here surveys are used to collect quantitative data, of which the predictive value is then examined using partial least
squares (PLS) structural equation modeling, discussed later in Chapter 5. The last step in

· Concerned with providing explanations of society in terms which emphasize unity and cohesiveness

· Realism: The social world is a hard structure that exists with or without the
labels we impose on it.

· Assumes that society holds together as
opposed to being pulled apart

· Logical Positivism: One can seek to find patterns and use them to predict
future outcomes (hypothesis testing)

· Determinism: humans are determined
by their environment

the cycle requires the researcher to present the data against what was originally hypothesized. If the empirical data does not support the original claims, the cycle begins again with theory modification. Because of the logical cyclical nature of this process, the
functionalist paradigm is also a good starting point for new researchers like myself. A
literature review of the key research concepts follows.

· Nomothetic: surveys and hypothesis

testing can be used to figure out the
world

There are two reasons why the functionalist paradigm is well suited for this

research. Firstly, understanding individuals from a utility-maximizing perspective is
important because this research is largely focused on the benefits of social capital to individuals. An underlying assumption here is that people will exhibit observable behaviour, which is meant to be beneficial to them in some way. In cases where they do not, they can be steered in a new direction by transforming their environment--or in this

case facilitating the occurrence of factors that contribute to bridging social capital.
Further beneficial to the content is the idea that people tend toward social regulation as it
allows us to understand why displaying ones' social network is a valuable tool to create
community and cohesiveness. (Boyd & Ellison, 2007)

The ability to test hypotheses is another benefit. Here the hypothetico-deductive approach is applied. Thus, we enter the knowledge reproduction cycle by way of theory formulation. While constructing a new theory can be an entry point, choosing an existing
theory (or theories), as in the case of this research, is an equally appropriate first step.

The next phase allows the researcher to formulate measurable hypotheses that are a result

common goal, as in the case of communities, but rather just a place for them to connect.

2

Literature Review
This research interrogates online social -networks from a social capital

On the other hand, there are similarities that can be drawn between online communities
and social networks. For example in mirroring the real world, social network sites tend to
attract individuals that initially segregate themselves by nationality, age, education level and etc. (Hargittai, 2007). This however is a not the intention of the networks. In fact one

perspective. Thus, this literature review begins with an analysis of online social networks. Key concepts surrounding this new technology are explored. Social networking sites allow users to create and share profiles (Boyd & Ellison, 2007). They are new, and
different than previously studied online communities, as a result of being egocentric

of the benefits of social networks is the possibility of overcoming this segregation, and
forming highly heterogeneous groups of individuals, within which the poorer can get richer. Studies that treat online social network sites are as new and separate entities have already found support for this to be true. (Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007;
Valenzuela, Park, & Kee, 2008)

rather than interest based (Wellman, 1997). An exploration of the main research areas within social network sites follows. These areas include research in impression
management, network and network structure, online versus offline networks, privacy and

socio-demographics. Additional summaries of work done in online social networks can
be found in Appendix A.

The popularity of these types of sites began in 2001, though examples of them existed in prior years. As a result of their viral acceptance, researchers are focused on the effects they will have on various aspects of our lives. Current studies in social networks
are centered around the concepts of impression management, network and network structure, the relationship between online and offline networks and privacy. (Boyd &

2.1

Key concepts in Online Social Networks
Broadly, online social networks can be defined as sites that allow members to
1.
2.

Create a public, private, or semi-private profile,
Share their connection with selected users, and

3.

See the profiles of the connections made. (Boyd & Ellison, 2007) In research, these networks are often treated as online groups or communities.

Ellison, 2007) While some of these constructs are outside of the scope of this thesis, an
overview of each will follow.

However, researchers are beginning to acknowledge that they are different in several

2.1.1

Impression Management

ways. Firstly, their purpose is to display the network in order to uncover latent ties that may not have been found otherwise (Haythornthwaite, 2005). Secondly, they are
primarily organized around people, not interests--as such they mirror the social structures we see offline, producing networks of actors, not groups (Wellman, 1997). Thus, they are not meant to be a place where individuals come together to work towards a

In a seminal book about impression management, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, Goffman explores the concept that people manage what they would like

others to think of them (Goffman, 1978). This is relevant in the social network space

because there is a highly public purpose for site membership in that we join to be seen.
Thus, one would infer that creating an online profile is representative of one's identity.

8

However,

nonverbal

cues

are

missing

during

interactions

making

impression

other CMC, it is important to point out that the nonverbal cues are missing during
interactions (Marwick, 2005). While this leaves possible gaps in interpretation, the

management different online than it is offline (Marwick, 2005). Furthermore, the ability

of contacts to comment on each other's profiles make social networks different than
computer mediated communication (CMC) technologies in general. In addition to a
user's ability to impact another person's reputation, the open display of user contacts

positive side of this is that the impressions made can be more thought out and controlled,
than face-to-face interactions (Haferkamp & Kramer, 2008). What makes social networks

different from CMC however, is that the user does not have complete control of their reputation because their contacts typically also have the ability to make comments on the profile. These external comments are considered when an impression is formed (Walther,
Van Der Heide, Kim, Westerman, & Tong, 2008). This can have potential hazardous
effects. For example, one study identified that 50% or surveyed Facebook users had a

keeps them honest, thus making profiles in social network sites more authentic insert ref. Whether the online identity is seen socially or professionally, by close friends or by
business contacts is typically determined by the type of site. However, in either case the
viewers of the site form impressions of the individual.

Reputation, or the public image of a person, is another way to interpret impression management. Reputation is particularly important when individuals have friends in

friend post a photo they did not want displayed online. Secondly, users tend to perceive that they have a higher level of control over information online then they actually do--

common (Burt, 1992). Goffman identifies that one can have a front and a.back stage representation of oneself. The first being public, seen by everyone, and the latter being
more private, displayed to a particular group. If the concept of reputation is public, the ability for users to manage their reputation in a social network environment becomes

revealing more about themselves personally than they are conscious of (Skog, 2005). The
result could mean that individuals are unknowingly mismanaging their online identity, or
even worse, damaging their reputation.

In addition to the differences between online and offline interactions, another important aspect of online impression management is the perception of profile authenticity. One mechanism to ensure truthfulness in a social network profile is the display of connections. Because users are joined to a group of individuals who can see their profile, it is possible that deceivers may be publicly punished, thus damaging their reputation (Donath & Boyd, 2004). Donath et al. contrast this with the online dating

exponentially important, because contact networks are typically enlarged to include not
only friends, but also friends of friends, their friends and so forth. To exemplify this

concept, while a user may share pictures from a party with their close friends, who know
that the individual attends few parties in a given year, outsiders (friends of friends) may form the impression that the individual is a frequent partygoer--thus changing their reputation. This scenario could not occur in an offline environment.

model, where users are connected one-on-one, making deception easy and frequent.
While women are generally more concerned with impression management, both genders

While this larger network of individuals is one point of difference for online versus offline impression management, there are other factors to consider. Firstly, as with
10

feel it is important that profiles be realistic (Haferkamp & Kramer, 2008). Though

11

sometimes the software application itself, not the user, affects the way in which one can self-represent. Social networks suffer from rigid profile structures that typically represent
users unnaturally as consumers, classifying them by favourite singer for example (Marwick, 2005). Interestingly, even though users claim that they want to represent

2.1,2

Network and network structure

One popular method of studying a social network and its structure is through

social network analysis. Social network analysis focuses on the patterns of relations
between units (whether that be groups, individuals, organizations or etc.) The method
proposes a shift from analyzing the individual toward understanding the structure. Rather

themselves as closely as possible to reality, they often do not trust the profiles of others-- particularly if they have an above average physical appearance (Haferkamp & Kramer, 2008).

than exploring the age and sex of a participant for example, a structuralist would look at
properties such as closeness or cliquishness of a friendship link, or perhaps the social

A review of literature by Leary and Kowalski (1990) conceptualizes impression
management through a 2-part model consisting of impression motivation and impression

exchange taking place. As such the unit of analysis becomes the tie or relation. (Garton,
Haythornthwaite, & Wellman, 1997)

construction. Impression motivation is the degree to which one is motivated to control
other's perception of oneself. Impression construction identifies the type of impressions

This form of analysis is not new however; online social networks have presented social network analysts with a world of opportunities as a result of digitizing the social
content (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). Typically, in order to map a social network, researchers would have to conduct lengthy phone and in-person interviews to gather the

people construct given a set ofiactors. This model is particularly useful for understanding
why impression management is important in an online setting (Leary & Kowalski, 1990).

Social networks provide individuals with a new way to connect with each other.

information. An online computer network completes this task (Adamic, Buyukkokten, &
Adar, 2003).

Thus, it is important to understand how those connections will shape their impressions, and generally how that is changing in the online environment. The ability to comment on user profiles as well as display one's network of connections, makes the process of impression management online different than offline. Outsiders actively participating in other's profiles via tools such as comments, means that users have less control over their online impressions than they would in an offline environment. Further, because shared public connections serve as a mechanism for encouraging authenticity in profiles, one can

By way of being a method, social network analysis often occurs in tandem with other theories. One study looked at social networks through diffusion of innovation theory, with membership as the diffusing property. Questions in the study included: who

joins networks, why networks grow, and how the information within networks changes.
Through the use of data mining techniques and decision tree modeling methods they seek
to explain features that would explain these phenomena. They find that membership

predict individuals increasingly beginning to trust online identities--making impression management in an online social network environment highly relevant and necessary.
12

based on network externalities suggests the law of diminishing returns--with more connections being made at the beginning. Further, network growth and information
13

changes are affected by how active the group is, community size, fringe, and how "hot" a
topic is. (Backstrom, Huttenlocher, Kleinberg, & Lan, 2006) s

Here, profile information from Facebook, a social networking site, was gathered in order to analyze whether the completeness of a profile has any impact on the number of connections an individual has. The study was rooted in three theoretical frameworks. Signaling theory was used to assess whether the type of information (or signal) mattered. Common ground theory was the basis for motivations to fill out profiles. Finally

One of the first large network studies analyzed the network structure of Flickr and

Yahoo!360 in order to better understand network growth. Their analysis revealed three distinct network groups and three different types of network users. The typology of
network users included passive members, inviters, and linkers (listed from least to most involved). Their group typology revealed that a majority of networks are comprised of
star structures, which mirror the dynamics of innovation, with many users being invited,

transaction cost theory explained how the two combine to ease communication between
connections. The study did conclude that populating fields was positively correlated with
the number of connections.

but only a core few participating more actively. They called the three groups: singletons who joined but never used the network; giant component who are a large interconnected group and; middle region who are the remainder. (Kumar, Novak, & Tomkins, 2006)

In another example of network structure, Adamic (2003) used social network

analysis in order to test a Stanford University network called Nexus. The study identified
social network phenomena that contribute to friendship formation. An individual's

Other studies remain rooted a bit closer to social network analysis on its own. Golder (2006) used the notion of geography and population density to explain rank-based
friendship. Mathematically the research proved that people who live close together, and

position within the network was used to test the small world effect, clustering, and the
strength of weakly tied individuals. It was found that users who were similar were more

likely to be friends (even if they were only weakly tied). In addition individuals with
more connections formed bridges within the networks, and were more likely to prevent
cliques from occurring.

have few people between them are more likely to have a higher-ranking friendship. Hsu (2007) used a graph mining method in order to differentiate features, which are
characteristic of a network, a pair of users, or an individual. The concept posits that in order to identify potential relationships within a group, one must identify links, classify
and annotate them.

Studies involving network structure identify the benefits of studying the collective
network as opposed to looking at individual actors. While social network analysis was a

cumbersome process in the past, online social networks have digitized the network
structure, making these studies accessible and increasingly popular. However, it is

Lastly, structural analysis is often used to explain social phenomena that may

combine and inform different theoretical areas of study. A study by Lampe, Ellison, &
Steinfield (2007) combined the study of impression management and network structure.

important that the generalizability of these studies onto the offline world is assessed as opposed to assumed--this is another area of online social network study.

14

15

2.1.3

Online versus offline networks

As an example, in an ethnographic study of multi-user domains, (Turkle, 1994)

Thanks to the digitization of social networks in an online environment, sociologists can now study networks in new ways, bridging what we already know about
social networks offline. In order to transfer this knowledge however, it is important to

found that playing online games becomes a part of the players' real lives; in fact often

splitting their identities into two or more parallel persons that they manage. Others argue
however, that rather than being parallel in nature, the lives users create online are more
perpendicular to their offline environments--as such they intersect and are not separate
(Thelwall, 2008).

understand how online and offline networks may differ. Often studies treat these online
networks like online communities, but social networks are not interest based in the same
way (Wellman, 1997). As such, one area of study is to evaluate social network sites
against offline networks.

The hope is that online environments will benefit our offline relationships. A study on the link between social capital and Facebook use, found that intensive use of the

Additionally, there have been concerns over the impact of these sites on one's

site does aid in maintaining friendships. Further, the relationships maintained online
served to supplement their offline contact, especially in cases where friends became
separated by physical distance (Ellison et al., 2007). As such, there seems to be a growing

offline networks. Here sociologists are aiming to understand whether participating in
online social networking is a social activity, and whether it impacts an individuals' sociality offline. It has been found that in many cases online communities are replicas of

body of evidence that online social network sites may have a positive impact on our lives.
2.1.4 Privacy

people's everyday lives. As such online activities are dependant on offline identities (Hargittai, 2007) and users carry their offline identities over into their online interactions
(Turkle, 1995).

Concerns of privacy with regard to online usage have been one of the more

longstanding and widely researched topics across social media. One definition of privacy is "right of people to control what details about their lives stay inside their own houses
and what leaks to the outside" (Garfinkel & Spafford, 2002). Closely tied to the concept of privacy are trust and intimacy. Arising from these concepts, and the current use of social network sites, many paradoxes can be observed and a discussion of them will

Identifying the intricate differences between online and offline worlds is not easy. Hargittai (2007) identifies that the difficulty in studying these social networking sites is that they are different from each other, and in aggregate, may not be as predictive.

Furthering the problem, studies on the impact of the Internet have also aggregated online behaviours, which does not allow for an understanding of online social networks
specifically. How the sites are used is also dependant on gender, age, and other characteristics (discussed later). As a result it is difficult to generalize usage over the installed base (Lenhart, Madden, & Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2007).
16

follow. On the whole, they stem from society's willingness to share information freely, as
a result of a lack of understanding. There are risks associated with this behaviour,
particularly when examining the younger generation of users.

17

Many privacy studies are concerned with protecting children. In the case of the

relationship fully--possibly pointing to the fact that society is willing to belong to a

social network space, usage among the younger generation is especially important, as this
generation is the first to grow up with this type of media. Where typically parents teach children socially appropriate behaviour, today teenagers are teaching themselves how to behave on social networks (Barnes, 2006). Thus, potentially harmful norms may be

network of millions without feeling threatened. (Dwyer, Hiltz, & Passerini, 2007) While trust online is not high, trusting someone is an intimate experience. Thus, once again paradoxically revealing private information online may yield unexpected
results in friendship--leading to many acquaintances as opposed to true friends. This

formed. Exposing too much information online puts young individuals at risk to anything
from rumors at school to possible sexual predator attacks.

again goes back to the amount of information one reveals. A study of 4000 Facebook
users at an American university showed shocking amounts of information being disclosed

The privacy paradox, as described by Barnes (2006) stems from the actions taken

with "90.8% of profiles contain an image, 87.8% of users reveal their birth date, 39.9%
list a phone number (including 28.8% of profiles that contain a cell phone number), and
50.8% list their current residence." (Gross & Acquisti, 2005)

by teens to reveal personal information, in opposition to the actions of adults attempting to stop the spread of private information. Barnes explains quite clearly "Adults are concerned about invasion of privacy, while teens freely give up personal information.

With the amount of information disclosed the risk of exploitation begins to emerge. In a majority of the cases users have themselves to blame for releasing these

This occurs because often teens are not aware of the public nature of the Internet"
(Barnes, 2006). He continues to describe that sitting at home, privately writing a
message, can have a deceiving feeling--for there is nothing private about posting that message to millions of users. From the example one can ascertain that privacy loss, is

cyber personas into the world. A vast amount of information hosted on the Internet is
provided directly by users. The only way to stop the exploitation of such data is for users
to exercise caution--this does not seem to however be a concern for young individuals
today. (Rosenblum, 2007)

often at the hand of the user, who has willingly released the information and
unknowingly put themselves at risk.

From a professional perspective, the younger generation needs to be conscious

While parents worry about children divulging information online, one could ask

that creating long lasting digital personas today, can have negative outcomes in the

why they do so in the first place? In offline situations, individuals give out private
information to those they trust. Just like people have different levels of trust with

future. Already employers Google potential candidates as a method of screening. A July 2006 survey US National Association of Colleges and Employers found that 27% of
employers have Googled their job candidates or checked their profiles on social

different friends, websites also have different trust levels. Interestingly, low trust values

don't always translate into more concern for privacy, therefore we do not understand this

networking sites (George, 2006). In social networks individuals who can access a user's

18

19

profile can impact that person's reputation. Employers could judge an individual based
on posts made by friends or potentially explore beyond the individual's profile into others

more interested in finding romantic partners. As a result, there is a preference on the sites
for female users (Thelwall, 2008).

in their network (Rosenblum, 2007). This is particularly important because social
networks reduce our connections to binary forms (friends or not), thus putting the whole

Studies on age have found interesting results. Often these sites are seen as being

characteristically young.

Sites like Facebook however, report that their fastest growing

network on the same plane, and missing the degrees of closeness one would gain in real life (Gross & Acquisti, 2005). The result can be, not getting a job over something written
by an almost complete stranger.

demographic is those 35 and older (Facebook.com). On average younger users have a
greater number of connections; with a majority of those connections being around the same age (+/- 2 years). Older individuals on the other hand have fewer connections, but
those they do have are more age diverse (Arjan et al., 2008).

While there are growing concerns over privacy, particularly when it comes to young individuals, users are willing to post more and more private information online.

Race and religion have also been of interest in these digital networks. A study by

This could stem from the lack of understanding that while a social network may feel
small and private, shared between friends, it is actually millions larger. The ideals of
privacy are changing, and we are adapting as a society in the future. Longitudinal studies will shed interesting perspective on whether today's young people regret posting so much
private information online.

Nyland (2007) explored the uses of Facebook in relationship to the religiosity of an individual. A positive correlation was found between those users who were more

religious and the use of Facebook to maintain friendships and find out about social
events. Further, it was found that students sharing social relationships as well as demographic traits tend to share a significant number of cultural preferences (Lewis,
Kaufman, Gonzalez, Wimmer, & Christakis, 2008). While one could hope that these

2.1.5

Socio-demographics

One area of investigation is social network research is describing the users' sociodemographic characteristics and evaluating their impact on usage. Common areas of
study include the impact of gender, age, race, and religion.

social networks decrease boundaries between individuals, be it racial, physical or etc. some sites have been creating and defining borders and identifying distinct identities
(Byrne, 2007).

One study on social network sites and gender has found that teenage girls have

more friends/contacts. The language they use in their profiles is also more social and selfreflective than that of males (Arjan, Pfeil, & Zaphiris, 2008). Research on MySpace has found that females use recreational networking sites to make friends, while males are

20

21

an investigation of the relationship between information communication technology

3

Focus of the study
In this thesis online social networks are assessed through the lens of social capital

(ICT), the Internet and social capital allows for a broader perspective on the field of study. Thus further anchoring the theoretical framework in a more specific body of
knowledge.

theory. Prior to an investigation of current work in online social networks and social

capital, it is important to further explore this theoretical background. Social capital has
very much become a highly heterogeneous umbrella-concept used in many contexts

3.1

Key concepts and definitions
In order to situate social capital for this thesis I now explore the evolution of

(Adler & Kwon, 2002). As such, it is essential that I position the context within which it is used here. This follows in the key concepts and definitions section.

social capital, and describe the different schools of thought associated with the concept. I begin with a discussion of dimensionality, followed by different types of social capital,
and different levels of study.

The definition used to anchor this thesis posits that social capital can be defined in the simplest terms as an investment in social relations with expected returns (Lin, 2001).

Meaning, building social capital takes work, investing time, effort, and possibly even money to build up social capital. This capital can then be used, like an asset, to pursue opportunities not accessible to the individual without his or her network. This view is

3.1.1

Dimensions of social capital

Social capital is a multi-dimensional concept, which requires researchers to

identify the lens with which they are studying it through. There are common dimensions
within social capital, which alone stand incomplete. For example rules and norms,
network resources and trust are all individual dimensions (Claridge, 2004). Rather than

rooted in the work of Bourdieu, who identified that having more social capital is positive
as well as presenting a challenge, usually stemming from social class. He recognized

social capital as "the aggregate of the actual of potential resources which are linked to

choosing one of these dimensions, there are researchers who have tried to address this

possession of a durable network of more or less institutionalized relationships of mutual
acquaintance and recognition" (Bourdieu, 2001). However, this is only one of many views of social capital. The key concepts section describes other contested topics in

dimensionality overall. Table 2 identifies some authors who developed dimensions of
social capital. Table 2: Dimensions of social capital (Woolcock & Narayan, 2000) ·
· ·

social capital such as: multi-dimensionality, the type of social capital, and level of
assessment.

Communitarian view
Network view Institutional view

·

Synergetic view

Once these concepts are detailed, the position taken on each is identified. Lastly, a review of social capital research in online social networks thus far is presented. Due to the limited literature that combines the field of social capital and online social networks,
22

(Narayan & Cassidy, 2001)

· ·
· ·

Group characteristics Generalized norms
Togetherness Everyday sociability

·

Neighbourhood connections
23

·
·

Volunteerism
Trust

exclusion, and gender discrimination suggest otherwise (Narayan & Shah, 2000).
3.1.1.2 Network View

(Onyx & Bullen, 2001)

· ·

Trust Social Agency

·)
·

Tolerance of diversity
Value of life

Unlike communitarianism, the network view of social capital does identify that it has upsides and downsides. This view emphasizes the importance of vertical and
horizontal relationships. Much of this approach is rooted in the work of Granovetter

· · · ·

Community connections Neighbourhood connections Family and friends connections Work connections Informal social ties
Formal social ties
Trust

(Liu & Besser, 2003)

·
·
·

(1973) who explored the benefits and drawbacks of close relationships, which he called strong ties, and more loosely tied relationships, which he called weak ties. Weak ties traditionally exist between colleagues and acquaintances and strong ties between close

·

Norms of collective action

The work of Woolcock and Narayan is seminal as they provide a highly complete and simple set of four approaches to social capital. The main ideas within these
dimensions will now be discussed.

friends and kin. The existence of these ties are not always categorized by those sets of

relationships, but rather by various measures such as: frequency of contact, closeness,
intimacy and reciprocity (Putnam, 2000).

3.1.1.1

Communitarian Viewt

Granovetter identifies that while it may be natural for us to think of our strong ties

The communitarian view of social capital identifies with local organizations such
as clubs, associations and civic groups. Woolcock et al. explain that communitarians such
as Putnam and Fukuyama, posit that the number of these groups and their density are a measure of social capital. Additionally, they believe that social capital is good and thus

as those most valuable, it is weak ties that have more immediate embedded resources. Information travels within groups quickly, however requires links (or what Burt (1992) calls bridges) to spread. Weak tie relationships allow us to make those connections
outside of our social circles or cliques. Thus, individuals with many weak ties will have
access to more information and opportunities. (Granovetter, 1973).

the more of these groups exist in a community the better. One criticism of this view is that where social capital is inherently good and always has a positive impact on the welfare of a community, the negative side of social capital is ignored. Portes and Landolt (1996) posit that communities are largely homogeneous and isolated, and as such can turn
productive social capital to perverse social capital, which hinders development. Examples

In recent literature these weak and strong tie relationships have become known as

bridging and bonding social capital. Network theorists have identified that a balance of
the two is necessary for successful individuals or communities to exist(Woolcock &
Narayan, 2000). In addition to the type of relationship that exists, other factors, which

of this are ghettos or gangs in communities. Further, communitarians believe that homogeneity of the group resultantly benefits all of its individuals. Inequality, ethnic

24

25

contribute to this view are a person's position within a network, as well as network
closure.

social capital from an institutional perspective. Here social capital is a dependent

variable, with community success being a product of political, legal, and institutional
environments. Much of the research done in the area addresses social capital from a macro rather than a microeconomic perspective (Claridge, 2004). As such, one of its drawbacks is a tendency to look at the impact of government, ignoring its ability to give
individual (micro) rights and freedoms (Woolcock & Narayan, 2000).

Network position has been echoed as an important characteristic of social capital

in the work of Coleman, Putnam and Bourdieu. Burt (1992) identifies that were groups
are weakly connected there are opportunities for holes in the network. He calls them simply structural holes. Individuals who span the holes then have a structural advantage

of circulating in different flows of information. These positions are referred to as brokers
(of information) or bridges (spanning the holes). Thus, holding the bridge positions near structural holes is advantageous from the social capital perspective. We recognize these

The view has two variations. The first uses case studies to demonstrate that where
government encourages community or economic growth, civil society is more successful.

The second is comprised largely of quantitative cross-national studies that interrogate the

individuals as seemingly being involved in a large variety of activities. (Burt, 1992; Burt,
2001)

impact on government performance on social or economic success. The work of Knack
and Keefer (1997) is seminal to this approach. The two have created indexes, with

Closely related to, and sometimes opposing, network position is the argument of network closure. Closed networks have densely knit membership, making individuals

various measures that measure the impact that social capital has on poverty, concluding that it decreases, or in the very least does not worsen, a society's well being. Thus the two
views come to similar conclusions, identifying that the more efficient and stable
government free from corruption and inequality, the less impediments it causes to the
prosperity of a society (Woolcock & Narayan, 2000).

highly accountable for their actions. They build relationships of trust, and form norms. One can see applications of accountability in high-risk job environments that work with

teams. The team members must trust each other, as well as have a way to recognize when
someone is behaving in a way that is not appreciated by the group. Researchers agree that network closure or density is a reality for networks. Whether it is positive or negative

3.1.1.4

Synergy View

The synergy view is an intersection between the networks and the institutional views of social capital. Woolcock and Narayan, themselves subscribe to this view. The premise of this approach is that it is important to understand the relationships between society and government in order to know the outcomes associated with different combinations of bridging and bonding relationships between them. As such social capital

however, seems highly contextual and debated by researchers. (Coleman, 1988; Morgen
& Sorensen, 1999)

3.1.1.3

Institutional View

The institutional view, as its name would suggest, largely resides in the study of

is a mediating variable in the synergy view. Public and private institutions shape social
26
27

capital, however social capital in turn has the ability to impact developmental outcomes.
(Woolcock & Narayan, 2000)

3.1.2.1

Structural and Cognitive

The structural and cognitive framework for social capital was developed by
Uphoff and Wijayaratna (2000). Here the researchers identify that structural social capital

The above-discussed four views for conceptualizing the multidimensionality of

social capital created by Woolcock and Narayan (2000) broadly categorizes social capital
literature into four views. In the community view of social capital the research operates under the guise of social capital being positive, suggesting the more the better--in effect ignoring the drawbacks. The networks view on the other hand sees social capital through the types of relationships held by individuals, and the characteristics of their network. Here the network has important implications on a micro individual level as resources reside in the relationships. The third view is the institutional view, which posits that institutions such as government need to perform, in order for civil society to succeed.
Here social capital is seen as the dependant variable. Lastly, the synergy view combines

is objective while cognitive social capital is subjective. Structural social capital facilitates
information sharing and collective action emerging from roles and social networks,

facilitated by rules, procedures, and precedents. Cognitive social capital refers to shared
norms, values, trust, attitudes and beliefs. Thus, structural capital is more external, while

cognitive is more internal to the individual (Krishna & Uphoff, 2002). Further, the two
types are not necessarily mutually exclusive. For example helpful behaviour between neighbours can occur on the basis of a cognitive bond rather than the structural arrangement of living next to each other (Grootaert & Van Bastelaer, 2002a).

Grootaert and Van Bastelaer (2002) build on this typology by identifying that

pieces of the networks and the institutional views of social capital. As such social capital

there are macro and micro dimensions in social capital, and the cognitive versus
structural types can be seen along a continuum thus identifying the different areas of research within social capital identified within the quadrants of Figure 1.

becomes the mediating variable where it is shaped by public and private institutions and

in turn has the ability to impact developmental outcomes. Given the different positions
that social capital can take on, it can be seen that positioning one's work is an important step when using social capital as a theoretical framework. I will continue to further

position this thesis within the literature, clearly outlining my approach in section 3.2.

3.1.2

Types of social capital

The attempts to conceptualize the different dimensions of social capital have
converged to the identification of different types of social capital. While there are many typologies within the different dimensional approaches, two highly popular typologies
are structural and cognitive, as well as bridging and bonding.

Figure 1: Conceptualization of social capital developed by Grootaert and Van Bastelaer
(2002)

28

29

3.1.2.2

Bonding and Bridging

provide an informal insurance (Narayan & Pritchett, 1999). One study of Tanzanian

The concept of bonding and bridging social capital is initially offered up by

households, Narayan et al. (1999) finds that families with higher social capital, measured
through group membership, were more innovative and overcame market failures more
effectively.

Putnam, in attempt to qualify that social capital is not all positive; and that some types of social capital are better than others. Namely that bonding is for 'getting by' while bridging is for 'getting ahead' (Leonard, 2004). A bonding tie can be understood as an intra-community close tie, while a bridging tie represents an extra-community weak tie. From the perspective of the individual this typology closely relates to the work of
Grannovetter, where weak (bridging) ties commonly exist between acquaintances and

In addition to being helpful to entire groups, some authors suggest that the true

strength of bridging ties is that they are capable of benefiting not only the community, but

also the individual. In fact, some argue that as individuals in communities make leaps
from bonding social capital to bridging social capital, it is the individuals that benefit,
rather than the community as a whole. (Leonard, 2004)

strong (bonding) ties typically exist between family and friends. (Grannovetter, 1973)

Putnam identified bonding ties as narrow, with limited benefits for the internal group only. In the work of Putnam, Coleman, and Grannovetter, bridging ties are seen as

3.1.3

Levels of social capital

The last point of divergence within the literature is the level at which social
capital is assessed. While some researchers identify social capital as occurring at the

a superior and more productive form of capital. Much of the benefits associated with

forming bridging ties are explained by network view researchers. For example in the
work of Burt (1992), a bridge is an individual linking two groups together. The premise is

individual level, others claim it to occur at the level of community, society, or some hybrid of them all (Claridge, 2004). Coming from the networks view, Adler and Kwon (2002) suggest that social capital resides within the individual's social structure. The result is that social capital can belong to and be used by the individual or the group within
which the individual resides.

that social capital is most profound when the relationships are heterogeneous, as this
allows for a diverse set of resources and opportunities (Narayan & Cassidy, 2001).

Narayan (2002) identifies that bonding ties within a group may help individual

members, however without bridging ties across to other groups, those members are excluded. She calls bridging ties cross-cutting, identifying that they bare economic
opportunities and improve social cohesion. Narayan goes on to identify the success of government given differing amounts of these cross-cutting ties. In studies of community,

Much of the research views social capital at a community rather than an individual level stemming from the arguments posited by Coleman (1988) who states that

unlike human capital, social capital resides within the social structure. There is consensus however that one can identify social capital occurring at several levels. These include

bridging or horizontal bonds, have been shown to influence public services, better
cooperative action, increase information sharing, increase community efficiencies and
30
31

macro (societal), meso (group), and micro (individual) levels. Moreover the goods produced by social capital can also be interrogated and observed on these different levels.

cannot belong to the group. Rather it is the intention to identify how an individual contributes to this collective, regardless if it is for group or individual benefit. A review of social capital theory research within social networks, ICT and the Internet follows.

Some researchers argue that depending on the level of assessment, social capital

can be either a public or a private good (Aldridge, Halpern, & Fitzpatrick, 2002; Onyx &
Bullen, 2001). Some understand it to be a public good only (Coleman, 1988). Others

3.3

The Impact of ICT and the Internet on Social Capital
Given that online social networks are quite new, it is useful to broaden the scope

believe that it is in fact a private good. Fukuyama, Reforms, & Democracy (2002)
advocate that while the nature of social capital is private, it bares many externalities both
good and bad.

and investigate the impact of the Internet on social capital. Here Quan-Haase and
Wellman (2004) poignantly identify three schools of thought:

1) The internet decreases social capital: the internet provides solitary entertainment
that draws people away from family and community

3.2

Position of theoretical framework within social capital research
The literature demonstrates that social capital is a multi-dimensional concept.

2) The internet transforms social capital: the low cost of the internet is leading to less
spatially bound groups

These dimensions have lead to the development of a categorization of different types of social capital. As such, even the definition of social capital is dependent on factors such as discipline and level of organization (Robison, Schmid, & Siles, 2002). The definition anchoring this research posits that social capital is as an investment is social relations with expected returns (Lin, 2001). Given social capital can be such a broad topic, it is

3) The internet supplements social capital: the internet extends our ties to new forms of communication, providing additional points of contact (Quan-Haase &
Wellman, 2004)

There is also the possibility of looking at this concept in reverse; to identify what effect social capital has on Information and Communication Technology (ICT) usage. For example, one study found that the existence of social capital lead to positive attitudes about Internet use (Borgida et al, 2002). There are a number of other studies that

important to situate the concept, and how it is being used here.

The view of social capital I adopt is the networks view, as the relations between individuals, and the resources they carry are central to the research questions. It is within
this view that the concepts of bonding and bridging social capital are introduced. The

investigate ICT in the context of relationships--whether they are sustained, created, and

what types of relationships emerge. These studies are rooted in the work of Grannovetter
and Putnam, drawing on the concepts of weak (bridging) ties and strong (bonding) ties.
Most studies agree that the Internet has positive effects on both strong and weak ties

bonding and bridging framework also identifies the two types of social capital being
investigated here. Lastly, the analysis is egocentric, meaning it occurs at the level of the

(Blanchard & Horan, 1998; Ferlander & Timms, 2001; Kavanaugh, 1999; Pinkett & O 'Bryant, 2003). On the other hand, there are studies that show that only strong ties are

individual. It is not the intention to assert that social capital and the goods it produces

32

33

augmented (Meredyth, Hopkins, Ewing, & Thomas, 2002). Most generally, there seems

communities replacing face-to-face communities (Quan-Haase & Wellman, 2004).

to be consensus however, that ICT usage has the ability to supplement whatever type of tie existed beforehand (Haythornthwaite & Wellman, 2002). Even here however, the

Lastly, some researchers identify that the Internet does not impact the social capital that already exists, but rather supplements its existence. Here the Internet is seen

definitions between ties differ, making it difficult to draw broad inferences. A brief
discussion of each of the three schools follows.

simply as yet another way to keep connected. Thus, if individuals do not often contact friends, the Internet would not change this behaviour dramatically. Likewise, if someone
spoke on the telephone often, it is likely that they also connect through email often. The

Studies indicating that Internet use decreases social capital are typically referring

to the traditional concepts around social capital for a society as a whole. For example, as
a result of spending time online, people are drawn away from spending time with then-

Internet is just another media that facilitates these interactions. (Haythornthwaite &
Wellman, 2002)

families (Me & Erbring, 2000; Nie, 2001). Some researchers compare time spent online
to television watching patterns (Putnam, 2000). This however is no longer commonly
accepted as a form of comparison because the Internet is much less passive, as well as

3.4

The Impact of online social networks on Social Capital
We have previously identified that drawing inferences on the state of social

capital in relation to Internet usage is not highly valuable, as there is a broad scope of activities one can choose to engage in online--some more social than others. Thus,
collapsing activities that range from playing video games to reading the news, to emailing

offering the ability to be social (Quan-Haase & Wellman, 2004). This traditional view of socializing can potentially be ignoring the new ways in which we interact, particularly in
the online social network environment.

is a mistake (Baym, Zhang, & Lin, 2002). As such breaking down the Internet into specific uses is more constructive. In the context of this research, the impact of online
social network sites on social capital is most relevant.

Some researchers have inferred that the Internet transforms social capital. Because the Internet is cost effective, easy to use, and provides a variety of tools, its

impact can be seen as positive. Further, the Internet bridges physical distances between

Given that social network sites are a new technology, there are not many studies
presently published in the area, especially when compared to studies of the Internet as a

individuals, allowing much further-reaching communities to exist (Wellman, Haase, Witte, & Hampton, 2001). At the same time, it also allows users to group themselves
according to interests, fueling community growth (Baym, 1993). There also exists the possibility for socio-demographic barriers to be reduced online (Sprbull & Kiesler, 1991). In this view of the impact of online activities we come to understand that perhaps social capital is not diminishing in North America, but rather changing form--with online
34

whole. Much in the same way that we have identified that the Internet as a unit of measure is too broad, it is also important to note that research in online communities
cannot be generalized to social network sites. Online communities are interest based,

while online social networks are more egocentric in nature. (Wellman, 1997)

35

Studies investigating online social networks and social capital specifically, have

as looking for online connections that can be transferred offline, while social searching is
finding out more about offline connections in an online environment. Firstly, the study identified that users felt their profiles accurately represented them, and that these
representations were positive. Secondly, the results of the research indicated that students largely used Facebook for searching rather than browsing.

found that there is a positive relationship between the two. One study of Facebook, found

that there is a positive relationship between the intensity of Facebook use and social capital. Further, the relationships maintained online serve to supplement one's offline
contacts, especially in cases where friends are separated by physical distance (Ellison et

al, 2007). This is in line with earlier studies about communities supported by online
networks, such as the Netville community in Toronto (Hampton, 2003). More currently

These studies show a promising future for social capital research within the online social network space. This thesis contributes to this area of research. In addition I hope to
address another hurdle of this field--a lack of appropriate measurement scales. More specifically it is an opportunity to utilize some recently developed scales to further their

another study also supported this premise. Here social capital was measured using

dimensions described by Putnam, which include life satisfaction, social trust, civic
participation and political engagement. The study explains that the positive relationship

strengths as a tool. In his study, Williams (2006) creates two sets of scale for bonding and bridging social capital. The scales are rooted in the work of Putnam (2000). Williams
uses: outward looking; contact with a broaderrange of people; view of oneself as part of a broader group; and diffuse reciprocity with a broader community; as indicators of bridging social capital. Emotional support, access to scarce or limited resources, ability to

between social networks and social capital, though not exceptionally strong, shows that online social networks do not cause isolation as often quoted in mainstream media, but
rather contribute to social capital. (Valenzuela et al., 2008)

Interestingly, in the latter study the only socio-demographic variable that was moderating was race, with gender, age and family background having no impact on the
relationship. Encouragingly the minorities in this study achieved greater gains from the

mobilize solidarity and out-group antagonism are used to predict bonding social capital. These scales are used in this thesis and will be described more thoroughly in Chapter 5.

site. Similarly, Ellison (2007) found that students with low self-esteem experienced

3.5

Theoretical Framework for the research

reduced barriers to participation. Lastly, the positive relationships between intrapersonal
social capital dimensions was stronger than that of the interpersonal ones, showing that

The theoretical framework for this research is a combination of concepts from social capital theory and technology acceptance theory. Within the broad range of social capital topics this research uses two frameworks; the bonding/bridging framework and

online social networks have varying impact on different social capital dimensions
(Valenzuela et al., 2008).

the searching/browsing framework. These frameworks are appropriate because they combine types of relationships or ties with types of behaviours typically leading up to the
existence of those ties, respectively. Along with these two constructs, the research also
37

Another type of study, (Lampe, Ellison, & Steinfield, 2006) investigated whether Facebook was used for social searching or social browsing. Social browsing is described
36

includes the ease of use framework, stemming from the technology acceptance model.
(Davis, 1989)

Putnman's organization of these two types of social capital is derived from the concept of different tie strengths, originally articulated by Granovetter (1973) in the

Research on the impact of the Internet is divided into three schools of thought

Strength of Weak Ties Theory. There are two basic types of ties that can be attained:
weak ties which map to bridging social capital and strong ties which map to bonding

with regards to social capital--the Internet is seen to either increase, decrease or
supplement social capital (Quan-Haase & Wellman, 2004). Online social network

social capital. The existence of these ties is not always categorized by those sets of relationships, but rather by various measures such as: frequency of contact, closeness,
intimacy and reciprocity. (Putnam, 2000)

research is not as clear in this regard because too few studies currently exist in the area. As such this research contributes to this new and developing area of knowledge. Given
that so far scholars agree that social network sites have the ability to support social capital, this thesis explores contributing factors using a new combination of three theoretical frameworks. An explanation of each follows.

Granovetter (1973) identifies that while it may be natural for us to think of our strong ties as those most valuable, it is weak ties that have more immediate embedded resources. Information travels within groups quickly, however requires spreading. Weak

3.5.1

Bonding and bridging social capital

tie relationships allow us to make those connections outside of our social circles or cliques. Thus, individuals with many weak ties will have access to more information and
opportunities. Putnam further highlights the benefits of bridging social capital as capital

I have already introduced the bonding and bridging framework of social capital in
section 3.1.2.2 discussing different typologies of social capital. The bonding/bridging

framework was popularized by Putnam (2000), a seminal author in social capital
research. Bridging social capital occurs among larger, inclusive groups of members who

used for 'getting ahead'. (Putnam, 2000) As such, the focus of this thesis is on
bridgingsocial capital.

typically describe themselves as acquaintances or co-workers for example. It is important because it allows networks to span across and connect to other networks. Burt (1997) calls these connections bridges. In doing so, additional information can flow across the

The use of the bonding and bridging framework in the context of social networks is appropriate for several reasons. Most research on the impact of the Internet use on social capital pertains to the types of social ties created. Studies have shown that age

bridge, and the network becomes richer. Bonding social capital, on the other hand,
describes the types of relationships that exist between close friends and family. Bonding
networks are typically homogeneous in nature, connecting people from similar

impacts the type of tie created, with younger individuals creating more bridging ties, and
seniors more bonding ties for social support (Kavanaugh, 1999). Other studies indicate
that networked communities can positively influence both strong and weak ties

backgrounds, used to offer emotional support. Both types of capital have a useful purpose
in a person's life. (Putnam, 2000)

(Ferlander & Timms, 2001; K. N. Hampton & Wellman, 2000; Pinkett & O'Bryant,
2003). This concept can be extended further to say that the Internet is most productive at

38

39

forming weak ties (Ellison et al., 2007), though the quality of those online ties may be
more fragile than its offline predecessor (Haythornthwaite & Wellman, 2002). While

Facebook is primarily used as a social searching tool, connecting offline friends. One could infer however, that a technology that is used to grow social capital would have to support social browsing. These browsing results in turn would likely initially create
bridging ties (Lampe et al., 2006).

weak ties have been the focus of Internet research in general, strong ties are a construct
we see often in virtual communities, because of their purposeful nature to pursue a common goal, typically oriented around a common interest (Preece, 1999). While social

The concept of social browsing is not new--it was also introduced by Root

networks have the ability to capture both weak and strong ties however theoretically they
seem to be better equipped to exploit bridging ties.

(1988). Here he identifies that social browsing is part of the social interface in Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). He writes "We use the term "social browsing" to describe this dynamic process of informal, in-person, mobility-based social interaction.
We suggest that social browsing is a fundamental mechanism for developing and

Secondly, the bonding/bridging framework is appropriate for this research

because it is the only framework that has been developed and empirically tested directly

in the context of social network research. Williams (2006) has developed sub-scales,
which can be used to measure social capital in the social network context. An adapted

maintaining social relationships in the workplace" (1988, pp. 27). We know that work relationships are typically weakly tied, and that those ties are highly valuable in the
workplace (Granovetter, 1973).

version of the scales has been used in a study to determine the types of social capital that
exist on Facebook (Ellison et al., 2007). Williams has constructed this type of measure in
response to Putnam, who writes "I have found no reliable, comprehensive, nationwide

The searching/browsing framework has made inroads to understanding how
people are using online social networks. Given that bridging social capital formation is possible through the use of online social networks, we can interrogate which behaviours

measures of social capital that neatly distinguish 'bridgingness' and 'bondingness'" (2000,

pp. 23-24). Thus, it is valuable to further continue to develop the predictive value of
bonding/bridging online.

help individuals achieve this task. As such we are able to test whether the uses of social
networks that Lampe et al. (2006) identify as social browsing behaviour, help predict
bridging social capital formation online.

3.5.2

Searching vs. Browsing

The social searching versus social browsing framework broadly categorizes the way in which participants use social networks. It explains, "Social searchers would use the site to investigate specific people with whom they share an offline connection to learn
more about them. Social browsers would use the site to find people or groups online with

3.5.3

Ease of use

While the social searching/browsing model will help us understand the impact of user motivations on social capital formation online, ease of use, emerging from the

Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), is used to investigate the characteristics of the

whom they would want to connect offline" (2006, pp.1). The study identifies that
40
41

website (the technology) that may contribute to forming bridging social capital. TAM posits that usefulness and ease of use will impact the behavioural intention to use an

Internet usage through the lens of the TAM model.. While the results did confirm that ease of use directly and indirectly affected Internet usage, the variances were not well explained using TAM. The lack of success was explained by the novelty of the Internet,

information system as well as its actual use. A study by Davis (1989), a seminal author
in the field, identifies scales to measure both ease of use and usefulness.

and people's attitude toward it being an entertainment rather than work technology. Given some of those differences Lederer, Maupin, Sena, & Zhuang (2000) extended the TAM model to include antecedents of the constructs, finding that the ability to easily find and understand information impacted ease of use. Others have extended the model to

Davis (1989) describes perceived ease of use to be "the degree to which a person

believes that using a particular system would be free of effort" and usefulness as "the
extent to which people feel that a system will help them do their job" (1989, pp.320) It

also suggests that ease of use may be an antecedent to usefulness, is such a way that there

include other hedonic website properties such as visual attractiveness(Mahlke, 2002; Van Der Heijden, 2001).Given the parsimony of the model, and its success in other fields, it is
beneficial to continue to explore its use in this way.

is a causality chain starting with ease of use, followed by usefulness, and finally usage. In

this study we adopt the first link of that chain as a construct to identify the technological
impact of use on creating bridging social capital.

Secondly, while usability studies are beginning to emerge in the space of social
networks, these concepts have not been empirically tested in this environment (Pilgrim,

There are two important assumptions that are implied, which make the use of

TAM appropriate. Firstly, social networks function more like applications than they do
traditional websites, because you use them as opposed to just read them for example. In

2008). Ease of use offers a set of validated constructs, which is beneficial here as other
components of the model are more experimental. I use the six indicators of ease of use, as

fact, the Internet in general is becoming more like a set of applications that assist in

validated by Davis (1989). They include: if the system is easy to learn, controllable, clear
and understandable, flexible, easy to gain skill and easy to use. Not only is ease of use

completing a task (Pilgrim, 2008). For example, online communities have been identified
to function as internet-based information systems (Wachter, Gupta, & Quaddus, 2000).

beneficial because it has been empirically tested many times, it also offers a very
successful set of scales with the predictive value being 94%.

While, traditionally, TAM has been very popular for testing IS systems such a
Management Information Systems, its use has been extended to the Internet as well.

Thus, ease of use is a validated construct, which is a valuable extension into the
social network environment. This is appropriate because it furthers TAM Internet
research. Given that the Internet, and social networking in particular is being used more

Several studies have shown TAM as an appropriate tool in Internet research. Morris and Dillon (1997) used TAM to test the acceptance and use of Netscape, an Internet browser, finding that ease of use predicts usage.(Teo, Lim, & Lai, 1999) studied

like an information system, understanding usage through the lens of TAM, and in this
case ease of use is beneficial. As such, it is appropriate to extend ease of use to study

42

43

online social networks.

Table 3: Theoretical concepts leading to bonding social capital
Theoretical
Concept

3.6

Operationalization of the concepts

ISCS Question

This research brings together several constructs from different disciplines, which

Emotional
support

There are several people online/offline I trust to help solve my
problems.

must be operationalized. The data is gathered using the survey method explained in

Chapter 5. The three frameworks being used already have validated constructs in the
form of survey questions. As such, only small modifications are made here in order for
the constructs to fit the study.

making very important decisions.

There is someone online/offline I can turn to for advice about

There is no one online/offline that I feel comfortable talking to
about intimate personal problems.

When I feel lonely, there are several people online/offline I can
talk to.

First, the bonding/bridging scales are operationalized using the Internet Social Capital Scales (ISCS) proposed by Williams (2006). Using exploratory factor analysis,

Access
scarce

to
or

If I needed an emergency loan of $500, I know someone
online/offline I can turn to.

limited
resources

Williams develops 10 item scales for measuring bonding and bridging social capital. His
original set of questions is developed from the work of Putnam, who identified qualities

The people I interact with online/offline would put their
reputation on the line for me.

The people I interact with online/offline would be good job
references for me.

leading to different types of ties. Tables 3 and 4 show the initial quality identified by
Putnam and the question that represents it in the ISCS scale.

The people I interact with online/offline would share their last
dollar with me.

Ability
mobilize solidarity

to

I do not know people online/offline well enough to get them to
do anything important, (reversed)

The people I interact with online/offline would help me fight an
injustice.

Out-group antagonism

Confirmatory factor analysis did not find any significant
questions in this category

44

45

Table 4: Theoretical concepts leading to bridging social capital
Theoretical
concept

For this study the constructs are modified to reflect a more professional context (because Linkedln, the online social network being tested, is largely for professional use). Secondly, measures that are thought to be indicative of new, bridging ties, are added. The original framework does not have many browsing behaviours listed, perhaps because the purpose of Facebook is largely to "search". The purpose of Linkedln on the other hand, is
to create opportunities for new connections--thus more closely tied to "browsing".

ISCS Question

Being
looking

outward

Interacting with people online/offline makes me interested in things that happen outside of my town. Interacting with people online/offline makes me want to try new things.

Interacting with people online/offline makes me interested in
what people unlike me are thinking. Talking with people online/offline makes me curious about other places in the world.
Feeling contact
with a broader

Table 5 identifies the constructs created using the searching and browsing framework. The focus of this thesis is bridging social capital, which closely aligns with browsing behaviours. As such, while I operationalized the entire framework, the model currently utilizes the browsing construct. The reasoning for this approach is further
discussed in Chapter 5.

Interacting with people online/offline gives me new people to
talk to

range of people
Viewing
oneself as part

Online/offline, I come in contact with new people all the time.
Interacting with people online/offline makes me feel like part of a larger community.

of

a

broader

group

Interacting with people online/offline makes me feel connected
to the bigger picture.

Interacting with people online/offline reminds me that everyone
in the world is connected. Diffusing reciprocity with a broader

Table 5: Operationalization of the social browsing and searching construct
Social browsing:

I am willing to spend time to support general online/offline
community activities.

· SBPI: Getting information about people in my industry

community

SBJC: Searching for potential job candidates
SBJO: Searching for potential job/business opportunities

· SBFF: Having a face-to-face encounter with someone I was introduced to on the website

The second framework used in this thesis is the searching and browsing

Social Searching: SSND: Finding people to date

framework. This framework was also operationalized through exploratory methods.
Lampe et al. (2006) use a survey to determine the uses of Facebook, which arethen

SSKT: Keep in touch with old friends and colleagues
· SSNS: Check out new people I met socially 9 SSNP: Check out new people I met professionally

categorizes into searching and browsing behaviours. The key differentiating factors between the two types of behaviours is whether the contact existed online or offline first. Thus an example of a searching behaviour would be "Keeping in touch with old friends" and an example of browsing behaviour would be "Getting information about people in
my industry". 46
47

The last framework to be operationalized is ease of use. Ease of use has been previously validated, with a large body of research confirming the value of the six original constructs defined by Davis (1989). The core six identified in Table 6 is used for

this research without changes. Two constructs--"It is easy to meet people I've never met before using the website" and "It is easy to find and add my contacts to my network" were added in order to help differentiate between the possibility of ease of use impacting
bridging or bonding social capital respectively. Table 6: Operationalization of ease of use

The proposed model in Figure 2
individually discussed below.

consists of three theoretical hypotheses

·

HI: An individual's bonding capital will impact his/her bridging capital

· ·

H2: Browsing behaviours will impact an individual's bridging capital H3: Ease of use will impact an individual's bridging capital

ELKN: It is easy to learn how to use the website.
EOU: Overall, I find the website easy to use

ECTRL: I find it easy to get the website to do what I want it to EUND: My interaction with the website is easy for me to understand EFLX: The website is rigid and inflexible to interact with ESKL: The website behaves in unexpected ways

Figure 2: Model of factors contributing to bridging social capital

EBRDG: It is easy to meet people I've never met before using the website
EBND: It is easy to find and add my contacts to my network
ill

3.7

Hypotheses
This thesis brings together three theoretical frameworks in order to build a model

that is able to predict the variance in bridging social capital on Linkedln. The purpose of

Linkedln is to uncover ties and bring new opportunities to individuals--both very much in line with the Strength of Weak Ties theory from Grannoveter, and bridging social capital from Putnam.
Ease of
Uie

This is the first attempt to measure bridging social capital formation on Linkedln,

3.7.1

HI: An individual's bonding capital will impact his/her bridging capital

thus making the research highly exploratory. One of the principal challenges in this research has been selecting variables, which contribute to bridging capital. Testing the

The concepts of bonding and bridging ties stem from the work of Grennovetter.
They were renamed and popularized by Putnam, in attempt to qualify that social capital is not all positive; and that some types of social capital are better than others(Leonard,

model allows us to see the amount of variance in bridging capital that is explained by the 3 selected variables. Each of these hypotheses will be discussed using the data gathered
for the research.

2004). Bridging social capital exists between loosely tied individuals, while bonding capital indicates stronger relationship ties. Researchers in the area focus on testing this

48

49

typology, in order to gauge how the two types interact, whether they are in fact different,
and how to measure them.

The relationship being articulated by this hypothesis is similar; in that higher

bonding capital would contribute to higher levels of bridging social capital. The
reasoning for this relationship is twofold. First, according to Putnam, bonding social
capital gives individuals a network for social support. Having the backing of that

This thesis revolves around predicting the factors that impact bridging social capital. Not only does it contribute to understanding bridging social capital, but it also suggests the relationship that can exist between bonding and bridging social capital. While it is generally accepted that these two types of social capital are in fact different
and have various uses^enefits, I posit that bonding social capital here is an antecedent to
bridging social capital.

network, individuals are more likely to reach out to further ties. Second, is the effect of network externalities. Networks like Linkedln are used to expose latent ties. It follows then that the more initial ties an individual has, the more latent ties are exposed, thus growing the network out to a greater number of weakly tied individuals. A potential future study could consider whether bonding ties are the first set of contacts added.

Several studies are in support of this hypothesis and have confirmed this
relationship. In a study of 8 Phoenix neighbourhoods, Larsen et al. investigate whether higher social capital lead to civic action. They confirm that there are two forms of social
capital, bonding and bridging. Further their findings support the notion that bonding is an antecedent to bridging. As such bridging social capital, they suggest, requires the existence of bonding social capital (as well as other resources such as money and education). (Larsen et al., 2004)

3.7.2

H2: Browsing behaviours will impact an individual's bridging capital The searching/browsing framework posits that searching behaviour would

constitute using a social network in order to maintain friendship and search out additional information about friends, while browsing behaviour would constitute seeking out online contacts to meet offline (Lampe et al., 2006). Logically this aligns well with the framework of bonding and bridging ties. Any tie created as a result of browsing
behaviour would then begin as a bridging (or weak) tie. As such I hypothesize browsing
behaviour will have a positive impact on bridging social capital.

This concept also translates well into the technology space within which the thesis is situated. A longitudinal study of an ERP implementation, found that building bonding
social capital is an important antecedent to bridging social capital. Where bonding social

3.7.3

H3: Ease of use will impact an individual's bridging capital

This third premise has been included in order to gather some information
regarding the technology at hand. This was done primarily to understand the impact of the actual website on bridging social capital. Ease of use was selected as a practical measure of understanding this relationship. Perceived ease of use is the degree of ease

capital is low, little obligation is to the team. Combined with instability (which many IT

projects experience), individuals begin using their social capital for themselves, as
opposed to for the good of the project. (Newell, Tansley, & Huang, 2004)

with which a person believes they can use a system free from effort. It is a predictor of

50

51

whether a system is useful and whether or not it is used. Because Linkedin functions
much like an application, rather than a website, it is appropriate to apply ease of use for

4
4.1

Research methods and data sources
Data Collection

this research. As such I posit that if Linkedin is not easy to use, then it will not positively contribute to bridging capital--thus a positive relationship should exist between the two
variables. (Davis, 1989)

4.1.1

Background of Linkedin

Even though online social networks are a relatively new technology, they have

In addition to ease of use, the TAM model also includes a usefulness construct. Usefulness was not tested because it is a predictor of whether the system helps an individual with a particular task or job. Due to the immature stage of social networking

had incredible acceptance. Today, there are hundreds of social networking sites,

surrounding many purposes. Wikipedia identifies 158 different social networks, and with the ability to now create your own social network site, this list is certainly not exhaustive. Part of the difficulty in online social network research is that social networking sites are different from each other, and in aggregate, may not be as predictive (Hargittai, 2007).
Thus selecting which network to study is a strategic choice made by the researcher.

websites it is difficult to measure whether the technology is useful, because its use is still
being developed. Future studies should investigate the uses of Linkedin in an exploratory format, then test whether the technology is in fact useful in this way. For the purpose of this study, the use is proposed to be bridging capital. It is the use identified by the site's
creators (as explained in section 4.1.1). As such one way to interpret the data is to allow the bridging capital measure to also serve as a measure of usefulness.

All of the sites have a common backbone, which is a visible network. They differ

in purpose however--some sites, like online communities, are centered on interests, culture, religion, shared experiences, and etc. Others are vastly broad in scope, like
Facebook or MySpace, accumulating more than 250 million users. It is this differentiation of use that made the selection of a specific site for this research important. Linkedin is an online professional social networking site launched in 2003. Rather

than having a broad audience it is slightly more specific toward professionals--and in that sense it is an application used to identify opportunities through a social network.
While it is not the first or the only social network for professionals, it is the largest, with
43 million members across 200 countries. (Linkedln.com)

52

53

Linkedln has been selected for this research because of its purpose and scope.
While it is not as broad and inclusive as Facebook, it does attract a large variety of individuals. Generally, Linkedln attracts professionals, however given the number of

4.1.2

Data Sources

The data for this research was gathered using a self-administered online survey. Constructs used in the survey are attached in Appendix B. The survey design was crosssectional, meaning that it gathered information about one point in time rather than

professions that exist, their market is broad. As such, it is not an interest based online
community, but rather a network of professionals connected online. This is important because it is proposed here that social networks differ from online communities in that
they are ego-centered not interest-based. Belonging to a community held together by an

longitudinally (Creswell, 2008). Using survey methods to gather the data is appropriate for several reasons. Firstly, due to the quantitative nature of survey data, it can be used to gather a larger sample and generalize findings across a population. Secondly, the framework studies used as constructs for the model (Williams, 2006; Lampe, 2006;

interest or shared experience would likely have a different impact on social capital.

Secondly, Linkedln was selected because of its purpose. As identified by Linkedln using the website you can:

Davis, 1989) use survey methods, providing the researcher with a set of validated
constructs. Lastly, online web surveys provide several additional advantages such as:

immediate data storage, convenience for the respondent, low cost, and efficient ability to
· Find potential clients, service providers, subject experts, and partners who come
recommended

digitize the data for usage with statistical software.

· ·

Be found for business opportunities Search for great jobs

A single-stage sampling procedure was used,' thus surveying individuals directly (Creswell, 2008).The survey respondents were invited to participate in the survey through
Linkedln. In this sample, data on non-users was not gathered; as such using Linkedln directly provided the opportunity for a dense sample of qualified candidates (the qualifier being an account on Linkedln). The drawbacks of this approach are discussed in section
6.1.

·
·

Discover inside connections that can help you land jobs and close deals
Post and distribute job listings

· ·

Find high-quality passive candidates Get introduced to other professionals through the people you know

This is relevant here because the uses of the site are closely aligned with bridging social capital. As previously identified, bridging social capital is weakly tied, exposing

opportunities, and transferring information faster than bonding social capital. The site is engineered for the purpose of creating and maintaining these bridging relationships.
Thus, it is most appropriate to evaluate it through this lens.

The first method of inviting survey responses consisted of an email to the contact list belonging to the researcher. However, using this set of contacts is likely to introduce
a strong sample bias, as users of social network sites tend to initially segregate

themselves by nationality, age, education level and etc. (Hargittai, 2007). In order to achieve a more random sample, which is more desirable in survey research (Babbie,
54

55

1990), links for the survey were also posted on various Linkedln groups. Due to ethics

transposed into a numerical format understood by the statistical program used for
analysis--in this case being VisualPLS.

considerations, the surveys were kept anonymous. As such, it is difficult to know what
percentage of the surveys came from the groups, or further removed ties. It can be

The self-administered online surveys were hosted on a survey tool called

assumed that at least 50% of the responses are outside of the close network (since the
number responses doubles the number of contacts in my network).

Zoomerang. The questionnaire for this research consisted of Likert scale questions, with
ratings from 1 to 5 (with l=Never, 2=Seldom, 3=Sometimes, 4=Often, 5=Very Often). One of the advantages of using online survey software like Zoomarang is its ability to

Information about the socio-demographic characteristics of the sample was

gathered in order to verify whether the sample was representative of the Linkedln
population. With 167 responses, and a 50% response rate, the statistics show that the

handle data efficiently. Here the data was downloaded into an Excel file format.
Zoomerang translated all of the Likert scale questions into a numerical format. The question names were then changed to four characters each for VisualPLS consideration.

sample is representative. Table 7 identifies the sample relative to the statistics of the
Linkedln population.

This data file was then loaded for statistical analysis.

Table 7: Linkedln demographic statistics as compared to the research sample
Linkedln Population 56% Male
Average age of 41

Additional data such as the socio-demographic characteristics of the sample listed

Sample Population 60% Male Average age of 38.80 79% Caucasian

in Table 7 of the previous section (4.1.2), where interpreted directly on Zoomerang, and
are also presented in Chapter 6.

83% Caucasian

4.3

Data Analysis
The method of statistical analysis for used in this thesis is Structural Equation

$60-100K 29%, $100K + 38%
53% College educated

S50-75K 40%, $100K + 27%
35% College educated

Modeling (SEM) using the partial least squares (PLS) approach. SEM combines multiple

(28% Graduate school)

(39% Graduate school)

regression and factor analysis, allowing the researcher to interpret several relationships of
a model in one step, and determine model fit. SEM is appropriate here because the model, as well as the hypotheses surrounding it, area priori. Meaning, the model has been created prior to data collection, and SEM is used to determine the value of the model.

Source: http://www.quantcast.com/linkedin.c6m#demographics
4.2 Data Preparation

Data preparation is an essential step in quantitative research. Improper treatment of the data prior to analysis can confound the findings. The gathered data must be

In addition to measuring the model fit, SEM simultaneously measures the

individual factors that make up the model constructs. The specific method of SEM used

56

57

here is partial least squares, which is a multivariate regression technique rooted in pathanalysis. In addition to being able to test a priori knowledge derived from theory, PLS
divides model testing into two components: the measurement and the structural model. In

phenomenon of interest, it can be tested against empirical data. (Raykov & Marcoulides,
2006)

This

thesis uses

quantitative

data

gathered using an online

survey,

then

this case the measurement model consists of the questions used to measure the individual
constructs. This allows the researcher to test whether the questions are in fact measuring the construct by way of a confirmatory factor analysis. The structural model consists of
the relationships between these constructs. These relationships form the explanatory

downloaded into VisualPLS for statistical analysis. The method used by this program is
partial least squares.

4.4

Confirmatory Factor Analysis
SEM is an a priori approach to data analysis. As such my first step was to specify

power of the whole model, as well as the relationships between the constructs (paths).
(Igbaria & Greenhaus, 1992)

the measurement model, which has a theoretical basis. Thus, the scales used to measure
the concepts of the proposed model were operationalized from work done by prior

In addition to its ability to simultaneously measure the measurement and structural models, other reasons for using PLS are its ability to handle exploratory data,
where little theoretical knowledge is developed, its ability to handle small sample sizes,
and no requirement for normally distributed data.

researchers. An alternative option would have been to develop my own scales, however

this is outside of the scope of this thesis. Scale development poses the risk of not actually
measuring the constructs, and as such can be a lengthy and iterative process. As such

previously tested scales were used for this research, thus improving the content validity This process may indicate that the model is inappropriate, leading to a of the measures. Nonetheless, these scales have never been placed together in this fashion; therefore it is important that data analysis begins with Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA). Further, while the scales were not created from scratch, some items were modified to better fit the study. Thus, CFA ensures the scale appropriateness given this new context, as well as ensuring that modified items that have been added to the scales positively contribute to the construct.

modification of the hypothesis, or a complete reassessment of the model. Secondly, SEM

is used successfully to identify latent variables. Because the study is exploratory in nature it is quite likely that latent variables connecting constructs may emerge. Thus, the
analysis will be used to understand patterns between variables and well as explain these patterns as completely as possible using the model. (Kline, 2005)

Specifically, SEM can be used to represent knowledge or hypotheses about a

Conducting the CFA enables the researcher to make certain that all the specified measures contribute to the construct significantly. Further it improves the parsimony of

studied phenomenon, which is usually based on an existing or proposed theory that
describe and explain the phenomenon. Once the theory has been developed about the

the model by reducing its complexity. While it is generally agreed that factors should

58

59

T
load 0.70 or higher to confirm that independent variables identified a priori are

represented by a particular factor, this research is exploratory in nature. Thus, factor loadings as low as 0.40 are appropriate (Hair, Anderson, Tatham, & Black, 1998). The reason that this research is exploratory is because while the individual constructs in the
model have been individually tested by other researchers, this is the first time that they

5
5.1

Research findings
CFA Results
After specifying the model in VisualPLS the first step was to conduct a factor

analysis. This initial CFA in Table 8 shows all of the scales initially used to measure the constructs. A discussion of these measures and their individual constructs follows. A

are being brought together in this manner. This also impacts the directionality of the
hypotheses. Because the relationships have not been tested before the direction is not

legend for the question codes can be found in Appendix B.

known, but rather only partially informed by the research. As such only the results can

Table 8: Initial Confirmatory Factor Analysis
Scale Items hasc of Use
Browsing. Behaviour
l-l.RN
0.7760 Bonding

prove the directionality of the hypotheses. The steps followed in this process were 1)
examine all factors 2) remove factors with loading of less than 0.40. In SEM the model fit and the CFA are presented in one step. As such this allowed me to observe the model fit before and after the CFA. The results of the CFA are now discussed as part of the
research findings.

Bridging
capital 0.2139 O.220O

capital
0.1056

0.2906 0.31S7

I-OU
KTRI. l-.UND

0.7938

0.1956

0.8103
0.8121 0.5881
0.442-1

0.2910
0.2395 0.1037 -0.0116 0.1975 0.1701 0.8193 0.5222 0.8182

0.1799 0.1961 0.1016 0.0155 0.1401

0.2304

0.2244 0.1917
0.03-10

Wl.X
I-.SKI. HBRLXi

0.5950 0.4435
(U24X

0.4367 0.2305
0.5197

i;hm)

0.3178
0.2397 0.0624
0.3509

SUP] SRIC
SliJO

0.1 S75

0.2354

0.2584
0.170S 0.1999 0.1394

0.5113 0.3070
0.4536
0.4197

SUMBOH) HOPS HOl.f

0.7123 0.2356
0.2314

0.1355
0.7958

0.7364
0.3213 0.2930 0.6098

-0.0664
0.0 IM

-0.0087 -0.0494

0.1831 0.1070
0.3470

HOI-.l.
BORl,

0.1500
0.2419

0.09S2
0.1490

BOOR

0.6166

0.3515

60

61

T
IJOLI) BOA1 BOM
0.0:'K7
-\/.\f 'Oil

0.1886
0.6717 0.5384

0.1 »7f.
0.3S20

5.1.2

Browsing Behaviour

0.1346
0.1610

().1%7
O.08O2

All the scale items were maintained for the browsing behaviour construct. Even
though these measures were exploratory, only one of them (SBJC: Searching for potential job candidates) fell below the 0.70 cut-off considered to be standard. This shows the
strength of the browsing behaviour construct.

0.3069

BROI
1JRTN BRUT
BRfW

0.3049

O.3S03
0.3305 0.4041 0.3143 0.4105
0.442S

0.47X1

0.7440

0.3020 0.2629 0.2745
0.3349

0.5114
0.3828

0.7283
0.6770
0.5699

0.32X2

BRI.C"
BRRP

0.4K98
0.4866

0.7835 0.8008
0.5929

5.1.3

Bonding Capital

0.3170

Of all four constructs, bonding social capital had the weakest CFA. Three factors
(BOLC: When I feel lonely, there are several people on Linkedln I can contact, BOAL: If I needed an emergency loan of $500, I know someone on Linkedln I can turn to and BOLD: The people I interact with on Linkedln would share their last dollar with me) were dropped from the construct measure. Overall, it may be that there is a difficulty measuring bonding capital, as it exists on Linkedln because the site is geared toward more weakly tied relationships. Opportunities to improve this scale should be a part of
future research, discussed further in section 6.1.

BRWC liRSC1
BRNP

0.2R5H
0.3346

0.316')
0.4905
0.4S91

0.3518 0.3S52 0.4485

0.7664 0.7964
(1.7411

0.2772 0.3003

BRNP2

0.5003

0.3431

5.1.1

Ease of Use

All of the scale items for the construct of Ease of Use passed the 0.40 factorloading threshold. However, while the rest of the research is exploratory in nature, the EOU construct has been developed and tested for over 25 years now. As such this scale

should be subjected to the stricter cut-off od0.70 for the factor loading. Of the initial 6 measures developed by Davis (1989), ESKL (The website behaves in unexpected ways)
was thus dropped from the model. Two new measures (EBRDG: It is easy to meet people
I've never met before using the website and EBND: It is easy to find and add my contacts

5.1.4

Browsing Capital

The browsing capital scale performed well in the context of this research, with all
of the factors being significant at the 0.40 level, and only 3 falling below the 0.70 level.

As such all of the question items were maintained for this construct.

to my network) were introduced that also fell below the 0.70 cut-off. However, their presence was maintained because they qualified to be treated according to the 0.40
threshold. factor loadings overall and with fewer individual measures, thus also improving the
parsimony of the model.

Table 9 shows the CFA after I dropped the low-performing constructs and ran the data analysis again. As a result the model became more accurate as shown with better

62

63

Table 9: Final confirmatory factor analysis
Scale hems Ease
Use

5.2
Bonding
capital

Construct Validity and Reliability
Construct validity can be defined as the extent to which the scales used measure

of

Browsing
Behaviour

Bridging
capilal

f-Statistic

1-I.RN
1-OIJ KTRI. HUM)

0.7616
0.7999 0.7809 0.8057

(1.2903
0.31X4 0.2904 0.2391

0.0SH
0.1763 0.15% 0.1905

0.2OS5
0.2206 0.2267 0.2244

10.64X7
14.6867 11.5194 12.5557

the appropriate concept (Bagozzi, Yi, & Phillips, 1991). I have already examined the
appropriate levels for the factor loadings in the first part of the factor analysis. The next step is to examine convergent validity, discriminante validity, and reliability. Convergent validity is established when the loadings are significant and above

UHRDG
l-.BND SBl'I SBJC SBJO SBFF UO1D
HOI'S
BOR.I

0.6368
0.4645 0.3342 0.1950 0.274S 0.1869 0.2057
0.1347
0.1441

0.1973
0.1705 0.8172 0.5207 0.8205 0.7130 0.2361
0.2339
0.0985

0.1373
0.3157 0.2081 0.0548 0.3245 0.1264 0.8249
0.7609
0.6325

0.4343
0.2358 0.5147 0.2333 0.5180 0.3696 0.4592
0.4236
0.3521

7.7115
3.6346 23.6485 5.7479 2I.389S 11.3600 8.2740
6.5064
4.6075

0.70 (Chin, 1998). Discriminant validity is established when each of the items loads

highest on the correct construct (Gefen & Straub, 2005). Secondly, the square root of the
AVE value should be greater than any number in the same row or column and above

0.50. Lastly, reliability indicates whether the answers are repeatable therefore giving consistent results. Most commonly reliability is measured by the Cronbach Alpha, with values of above 0.70 being acceptable (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). As can be seen in Table 10 all of the measures but two (the AVE for Bonding Capital and the Cronbach Alpha for Bridging Behaviour) show appropriate results. Further, I tested statistical significance by using the t-statistic generated for each variable during the bootstrap analysis. All of the measures are significant at the 0.01 level and a

BOCiR
BOAI

0.2237
0.1372

0.1493
0.1973

0.6358
0.6829

0.3540
0.3SO2

4.3531
5.2740

IJOI-'J HROI BRTN
BRUT

0.1619 0.3137 0.3071
0.2737

0.0806 0.3X06 0.3309
0.4046

0.5393 0.478.5 0.4986
0.3779

0.3003 0.7501 0.7241
0.6823

3.2410 10.2505 7.1777
8.6694

BRCW BRI.C
BRBP HRAVC BRSC

0.2980 0.3298
0.3173 0.2835 0.3448

0.3151 0.4101
0.4427 0.3167 0.4909

0.3366 0.4671
0.5024 0.3494 0.3724

0.5879 0.7698
0.8183 0.5945 0.7672

7.1255 11.2256
12.1308 7.7499 11.7354

full list of t-values for each question can be found in Table 9 (previous page). The Cronbach Alpha for the Bridging Behaviour construct on the other hand reaches the threshold when rounded, and as such I will treat it as reliable. Bonding social capital
seems to be a difficult construct to capture. In the initial research proposed for this scale,

BRNI'
BRM'2

0.2867
0.3206

0.4891
0.5092

0.4376
0.3007

0.7975
0.7209

8.23')h
8.3479

Bonding was also a slightly weaker measure (Williams, 2006). As such this result is not

surprising and will be discussed as a model limitation. Further, two constructs in this

p-value for all factors ·-0.0001 except EBDN (0.0002) and BOFI (0.0007)

model, Bonding and Bridging Social Capital, are formative constructs. Traditional
64

65

construct validity techniques (convergent and discriminant validities) cannot be applied
to formative constructs (Petter, Straub, & Rai, 2007).

5.3

Model Fit

Once the CFA was completed, and the non-contributing measures were dropped, I recalculated the model fit for the new measurement model. The model fit as indicated by
Cronbach Alpha

Table 10: Composite Reliability, AVE and Cronbach Alpha Construct Composite
Reliability
ease

> AVIi

the R2 prior to the CFA was 0.536. This indicates that the model explained 53.6% of the
variance in bridging social capital using the ease of use, bridging behaviour, and bonding

0.858631
0.810464

! 0.510454
0.523761

.0.793718
j 0.693755
0.805X59

social capital constructs. The final structural model shown in Figure 3 improved slightly

lvha\

bond
bridge

0.836316
0.9144%

0.464496
I 0.519471 1

with a final R2 of 0.538. Further, parsimony of the model was improved as fewer
measures were used to produce better results. All three of the constructs also showed to

0.907194

be statistically significant with a p-value of < 0.0001 calculated using the t-statistic, shown in brackets. The implications for this structural model will now be discussed in

When testing formative constructs for validity and reliability, one is concerned
with multicollinearity, which can be inspected using the Correlation Table (Table 11).

Chapter 6.

Where multicollinearity is present two constructs are changing together and thus
measuring the same thing--they are highly correlated. Because none of the items in the

Figure 3: Factors affecting bridging social; capital
ease

table are highly correlated it can be said that the formative constructs in the model are
sound.
behav
0.153

Table 11: Correlation table
1 case
i

(2.235)

bridge

bchav

bond

bridge
bond

0.424

ease

1.000

(5.380)

behav

0.349* 0.250**

1.000
0.272**

0.402

(5.415)

bond bridge

1.000

0.406*

0.589*

0.557*

1.000

*p-value of <0.0001 **p-value of <0.0005

66

67

6

Discussion
The purpose of this research is to develop a predictive model which will allow us

Figure 4: Frequency of Linkedln use
How frequently do you use Unkedtn?

to understand how online browsing behaviours, bonding social capital, and ease of use impact bridging social capital online. At the outset of the research, I hypothesized that all

three variables would have a positive impact on explaining the variance in bridging social
capital. The data does show support for all three initial hypotheses.

Prior to examining the individual hypotheses, some additional conclusions can be

drawn from individual questions outside of the suggested model. In addition to looking at different types of website uses, some descriptive statistics gathered will be discussed. Mainly, I will investigate the impact of gender, level of education, and age on the model
variables.

Secondly, very few users indicated that they were actually meeting new

individuals through Linkedln. Figure 5 shows that 73% of the sample met less than 10% of their network on the site directly. Further to this, of the 73% there may be respondents

who met no new individuals on Linkedln at all because the question did not provide a
zero per cent option. This implies that Linkedln facilitates in broadening bridging

Firstly, Figure 4 shows that half of the sample uses the website at least once per

relationships that exist in an individual's offline network. Thus there is a possible area of growth for this type of social network. Linkedln can branch out into facilitating
completely new relationships.

day. This would indicate that the network has become a part of their daily routine.
Researchers have suggested that social networks are different than past online groups

because they mirror people's offline networks. While this concept is not fully explored here, and discussed further in section 6.1, this frequent participation leads me to believe
that in the very least the network is important to the participants.

Figure 5: Percentage of new contacts acquired through Linkedln
What percentage of contacts did you meet through Unkedfn?

fcSani shaft J3%. toft tat* fte

68

69

Interestingly, when the sample was filtered for those respondents who have met

The question then becomes, do individuals with a greater number of contacts,

more than 10% of their network through Linkedin alone, a secondary implication was

behave differently than those with a lesser number? The sample of these potential "superusers" is not high enough to be generalizable here. However, ANOVA results (shown in

found. Thirty-two percent of the surveyed sample had between 20-50 contacts (Figure 6).
Figure 6: Number of contactsjm Linkedin
How many contacts do you have in your network?

Table 12) do present a statistically significant difference between the individual
responses for browsing behaviours displayed by users with different numbers of contacts.

The groups are divided into people with: 1) < 20 contacts 2) 20-50 contacts 3) 51 to 100
contacts 4) 101 to 200 contacts and 5) > 200 contacts. The differences between them are

significant at the 0.05 level. The mean responses for the 200+ contacts category are higher than that of the other categories, with the exception of SBJO "Searching for
potential job/business opportunities", where it is second highest (see Appendix D for descriptive tables). This leads me to believe that this group is showing a higher level of
On the other hand, those individuals who used Linkedin to meet new contacts had a much larger network, with 34% of them with networks greater than 200 contacts
(Figure 7).

browsing behaviours. While user typologies are not the focus of this thesis, further
research could be conducted in this area.

Table 12: ANOVA Results for Browsing Behaviour and Number of Contacts
Sum of Squares SBPI Between Groups Within Groups
Total
d

network on Linkedin

Figure 7: Number of contacts held by individuals who have met more than 10% of their

Mean Square
9.624

F

Sig.
.000

38.497

7.903

197.275
235.772

162 166
i.

1.218

How many contacts do you have In your network?

SBJC

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

50.605
206.221 256.826

12.651 1.273

9.938

.000

162 166 4
162

SBJO

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

20.938
286.056 306.994

5.235
1.766

2.964

.021

166
4 162

SBFF

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

12.256 165.397 177.653

3.064
1.021

3.001

.020

166

70

71

In addition to looking at difference of use, I investigated whether several socio-

Table 13 : Descriptive statistics for SBJO

demographic variables displayed a difference of means. In particular, I checked the
means for different age groups, educational levels attained, incomes and genders.

SBJO: "Searching for potential job/business
opportunities"
25 and under
Age 26 lo 30 N
2
1

95% Confidence Interval fo
Std Mean
2.9

Mean

Deviation
1.238
1.147

Std. Erro
.23 .287 .185

Lower Bound Upper Bound Minimum Maximum
2.43.2 2.17
3.4

Previous research discussed in section 2.1.5 pointing out there differences between age
groups, gender and even religion can impact the way we use social networks. Perhaps in
contrast to this is Hargittai (2007) shows that initially users of social networks band

3.8

31 to 40 41 to 50 51 or higher
Total

4.4 2.93 3.52 3.69 3.20

b
46 27

2.55
3.09 3.22
2.99

1.346
1.45J

.215 .225 .105

2.65 2.75
2.79

1.188 1.360

167

together. Not many differences existed between the various demographic groups. Perhaps given that Linkedln is a relatively new technology, this is what we are observing here.
The statistical result for these variables can be found in Appendix D.

Gender

Education
Male

Gender

101 66

2.80 3.29

1.312 1.390

.131
.171

2.5' 2.95

Female

3.06

c

The socio-demographic variable that seemed to have the most impact was Education. Here there was a significant difference of means above the 0.05 alpha level
Education

Total

3.63

167
c

2.99
2.67 4.00

1.36C
1.581

.105 .527 .577 .526 .348
.184
.271

2.7E

High school

3.20
3.88 6.48
1
3
c

1.45
1.52 1.91 2.32

Some college College
Some
10 13
53 18
43

1.000 1.663 1.256
1.338

g

3.10 3.08
3.45

for "Getting information about people in my industry" (SBPI), "Searching for potential job/business opportunities" (SBJO), "My interaction with the website is easy for me to
understand" (EUND), and "The people I interact with on Linkedln would help me fight

4.29
3.84 3.82 4.07 2.77 4.07 3 22 3.20

1

undergraduate

1

g

Undergraduate
Some graduate
iviasiers

3.08
2.93

1
2

g

3.50
2.42

1.150 1.139 1.342
1.387 1.360

5

.174

2.07 .73 1.55
2.79

Some doctoral
Doctorate
otal

1

5 13
167

2.40
2.38
2.99

an injustice" (BOFI). Interestingly, SBJO was the only other statistically significant
question, with a difference of means in education, gender, and age. The ability to search

.600 .385
.105

1 1
1

4

for job/business opportunities is one of the primary intended uses of Linkedln. The

descriptive statistics in Table 13 show us that; females, between the ages of 26 to 30, with
an undergraduate degree of some graduate education use Linkedln for this purpose. As

These questions give insight into possible avenues of future research. The focus

for this thesis in particular however is the impact of three constructs: bonding capital, browsing behaviour, and ease of use. In addition to examining support for each hypothesis represented by the three variables, a practical discussion of the results follows.

such, Linkedln may be a way that young professional women are reaching out in their
careers and overcoming past biases. A possible area of exploration would be to measure

whether females are able to actually capitalize on their social capital more often, or
whether these results are pointing to effort rather than reward.

72

73

HI: An individual's bonding capital will impact his/her bridging capital

that support this concept include the ability to load contacts from existing email lists as
well as software tools which suggest possible, contacts. Linkedln has already implemented these features. Thus, as you log on to the network, Linkedln facilitates how quickly you can build a list of contacts. Not all social networking sites are intuitive in this
way.

The path coefficient for the bonding to bridging indicates that were bonding

increases, an increase of 40.2% from the standard deviation can be expected in bridging
social capital. This shows a strong positive relationship between browsing and bonding. This would indicate that bonding could be seen as a predecessor of bridging, as already identified is some social capital literature (Larsen et al., 2004; Newell et al., 2004). Most
social capital literature agrees that these two types of capital are different (Putnam, 2000).
However, describing the relationship between them the way in which it has been done in
this thesis appears less common.

H2: Browsing behaviour will impact an individual's bridging capital

The path coefficient for the browsing to bridging indicates, that were browsing

behavior increases, an increase of 42.4% from the standard deviation can be expected in bridging social capital. Thus again, a positive relationship between the two variables is

Identifying bonding social capital as a predecessor of bridging has important

confirmed. Browsing behaviour as defined by Lampe (2006) occurs when individuals seek out new relationships online. This hypothesis makes sense intuitively; suggesting
that in order to gain loosely tied bridging relationships online you have to seek them out.

implications both in theory and practice. At the outset of this research I had hoped that

Linkedln would be a good resource for building bridging social capital. However, the
data shows that having bonding capital is important to building bridging capital. This social network in particular is not designed with the purpose of strengthening close

Strong support for this positive relationship also suggests that individuals participating in the network are also exhibiting the correct behaviours in order to gain bridging social
capital.

relationships, but rather building new bridges and opportunities for individuals.
Practically however, the results show that giving people the ability to host their bonded network online would improve their bridging capital--and thus better fulfill Linkedln's
purpose.

From a practical perspective it is important to understand these behaviours so that

the design may facilitate their occurrence. As an example, one browsing behaviour is "Getting information about people in my industry". Linkedln enables you to do this in

The design implications for this hypothesis are such that solely professional
networks could be less successful. People need the ability to bring in their close relationships as a "stepping stone" to building new ones. While social networks often

several ways. You can browse the network by industry or by company, quickly
uncovering individuals in those areas. As part of their vision, Linkedln explains that they

are in the business of identifying opportunities by uncovering previously hidden personal networks. One possible hurdle to this goal, are the privacy settings of each individual's profile. It is important the Linkedln maintains the open spirit of the network so that
75

don't differentiate this distance of relationships (Gross & Acquisti, 2005), users need to

be able to connect with their existing bonded network first. Tools developed by Linkedln
74

valuable information may be searchable. If individuals become weary about disclosing
their place of work or industry for example, there will be little result to social browsing.
H3: Ease of use will impact an individual's bridging capital

Figure ^

have participated on Linkedln
How Jong have you had a Linkedln profile?
Mote than 2 years - ]

The path coefficient for the ease of use to bridging indicates that were ease of use

Mwettore 1 yeas, bit tsss ihsn 2 years-

increases, an increase of 15.8% from the standard deviation can be expected in bridging social capital. While this percentage is statistically significant, it's contribution is smaller
than initially expected. My reason for including this variable stems from preliminary
conversations I had with individual users of Linkedln early on in the research process. It seemed that some users found the site difficult to understand, and thus were put off by

ttsan & months, bat less than 1 y«a?-

Mo«s than 1 manJf^, tart less fcsm 6

mcmths -!

Lass than 1 month -

using it. As such I thought an important factor in being able to build bridging social
capital would be the ability to use the site with ease.

In conclusion, the data supports all three hypotheses. Bonding capital, ease of use,

and browsing behaviours all contribute to predicting bridging social capital. Further,
Looking at the data further, there is a possible explanation for the lesser impact of

53.8% of the variance in bridging social capital is explained by the three suggested
variables. Given its exploratory nature, the model fit is an encouraging step toward future research. A discussion of the current limitations, leading to further research opportunities
follows.

this variable. Figure 9 shows that a combined 70% of the sample has been using the
network for 1 year or more. As such, a majority of the sample has learned how to use

Linkedln. Where ease of use is high, there is little positive or negative impact on building bridging capital. However, I hypothesize that in a sample where ease of use would be
poor, there would be a more significant impact on bridging social capital. The limitation

6.1

Limitations and future research

of this study, which prevents me from exploring this further is not including non-users, as
well as past users of the website. This is discussed further in Section 6.1.

This thesis has served as an incredible learning tool, teaching me the process of academic research. As I reflect on the process as well as the results it is important that the

limitations for this research are discussed. Many of these limitations are the result of the
scope of a Masters-level thesis. As such, I intend to pursue them in future research.

The first limitation for this study is that only current users of Linkedln

participated in the survey. No non-users were included. Understanding why individuals
76 77

choose not to use the technology could be a good insight into its pitfalls. In addition, past
users, who have abandoned the technology, were also not included. Excluding the users

individual's offline network to compare whether there is a difference between the individual's online and offline capital. Here the focus was just whether social capital was
accessed online, no matter the origin.

who have abandoned the site may be the reason for lowered support for the ease of use
construct because individuals who found the site difficult to use simply left. This is not

Another consideration for this research is whether it is generalizable to other online social network technology. While the results are reliable and valid for Linkedin, further research should include several types of online networks. Including different

measured here. The choice to use only current participants was made to ease the data

collection process. Further research in this area will include an exploration of why individuals leave the technology behind as well as why they choose not to join in the first
place.

networks may also lead to an understanding of whether there are different uses for
different networks as suggested by Hargittai (2007).

Another opportunity for further research is to identify additional construct that

Lastly, there is an opportunity to reassess the scales utilized in this research.

contribute to understanding the variance in bridging social capital. The study identifies three variables that explain 53.8% of that variance. Further variables will increase the model fit. Also, antecedents of those variables can be addressed to better understand the
model.

While developing social capital scales was outside of the scope of this thesis, further looking at developing scales would be highly beneficial. Williams (2006) presented his
bonding and bridging scales in an attempt to fill this current literature gap. Williams' approach to building the scales was rooted in the work of Putnam. He

The variables selected for this research were informed primarily by social capital

used the criteria that Putnam identified for bridging social capital 1) outward looking; 2)
contact with a broader range of people; 3) a view of oneself as part of a broader group;

literature. As such, looking to other areas of research, technology acceptance in particular, will lead to additional insights. As an example, network externalities may be a
contributor to bridging social capital. Do people find more value using the tool if they
have more friends also participating?

and 4) diffuse reciprocity with a broader community as well as the criteria for bonding

social capital 1) emotional support; 2) access to scarce or limited resources; 3) ability to mobilize solidarity; and 4) out-group antagonism. Some of these criteria groups were not
strong measures, and ended up being dropped in the factor analysis process. Bonding

While this research was primarily concerned with the existence of bridging capital on Linkedin, further research may look to separate the offline network component of

social capital as a whole was a weaker construct than bridging capital. As such, there is
an opportunity to reassess the bonding social capital scale. Future research can look at

capital. Thus we could understand how much social capital is created online solely. Williams (2006) suggested running the same set of bonding and bridging scales for the

78

79

developing a scale that measures the bonding capital construct more effectively, as well
as considering it as a possible bridging capital predecessor.

7

Design Implications
This thesis has explored factors contributing to bridging social capital in online

social networks. I have identified that three positive directional relationships exist
between building bridging social capital and bonding capital, ease of use, and browsing

behaviour. These results bare some design implications. Firstly, in order to facilitate the
positive relationship between bonding and bridging, a network must enable users to

easily find their close relationships online. Other studies have also supported the premise that bonding is an antecedent to bridging capital (Larsen et al., 2004; Newell et al., 2004) Seemingly this acts as a stepping-stone giving users the ability to build further browsing
relationships.

Secondly, in order to enable the creation of bridging social capital the design of

privacy settings in online networks needs to be carefully considered. Strict privacy
settings can impact a person's ability to browse a social network. Browsing is the act of

looking to create new relationships online. (Lampe et al, 2006) Due to increasing privacy
concerns, many networks such as Facebook, have enabled and individual to "hide" their

profile, allowing individuals to use the network to find others, however not be found in
return. When the profiles of two individuals trying to find each other are both hidden, the
network cannot link them.

The inability to find friends on a network like Facebook, meant primarily for
searching or finding old friends (Lampe et al, 2006) poses less risk than it does on a

network like Linkedln. On Facebook, the individuals typically have some other means of

80

81

contact outside of the network whereby they can facilitate adding each other's profiles.

An example of user identity control on Linkedln is the ability to approve or

For example by removing the privacy settings for a day to link to one another. This same
process is not possible in instances where people do not know each other in advance. In
fact, browsing a network in which every user is hidden is not possible at all.

disapprove recommendations from other individuals. Thus, no one can attach a
recommendation to another person's profile unless the owner of the profile has approved

them. While this may avert risk for the user, it does also carry drawbacks. Donath et al

Part of the issue is that when a user restricts their profile, they are typically not

(2004) shows that the reason that people trust networks is because they are uncensored,
enabling other users to punish deceivers. Thus in giving people the ability to control their

decreasing their own ability to build bridging ties, but rather someone else's, as a result of removing themselves from a potential search. Some studies have identified that
privacy loss is typically at the hands of the unknowing user (Barnes, 2006). While many
young individuals do not restrict the information in their profiles today, this may begin to

identity, the network is also reducing the level of trust others have in the network information. Dwyer et al (2007) have shown that lower levels of trust do not always
result in more privacy concerns. However, while trusting the site may not be an issue,
trust in necessary to build strong bonded relationships, (Gross & Acquisti, 2005) thus

change as they enter the professional world. (Rosenblum, 2007) Given that there is little benefit to staying open in a social network, one approach is that the networks can create

also having an impact on the type of tie created. It can be seen that managing privacy and
online identity without devaluating the network is a challenge.

this benefit. An example of one such an incentive is giving users points for participation.
Even if the points are "virtual", and bare no monetary value, they may have enough
positive impact on a user's reputation to urge them to-participate.

There are some design features that have already helped to synergize the

relationship between the concern for privacy and impression management. Namely, users
are able to restrict pieces of their profiles. Another potential improvement would be to

In addition to creating this benefit the design of the network can be improved to

make privacy less of a risk for users. Meaning, if users are not worried about the type of

limit the information of the user's network contacts. Meaning, if you are looking through
my contact list, I have the ability to choose what you are allowed to see. If one of my

information they are sharing online, and they feel safe to participate, overall the network

will remain open. I believe that this perceived risk is a result of the difficulties around

contacts chooses to post a comment or photo that I wish not to reflect badly on me, I can

impression management in an online social network. Individuals have less control over
their identity online because they are judged not only by who they are, but also by who

simply turn that information off to those visiting my profile. Thus, my network is still visible--but I control to what degree. Currently, some sites allow you to turn off the

their network contacts are (Gross & Acquisti, 2005).. Giving individuals the ability to
have firmer control over how other users impact their online identity may present a
solution.

ability to see a user's network of contacts. However, improving the utility of this feature
would enable a network to remain more open, thus better enabling browsing, which is
shown here to contribute to bridging social capital.

82

83

This thesis outlines some of the factors that are necessary to building bridging

social capital on Linkedln. This type of capital is valuable as it exposes individuals to
opportunities they may not have had otherwise. Thus, users make investments of time

8

References

and effort to build their network, so that they can access this capital when and if
necessary. In being able to identify the contribution of these variables, several design

Adamic, L. A., Buyukkokten, O., & Adar, E. (2003). A social network caught in the
web.First Monday, 8(6-2)

implications have risen. Primarily, in order to build bridging capital, a network must be
open, thus facilitating existing strong ties that act as a stepping-stone to browsing for new

Adler, P. S., & Kwon, S. W. (2002). Social capital: Prospects for a new conceptAcademy
OfManagement Review, 27(1), 17-40.

ties thus leading to bridging social capital. Careful consideration must be made for the

Aldridge, S., Halpern, D., & Fitzpatrick, S. (2002). Social capital: A discussion
paperPerformance and Innovation Unit.

effects of privacy settings as well as tools that enable impression management online.
V/here users are able to look for new opportunities and become opportunities for other
network users, social networks will stand to thrive as a tool for building bridging social
capital.

Arjan, R., Pfeil, U., & Zaphiris, P. (2008). Age differences in online social networking.
Babbie, E. (1990). Survey research methods .belmont, CA: Wadsworth.

Backstrom, L., Huttenlocher, D., Kleinberg, J., & Lan, X. (2006). Group formation in large social networks: Membership, growth, and evolution. Proceedings of the 12th ACMSIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
44-54.

Bagozzi, R. P., Yi, Y., & Phillips, L. W. (1991). Assessing construct validity in
organizational researchAdministrative Science Quarterly, 36(3)

Barnes, S. B. (2006). A privacy paradox: Social networking in the united statesiW
Monday, 11(9)

Baym, N. K. (1993). Interpreting soap operas and creating community: Inside a
computer-mediated fan cultureJournal of'Folklore Research, 30(2/3), 143-176.

Baym, N. K., Zhang, Y. B., & Lin, M.C. (2002). The Internet in college social life.
presented at Internet Research 3.0, Maastrich, The Netherlands.

Blanchard, A., & Horan, T. (1998). Virtual communities and social capMSocud Science
Computer Review, 16(3), 293.

84

85

Borgida, E., Sullivan, J. L., Oxendine, A., Jackson, M. S., Riedel, E., & GangI, A. (2002).

Dwyer, C, Hiltz, S., & Passerini, K. (2007). Trust and privacy concern within social

Civic culture meets the digital divide: The role of community electronic
networks.Journal of Social Issues, 55(1), 125-141.

networking sites: A comparison of facebook andMySpace. Americas Conference on
Information Systems (AMCIS), Keystone, Colorado, USA, Aug,

Bourdieu, P. (2001). The forms of capital. The Sociology ofEconomic Life, ,96-111.

Ellison, N. B., Steinfield, C, & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of facebook "friends:" social capital and college students' use of online social network sites Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(4), 1143-1143.

Boyd, & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and
scholarshipJWrca/ of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 210-230.

Burrell, G, & Morgan, G. (1979). Sociological paradigms and organization analysis.
Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural holes.Cambridge, MA,

Ferlander, S., & Timms, D. (2001).Local nets and social capital.Telematics and
Informatics, 18(1), 51-65.

Fornell, C, & Larcker; D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with

Burt, R. S. (2001). Structural holes versus network closure as social capital.Sbc/a/
Capital: Theory and Research, ,31-56.

unobservable variables and measurement errorJournal of Marketing Research, ,3950.

Byrne, D. N. (2007). The future of (the)"Race": Identity, discourse, and the rise of
computer-mediated public spheres.Mac^/mr Foundation Book Series on Digital
Learning: Race and Ethnicity Volume, ,15-38.

Fukuyama, F., Reforms, G., & Democracy, L. (2002).Social capital and civil society.

Garfinkel, S., & Spafford, G. (2002).Web security, privacy, and commerceO'Reilly
Media, Inc.

Chin, W. W. (1998). Issues and opinion on structural equation modeling.Management
Information Systems Quarterly, 22(1), 7-16.

Garton, L., Haythornthwaite, C, & Wellman, B. (1997). Studying online social
networks.3, 0-0.

Claridge, T. (2004). Social capital and natural resource management: An important role
for social capital. Unpublished manuscript.

Gefen, D., & Straub, D. (2005).A practical guide to factorial validity using PLS-graph: Tutorial and annotated example.Communications of the Association for Information
Systems, 9/(109), 109.

Coleman, J. S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capitaUmmcarc Journal
of Sociology, 94(Sl), 95.

Creswell, J. W. (2008). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approachesSage Pubns.

George, A. (2006). Things you wouldn't tell your motherJVew Scientist, 191(2569), 5051.

Goffman, E. (1978).The presentation ofselfin everyday /J/eHarmondsworth.

Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of
information technology.MS Quarterly, 13(3), 319-340.

Golder, S., Wilkinson, D. M., & Huberman, B. A. (2006). Rhythms of social interaction:
Messaging within a massive online networkArxiv Preprint Cs.CY/0611137,

Donath, J., & Boyd, D. (2004). Public displays of connection.57 Technology Journal,
22(4), 71-82.

Goodhue, D. L., & Thompson, R. L. (1995). Task-technology fit and individual
performa.nce.MS Quarterly, 19(2), 213.

86

87

Granovetter, M. S. (1973).The strength of weak ties.The American Journal of Sociology,
78(6), 1360-1380.

Hsu, W. H., Lancaster, J., Paradesi, M. S. R., & Weninger, T. (2007). Structural link
analysis from user profiles and friends networks: A feature construction
apiproach.Proceedings oflCWSM, ,75-80.

Grootaert, C, & Van Bastelaer, T. (2002a). The role ofsocial capital in development: An
empirical assessmentC&vcfon&ge University Press.

Igbaria, M., & Greenhaus, J. H. (1992). The career advancement prospects of managers and professionals: Are MIS employees unique?£>ec«7on Sciences, 23(2), 478-499.
Kavanaugh, A. (1999). The impact of computer networking on community: A social network analysis approach. Telecommunications Policy Research Conference, 27-29. Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles andpractice ofstructural equation modelingThe Guilford
Press.

Grootaert, C, & Van Bastelaer, T. (2002b). Understanding and measuring social capital:
A multidisciplinary toolfor practitioners^orld Bank Publications.

Gross, R., & Acquisti, A. (2005). Information revelation and privacy in online social
networks (the facebook case).Proceedings of the 2005 ACM Workshop on Privacy in
the Electronic Society, 71-80.

Haferkamp, D. M. N., & Kramer, N. C. (2008). Creating a digital self: Impression
management and impression formation on social network sites.

Knack, S., & Keefer, P. (1997). Does social capital have an economic payoff? A cross
country investigation.Quarterly Journal ofEconomics, 112(4), 1251-1288.

Hair, J. F., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C. (1998). Multivariate
aaalysis.Englewood: Prentice Hall International,

Kositanurit, B., Ngwenyama, O., & Osei-Bryson, K. (2006). An exploration of factors that impact individual performance in an ERP environment: An analysis using multiple analytical techniques.EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF INFORMATION

Hampton, K. N., & Wellman, B. (2000). Examining community in the digital

neighborhood: Early results from Canada's wired suburb .LECTURE NOTES IN
COMPUTER SCIENCE, ,194-208.

SYSTEMS, 15(6), 556.

Krishna, A., & Uphoff, N. (2002). Mapping and measuring social capital through
assessment of collective action to conserve and develop watersheds in rajasthan,
india. (pp. 85-124)

Hampton, K. (2003). Grieving for a lost network: Collective action in a wired suburb.TTze
Information Society, 19(5), 417-428.

Hargittai, E. (2007). Whose space? differences among users and non-users of social
network sitesJournal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 276-297.

Kumar, R., Novak, J., & Tomkins, A. (2006). Structure and evolution of online social
mtworks.Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 611-617.

Haythornthwaite,

C.

(2005).

Social

networks

and

internet

connectivity

effects.Information, Communication & Society, 8(2), 125-147.

Lampe, C, Ellison, N., & Steinfield; C. (2006). A face (book) in the crowd: Social
searching vs. social browsing. Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 167-170.

Haythornthwaite, C, & Wellman, B. (2002). The internet in everyday life: An
introduction.The Internet in Everyday Life, ,3^4".

Lampe, C, Ellison, N., Steinfield, C, (2007). A familiar Face(book): profile elements as signals in an online social network. In: Proceedings of Conference on Human

88

89

Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, New York, pp. 435-444.

Marwick, A. (2005). Fma lot more interesting than a friendster profile: Identify
presentation, authenticity and power in social networking services.Association of
Internet Researchers.6.0: Internet Generations,

Larsen, L., Harlan, S. L., Bolin, B., Hackett, E. J., Hope, D., Kirby, A., et al. (2004).

Bonding and bridging: Understanding the relationship between social capital and
civic actionJournal oj'Planning Education and Research, 24(1), 64. Leary, M. R., & Kowalski, R. M. (1990). Impression management: A literature review

Mathieson, K. (., KeilFax.: 404-651-3830, & e-mail: mkeil@gsu.edu, M. (1998). Beyond

the interface: Ease of use and task/technology ^..Information & Management, 34(4),
221-230.

and two-component modQlPsychological Bulletin, 107(1), 34-47.

Lederer, A. L., Maupin, D. J., Sena, M. P., & Zhuang, Y. (2000). The technology
acceptance model and the world wide web.Decision Support Systems, 29(3), 269282.

Meredyth, D., Hopkins, L., Ewing, S., & Thomas, J. (2002). Measuring social capital in a
networked housing estate.First Monday, 7(10)

Morris, M. G., & Dillon, A. (1997). The influence of user perceptions on software

utilization: Application and evaluation of a theoretical model of technology

Lenhart, A., Madden, M., & Pew Internet & American Life Project. (2007). Teens,
privacy & online social networks how teens manage their online identities and personal information in the age ofMySpace?sw Internet & American Life Project.

accepta.nce.IEEE Software, 14(4), 56-75.

Morgen, S. L., & Sorensen, A. B. (1999). Parental networks, social closure, and

Leonard,

M.

(2004).

Bonding

and bridging

social

capital:

Reflections

from

mathematics learning: A test of coleman's social capital explanation of school
effects.American Sociological Review, 64(5), 661-681.

belfast.Sbc/o/ogy, 55(5), 927.

Lewis, K., Kaufman, J., Gonzalez, M., Wimmer, A., & Christakis, N. (2008). Tastes, ties,
and time: A new social network dataset using facebook. com.Social Networks, 30(4),
330-342.

Narayan, D., & Cassidy, M. F. (2001). A dimensional approach to measuring social

capital: Development and validation of a social capital inventory. Current Sociology,
49(2), 59-102.

Lin, N. (2001). Building a network theory of social capitaLSbcza/ Capital: Theory and
Research, ,3-29.

Narayan, D., & Pritchett, L. (1999). Cents and sociability: Household income and social

capital in rural taazania.Economic Development and Cultural Change, 47(4), 871897.

Liu, A. Q., & Besser, T. (2003). Social capital and participation in community improvement activities by elderly residents in small towns and rural
commumties.Rural Sociology, 68(3), 343-365.

Narayan, D., & Shah, T. (2000). Gender inequity, poverty, and social capital.Po/zcy

Research Report on Gender Development, Working Paper Series. Washington, DC:
World Bank,

Mahlke, S. (2002). Factors influencing the experience of website usage. CHI'02 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 847.

Newell, S., Tansley, C, & Huang, J. (2004). Social capital and knowledge integration in

an ERP project team: The importance of bridging and bonding.British Journal of
Management, 15(Sl), 43-57.

90

91

Nie, N. H. (2001). Sociability, interpersonal relations, and the internet: Reconciling
conflicting findings.American Behavioral Scientist, 45(3), 420. Nie, N. H., & Erbring, L. (2000). Internet AND society: A preliminary report.

Root, R. W. (1988). Design of a multi-media vehicle for social browsing. Proceedings of the 1988 ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, 25-38.
Rosenblum, D. (2007). What anyone can know: The privacy risks of social networking
sites.IEEE SECURITY & PRIVACY, ,40-49.

Nyland, R., & Near, C. (2007). Jesus is my friend: Religiosity as a mediating factor in
internet social networking use. AEJMC Midwinter Conference, Reno, NV,

Skog, D. (2005). Social interaction in virtual communities: The significance of
technologyJnternationalJournal of Web Based Communities, 1(4), 464-474. Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1991). Connections: New ways of working in the networked
organizationMYY Press.

Onyx, J., & Bullen, P. (2001). 4 the different faces of social capital in NSW
australia.<Sbc/a/ Capital and Participation in Everyday Life, ,45.

Petter, S., Straub, D., & Rai, A. (2007). Specifying formative constructs in information
systems research.Ms Quarterly, 31(4), 623-656.

Stutzman, F., & Russell, T.

(2006). ClaimID: A system for personal identity

Pilgrim, C. J. (2008). Improving the usability of web 2.0 applications. Proceedings of the
Nineteenth ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia, 239-240.

management. Proceedings of the 6th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital
Libraries, 367-367.

Pinkett, R., & O'Bryant, R. (2003). Building community, empowerment and selfsufficiencyInformation, Communication & Society, 6(2), 187-210.

Teo, T. S. H., Lim, V. K. G., & Lai, R. Y. C. (1999). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in
internet usage.Omega, 27(1), 25-37.

Portes, A., & Landolt, P. (1996). The downside of social capital.The American Prospect,
26(94), 18-21.

Thelwall, M. (2008). Social networks, gender, and friending: An analysis of MySpace member prnfitesJournal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 59(8)

Preece,

J.

(1999).

Empathic

communities:

Balancing

emotional

and

factual

communicationJnferac/mg with Computers, 12(1), 63-77.

Turkle, S. (1994). Constructions and reconstructions of self in virtual reality: Playing in
the MUDs.MW, Culture, and Activity, 1(3), 158-167. Turkle, S. (l995).Life on the screenNew York: Simon & Schuster.

Putnam, R.

D.

(2000). Bowling alone:

The collapse and revival of american

communitySimon & Schuster.

Quan-Haase, A., & Wellman, B.

(2004). How does the internet affect social

Uphoff, N., & Wijayaratna, C. (2000). Demonstrated benefits from social capital: The
productivity of farmer organizations in gal oya, sri lank&.World Development,
25(11), 1875-1890.

capital.Sbcza/ Capital and Information Technology, ,113-135. Raykov, T., & Marcoulides, G. A. (2006)^4 first course in structural equation
modelingLawtence Erlbaum.

Valenzuela, S., Park, N., & Kee, K. F. (2008). Lessons from facebook: The effect of
social network sites on college students' social capital.

Robison, L. J., Schmid, A. A., & Siles, M. E. (2002). Is social capital really
capitaUReview ofSocial Economy, 60(1), 1-21.

Van

Der Heijden,

H.

(2001).

Measuring

IT core

capabilities

for

electronic

commerce Journal ofInformation Technology, 16(1), 13-22.
93

92

Wachter, R. M., Gupta, J. N. D., & Quaddus, M. A. (2000). IT takes a village: Virtual communities in support of educa.tion.International Journal of Information

Appendix A: Literature review table

Management, 20(6), 473-489.

Walther, J. B., Van Der Heide, B., Kim, S. Y., Westerman, D., & Tong, S. T. (2008). The

role of friends' appearance and behavior on evaluations of individuals on facebook:
Are we known by the company we keeptHuman Communication Research, 34(1),
28-49.

Author(s)

Date

Technology

Method

Constructs

Findings

Privacy, attitudes
Acquisti, &
Gross

Privacy concerns do not predict membership.

2006

Facebook

Survey and data mining

toward privacy, privacy behaviours,
information

Wasserman,

S.,

&

Faust,

K.

(l994).Social

network

analysis:

Methods

and

There are misconceptions about privacy on the network.
Users share a lot of private information on the network.

disclosure

applicationsCambridge Univ Pr.

Wellman, B. (1997). Structural analysis: From method and metaphor to theory and
substance.CONTEMPORARY STUDIES IN SOCIOLOGY, 15, 19-61. Wellman, B., Haase, A. Q., Witte, J., & Hampton, K. (2001). Does the internet increase,
Network Adamic,

Smallworld effect,
clustering, the strength of weak

The network closely mirrors the "real-life" campus.
People with similar interests to tend toward each other,

Buyukkokten,
&Adar

2003

Club Nexus

analysis of
2469 university

ties, properties of

individual profiles,
association by similarity, similarity and distance

decrease,

or

supplement

social

capital.Sbcza/ Networks,

Participation,

and

students

however where two dissimilar individuals link a bridge is formed and a greater amount
of ties exists.

Community Commitment.American Behavioral Scientist, 45(3), 436-455.
Content

Woolcock, M., & Narayan, D. (2000). Social capital: Implications for development theory, research, and policy. The World Bank Research Observer, 15(2), 225-249.
Arjan, Pfeil,
& Zaphiris 2008 Myspace

analysis of 100 user

profiles
using

Difference in word usage of different
age groups

Younger individuals have more friends within their own age group, while older

Linguistic
Inquiry

Word Count

individuals have less friends with more links across different age groups.

Backstrom, Huttenlocher, Kleinberg, & Lan 2006

Joining communities and
LiveJournal
Data mining Structural social

community growth is dependant on the network structure--in particular the connections between friends, and friends of friends.

network features

The privacy paradox; private
Social Barnes

versus public space; Literature review

2006

networks

and, social networkingprivacy
issues.

Teens and adults view privacy online differently.

94

95

Rec.arts.tv.so
Baym

Content analysis of
user profiles

1993

Exploratory study investigating what
people do on computer mediated

aps

newsgroup

and surveys

Computer networks are a positive medium for folklore and building online
community.

Donath &boyd

2004

Several social

Literature
review

Connection display,
network creation,

network sites

and online identity
Perceptions of trust

There are social implications of the public display of one's
social network

communities

Social capital and civic Community Virtual Blanchard &
Horan 1998 engagement will increase

and privacy concern,
Dwyer, Hiltz,
& Passerini 2007

Survey of
342 adults living in

participation, civic
engagement, social

Communities and social capital

when virtual communitiesdevelop around

Facebook and
MySpace

Online
survey of

willingness to share information and develop new

California

capital (as indicated by networks, norms and trust)

physically based communities and when these virtual
communities foster additional communities of interest.
Ellison,

117 users

relationships

Both sites reported similar levels of privacy concern. However the existence of trust/willingness to share information, did not always
result in new "friendship"

Survey of

Boase,

Horrigan,

Impact of the
2006

Wellman, & Rainie

Internet

Survey

internet on

friendship, social

The Internet helps build social capital and supports social
networks

Steinfield, &
Lampe

2007

Facebook

800

University

Students

Facebook usage and social capital maintenance

Strong association between

Facebook and social capital.
Strongest relationship with bridging social capital.

capital, connectivity The role of norms,
cooperation and

Communities where social

Borgida, Sullivan,

Mail

LakesNet,
2002 ItascaNet

surveys,

civic and political
culture in Internet use (addressing the

Oxendine,Jac kson, Riedel,
& Gangl

qualitative focus groups and archival
data

When comparing situations where technology is supported by both the public and private
sectors, as opposed the private

Networks, support, Mixed
Ferlander & 2001 Local net in Sweden methods:

capital is low exhibit a

Timms

belonging and trust (addressing "digital
divide")

positive attitude and high expectations toward local net

Surveys and

projects. Attitudes are
consistent across different

sector alone, individuals are more supportive of the goal

interviews

"digital divide")

demographics showing the
opportunity to overcome the

and less concerned with
technology.
Computer Garton, supported
1997

digital divide.

boyd

2006

Friendster and MySpace

Ethnographi c data, case
study

Friendship

formation, culture and social processes

Friendship creates culture and allows users to socialize and locate themselves in an
egocentric network.

Social network
analysis as a method

Computer supported social networks can use social network analysis to understand

Haythornthw
aite, &

social

Literature
review

of research for

networks

Wellman

CMC/CSSN

how structure affects them.

Collectively, they show
Social

hownetworked practices
Literature review

boyd, Ellison

Network 2007

mirror, support, and alter
Social network
history

Sites Friendster

known everyday practices,
especially with respect to how

Social

Literature

A person's job or position in Online information
sharing

George

2006

networking sites

review/opini
on article

life (age) affects how much

people present (and hide) aspects of themselves andconnect with others
User reputation is based on Ethnographi community knowledge Race and ethnicity

they are willing to post and whether they use some online networking sites at all
Facebook is geographically bound by schools. Facebook users display strong weekly and dailyroutines.

Golder,

Wilkinson, &
Huberman

2007

Facebook

Data mining

Network structure, temporal messaging, message frequency, seasonal variation

AsianAvenue
Byrne, 2008 2008

c content

, BlackPlanet, and MiGente

analysis of
over 3,000

Users have a healthy sense of racial identity R.ace is implicitly described in
the postings
Gross & Acquisti 2005 Facebook

Content

analysis of
4000 university students profiles

discussion threads

Privacy is a
necessary factor of

People are generally not aware

intimacy; therefore there are less close relationships online.

of the privacy issues they are making themselves susceptible
to.

96

97

T
Haferkamp & Kramer 2008

StudiVZ

12 in-depth

interviews

Authenticity of SNS profiles

Online impressions are more thought out and controlled
than real life Kavanaugh
1999 Blacksburg Electronic

Longitudinal study (3 year)

Computer networks expand social networks in geographic
Social ties, civic
engagement

communities.

The Internet can increase civic
engagement and community

Netville
Hampton
2003

Combinatio
nof

ICT facilitates community participation and collective action through large dense networks of weak ties. Weak ties, collective action, network density, ICT is a good organization
tool.

Village

surveys and interviews

involvement for people displayed preexisting
involvement.
Quality of life,
community

online residential community

ethnographi c and survey data

involvement, and
Kavanaugh &
Patterson

Participation in the network did not increase community
involvement.

There was no evidence to
suggest that social capital

Blacksburg 2001

socialcapital Telephone
survey

decreased as a result of
Netville

Electronic Village

Internet use, community

Results showed increased
Internet usage for building social capital.

attachment, and
community

Mixed

methods:
surveys,

The Internet supports a variety of social ties, strong and weak, instrumental, emotional.
Residents' community ties

involvement

ethnographi
Hampton &
c

Wellman

2000

Netville

observations , online
focus groups, and

online and offline, globally and locally, civic involvement, Internet use, and

Relationships are sustained through a combination of online and offline interactions. The high rate of online activity led to increased local
awareness, high rates of inperson activity and to rapid

Lampe,

Survey of
2006 Facebook 1440

Ellison,

Social searching and social browsing

Facebook appears to be a social searching tool for investigating people met
offline. Summary statistics on what

&Steinfield

university students

individual attitudes.

Lenhart, Madden, &
Pew Internet 2007

teens post, what privacy
Survey and

forum monitoring.

Online privacy
among teens on

means to them, what parents
should do to protect them.

political mobilization at the end of the field trial
Demographics impact social network sites.

MySpace

& American Life Project'

focus groups

MySpace

Study revealed age and gender differences.
Culture

Facebook, Hargittai
2007 MySpace, Xanga, and Survey

Users and non-users of social network sites

Friendster

Experience with social networks increases usage (resulting in digital inequity)

Race/ethnicity
Lewis,
Kaufman, Gonzalez,

Content analysis of 2008 Facebook 1640

Higher education
Tastes

Descriptive statistics of
constructs are provided.

Generally the data set analysis exemplifies the potential for future research

Wimmer, &

university
students

Haythornthw aite

2005

LEEP

Strong and weak Data mining

The communication media has
a strong impact on weak ties

Christakis

Gender

ties, information flow, latent ties

Socioeconomic
status

Changes in weak ties are more disruptive than strong ties

The affect of

Haythornthw
aite& 2002 Internet

Internet usage on
Introductory

everyday life. Investigation on low the Internet is

Wellman

sook chapter

There are many positions on whether the Internet has sositive, negative, or no
impact on people's lives

used and its impact.

98

99

Self-presentation is affected by site purpose and profile
structure.

Online
Preece

Ethnographi
c study (content analysis)

1999

medical
support group

Empathy and factual information in

online communities
A theoretical investigation on the affects of the
Internet on social capital.

Empathy and factual info exchange both play an important role is online communities

Friendster,
Marwick
2005

Social Network Analysis Further, social

Framing identity influences self-presentation online.
Quan-Haase Internet and social capital

Orkut, and MySpace

networks are

decontextualized from the real world because the exclude pieces (like nonusers)
Meredyth,
Community
2002

& Wellman

2004

Archival
survey data

The internet is adding to (not decreasing or transforming) social capital--particularly in
geographically dispersed
networks.

Social capital and resulting activites
Resnick

Hopkins,
Ewing, &

network in

Interviews and focus
groups

Community

(resource exchange,
2001

It is possible to generate more social capital online than in previous offline settings. This may be a different type of capital called sociotechnical
capital.

exchanges,
participation, trust, and social capital

Melbourne,
Australia

No findings. Presentation of
research agenda.

Internet

Essay

emotional support,

etc.) SocioTechnical
Capital

Thomas

Impact of the Review of 4

The Internet is decreasing face-to-face communication.

internet use on the quantity and quality of interpersonal communication and
sociability.

Privacy risk,
specifically to job

Nie

2001

Internet

academic
surveys of

Internet use

The Internet does not cause users to be more sociable;
more socially connected people use the Internet

Literature
Rosenblum 2007 MySpace

review/opini on article

and education, for posting information
online

Future employers may judge individuals by their participation is social networks

Online
Nie& Erbring
survey of 2002 Internet

Time spent online,
types of online

4113

American individuals

activities, social
isolation

The more time people spend online, the more they lose contact with their social environment
Type of group, and contact with that group is predictive of the bonding or bridging function. As such the internet

Shah, Kwak, & Holbert

Media use, civic
2001 Internet Survey
engagement,

Social capital production

online is generational, with higher capital being built
among younger (gen x)

interpersonal trust, and life contentment

generations.

Norris

2003

Online
communities

Bonding and Survey

Semi-

bridging functions
of online groups

Skog

2005

LunarStorm

structured

interviews
of 14 users

Technology features used

Technology design impacts social interaction

both widens and deepens a
user's social experience.
Sproull &

After using the C3 system participants had: -Strengthened their social ties
Creating Pinkett &
O'Bryant

Kiesler

1991

Community building and community
Case study

Females tend toward Content Thelwall analysis of
2008

2003

Community Connections

technology Empowerment and

-Increased awareness of community resources -Civic engagement, social
contact, cense of

General demographic data and uses of
MySpace

friendship, while males tend
toward dating.

(C3)System

MySpace

over 20,000

Friending behaviour online can be categorized.

self-sufficiency

empowerment and sense of

extracted
user profiles

community was positively correlated with Internet use

100

101

Online
Valenzuela, Park, & Kee, Survey of
2008

Moderate, positive
Civic journalism,

relationships between intensity of Facebook use and students' life satisfaction, social trust,

Facebook

1,715 university

public life and civic
action

Appendix B: Survey tool/question codes
Ease of use:
ELRN

students

civic participation and
political engagement. Having attractive friends

Walther, Van

increases a user's own Questionnair 2008 Impression formation from

It is easy to learn how to use the website Overall, I find the website easy to use

Der Heide, Kim,
Westerman, & Tong

attractiveness. Negative messages had positive affects on attractiveness of males, but negative of females.

Facebook

eof389 university

EOU
ECTRL
EUND EFLX

comments made by "friends"

students

I find it easy to get the website to do what I want it to
My interaction with the website is easy for me to understand

The website is rigid and inflexible to interact with
The website behaves in unexpected ways

Wellman

1997

n/a

Book chapter

Structural network

An investigation of the use of
structural network analysis

analysis

ESKL EBRDG

Wellman,
Boase, &

The Internet does not weaken
2002
Internet

It is easy to meet people I've never met before using the website
It is easy to find and add my contacts to my network

Survey

Internet use and

community--it adds to

EBND

Chen

impact on daily life.

existing forms of
communication. Internet usage supplements

Online
survey of

Network capital
(social ties),

face-to-face communication.
Heavy Internet users are

Bonding Subscale
BOID

There is someone on Linkedin I can turn to for advice about making
very important decisions.

Wellman,

39,211 2001 Internet

participatory capital
(community involvement) and community

Haase, Witte,
& Hampton

National Geographic Web site

linked to in voluntary organizations and politics.
Heavy users show less online

BOPS BOLC
BOEL

There are several people on Linkedin I trust to help solve my
problems.

visitors

commitment

community commitment

When I feel lonely, there are several people on Linkedin I can contact.
If I needed an emergency loan of $500,1 know someone on Linkedin
I can turn to.

Williams

2006

Online social networks

Survey for

Bonding and bridging social capital

scale development

Development of bridging and bonding social capital scales for online networks. Confirmatory factor analysis revealed bridging and bonding are two distinct but related dimensions of social capital.

BORL

The people I interact with on Linkedin would put their reputation on
the line for me.

BOGR BOLD

The people I interact with on Linkedin would be good job references
for me.

The people I interact with on Linkedin would share their last dollar
with me.

BOAI
BOFI

I have Linkedin contacts whom I know well enough that they would
do anything important for me. injustice

The people I interact with on Linkedin would help me fight an

Brideina Subscale
BROI

Interacting with people on Linkedin makes me interested in things
103

102

that happen outside of my industry.
BRTN

Interacting with people on Linkedin makes me want to try new things. Interacting with people on Linkedin makes me interested in what people unlike me are thinking.

Appendix D: Descriptive Statistics
Descriptives for Browsing Behaviour and Number of Contacts
N Mean 30 2.47

BRUT

BRCW BRLC
BRBP

Talking with people on Linkedin makes me curious about other
places in the world.

Std. Deviation 1.106 1.109 1.206
1.211

Std. Error
.202

Interacting with people on Linkedin makes me feel like part of a
larger community.

SBPI

Less than 20 Between 20 and 50
Between 51 and 100 Between 101 and 200

Interacting with people on Linkedin makes me feel connected to the
bigger picture.

48
34 29

3.44
3.00

.160
.207 .225

BRWC BRSC
BRNP BRNP2

Interacting with people on Linkedin reminds me that everyone in the
world is connected.

3.59
3.96

I am willing to spend time to support general Linkedin community
activities.

More than 200 Total SBJC Less than 20 Between 20 and 50 Between 51 and 100

26 167
30 48 34 29 26 167

.774 1.192
1.042 1.035 .821

.152 .092 .190
.149 .141

Interacting with people on Linkedin gives me new people to connect
with.

3.28 1.53 1.69 1.41
2.31

I come in contact with new people "on Linkedin all the time.

Social searching
SSKT SSNS SSNP
SSND

Between 101 and 200

1.391
1.386

.258
.272 .096

Keep in touch with old friends and colleagues
Check out new people I met socially
SBJO

More than 200

3.00
1.92 2.67 2.96

Total

1.244 1.493 1.383 1.371 1.147 1.142 1.360 .837 1.016 .819 1.254

Less than 20
Between 20 and 50

Check out new people I met professionally
Finding people to date

30
48 34 29

.273
.200

Between 51 and 100 Between 101 and 200

2.62
3.62

.235 .213
.224 .105

Social browsing
SBPI

More than 200

26
167

3.23
2.99

Getting information about people in my industry

Total

SBJC
SBJO SBFF

Searching for potential job candidates
Searching for potential job/business opportunities

SBFF

Less than 20 Between 20 and 50

30 48
34 29

1.70 1.77 1.76
2.00

.153
.147

Between 51 and 100
Between 101 and 200
More than 200 Total

.140
.233 .217

Having a face-to-face encounter with someone I was introduced to on
the website

26
167

2.50 1.91

1.105
1.035

.080

104

105

T
ANOVA (AGE)
Sum of Squares
df
4

BORL Mean Square 1.955 1.407
F

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

2.785 170.053
172.838

4
162

.696

.663

.618

Sig.

1.050

SBPI

Between Groups

7.820 227.952 235.772 2.191

1.389

.240 BOLD

166
4 162 166 4 162

Within Groups
Total

162 166 4
162

Between Groups
Within Groups

4.241
160.705

1.060
.992

1.069

.374

SBJC

Between Groups

.548 1.572

.349

.845
BOAI

Total
Between Groups

164.946
4.688

Within Groups
Total

254.635 256.826 24.446
282.548
306.994

1.172 1.138

1.030

.394

166 4
162 166
4

Within Groups 6.111
1.744

184.414

SBJO

Between Groups
Within Groups Total

3.504

.009 BOFI

Total Between Groups Within Groups

189.102
2.915

166 4
162 .729 .648 .629

182.079 184.994
6.811 168.459

1.124

SBFF

Between Groups
Within Groups Total

1.450

.363 1,088

.333

.855 BROI

Total
Between Groups

166
4 162 166 4 162

176.203
177.653
4.668 100.985 105.653
2.434

162

1.703 1.040

1.637

.167

166
4 1.167

Within Groups

ELRN

Between Groups

1.872

.118

Total

175.269
6.087

Within Groups
Total

162 166
4

.623

BRTN

Between Groups Within Groups

1.522 .983

1.547

.191

159.315
165.401 1.558 165.712

EOU

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

.609 .636

.957

.433 BRUT

Total

166
4 162 166 4 162 .816 1.222 .667 .616 .389

102.967

162
166 4

Between Groups

.381

.822

105.401
1.676

Within Groups
.419

1.023

ECTRL

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

.593

.668

Total

167.269 3.263 197.995
201.257 5.789 183.421

114.480
116.156 5.534

162

.707

BRCW

Between Groups
Within Groups

166
4 162 166 4
62

EUND

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

1.384

2.203

.071 BRLC

Total

166
4 162

101.735
107.269 2.671 129.233 31.904 6.110 52.705

.628

Between Groups Within Groups

1.447
1.132

1.278

.281

EBRDG

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

668
798

837

503
BRBP

Total
Between Groups

189.210
5.714

166
4 1.429 1.395 .238

66


Within Groups
-527 .620 172

165.855 171.569 2.371

162 166 4 162
166 4

1.024

EBND

Between Groups
Within Groups Total

Total BRWC Between Groups

62

943

.593 1.083

.548

.701

58.814
9.529
.

66
2.382

Within Groups
2.047 090 BRSC Total Between Groups Within Groups .091 .037

175.366
177.737
5.375

BOID

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

88.531 98.060
.362

62
66

.164

1.344 1.071

1.255

.290

173.463 178.838 5.168 131.550

162
166

BOPS

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

390
BRNP

Total Between Groups

70.440
74.802

62 66

.052

4 162

1.292

1.591

.179

Within Groups

.812

106

107

Total BRNP2 Between Groups

136.719 .389 193.587

166
4

Within Groups
.097
1.195

197.948 198.060
.172

165
166
1

1.200

.081

.988

Total BOPS Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Within Groups Total ANOVA (Gender)

162

172

163

687

193.976

166

174.630
174.802
.155 172.683 172.838 .001 164.945
164.946

165
166
1

1.058

BORL Sum of Squares

Between Groups

.155 1.047

.149

.700

df
1

»/Iean Square 1.034 1.423

F

Sig.
.395

Within Groups
Total

165

SBPI

Between Groups

1.034 234.738
235.772 1.048

727

166
1

Within Groups Total
SBJC Between Groups

165
166
1

BOLD

Between Groups
Within Groups

.001

.001

.977

165
166
1

1.000

1.048 1.550

.676

.412

Total BOAI Between Groups Within Groups

Within Groups Total

255.779
256.826

165 166
1

1.728

1.728 1.136

1.522

.219

187.374
189.102 2.211 182.783 184.994 .002

165 166 1

SBJO

Between Groups
Wilhin Groups
Total

9.424 297.570
306.994

9.424
1.803

5.226

.024
BOFI

Total Between Groups

165
166
1

2.211 1.108

1.996

.160

Within Groups .108
1.076 .100 .752 Total

165
166
1

SBFF

Between Groups Within Groups Total

.108

177.545 177.653
.236 105.416 105.653

165 166

BROI

Between Groups Within Groups

.002

.002

.966

175.267 175.269 .095 165.306
165.401

165
166
1

1.062

ELRN

Between Groups
Within Groups Total

1
165
166
1

K

.236 .639

.370

.544

Total BRTN Between Groups

.095 1.002

.095

.758

Within Groups
.916 .633
1.447

165
166 1

EOU

Between Groups Within Groups Total

.916 104.485

.231
BRUT

Total Between Groups

165
166
1

.270
167.000

.270
1.012

.267

.606

105.401
.809

Within Groups
.809 .699
1.157

165 166 1

ECTRL

Between Groups

.284 BRCW

Total
Between Groups

167.269
.377 200.880

Within Groups Total
EUND Between Groups Within Groups

115.347
116.156 1.328 105.941

165
166
1

.377

.310

.579

Within Groups 1.328
.642 2.069

165 166
1

1.217

.152 BRLC

Total

201.257
2.141 187.068

165 166 1 165 166 1 165 166
1

Between Groups Within Groups

2.141 1.134

1.889

.171

Total EBRDG Between Groups Within Groups Total EBND Between Groups
Within Groups

107.269 .489 131.415 131.904 2.475 156.339 158.814
.112

165

.489
.796

.614

.434 BRBP

Total Between Groups

189.210
.584

166
1

.584

.563

.454

Within Groups
2.475 .948 2.612

170.985 171.569 .323

165 166
1

1.036

.108 BRWC

Total Between Groups

.323

.301

.584

Total

Within Groups
.112 .093 .760

177.413
177.737

165
166

1.075

BOID

Between Groups

Total

108

109

BRSC

Between Groups Within Groups Total

1.056 177.783
178.838 .090

1

1.056 1.077

.980

.324

EBND

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

10.789

8 158

1.349
.937

1.440

.184

165
166

148.025 158.814
8.236

166
8

BRNP

Between Groups Within Groups Total

1 165 166
1 165

.090
.828

.108

.742

BOID

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

1.029
1.201

.857

.554

136.629 136.719
.444 193.532

189.824
198.060

158 166
8

BRNP2

Between Groups

.444 1.173

.378

.539

BOPS

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

7.274
167.529

.909

.858

.554

Within Groups Total ANOVA (Education)

158 166 8 158
166

1.060

193.976

166 BORL

174.802
6.048

Between Groups Within Groups

.756

.716

.677

166.790 172.838 10.526

1.056

Sum of Squares SBPI Between Groups Within Groups Tolal SBJC Between Groups Within Groups
Total SBJO Between Groups

df 8 158
166 8

Mean Square
2.801

F
2.074

Sig.
.041

Total

22.407
213.365 235.772 17.451 239.375 256.826 40.797 266.197 306.994

BOLD

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

1.350

8 158 166 8 158
166 8 158 166 8

1.316 .977

1.346

.225

154.420 164.946
10.998 178.104 189.102 17.908
167.086 184.994 5.176

2.181 1.515

1.440

.184

BOAI

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

1.375 1.127

158 166
8 150 166

1.220

.291

5.100
1.685

3.027

.003

BOFI

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Within Groups
Tolal

2.239
1.0C8

2.117

.037

SBFF

Between Groups
Within Groups Total

14.110 163.543 177.653
9.638 96.015

8
158 166 8
158

1.764 1.035

1.704

.101

BROI

Between Groups

.647 1.077

.601

.776

Within Groups
Total

170.094 175.269 4.646 160.755 165.401
6.325 160.944 167.269

158 166 8

ELRN

Between Groups
Within Groups Total

1.205 .608

1.982

.052

BRTN

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

.581 1.017

.571

.801

158 166
8

105.653
6.424

166 8

-

EOU

Between Groups Within Groups Total

.803 .626

1.282

.257

BRUT

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

98.978

158 166 8 158
166 8

791

.776

.624

158 166 8

1.019

105.401
10.137 106.019

ECTRL

Between Groups
Within Groups Total

1.267

1.888

.065

BRCW

Between Groups

8.891

1.111

.671

913

507

Within Groups
Total

92.366 201.257 7.118 72.091 89.210 0.782 60.787

158
166
8

1.218

116.156
10.179 97.091 107.269

EUND

Between Groups

1.272 .614

2.071

.042

BRLC

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

Within Groups
Total EBRDG Between Groups

2.140

158
166 8

1.965

054

58
66

.089

6.699
125.206

.837 .792

1.057

.396

BRBP

Between Groups
Within Groups

Within Groups Total

.348
58

158 166

.324

235

.018

131.904

110

111

T
Total 171.569 6.789 170.948 166 8
158
.849 .784 .617 Total

07.269
.476
j

66 .068 59
66
j

BRWC

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

EBRDG

Between Groups Within Groups Total

.365

224

1.082

24.429 31.904
.925

783

177.737
11.763

166
8 158 166
8
.536 .639 .744

BRSC

Between Groups Within Groups Total

1.470 1.057

1.390

.204

EBND

Between Groups

.132
59

1.193

310

167.075 178.838 4.287 132.432

Within Groups
Total BOID Between Groups Within Groups Total

50.889
58.814

949

66
r

BRNP

Between Groups Within Groups Total

8.384 189.676
198.060 4.543 170.259 174.802

1.198 1.193

1.004

430

158 166
8 158 166

.838

159 166
j

136.719
17.404 176.572 193:976

BRNP2

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

2.176 1.118

1.947

.057

BOPS

Between Groups

.649 1.071

.606

750

Within Groups Total

159 166
7

ANOVA (income in thousands)
Sum of Squares
df 7 159
Mean Square 1.867

BORL

Between Groups
Within Groups

8.669
164.169

1.238 1.033

1.199

.306

159
166
7

F
1.333

Sig.
.238 BOLD

Total
Between Groups Within Groups

172.838
4.154 160.792

SBPI

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

13.070
222.703 235.772 27.112 229.714

.593 1.011

.587

.766

1.401

159
166

166
7 159 166 7 159 166
3.873 2.681 .012 BOAI

Total
Between Groups Within Groups

164.946 5.798
183.304 189.102

SBJC

Between Groups
Within Groups Total

7

'

.828 1.153

.718

.656

1.445

159 166
7

256.826
10.273 296.721 306.994
15.866

Total 1.468
1.866

SBJO

Between Groups
Within Groups Total

.786

.600

BOFI

Between Groups Within Groups Total

12.158 172.836 184.994 7.140 168.130
175.269 9.272 156.130

1.737 1.087

1.598

.140

159 166 7 159
166 7

SBFF

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

7
159 166 7

2.267

2.228

.035

BROI

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

1.020 1.057

.965

.459

161.787
177.653

1.018

ELRN

Between Groups

5.660 99.992

.809 .629

1.286

.261

BRTN

Between Groups

1.325 .982

1.349

.231

Within Groups
Total

159 166 7 159 166 7
159

Within Groups Total

159

105.653
6.095 99.306 105.401
6.037

165.401

166
7 159 166
7

EOU

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

.871

1.394

.211

BRUT

Between Groups
Within Groups

3.743
163.526

.535

.520

.819

.625

1.028

Total
862
693

167.269
12.600

ECTRL

Between Groups Within Groups Total

1.245

281

BRCW

Between Groups Within Groups Total

1.800 1.187

1.517

.165

110.118

188.658 201.257 4.246

159 166
7

116.156
6.033 101.237

166
7

EUND

Between Groups

862 637

1.354

229

BRLC

Between Groups

.607

.521

.817

Within Groups

159

112

113

T
Within Groups Total BRBP Between Groups
Within Groups Total

184.964
189.210 3.828

159
166 7

1.163

.547

.518

.820

167.741
171.569

159 166 7 159 166 7 159 166
7 159 166 7 159

1.055

Appendix E: Ethics review approval

BRWC

Between Groups Within Groups Total

4.814
172.923 177.737

.688

.632

.729

1.088

BRSC

Between Groups Within Groups
Total

3.439 175.399 178.838 4.240 132.478 136.719 7.489
186.487

.491
1.103

.445

.872

BRNP

Between Groups Within Groups Total

.606 .833

.727

.649

BRNP2

Between Groups Within Groups Total

1.070

.912

.499

1.173

193.976

166

114

115

To:

Natalia Gilewicz

School of Business: Graduate Studies Re: REB 2009-033: SOCIAL CAPITAL FORMATION USING ONLINE SOCIAL

NETWORKS: THE IMPACT OF USER MOTIVATIONS AND EASE OF USE
Date: March 20, 2009

Dear Natalia Gilewicz,

The review of your protocol REB File REB 2009-033 is now complete. The project has been approved for a one year period. Please note that before proceeding with your project, compliance with other required University approvals/certifications, institutional requirements, or governmental
authorizations may be required.

This approval may be extended after one year upon request. Please be advised that if the project is not renewed, approval will expire and no more research involving humans may take place. If this is
a funded project, access to research funds may also be affected.

Please note that REB approval policies require that you adhere strictly to the protocol as last reviewed by the REB and that any modifications must be approved by the Board before they can be implemented. Adverse or unexpected events must be reported to the REB as soon as possible with an indication from the Principal Investigator as to how, in the view of the Principal Investigator, these events affect the continuation of the protocol.

Finally, if research subjects are in the care of a health facility, at a school, or other institution or community organization, it is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator to ensure that the ethical guidelines and approvals of those facilities or institutions are obtained and filed with the REB prior
to the initiation of any research.

Please quote your REB file number (REB 2009-033) on future correspondence.
Congratulations and best of luck in conducting your research.

Nancy-Walton, Ph.D.

Chair, Research Ethics Board

