Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2011

Images of an illness : a case study of Albert R. Stone's tuberculosis photographs
Tasha Lin Caswell
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Film and Media Studies Commons Recommended Citation
Caswell, Tasha Lin, "Images of an illness : a case study of Albert R. Stone's tuberculosis photographs" (2011). Theses and dissertations. Paper 839.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

                                 IMAGES  OF  AN  ILLNESS:  A  CASE  STUDY  OF  ALBERT  R.  STONE'S  TUBERCULOSIS   PHOTOGRAPHS      by      Tasha  Lin  Caswell,     Bachelor  of  Arts,  Lewis  &  Clark  College,  2003   Master  of  Information  Studies,  University  of  Toronto,  2007      A  thesis      presented  to  Ryerson  University  and  George  Eastman  House      in  partial  fulfillment  of  the        requirements  for  the  degree  of      Master  of  Arts      in  the  program  of      Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management      Rochester,  New  York,  United  States,  2011      ©  Tasha  Caswell  2011

i  

   I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis  or  dissertation.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  or  dissertation  to  other   institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.     

   I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  or  dissertation  by   photocopying  or  by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other   institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.     

  

  

ii  

  

Abstract  

   Images  of  an  Illness:  A  Case  Study  of  Albert  R.  Stone's  Tuberculosis  Photographs   Master  of  Arts   2011   Tasha  Caswell   Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management   Ryerson  University  and  George  Eastman  House  International  Museum  of   Photography  and  Film         This  master's  thesis  is  a  case  study  of  sixteen  black-and-white  photographs  of   tuberculosis  treatment  facilities  in  Rochester,  N.Y.,  by  local  photographer  Albert  R.   Stone.  They  appeared  in  the  Rochester   Herald  in  as  two  photo  essays,  one  in  1909   and  the  other  in  1923.  The  aim  of  my  research  was  to  provide  contextual   information  about  Albert  Stone  and  the  Rochester   Herald,  tuberculosis  and  its   treatment,  and  how  the  disease  was  portrayed  photographically,  and  ultimately,  to   determine  whether  Stone's  photographs  were  typical  of  tuberculosis-related   images.  I  examined  them  in  the  context  of  other  sanatorium  images  and  based  on   statements  about  the  conventions  of  sanatorium  photographs  made  by  Daniel  M.   Fox  and  Christopher  Lawrence  in  Photographing   M edicine:   Images   and   Power   in   Britain   and   America   Since   1840  and  concluded  that  they  were  representative  of   photographs  of  sanatoriums  made  in  the  early  twentieth  century.                                   

iii  

  

Acknowledgements  
   I  would  like  to  thank  my  thesis  adviser,  Alison  Nordström,  for  her  help  in  crafting   this  research  paper.  Her  willingness  to  sit  down  with  me  and  review  my  work  page   by  page  was  enormously  instructive,  and  her  enthusiasm  for  my  topic  was   encouraging.      Thank  you  to  my  second  reader,  Robert  Burley,  for  suggesting  ways  to  clarify  and   tighten  several  of  the  points  I  was  trying  to  make.        Christopher  Hoolihan,  the  Rare  Books  &  Manuscripts  Librarian  at  University  of   Rochester  Medical  Center's  Edward  G.  Miner  Library,  assisted  me  initially  in  my   search  for  a  thesis  topic  and  later  pulled  tuberculosis-specific  journals  for  me  to  look   at.  A  special  thanks  to  him  for  showing  me  the  J.N.  Adams  Hospital  Scrapbook,  an   album  containing  similar  photographs  to  Albert  R.  Stone's,  and  for  scanning  specific   images  so  I  could  write  about  them.      Leatrice  Kemp  and  Kathryn  Murano  from  the  Rochester  Museum  &  Science  Center   generously  answered  my  questions  about  Albert  Stone,  provided  me  with  the   digitized  negatives  and  let  me  look  at  contact  prints.        The  staff  of  the  Local  History  and  Genealogy  Department  at  the  Rochester  Public   Library  showed  me  resources  about  Rochester  and  the  Rochester   Herald  in  the  early   twentieth  century  that  I  never  would  have  found  on  my  own.  Additionally,  Local   History's  collection  of  microfilmed  newspapers,  including  the  Rochester   Herald,  is   central  to  the  very  existence  of  this  paper.        Thanks,  also,  to  my  colleagues  in  the  Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections   Management  program,  particularly  Andrea  Raymond,  Mandy  Malazdrewich  and   Marissa  Potvin,  for  acting  as  sounding  boards  and  talking  through  the  tricky   sections  of  my  thesis  with  me.      Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  my  cat,  Leo,  for  reminding  me  that  good  food  and  naps   are  important  parts  of  any  project.                                   

  

iv  

  

Contents  
Acknowledgements                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  iv   List  of  Figures                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vi   Introduction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1   Literature  Review                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4   Tuberculosis  in  the  United  States                                                                                                                                                                                            12   Iola  Sanatorium:  Monroe  County  Tuberculosis  Hospital                                                                                          16   Early  Photojournalism  and  Albert  R.  Stone                                                                                                                                                        17   Albert  R.  Stone's  Body  of  Work                                                                                                                                                                                        20   Albert  R.  Stone's  Tuberculosis  Photo  Essays  in  the     Rochester  Herald                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          24   "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague"                                                                                                                                            26   "Up  at  Iola,  Where  Health  and  Learning  Go  Hand  in  Hand"                                                                                35   The  Images  as  Evidence  of  the  Treatment  of  the  Disease                                                                                        43   Identifying  Typical  Tuberculosis  Photographs                                                                                                                                            45   Tuberculosis  Photographs  in  Reform  Publications                                                                                                              46   Images  of  Sanatoriums                                                                                                                                                                                                                      48   J.N.  Adams  Hospital  Scrapbook                                                                                                                                                                          49   Representative  of  a  Genre:  Albert  R.  Stone's     Tuberculosis  Photographs                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50   Conclusion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  57   Bibliography                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60  

v  

  

List  of  Figures  
1.  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague"                                                                                                                                                  27   2.  "General  view  of  tuberculosis  day  camp"                                                                                                                                                      28   3.  "Rest  tent  for  the  female  patients,"  and  "Rest  tent   for  the  male  patients"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        29   4.  [Rest  tent  for  female  patients  at  tuberculosis  day  camp]                                                                                                  30   5.  [Rest  tent  for  male  patients  at  tuberculosis  day  camp]                                                                                                        30   6.  "View  of  the  Dining  Tent,"  "Lunch  Time  at  the  Camp,"   "Headquarters  of  Doctor  and  Nurse"                                                                                                                                                                                30   7.  "Bath  House  and  Kitchen"  and  "Public  Health  Association  Directors"                                              32   8.  "Up  at  Iola  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  in  Hand"                                                                                                36   9.  Title  from  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague"                                                                                                        37   10.  Title  from  "Up  at  Iola  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  in  Hand"                                                  37   11.  "The  main  building  of  the  present  Monroe  County  Tuberculosis  Sanatorium-- Iola,"  and  "The  first  Monroe  County  tuberculosis  camp  and  open  air  school"                          38   12.  "The  Iola  boys  are  keen  in  their  interest  in  their  bird  friends,"   "Who  says  these  girls  are  not  healthy  and  happy?,"  "Experts  with  the  skis,"   "A  battery  of  winter  sports  enthusiasts,"  "Joe,  who  is  an  expert  at     weaving  baskets,"  and  "The  Christmas  tree  that  was  made  into  a  gift     to  the  birds"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            39   13.  "The  Iola  boys  are  keen  in  their  interest  in  their  bird  friends,"   "Who  says  these  girls  are  not  healthy  and  happy?,"  and  "Experts  with  the  skis"              40   14.  "A  battery  of  winter  sports  enthusiasts"  and  "Joe,  who  is  an  expert  at     weaving  baskets"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40   15.  "The  Christmas  tree  that  was  made  into  a  gift  to  the  birds"                                                                              41   16.  [Dining  tent  at  Rochester's  tuberculosis  day  camp]                                                                                                                51   17.  [Boys  on  skis  at  Iola]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                52   18.  [Looking  in  a  birdhouse]                                                                                                                                                                                                                  54   19.  [Iola  patients  with  skis]                                                                                                                                                                                                                      55   20.  [Dining  tent  at  Rochester's  tuberculosis  day  camp]                                                                                                                56

  

vi  

  

Introduction  
   This  essay  is  a  case  study  of  sixteen  photographs  of  tuberculosis  treatment  

facilities  taken  by  Rochester,  New  York,  photographer  Albert  R.  Stone.  The  aim  of   my  research  was  to  determine  whether  or  not  Stone's  photographs  were   representative  of  sanatorium  photographs  of  the  early  twentieth  century.  Stone,  the   first  full-time  newspaper  photographer  in  Rochester,  worked  for  the  Rochester   Herald  from  1903  until  1927,  when  the  paper  was  purchased  by  another  local  daily,   the  Democrat  and  Chronicle.1  Between  1909  and  1923,  Stone  photographed  Monroe   County's  tuberculosis  treatment  facilities,  producing  sunny,  optimistic  photographs   that  documented  the  patients  at  Rochester's  day  camp,  outdoor  schools  for  delicate   children,  and  Iola  Sanatorium.  These  photographs  were  published  in  the  newspaper,   many  of  them  in  the  Sunday  rotogravure  picture  section,  with  accompanying   captions  and  the  hand-drawn  art  that  was  widely  employed  at  the  time.     Of  the  75  tuberculosis-related  photographs  that  Stone  produced,  this  paper   will  focus  on  a  mere  sixteen,  eight  each  in  two  stories  published  in  the  Herald:  one   from  1909  that  depicts  the  buildings,  patients  and  medical  staff  at  the  tuberculosis   day  camp;  and  the  other  from  1923  that  depicts  young  Iola  patients  outdoors  in   winter.  Photo  essays  about  the  children  at  Rochester's  outdoor  schools  also  exist,   but  the  outdoor  schools  were  not  exclusively  for  children  with  tuberculosis,  but  

                                                                                                                 1  Leatrice  M.  Kemp,  "Albert  Stone  and  His  Photographs  of  `Afro-Rochester,'"  in   Images:   "Afro-Rochester"   1910-1935,  by  Leatrice  M.  Kemp  and  Victoria  Sandwick   Schmitt  (Rochester,  NY:  Rochester  Museum  &  Science  Center,  1996),  15. 1  

   rather  those  susceptible  to  it  and  other  diseases.  As  such,  they  do  not  fit  the  scope  of   this  paper.   The  Rochester  Museum  &  Science  Center  (RMSC)  houses  Albert  Stone's  glass   plate  negatives.  A  team  of  volunteers  identified  when  the  corresponding   photographs  were  published  in  the  Rochester   Herald.  The  negatives  were  digitized   and  made  available  online  along  with  the  publication  information  and  searchable   categories  (created  by  RMSC  staff,  not  Stone  himself).  I  searched  for  all  of  the   tuberculosis  images,  noted  when  they  were  published,  and  located  them  in  the   Rochester   Herald,  which  is  available  on  microfilm  from  Rochester  Public  Library.   Once  I  had  copies  of  the  published  photographs,  I  was  able  to  narrow  my  selection   from  75  to  sixteen.   I  selected  the  stories  from  among  the  handful  of  tuberculosis-related  articles   that  Stone's  images  illustrated  specifically  because  the  photographs  in  them  were   clearly  the  focus,  not  mere  illustrations  for  text.  For  starters,  each  story  took  up  a   full  page  in  the  newspaper.  What  is  more,  the  photographs  comprised  the  majority   of  the  page,  a  layout  and  design  decision  that  emphasizes  their  importance.  Finally,   the  images  and  their  accompanying  details--the  captions,  titles  and  other  text,  as   well  as  hand  art--form  a  body  of  work  that  presents  two  different  views  of   tuberculosis  in  Rochester,  one  of  adherence  to  the  open-air  routine  at  the  day  camp,   and  the  other  of  cheerful  children  whose  optimistic,  can-do  attitudes  heal  them  and   their  elders.   The  core  of  my  argument,  that  Stone's  photographs  were  typical  of   sanatorium  imagery,  relies  on  Daniel  M.  Fox  and  Christopher  Lawrence's  book,  

  

2  

   Photographing   M edicine:   Images   and   Power  in  Britain  and  America  Since  1840.  The   authors  make  definitive  statements  about  this  kind  of  photography--that  the   images  rarely  contained  visibly  ill  people  or  the  interiors  of  tuberculosis   sanatoriums,  instead  emphasizing  patients'  access  to  the  outdoors  and  the  company   of  others--and  provided  photographic  examples  in  their  book.  After  looking  at   photographs  of  sanatoriums  in  Photographing   M edicine  and  other  sources,  including   reform  journals,  I  determined  that  Albert  Stone's  photographs  were  typical  of  this   kind  of  photography.   While  Photographing   M edicine  defines  the  conventions  of  sanatorium  images,   it  considers  only  the  photographs,  not  the  context  of  their  publication,  if  they  were   in  fact  published.  Because  Stone's  photographs  were  published,  it  is  important  to   deal  with  the  time  period,  their  layout  and  design,  and  the  captions  and  other  text   that  accompanied  the  photographs,  and  what  impact  these  factors  have  on  the   meaning  of  the  images  and  photo  essays  overall.  Therefore,  this  paper  goes  beyond   simply  establishing  that  Stone's  images  were  not  unusual,  to  explore  the  context  of   their  publication.  Doing  so  requires  background  information  about  Stone's  body  of   work  and  where  his  tuberculosis  photos  lie  within  it,  as  well  as  factual  information   about  tuberculosis  and  its  prevention  and  treatment,  and  finally,  how  tuberculosis   was  depicted  and  perceived  photographically  during  the  time  period  in  which  Stone   was  photographing  Rochester's  efforts  to  combat  the  disease.  A  comparison  of   published  photojournalistic  and  reform  photographic  representations  of   tuberculosis,  as  well  as  available  unpublished  photographs  from  archives,  will  

3  

   reveal  that  Stone  was  operating  within  the  conventions  of  sanatorium  photography   in  his  depictions  of  the  disease.   To  the  modern  eye,  the  photographs  appear  to  gloss  over  what  must  have   been  a  grim  subject:  in  1900,  tuberculosis  was  the  leading  cause  of  death  in   Rochester,2  and  nationwide  death  rates  did  not  dip  below  100  per  100,000   population  until  the  1920s.3  It  is  striking,  then,  that  the  1909  photographs  present  a   rather  sterile  view  of  tuberculosis,  one  that  largely  ignores  the  patients'  emotional   experience.  Additionally,  while  the  1923  photographs  are  more  personal  in  that  they   focus  on  the  children  who  lived  at  Iola  instead  of  the  institution's  approach  to   treatment,  the  images  and  text  are  so  optimistic  that  they  fail  to  convey  any  sense  of   the  urgency  that  tuberculosis  was  associated  with  in  the  early  twentieth  century,  as   I  discuss  later  in  this  essay.  Ultimately,  these  qualities  seem  in  such  conflict  with  a   twenty-first  century  notion  of  the  disease  that  the  question  must  be  asked:  are  these   typical  portrayals  of  tuberculosis  in  the  early  twentieth  century?  

Literature  Review  
   Tuberculosis  in  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries  is  a  widely  covered   topic,  and  I  consulted  contemporaneous  resources  from  the  early-  to  mid-twentieth   century,  as  well  as  more  recent  books.  The  American   Review   of   Tuberculosis ,   published  from  1917  to  1954,  contains  information  about  how  the  disease  was   treated  and  perceived  socially  at  the  time;  only  the  years  1917  to  1925  were                                                                                                                    2  David  B.  Brady  and  Albert  D.  Kaiser,  M.D.,  Fifty   Y ears   of   Health   in   Rochester,   New   York,   1900-1950  (Rochester,  NY:  Health  Bureau,  July  1950). 3  Lawrence  Geitner,  Ending   Neglect:   The   Elimination   of   Tuberculosis   in   the   U nited   States   (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  2000),  24.    4  

   consulted  for  this  paper,  as  those  were  the  volumes  published  during  the  time   period  in  which  Stone  was  taking  photographs.4  The  journal  also  contains   photographs,  most  of  them  of  x-rays  and  pathological  specimens,  making  them   irrelevant  to  this  paper.  While  many  of  the  articles  it  published  were  medically  and   scientifically  oriented,  quite  a  few  presented  opinions  on  the  efficacy  of  the   sanatorium  movement  and  other  treatment  methods.  Many  of  the  statements  reveal   attitudes  toward  the  disease  and  its  victims  that  are  difficult  to  gauge  from  more   current  texts,  which  was  helpful  in  constructing  the  social  context  of  tuberculosis  for   this  paper.     Also  consulted  but  of  less  relevance  were  The   J ournal   of   Tuberculosis:   A   Quarterly   M agazine   Devoted   to   the   Prevention   and   Treatment   of   Tuberculosis 5  and  T.B.:   Playing   the   Lone   Game   Consumption,6  both  of  which  offer  contemporary  approaches   to  the  disease  but  ultimately  did  not  contain  as  much  relevant  information  as  the   American   Review.  Walters'  comprehensive  statistical  survey  of  tuberculosis   institutions  provides  insight  into  how  pervasive  sanatoriums  were  in  the  United   States  in  1913,  its  year  of  publication.7   Much  has  been  written  on  tuberculosis  from  a  more  modern  perspective.   While  many  books  address  the  disease's  romantic  connotations  in  nineteenth                                                                                                                    4  Edward  R.  Baldwin,  ed.,  American   Review   of   Tuberculosis:   J ournal   of   the   National   Association   f or   the   Study   and   Prevention   of   Tuberculosis   1-10  (1917-1925).   5  Karl  von  Ruck,  ed.,  The   J ournal   of   Tuberculosis:   A   Quarterly   M agazine   D evoted   to   the   Prevention   and   Treatment  of   Tuberculosis  2  (1900). 6  Thomas  Crawford  Galbreath,  T.B.:   P laying   the   Lone   Game   Consumption,  (New  York:   Journal  of  the  Outdoor  Life  Publishing  Company,  1915). 7  Frederick  Rufenacht  Walters,  Sanatoria   f or   the   Tubercular:   Including   a   D escription   of  M any   Existing  Institutions  and  of  Sanatorium  Treatment  in  Pulmonary  Tuberculosis ,   4th  ed.  (London:  George  Allen  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  1913). 5  

   century  Europe  as  writers,  poets  and  other  artists  succumbed  to  tuberculosis,  Susan   Sontag's  Illness   as   M etaphor  discusses  it  extensively.8  She  posits  that  the  metaphors   associated  with  the  disease--that  it  "consumed"  its  victims;  that  those  victims  were   sensitive  individuals,  beyond  the  indignities  of  mundane  life;  that  it  contributed  to   the  glamour  of  being  pale,  anemic  and  sickly  in  appearance--ignored  the  reality  of   tuberculosis.  Although  I  found  her  interpretation  was  helpful  in  understanding  the   disease's  romantic  associations  and  metaphors,  Stone's  photographs  were  not   metaphors,  they  were  information.   Several  books  offer  various  histories  of  tuberculosis,  many  of  them  following   the  disease  from  its  romantic  connotations  in  nineteenth  century  Europe  to  the   sanatorium  movements  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  in  the  twentieth  century.9   Rothman's  Living   in   the   Shadow   of  Death:  Tuberculosis  and  the  Social  Experience  of   Illness   in   American   History   focuses  on  the  patient,  offering  a  thorough  account  of   how  tubercular  individuals  handled  the  disease  in  the  United  States  between  1810   and  1940,  as  various  trends  in  treatment  gained  in  popularity  over  time.10  All  of   these  resources  were  helpful  in  establishing  a  greater  understanding  of  how   tuberculosis  affected  the  patients'  experiences  living  in  sanatoriums  that  went                                                                                                                    8  Susan  Sontag,  Illness   as   M etaphor  (New  York:  Farrar,  Straus  and  Giroux,  1978). 9  Thomas  M.  Daniel,  Captain   of   D eath:   The   Story   of   Tuberculosis   (Rochester:   University  of  Rochester  Press,  1997);  Thomas  Dormandy,  The   White   Death:   A   History   of  Tuberculosis   (Washington  Square,  NY:  New  York  University  Press,  1999);   Georgina  D.  Feldberg,  Disease  and  Class:  Tuberculosis  and  the  Shaping  of   M odern   North  American  Society ,  (New  Brunswick,  N.J.:  Rutgers  University  Press,  1995);   Sheila  M.  Rothman,  Living   in   the   Shadow  of  Death:  Tuberculosis  and  the  Social   Experience   of   Illness   in   American   History   (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1994);  Katherine   Ott,  Fevered  Lives:  Tuberculosis  in  American  Culture  s ince  1870  (Cambridge,   Massachusetts:  Harvard  University  Press,  1996). 10  Rothman,  Living   in   the   Shadow   of   D eath.    6  

   beyond  statistics  on  recovery  to  consider  their  psychological  wellbeing,  a  subject   that  comes  up  in  some  of  Stone's  photographs  and  the  captions  and  other  text  used   to  describe  them  in  the  Rochester   Herald.     To  provide  contextual  information  on  the  time  period  in  which  Albert  Stone's   photographs  were  created,  I  consulted  Faith  Jaycox's  The   Progressive   Era,  which   offers  a  thorough,  accessible  account  of  the  early  twentieth  century.11  I  also   consulted  several  books  that  addressed  the  relationship  between  photography  and   medicine.  Tanya  Sheehan's  Doctored:  The  M edicine  of  Photography   in  Nineteenth- Century   America  examines  how  photography  and  medicine  in  the  1800s  shared   metaphors  and  practices.  While  she  does  include  a  chapter  on  public  health,  disease   and  photography,  it  is  mostly  to  offer  insight  on  the  connections  between  the   afflictions  of  the  physical  body  and  those  visited  upon  photographs.12     Daniel  M.  Fox  and  Christopher  Lawrence's  Photographing   M edicine:   Images   and  Power   in   Britain   and   America  Since  1840  contains  generalizations  about  the   content  of  sanatorium  photographs  created  between  1880  and  1939,  made  as  a   result  of  the  authors'  analysis  of  medical  photographs  in  archives,  publications  and   private  collections.13  These  generalizations,  discussed  in  greater  detail  further  on  in   this  paper,  form  my  understanding  of  what  were  the  conventions  of  sanatorium   photographs:  that  patients'  proximity  to  the  outdoors  and  companionship  with                                                                                                                    11  Faith  Jaycox,  The   P rogressive   Era  (New  York:  Facts  on  File.  2005). 12  Tanya  Sheehan,  D octored:  The   M edicine   of   P hotography   in   Nineteenth-Century   America  (University  Park,  PA:  The  Pennsylvania  State  University  Press,  2011),  118- 125. 13  Fox  and  Lawrence,  P hotographing   M edicine:   Images   and   P ower   in   Britain   and   America   Since   1840,  (Westport,  CT:  Greenwood  Press,  1988),  327. 7  

   other  consumptives  were  depicted  more  frequently  than  were  visibly  ill  people  and   the  interiors  of  the  institutions.     Two  resources  included  imagery  of  sanatoriums  culled  from  archives  and   publications,  offering  a  selection  of  items  with  which  to  compare  Albert  Stone's   photographs.  The  above-mentioned  Photographing   M edicine  contains  examples  of   the  images  that  embodied  the  authors'  statements  about  the  generalities  of   sanatorium  photographs.  Additionally,  the  Illustrated   Catalogue   of   the   Slide   Archive   of   Historical  M edical  Photographs  at  Stony  Brook  offers  reproductions  of  the  slides  and   the  images'  original  publication  information.14    It  contains  at  least  29  photographs  of   sanatoriums,  patients  and  medical  staff,  all  of  which  informed  Fox  and  Lawrence's   conclusions  about  how  the  disease  was  depicted.  The  Illustrated   Catalogue  became   an  excellent  resource  for  images  to  use  in  comparison  to  Stone's,  as  well  as  through   which  to  discover  publications  containing  tuberculosis  imagery.     Publications  on  early  photojournalism  (pre-1936)  were  valuable  in  building   an  overview  of  the  technological  history  of  photojournalism  leading  up  to  Stone  and   the  Rochester   Herald's  era.  Estelle  Jussim  and  Michael  Carlebach,  in  particular,   consider  early  "documentary"  and  reform  photography,  15  discussions  that  are   perhaps  most  relevant  in  this  paper  for  establishing  what  Stone  was  not,  rather  than   what  he  was.  Finally,  Scoop   Scandal  and  Strife:  A  Study  of  Photography  in  Newspapers ,                                                                                                                    14  Rima  D.  Apple,  compiler,  Illustrated   Catalogue   of   the   Slide   Archive   of   Historical   Medical   Photographs   at   Stony   Brook  (Westport,  CT:  Greenwood  Press,  1984). 15  Michael  L.  Carlebach,  The   Origins   of   P hotojournalism   in   American  (Washington,   D.C.:  Smithsonian  Institution  Press,  1992);  Estelle  Jussim,  `"The  Tyranny  of  the   Pictorial':  American  Photojournalism  from  1880  to  1920,"  in  Eyes   of   Time:   Photojournalism   in   America,  ed.  Marianne  Fulton  (Boston:  Little,  Brown,  1988),  37- 74.    8  

   examined  photojournalism  from  a  British  point  of  view,16  highlighting  the  fact  that   American  newspapers  in  fact  lagged  behind  their  English  counterparts  in   recognizing  the  value  of  newspaper  photography.  However,  it  is  no  surprise  that  the   Rochester   Herald,  in  the  city  of  Kodak  and  George  Eastman,  embraced  photography   in  its  pages  early  on.17   In  attempting  to  piece  together  the  story  of  the  early  newspaper   photographer  and  his  likely  assignments,  information  that  helped  ground  Stone's   overall  body  of  work,  the  most  useful  resource  was  Get   That   Picture!   The   Story   of   the   News  Cameraman,  by  J.A.  Ezickson.18  Focusing  primarily  on  the  evolution  of  the   picture  syndicate,  it,  too,  provided  some  context  for  what  the  Rochester  Herald  and   Albert  Stone  were  not.  However,  Ezickson  does  include  some  useful  information   about  the  sometimes  exciting,  often  dull  stories  a  news  photographer  could  expect   to  cover  in  the  1920s  and  `30s,19  which  validated  many  of  the  subjects  under  which   Stone's  photographs  are  categorized.   Several  resources  were  helpful  in  establishing  the  prevalence  of  the  hand   drawn  art  that  appears  in  the  second  of  Stone's  photo  essays.  Raymond  Smith                                                                                                                    16  Ken  Baynes  et  al.,  Scoop   Scandal   and   Strife:   A   Study   of   P hotography   in   Newspapers    (London:  Hastings  House,  1971). 17 Photographs  seem  to  have  been  introduced  into  the  pages  of  the  Herald  gradually.   On  Friday,  September  6,  1901,  a  photographic  reproduction  appears  in  an   advertisement,  and  by  1902,  at  least  one  ad  featuring  a  photograph  was  run   regularly.  The  first  instance  of  a  photograph  used  in  an  article  that  I  could  find  came   on  February  24,  1902,  with  portraits  of  Kaiser  Wilhelm  and  his  family.  It  wasn't  until   1903,  the  year  that  the  Herald  hired  Stone,  that  photographs  are  used  regularly  to   illustrate  articles. 18  J.  Ezickson,  Get   That   P icture!   The   Story   of   the   News   Cameraman,  (New  York:   National  Library  Press,  1938). 19  Ibid.,  122. 9  

   Schuneman's  1966  Ph.D.  dissertation  offers  a  thorough  statistical  analysis  of  the  use   of  photographs  in  a  selection  of  New  York  City's  daily  newspapers  between  1890   and  1937,  as  well  as  qualitative  information  on  how  the  photographs  were   presented.20  He  pinpoints  the  period  between  1911  and  1919  as  when  newspapers   began  presenting  photographs  with  fanciful  decorations  and  in  unusual  shapes.21   Hoffer  also  mentions  the  prevalence  of  this  type  of  treatment  in  early  photo  essays,   suggesting  that  picture  editors  of  the  time  did  not  recognize  the  photograph's   inherent  ability  to  communicate  information,  and  as  a  result  used  "complicated   flourishes"  and  crowded  layouts.22  Indeed,  picture  editing  manuals  of  the  1970s   warn  the  reader  against  "amazingly  ugly  jumbles  of  odd  shapes  and  silhouettes"23   and  state  that  the  editor's  lack  of  respect  for  photographs  is  evident  in  "the  mortises,   the  blockouts,  the  insets,  the  many  techniques  of  `design'  that  only  despoil."24  While   it  is  never  explicitly  stated,  the  hostility  towards  decoration  and  fanciful  shapes   suggests  that  these  were  widespread  conventions  of  early  photojournalism  that   experienced  a  backlash  in  the  1970s.   Local  resources  proved  invaluable  in  telling  the  stories  of  Albert  Stone,  the   Rochester   Herald,  tuberculosis  in  Rochester,  and  Iola  Sanatorium.  Leatrice  M.  Kemp                                                                                                                    20  Raymond  Smith  Schuneman,  "The  Photograph  in  Print:  An  Examination  of  New   York  Daily  Newspapers,  1890-1937"  (PhD  diss.,  University  of  Minnesota,  1966). 21  Ibid.,  263-280. 22  Mary  Jane  Hoffer,  "Technical  and  Aesthetic  Developments  of  the  Photo-Essay,"   (EdD  diss.,  Columbia  University  Teacher's  College,  1984),  105. 23  Laura  Vitray,  John  Mills,  Jr.  and  Roscoe  Ellard,  P ictorial   P hotojournalism   (New   York:  Arno  Press,  1973). 24  Gerald  D.  Hurley  and  Angus  McDougall,  Visual   Impact   in   P rint:   How   to   M ake   Pictures   Communicate;   A   Guide   f or   the   Photographer,  the   Editor,   the   Designer.   (Chicago:  Visual  Impact,  1971),158.      10  

   and  Victoria  Sandwick  Schmitt's  Images:   "Afro-Rochester"   1910-1935  provided   biographical  information  about  Stone  and  included  a  brief  discussion  of  Stone  as  a   news  photographer  anld  a  photojournalist  and  the  differences  between  them.25   William  F.  Peck's  book  on  the  history  of  Rochester  included  a  section  that  recounted   the  history  of  the  local  press,  including  information  about  the  political  allegiances  of   the  local  newspapers.26  Brady  and  Kaiser's  Fifty  Y ears  of  Health  in  Rochester,  New   York,   1900-1950  contained  statistical  information  about  the  local  death  rate  from   tuberculosis,  which  fit  into  national  statistics  found  elsewhere  and  created  a  local   connection  to  the  disease.27  "The  History  of  Public  Health  in  Rochester,  New  York,"   by  Blake  McKelvey,  provided  details  about  the  Public  Health  Association's  role  in  the   conception  and  construction  of  Iola.28  Iola's  own  Circular  of  Information  and  Annual   Report,  published  from  1912  to  1960,29  contained  historical  information  about  the   sanatorium.     Overall,  this  research  was  instrumental  in  establishing  not  only  the  context  of   the  disease  and  the  time  period  in  which  Stone  was  photographing,  but  also  how   sanatoriums  were  generally  depicted  in  Stone's  time.  Understanding  the                                                                                                                    25  Leatrice  M.  Kemp,  "Albert  Stone  and  His  Photographs  of  `Afro-Rochester,'"  in   Images:   "Afro-Rochester"   1910-1935,  by  Leatrice  M.  Kemp  and  Victoria  Sandwick   Schmitt  (Rochester,  NY:  Rochester  Museum  &  Science  Center,  1996),  15. 26  William  F.  Peck,  History   of   Rochester   and   M onroe   County   New   Y ork,   From   the   Earliest   Historic   Times   to   the   Beginning   of   1907.  Illustrated  with  Maps,  Portraits  and   Views.  Also  Biographical  Sketches  of  Some  of  the  More  Prominent  Citizens  of   Rochester  and  Monroe  County  (New  York:  The  Pioneer  Publishing  Company,  1908). 27  David  B.  Brady  and  Albert  D.  Kaiser,  M.D.,  Fifty   Y ears   of   Health   in   Rochester,   New   York,   1900-1950  (Rochester,  NY:  Health  Bureau,  July  1950). 28  Blake  McKelvey,  "The  History  of  Public  Health  in  Rochester,  New  York,"  Rochester   History  18,  no.  3  (July  1956). 29  Iola  Sanatorium,  Monroe  County  Tuberculosis  Hospital,  Circular   of   Information   and  Annual   Report,  1912-1960.   11  

   conventions  of  this  kind  of  photography--that  sanatoriums  were  pictured  as  bright   institutions  where  people  could  recover  in  fresh  air  and  good  company,  and  that  ill   people  and  the  interiors  of  sanatoriums  were  rarely  shown--and  looking  at   photographs  that  upheld  them  were  crucial  to  my  own  research,  as  it  provided  the   basis  for  comparison  and  ultimately  helped  me  reach  the  conclusion  that  Stone's   photographs  represent  a  common  perspective.  However,  even  though  Stone's   photographs  are  typical  of  sanatorium  imagery  of  his  day,  the  details  of  their   publication--the  newspaper  in  which  they  appeared,  their  deliberate  arrangement,   how  they  were  paired  with  text,  and  the  eras  in  which  they  were  produced--lend   them  a  complexity  that  goes  beyond  their  conventional  content.    

Tuberculosis  in  the  United  States    
   It  is  difficult,  in  the  United  States  in  the  second  decade  of  the  twenty-first   century,  to  imagine  the  impact  of  tuberculosis  on  life  in  the  beginning  of  the   twentieth.  While  the  disease  has  long  had  a  romantic  connotation,  as  writers,  poets   and  other  artists  succumbed  to  tuberculosis  in  nineteenth-century  Europe,  it  was   primarily  a  disease  of  the  poor,  whose  employment  and  living  conditions   contributed  to  its  spread.  Laboring  side-by-side  in  poorly  ventilated,  overcrowded   factories  and  sleeping  in  similarly  unventilated,  also  overcrowded  rooms  at  night,   the  destitute  in  Britain  and  the  United  States  were  afflicted  by  tuberculosis.    

  

12  

   In  the  United  States,  almost  a  quarter  of  the  deaths  in  the  mid-1800s  could  be   attributed  to  tuberculosis  in  Providence,  Rhode  Island,  and  New  York,  New  York;30   the  death  rate  for  tuberculosis  was  about  15%  in  Philadelphia.31  In  1900,  the  death   rate  country-wide  for  tuberculosis  was  around  200  per  100,000  individuals,  and  by   1920  it  was  down  to  either  10632  or  99,  33  depending  on  who  was  presenting  the   figures.  Charles  Frederick  Weller's  Neglected  Neighbors:  Stories  of  Life  in  the  Alleys,   Tenements   and   Shanties   in   the   National   Capital,  provides  some  insight  into  how   prevalent  tuberculosis  was  in  inner  cities.  In  a  section  titled,  "The  Alleys  Have  Many   `Lung  Blocks,'"  he  writes,     In  the  Sammons  household,  as  in  countless  others,  tuberculosis  is  the  family   skeleton,  the  ever  haunting  dread.  Just  when  the  house  in  which  this  family   live  became  infected  we  do  not  know.  Amy  Raymond  died  here  of   consumption  before  they  moved  into  the  house;  but  they  themselves  must   have  left  the  germs  behind  them  in  other  houses,  for  they  had  two  sons  who   died  of  the  white  plague  within  recent  years.  In  the  house  next  door  to  their   present  abode,  where  they  lived  for  a  time,  another  victim  is  dying  of  the   same  disease.34      Weller's  passage  illustrates  how  people  in  urban  centers  unwittingly  spread  the   disease  and  how  common  it  was  in  cities.  

                                                                                                                 30  Geiter,  Ending   Neglect:   The   Elimination   of   Tuberculosis   in   the   U nited   States    (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  2000),  23.  The  death  rate  was  24%  in   Providence  and  23%  in  NYC.   31  Ibid.,  23. 32  Haven  Emerson,  "The  Causes  of  the  Rapidly  Increasing  Fall  of  the  Tuberculosis   Death  Rate  in  the  Last  Five  Years,"  in  American   Review   of   Tuberculosis   6,  no.  4  (June   1922),  304. 33  Lawrason  Brown,  "The  Future  of  Tuberculosis  Work  in  America:  Presidential   Address,"  in  American   Review   of   Tuberculosis   7,  no.  4  (June  1923),  219.   34  Weller,  Neglected   Neighbors ,  (Philadelphia:  The  John  C.  Winston  Company,  1909),   23.   13  

   Consistent  with  nationwide  statistics,  the  death  rate  in  1900  for  tuberculosis   in  Rochester,  New  York,  was  175  per  100,000  population,  making  it  the  leading   cause  of  death.35  It  was  not  until  1925  that  the  death  rate  dipped  permanently   below  75  per  100,000  population  in  Rochester,  after  which  time  it  declined   precipitously.36  By  the  1920s,  tuberculosis  had  been  in  general  decline  for  some   time37  and  reports  were  calling  for  reproducing  factors  elsewhere  that  had   drastically  lowered  the  death  rate  in  New  York  City  since  1870.  It  was  hoped  that   these  factors--public  health  education,  tenement  reform,  the  establishment  of   sanatoria  and  more--would  eventually  lead  to  "the  eradication  of  tuberculosis  as  a   disease  of  importance  within  the  next  twenty  years"  in  the  United  States.38  Still,  it   was  a  major  concern  in  the  period  between  1910  and  1930,  when  Stone  was   photographing  the  day  camp  and  Iola  Sanatorium.     While  tuberculosis  afflicted  the  populations  of  Europe  and  the  United  States   in  the  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  centuries,  its  cause  was  not  well  understood.   In  mid-nineteenth  century  France  and  Britain,  tuberculosis  was  thought  to  be  a   hereditary  disease  exacerbated  by  poverty  and  squalor.39  Many  members  of  the   same  family  dying  from  tuberculosis,  and  the  high  rates  of  the  disease  among  the                                                                                                                    35  Brady  and  Kaiser,  Fifty   Y ears   of   Health   in   Rochester,  22. 36  Ibid. 37  Emerson,  "The  Causes  of  the  Rapidly  Increasing  Fall  of  the  Tuberculosis  Death   Rate  in  the  Last  Five  Years,"  283-4.  The  death  rate  in  New  York  City  was  cited  as   having  fallen  77.9%  in  the  "past  fifty  years,"  which  would  mean  that  the  death  rate   had  been  falling  since  1870. 38  Emerson,  "The  Causes  of  the  Rapidly  Increasing  Fall  of  the  Tuberculosis  Death   Rate  in  the  Last  Five  Years,"  283. 39  Peter  Warren,  "The  Evolution  of  the  Sanatorium:  The  First  Half-Century,  1854- 1904,"  Canadian   Bulletin   of   M edical  History   23,  no.  2  (2006):  458.    14  

   poor  supported  these  theories,  and  even  after  Robert  Koch's  discovery  of  the   tuberculosis  bacillus  in  1882,  they  persisted.40   The  association  of  tuberculosis  prevention  and  recovery  with  open  air  and   mild  climates  began  in  1835,  when  James  Clark,  a  leading  consumption  expert,   recommended  that  susceptible,  delicate  children  be  raised  in  the  country,  away   from  the  foul  air  of  cities,  and  take  exercise  in  the  open  air  to  strengthen  their   bodies  and  improve  their  circulation.41  While  consumptives  could  "take  the  cure"  in   their  homes,  many  sought  treatment  in  sanatoriums,  institutions  designed  for  the   care  of  the  tubercular.     Sanatoriums  in  the  United  States  owe  their  existence  to  Edward  Trudeau.  A   physician  and  tuberculosis  patient  himself,  Trudeau  spent  what  he  assumed  were   his  final  days  in  the  Adirondack  Mountains  of  New  York.  When  he  recovered  from   the  illness,  he  read  about  European  sanatoriums  and,  appealing  to  wealthy  New   Yorkers,  raised  funds  to  start  his  own  in  the  Adirondacks  in  1885.42  A  mere  thirty   years  later,  there  were  218  sanatoriums  in  the  northern  Atlantic  states  alone.43  It  is   important  to  note  that  the  sanatorium  movement  in  the  United  States  was  a  large- scale  charity  project,  born  of  the  desire  to  "liberate"  the  victims  of  tuberculosis  from   the  unfortunate  circumstances  in  which  they  found  themselves.44    

                                                                                                                 40  Peter  Warren,  "The  Evolution  of  the  Sanatorium,",  460. 41  Ibid.,  459. 42  Ibid,  464. 43  Frederick  Rufenacht  Walters,  Sanatoria   f or   the   Tubercular:   Including   a   D escription   of  M any   Existing   Institutions   and   of  Sanatorium  Treatment  in  Pulmonary  Tuberculosis    (Fourth  Edition.  London:  George  Allen  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  1913). 44  Rothman,  Living   in   the   Shadow   of   D eath,  205. 15  

   American  sanatoriums  tended  to  look  to  the  Trudeau  model,  which  in  turn   followed  the  regimen  developed  in  Europe:  rich  diets,  lots  of  rest  and  fresh  air,  and   hygiene  were  the  major  components  of  the  sanatorium  routine.45  In  1918,  George  E.   Bushnell  weighed  in  on  the  "tripod  of  treatment":  an  "abundance  of  pure  air,  rest  to   restore  the  weakened  nerves  of  the  patient  and  lower  demands  on  his  reparative   powers,  and  good  food  well  assimilated."46  This  "tripod  of  treatment"  mimics  the   conventions  of  sanatorium  photographs,  which  also  often  pictured  the  patient  in  the   open  air,  resting  and  recovering.  

Iola  Sanatorium:  Monroe  County  Tuberculosis  Hospital  
   In  Rochester,  the  Public  Health  Association,  formed  in  1895,  stepped  in  to   help  combat  tuberculosis  in  1908,  when  it  established  a  day  camp  for  the  care  of  the   tubercular.47  The  city  of  Rochester  and  Monroe  County  merged  their  efforts  to   combat  tuberculosis  in  1910,  and  on  October  1  of  that  year,  Iola  Sanatorium  opened   with  ten  patients  in  a  temporary  building.48  It  accepted  all  cases  of  tuberculosis,   regardless  of  the  severity.  By  1912,  the  institution  had  expanded:  on  July  4,  it  added   Monroe  County's  second  open-air  school,  this  one  for  children  with  active   tuberculosis;  and  boasted  several  permanent  buildings,  including  a  pavilion  for   earlier  cases  of  tuberculosis,  two  for  advanced  cases,  and  a  children's  pavilion.49  Iola  

                                                                                                                 45  Ibid,  203-5. 46  George  E.  Bushnell,  "The  Treatment  of  Tuberculosis,"  in  American   Review   of   Tuberculosis   2  no.  5  (July  1918),  261. 47  McKelvey,  "The  History  of  Public  Health  in  Rochester,  New  York,"  20. 48  Iola  Sanatorium,  Circular   of   Information   and   Annual   Report,  1912,  3. 49  Iola  Sanatorium,  Circular   of   Information   and   Annual   Report,  1913,  9.    16  

   operated  as  a  sanatorium,  and  later  as  a  dispensary  and  outpatient  clinic,  from  1910   until  1961,  when  the  institution's  services  were  no  longer  needed.   Photographs  of  Iola  were  sometimes  published  in  the  institution's  Annual   Reports,  especially  in  the  1920s.  The  images  can  be  divided  into  two  categories:   those  of  the  exteriors  of  the  buildings,  and  those  that  followed  the  children  of  Iola  as   they  played  outdoors  in  the  snow,  exercised,  ate,  attended  classes  and  received   medical  attention  of  one  kind  or  another.  While  there  is  no  mention  of  the   photographer  in  any  of  the  annual  reports,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  Albert  Stone  took  at   least  six  of  the  photographs,  since  the  Annual  Report  for  1922  published  the  six   photographs  of  children  at  Iola  that  also  appeared  in  the  January  28,  1923  article  in   the  Rochester   Herald  that  is  one  of  the  foci  of  this  paper.  In  contrast  to  the   newspaper  article,  the  images  are  presented  simply,  with  no  hand  art,  captions  or   other  text.  Because  the  photographer  is  never  credited  or  identified  in  any  of  the   annual  reports,  it  is  unclear  whether  Stone  made  the  other  images.  None  of  the  other   photographs  from  the  annual  reports  appear  in  the  Rochester  Museum  &  Science   Center's  database.  However,  because  some  of  Stone's  negatives  were  broken  upon   transport  and  it  is  entirely  possible  that  some  were  lost  long  before,  Stone  might   have  been  responsible  for  the  additional  images  that  appear  in  the  annual  reports.    

Early  Photojournalism  and  Albert  R.  Stone  
   By  1903,  when  Albert  Stone  became  a  full-time  photographer  for  the   Rochester   Herald,  photography  was  a  well-established  means  of  visually   documenting  people,  places  and  events.  Even  before  the  technology  existed  to  

17  

   reproduce  photographs  in  newspapers,  wood  engravings  were  used  in  illustrated   papers  such  as  the  Illustrated   News ,  Leslie's  Illustrated  and  Harper's  Weekly   from  the   1850s  onward.50  The  October  18,  1862  issue  of  Harper's  Weekly   ran  eight  wood   engravings  after  Alexander  Gardner's  photographs  of  the  Civil  War,  a  significant   moment  in  the  history  of  photojournalism,  since  prior  to  as  well  as  after  the  war,   illustrated  papers  employed  sketch  artists  to  produce  illustrations  of  news  events.51   In  the  years  between  the  end  of  the  war  and  the  rise  of  professional  photojournalists   in  the  1890s52,  stereo  views  proliferated  and  were  widely  disseminated.53  On  March   4,  1880,  the  New  Y ork  Daily  Graphic  published  the  first  half-tone  photograph,  an   image  titled,  "A  Scene  of  Shantytown,  New  York,"  by  Stephen  H.  Horgan.54  It  was  not   until  January  21,  1897,  however,  that  Horgan  was  able  to  develop  the  technology  for   the  consistent  inclusion  of  halftone  photographs  in  newspapers.55     Publishing  tycoons  in  Great  Britain  were  quick  to  realize  the  enormous   potential  for  using  photographs  in  newspapers  instead  of  engravings--London's   Daily  M irror,  using  only  photographs  for  illustrations,  was  established  in  1904  as   the  first  newspaper  in  the  world  to  do  so,  while  in  the  United  States,  the  Illustrated                                                                                                                    50  William  Stapp,  "'Subjects  of  Strange  ...  and  of  fearful  interest':  Photojournalism   from  Its  Beginnings  in  1839"  in  Eyes   of   Time:   Photojournalism   in   America  by   Marianne  Fulton  with  contributions  by  Estelle  Jussim,  Colin  Osman  and  Sandra  S.   Phillips,  and  William  Stapp  (Boston:  Little,  Brown  and  Company,  1988),  31. 51  Ibid.,  31.   52  William  Stapp,  "'Subjects  of  Strange  ...  and  of  fearful  interest,'"  31. 53  Carlebach,  Origins   of   P hotojournalism ,  51. 54  Estelle  Jussim,  "'The  Tyranny  of  the  Pictorial':  American  Photojournalism  from   1880  to  1920,"  in  Eyes   of   Time:   Photojournalism   in   America  by  Marianne  Fulton  with   contributions  by  Estelle  Jussim,  Colin  Osman  and  Sandra  S.  Phillips,  and  William   Stapp  (Boston:  Little,  Brown  and  Company,  1988),  44. 55  Ibid.    18  

   Daily  News ,  the  M irror's  American  counterpart,  was  not  introduced  until  1919.56  In   the  early  twentieth  century,  the  rotogravure  printing  technique  was  perfected.  It   used  an  intaglio  process  that  allowed  high-quality  photographs  and  text  to  be   printed  on  the  same  sheet,  and  enjoyed  widespread  popularity  in  the  United  States,   and  newspapers  all  over  the  country  featured  rotogravure  supplements  in  their   weekend  editions.57   Rochester  in  the  early  twentieth  century  was  a  city  with  many  newspapers.   The  first  weekly  paper  was  started  in  1816;  the  first  daily,  in  1826.58  Newspapers   identified  with  the  political  parties  of  the  day,  and  several  of  the  city's  papers  were   born  out  of  presidential  campaigns  in  the  mid-1800s.  The  M orning   Herald  was   created  in  1879  and  a  change  in  ownership  in  1892  recast  it  as  the  Rochester   Herald.59  According  to  William  F.  Peck,  a  Rochester  historian,  the  paper  was   Democratic  politically  but  maintained  independence  by  occasionally  supporting   Republican  candidates  and  not  always  supporting  Democratic  ones.60  However,  in   an  article  marking  the  Herald's  fortieth  anniversary,  Samuel  D.  Lee,  one  of  the   paper's  founders,  claimed  that  it  was  politically  independent.61  Interestingly,  Lee   noted  that  the  Herald,  unlike  some  of  the  other  local  newspapers,  was  concerned                                                                                                                    56  Baynes  et  al.,  Scoop   Scandal   and   Strife 57  Luis  Nadeau,  "Rotogravure,"  in  Encyclopedia   of   P rinting,   P hotographic,   and   Photomechanical   Processes:   A   Comprehensive   Reference   to   Reproduction   Technologies,   containing  invaluable  information  on  over  1500  processes ,  (Fredericton,  New   Brunswick:  Atelier  Luis  Nadeau,  1990). 58  William  F.  Peck,  History   of   Rochester   and   M onroe   County   New   Y ork,   From   the   Earliest   Historic   Times   to   the   Beginning   of   1907,  191-2.   59  Ibid.,  196. 60  Ibid.,  197. 61  Samuel  D.  Lee,  "The  Beginning  of  the  Herald,"  Rochester   Herald  (Rochester,  NY),   Aug.  5,  1919. 19  

   with  issues  beyond  politics,  most  notably  city  concerns.62  Like  many  American   newspapers,  the  Herald's  Sunday  issue  included  a  rotogravure  supplement.  In  1926,   the  Herald  was  purchased  by  the  Democrat  and  Chronicle,  which  remains  Rochester's   main  daily  paper.   Albert  Stone  was  hired  to  be  a  full-time  photographer  for  the  Herald  in  1903,   only  six  years  after  it  was  technologically  possible  to  publish  halftone  photographs   with  any  consistency,  which  suggests  that  the  Herald's  editors  understood  early  on   the  camera's  utility  as  an  illustrative  tool.  Also  significant  is  that  the  paper  decided   to  use  its  own  photographer,  rather  than  relying  solely  on  picture  syndicates  as   many  newspapers  did,  as  it  suggests  that  Stone's  ability  to  capture  Rochester's   news,  events  and  people  was  appreciated  by  the  paper's  editors.  Finally,  Stone's   photographs  appeared  in  the  Sunday  rotogravure  as  stories  told  primarily   photographically  as  early  as  at  least  1909,  a  sign  that  suggests  that  readers  were   eager  for  more  photographs  of  life  and  goings-on  in  Rochester  beyond  breaking   news  captured  photographically.  Overall,  the  Rochester   Herald,  in  a  city  that  claimed   George  Eastman  and  Kodak,  was  committed  to  photography's  staying  power  as  a   medium  through  which  to  transmit  information.   Also  influencing  photojournalism  was  the  development  of  camera   technology.  Even  as  George  Eastman's  lightweight  and  hand-held  Kodak  and   Brownie  cameras  spawned  the  amateur  photography  craze  in  1890,   photojournalists  continued  to  use  8x10  cameras  until  William  F.  Folmer  introduced  

                                                                                                                 62  Ibid.    20  

   the  Graflex  in  1898.63  While  it  is  not  known  whether  Stone  used  a  Graflex  or  similar   portable  camera,  he  certainly  preferred  large  format  cameras  to  the  smaller   amateur  ones.    

Albert  R.  Stone's  Body  of  Work  
   The  Rochester  Museum  &  Science  Center  acquired  approximately  15,000  of  

Albert  Stone's  black-and-white  glass-plate  negatives  from  his  granddaughter  in   194264,  13,551  of  which  have  been  digitized,  catalogued,  and  made  available  online.   Because  the  images  have  been  subject  catalogued  by  the  RMSC  under  almost  3000   different  subject  headings,65  it  is  possible  to  get  a  sense  of  the  diversity  of  Stone's   photographs  without  reviewing  them  all.  In  order,  the  top  ten  subjects  and  the   number  of  images  in  each  subject  area  are  as  follows:  Parades  and  processions   (606),  Men  (423),  Horses  (398),  Automobiles  (300),  Parks  (297),  Horse  shows   (291),  Police  (280),  Winter  (241),  Soldiers  (239),  and  Baseball  players  (277).  To  get   a  more  complete  idea  of  what  a  newspaper  photographer  was  covering  in  the  first   three  decades  of  the  twentieth  century,  here  are  several  more  subjects:  Mayors   (194),  World  War,  1914-1918  (137),  Traffic  accidents  (76),  Subways--Design  and   construction  (72),  and  Children  playing  outdoors  (57).     Stone's  body  of  work  probably  reflects  the  kinds  of  things  a  man  in  his   profession  could  have  expected  to  cover.  J.A.  Ezickson,  in  Get   That   Picture!   The   Story                                                                                                                    63  Michael  L.  Carlebach,  American   P hotojournalism   Comes   of   Age  (Washington  :   Smithsonian  Institution  Press,  1997),  24. 64  Steve  Fennessy,  "A  legacy,  finally  unfolded,"  D emocrat   and   Chronicle. 65  The  subject  categories  were  derived  from  Library  of  Congress  Thesaurus  for   Graphic  Materials,  Library  of  Congress  Subject  Headings  and  Getty  Art  and   Architecture  Thesaurus.  Local  subject  headings  developed  by  the  Rochester  Public   Library  and  RMSC  were  also  used.     21  

   of  the   News   Cameraman,  wrote,  "Not  every  story  is  a  shipwreck,  five-alarm  fire  or   plane  disaster.  He  follows  life  in  its  true  course,  the  moments  and  incidents  that  are   dull  and  drab.  His  daily  assignments  follow  the  uninteresting  routine  of  club   meetings,  dinners  and  cornerstone  layings  ...  It  is  not  for  him  to  choose,  it  is  for  him   to  do  his  duty  and  do  it  well."66  Therefore,  the  mundane  subjects  that  top  the  list  of   categories  into  which  Stone's  photographs  fall  is  probably  typical.   In  this  list  of  the  usual  coverage  of  city  events  and  celebrations,  important   figures  and  world  news,  where  does  tuberculosis  fit  in?  There  are  three  subject   headings  related  to  tuberculosis:  Tuberculosis  (41),  Tuberculosis--Hospitals  (34),   and  Sanatoriums  (34).  However,  all  34  images  in  the  latter  categories  share  both   subject  headings,  so  that  the  total  number  of  photographs  related  to  the  disease  to   75.  By  comparison,  there  are  more  photographs  related  to  tuberculosis  than  there   are  of  Government  officials  (60),  Labor  unions  (55),  and  Floods--Genesee  River  (Pa.   and  N.Y.)  (68),  and  as  many  photos  listed  under  the  subject  headings  Homicides,   Subways,  Track  Athletes,  and  Hats.  While  the  number  of  tuberculosis-related   photographs  is  small  in  comparison  to  the  number  of  photos  Stone  took  of  parades   and  parks,  it  is  not  insignificant.  It  is  impossible  to  say  whether  these  numbers  mean   that  tuberculosis  treatment  stories  were  more  important  than,  say,  government   officials,  but  its  ongoing  coverage  does  suggest  at  the  very  least  that  Rochester's   efforts  to  fight  tuberculosis  were  not  ignored.   The  photographic  coverage  of  the  city's  struggle  against  the  disease  was  not   limited  to  the  two  stories  examined  in  this  paper,  as  evident  by  the  numbers                                                                                                                    66  Ezickson,  Get   That   P icture!,  122.    22  

   provided  above.  On  March  20,  1910,  a  short  article  called,  "Rochester's  Tuberculosis   Open  Air  School"  was  published,  with  three  photographs  of  the  school  printed  in  the   rotogravure  section,  pages  away  from  the  text.67  The  article  explained  that  the   school  was  not  only  for  children  with  tuberculosis,  but  for  any  child  examined  by  a   particular  doctor  and  found  to  be  delicate.  The  three  photographs  showed  the   students  in  the  classroom  eating  breakfast,  studying  and  resting,  and  the  captions   provided  information  about  the  nature  of  the  school  day,  the  children's  exposure  to   fresh  air,  and  two  boys'  weight  gain  which  allowed  them  to  return  to  their  regular   classroom.     In  1911,  Stone  revisited  the  open  air  school  and  on  February  19,  a  page  was   published  in  the  rotogravure  section  featuring  six  photographs  of  children  playing   in  the  snow.68  While  these  two  stories  about  the  open  air  school  seem  to  fit  into  this   paper's  topic  and  mesh  well  with  the  other  selections  in  the  number  and  use  of   photographs,  the  1911  story's  text  reveals  that  the  school  was  not  actually  meant  for   ill  pupils:  "It  is  a  strict  regulation  of  the  school  that  backward  children,  or  those   suffering  from  any  contagious  disease,  are  not  to  be  enrolled."69  Thus,  the  school   was  meant  for  children  at  risk  of  getting  tuberculosis  or  other  diseases,  not  for   children  who  were  already  ill,  and  therefore  photographs  of  it  do  not  fit  the  scope  of   this  paper.   Stone  and  the  Herald  did  publish  more  photographs  of  Iola  and  Rochester's   other  efforts  to  combat  tuberculosis  than  will  be  discussed  in  detail  in  this  paper.  On                                                                                                                    67  "Rochester's  Tuberculosis  Open  Air  School,"  Rochester   Herald  (Rochester,  NY),   Mar.  20,  1910. 68  Rochester   Herald  (Rochester,  NY),  Feb.  19,  1911. 69  Ibid. 23  

   June  8,  1911,  five  photographs  documenting  the  construction  of  Iola  were  printed,   along  with  a  brief  article  about  the  institution.70  The  photographs  are  different  from   the  ones  chosen  for  this  paper  in  that  they  appeared  in  the  regular  part  of  the   newspaper,  not  the  rotogravure  section,  and  because  they  did  not  focus  on  the   human  side  of  the  disease,  do  not  add  much  to  this  investigation  of  how  tuberculosis   was  pictured  socially.   Also  in  1911,  two  photographs  were  printed  in  a  short  article  titled,  "Good   Food  and  Outdoor  Exercise  Given  Rochester  Children  at  Tuberculosis  Pavilion  at   Summerville,"  on  July  19.71  The  text  described  the  two-week  summer  camp  for  boys,   describing  the  activities  and  preventive  measures  the  boys  could  expect  to  enjoy  at   the  camp.  The  photographs  show  the  head  nurse  with  two  of  the  boys  and  the  nurse   posed  in  a  group  with  all  of  them,  respectively.  While  these  photographs  do  offer   something  about  the  human  aspect  of  how  the  disease  was  treated  in  Rochester,  this   paper  focuses  on  the  two  tuberculosis-related  "photo  essays"  that  were  printed  in   the  rotogravure  section  specifically  because  the  photographs  were  clearly  the  focus   of  those  stories,  not  mere  illustration  for  text.  

Albert  R.  Stone's  Tuberculosis  Photo  Essays  in  the  Rochester  Herald  
      Stone's  photo  essay  about  the  tuberculosis  day  camp  was  published  in  1909,  

during  what  historians  now  refer  to  as  the  Progressive  Era.  It  is  considered  to  have   lasted  from  1890  until  1920,  and  was  a  response  to  the  changes  that  had  occurred  in                                                                                                                    70  "Iola  Sanatorium  for  Tuberculosis  Patients,"  Rochester   Herald  (Rochester,  NY),   June  8,  1911. 71  Rochester   Herald.    24  

   almost  every  aspect  of  American  life  as  the  country  became  urban  and  modern.72   Suffragists  were  actively  campaigning  for  voting  rights  for  women.  The  United   States  was  experiencing  its  heaviest-ever  decade  of  immigration  as  foreigners   poured  into  its  cities.  It  had  yet  to  establish  itself  as  a  participant  in  global  conflict.   And  finally,  the  reform  movement  was  on  the  rise,  as  ordinary  people  sought  to  end   the  dysfunction,  corruption  and  injustice  in  the  world  around  them.  The  biggest   public  health  campaign  of  the  Progressive  Era  was  the  fight  against  tuberculosis,   and  state  sanatoria  were  largely  created  due  to  reformers'  demands.73  It  was  during   this  period  of  great  change  and  tumult  that  Albert  Stone  was  photographing   Rochester's  tuberculosis  day  camp.      By  1923,  the  year  in  which  "Up  at  Iola:  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  In  

Hand"  was  published,  that  had  all  changed.  The  19th  Amendment  to  the  U.S.   Constitution  had  given  women  voting  rights  nationwide.  The  steady  stream  of   immigrants  had  ebbed  in  the  wake  of  World  War  I,  which  also  ended  the  country's   isolationist  policy  in  foreign  affairs.  Agitation  and  reform,  in  1909  the  instruments  of   social  change,  were  perceived  as  the  tools  of  Bolshevik  revolutionaries  as  the  threat   of  Communism  was  revealed.74   "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague"  documented  the  tuberculosis  day   camp  in  its  second  summer.  1923's  story,  "Up  at  Iola:  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go   Hand  In  Hand,"  described  the  exuberance  of  Iola's  child  patients  even  as  they  were   suffering  from  tuberculosis,  illustrating  this  with  six  photographs.  It  is  immediately                                                                                                                    72  Faith  Jaycox,  The   P rogressive   Era,  vii. 73  Ibid.,  328. 74  Faith  Jaycox,  The   P rogressive   Era,  477. 25  

   evident  that  the  two  stories  are  visually  distinct  from  each  other:  in  1909,  Stone's   photographs  were  published  with  no  hand  art  decoration,  a  typeset  title,  and   straightforward,  expository  text  that  provided  factual  information  about  the  day   camp;  in  1923,  the  page  is  liberally  decorated  with  hand  art  and  the  text  is   persuasive  rhetoric  about  the  children's  positive  outlook.  The  stories  put  forward   different  portraits  of  the  disease,  one  that  sticks  to  facts  and  the  other  that  aims  to   persuade  the  reader  that  tuberculosis,  for  the  children  of  Iola  at  least,  was  not  a   deterrent  to  a  healthy,  happy  and  productive  childhood.    

"Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague"  
   On  Sunday,  September  26,  1909,  the  Rochester  Herald  published  in  its   rotogravure  section  a  page  of  eight  black-and-white  photographs  with  captions  (fig.   1),  seven  of  which  are  outdoor  scenes  from  the  tuberculosis  day  camp,  then  a  year   old.  The  eighth  photograph  shows  the  Public  Health  Association's  Board  of   Directors,  who  were  instrumental  in  organizing  the  camp.  The  photographs  all  have   black,  single-rule  borders  around  them  and  captions  of  varying  length  below.  They   are  arranged  in  rows:  one  in  the  first  row,  two  in  the  second,  three  in  the  third,  and   two  in  the  fourth  and  final  row.  To  the  right  of  the  first  photograph,  five  paragraphs   of  text  are  contained  within  a  box  under  the  title,  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White   Plague."                    26  

  

Figure  1.  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  R ochester  Herald   (Rochester,   NY),  Sept.  26,  1909.

   27  

   The  presentation  style,  with  the  images  laid  out  in  an  orderly,  left-to-right   reading  manner,  suggests  a  narrative.  The  story  in  this  essay  moves  from  general  to   specific,  with  more  detail  about  the  camp's  buildings  and  the  patients'  daily  routines   coming  after  the  first  image,  "General  view  of  the  camp,  looking  from  hill  to  west,"   which  provides  the  viewer  with  some  context  about  the  nature  of  the  camp.  As  is   evident  from  figure  2,  there  are  garden  rows  in  the  background  and  trees  in  the    

                                                    

  

foreground,    which  establishes  the  site  as  at  least  semi-rural.  Several  tents  and  a   wooden  building  are  in  the  middle  of  the  frame,  with  several  figures,  seated  and   standing,  just  visible  in  front  of  them.  The  focus  is  not  on  the  people  but  on  the   buildings  and  their  environs;  its  purposes  are  to  orient  the  viewer  to  how  the  tents   looked  and  to  provide  an  introduction  to  the  rest  of  the  essay.  

  

28  

   This  general  view  makes  way  for  photographs  of  more  specific  aspects  of  the   camp.  Figure  3  shows  that  the  second  row  contains  two  side-by-side  scenes  of  the  

Figure  3.  "Rest  tent  for  the  female  patients"  and  "Rest  tent  for  the  male  patients,"   "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  R ochester  Herald ,  Sept.  26,  1909.

tents  for  the  female  and  male  patients,  captioned  accordingly.  These  two   photographs  are  almost  mirror  images  of  one  another;  the  tent  for  the  female   patients  is  oriented  in  the  frame  so  that  it  recedes  into  the  distance  to  the  right,   while  the  tent  for  the  male  patients  recedes  into  the  distance  to  the  left.  This  has  the   effect  of  almost  merging  them  visually  on  the  printed  page,  and  there  are  similarities   in  how  the  people  in  them  are  depicted,  as  well.  Outside  of  both  tents,  patients  rest   in  chairs  or  on  the  porch  steps,  while  a  nurse  stands  on  the  porch  of  the  female   patients'  tent,  and  doctors  and  a  nurse  stand  on  the  porch  of  the  male  patients'  tent.   It  is  evident  from  comparing  the  published  photos  to  their  digitized  negatives  that   they  were  cropped  so  that  the  tents  filled  the  frames  in  the  newspaper  story  (figs.  4   and  5).  

29  

  

Figure  4.  Albert  R.  Stone,  [Rest  tent  for   female  patients  at  tuberculosis  d ay  camp],   1909?  Digitized  glass-plate  negative,  9x7   in.      From  the  Albert  R.  Stone  Negative   Collection,  Rochester  Museum  &  Science   Center,  Rochester,  NY.

Figure  5.  Albert  R.  Stone,  [Rest  tent  for  m ale   patients  at  tuberculosis  d ay  camp],  1909?   Digitized  glass-plate  negative,  9x7  in.      From  the  Albert  R.  Stone  Negative  Collection,   Rochester  Museum  &  Science  Center,   Rochester,  NY.

Once  the  camp's  main  purpose,  to  let  patients  rest  in  open  air,  is  established,   even  more  details  about  the  facility  are  provided  photographically  and  in  text.  The   third  row  of  photographs  show,  left  to  right,  an  interior  view  of  the  dining  tent,   patients  lining  up  for  lunch  outside  of  what  is  presumably  the  dining  tent,  and  the   doctor  and  nurse's  headquarters  tent  (fig.  6).  These  photos,  in  addition  to  having  

Figure  6.  "View  of  the  Dining  Tent,"  "Lunch  Time  at  the  Camp,"  "Headquarters  of  Doctor  and   Nurse,"  from  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  R ochester  Herald ,  Sept.  26,  1909.

  

30  

   titles,  also  have  captions  of  two  or  three  sentences  each,  providing  a  bit  more   information  about  how  the  tent  in  the  picture  is  used.  The  captions  go  beyond   merely  identifying  the  tents'  purposes  to  touch  upon  the  camp's  state-of-the-art   quality.  For  example,  under  the  third  image,  titled,  "Headquarters  of  Doctor  and   Nurse,"  the  caption  explains,  "This  tent  is  for  the  use  of  Dr.  Edward  G.  Nugent  and   Miss  Grace  M.  Seyter,  the  nurse  in  charge.  It  gives  privacy  for  the  examination  of   patients.  There  is  a  telephone  service,  and  at  the  rear  are  the  kitchen,  bathrooms   and  storeroom."75  The  mention  of  patient  privacy  and  telephone  service  can  be  read   as  promoting  the  camp's  progressiveness  and  modern  conveniences.  The  caption  for   "View  of  the  Dining  Tent"  speaks  to  sanitary  procedures:  "All  of  the  cooking  is  done   in  the  kitchen,  which  the  patients  are  not  allowed  to  enter  on  any  condition.  In  the   rear  of  the  dining  room  is  a  separate  tent,  in  which  all  of  the  dishes  for  the  patients   are  thoroughly  sanitized."76     

                                                                                                                 75  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  Rochester   Herald  (Rochester,  NY),  Sept.   26,  1909. 76  Ibid. 31  

   The  fourth  row  of  photographs  contains  two  images  (fig.  7).  The  first   photograph  depicts  the  bath  house  and  kitchen.  In  it,  the  structure  that  houses  both  

Figure  7.  "Bath  House  and  Kitchen"  and  "Public  Health  Association  Directors,"  from   "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  R ochester  Herald ,  Sept.  26,  1909.

facilities  appears  on  the  left,  while  what  is  probably  the  incinerator  appears  on  the   right.  Here,  too,  the  caption  emphasizes  the  sanitary  quality  of  conditions  at  the   camp:  it  reads,  "At  the  rear  of  the  tent  for  the  use  of  the  physicians  and  nurses  in   charge  of  the  camp  a  wooden  building  has  been  erected,  which  is  used  as  a  kitchen,   in  part.  The  other  part  has  been  divided  into  bathrooms  for  the  male  and  female   patients,  which  are  provided  with  bath  tubs  and  shower  baths.  In  the  rear  of  this   building  is  the  incinerator,  used  to  burn  all  garbage,  sputum  cups  and  waste   material."77  The  final  image  is  a  portrait  of  the  Public  Health  Association's  Board  of   Directors,  the  governing  body  for  the  group  responsible  for  much  of  Rochester's   institutional  efforts  to  fight  tuberculosis.  This  photograph  establishes  that  the  camp  

                                                                                                                 77  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  Rochester   Herald,  Sept.  26,  1909.    32  

   was  created  by  an  authoritative  group  of  professionals  working  in  the  interest  of  the   community,  something  that  is  also  mentioned  in  the  text  block.     The  text  focuses  exclusively  on  factual  information  about  the  camp.  Much  of   it  is  related  to  the  infrastructure:  the  dimensions  of  the  patients',  doctors'  and   nurses'  tents;  the  existence  of  the  telephone  system;  and  the  presence  of  the   buildings  that  house  the  kitchen,  bathing  area  and  storeroom.  Some  background   information  is  provided,  including  an  account  of  the  camp's  enlargement  from  1908   to  1909,  under  the  direction  of  the  Public  Health  Association.  The  names  of  the   doctors  and  nurses  in  charge  in  1908  and  1909  are  given,  as  well.  Monetary  figures   for  the  cost  per  patient  per  day  in  1908,  the  cost  of  the  buildings  and  equipment  and   the  value  of  the  property  are  provided.  The  money  spent  on  buildings  and   equipment  reportedly  made  the  camp  "one  of  the  most  complete...in  the  country."78   The  patients  are  mentioned  in  the  text  only  in  the  context  of  how  many  of  them  the   camp  accommodated  in  1908  and  1909,  and  to  say  when  they  arrived  and  left  each   day.     The  overall  tone  of  the  photographs  and  captions,  and  the  five  paragraphs  of   text,  is  one  of  detached  observation  and  authority.  Only  facts  are  presented:  facts   about  the  number  of  patients  at  the  camp,  facts  about  its  establishment,  facts  about   its  cost,  facts  about  sanitary  measures,  facts  about  the  patients'  daily  routine.   Additionally,  it  seems  that  all  of  the  photographs  that  depict  patients  show  them  in   the  care  and  oversight  of  nurses  or  doctors.  The  doctor  and  nurse's  headquarters   are  shown,  as  is  the  Board  of  Directors  for  the  Public  Health  Association.  These                                                                                                                    78  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  Rochester   Herald,  Sept.  26,  1909. 33  

   authority  figures  are  also  mentioned  in  the  text.  The  patients'  emotional  experiences   at  the  camp  are  entirely  ignored.     While  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  the  tone  of  this  and  any  story  when  the   motivations  behind  it  are  unknown,  it  may  reflect  the  atmosphere  of  fact-finding   that  was  evident  in  the  burgeoning  field  of  "social  work,"  which  had  close  ties  to   photography,  with  its  ability  to  show  "objective"  truths  about  people  and  their  living   conditions.79  During  the  Progressive  Era,  photographs  of  the  poor  living  conditions   in  inner  cities  were  used  as  tools  to  spark  change.  Jacob  Riis's  1890  book,  How  the   Other   Half   Lives:   Studies   Among   the   Tenements   of   New   Y ork,  a  collection  of   illustrations  after  photographs  made  by  Riis  of  the  city's  poorest  denizens  along   with  sensational  text,  was  aimed  at  improving  living  conditions  in  tenements.80  The   Tenement  House  Exhibition  of  1900,  orchestrated  by  Lawrence  Veiller,  used  1000   photographs  as  evidence  of  what  various  parts  of  the  tenements  looked  like:   "`Buildings,  courts,  airshafts,  closets,  roofs,  and  fire-escapes  all  have  been  caught  just   as  they  are.'"81  In  1908  and  1909,  the  results  of  the  Pittsburgh  Survey,  a  study  using   scientific  inquiry  to  investigate  corporate  and  civic  responsibility  to  the  people  of   the  city,  were  published  in  Charities  and  the  Commons .82  Lewis  Hine  was  the  main   photographer  for  the  project,  which  relied  on  the  camera  to  provide  a  "luminous                                                                                                                    79  Kate  Sampsell-Willmann,  Lewis   Hine   as   Social   Critic  (Jackson,  MI:  University  Press   of  Mississippi,  2009),  77. 80  Jacob  Riis,  How   the   Other   Half   Lives:   Studies   Among   the   Tenements   of   New   Y ork   (1890). 81  Lawrence  Veiller,  quoted  in  Maren  Stange,  Symbols   of   Ideal   Life:   Social   Documentary   Photography   in   America,  1890-1950  (Cambridge,  UK:  Cambridge   University  Press,  1989),  40. 82  Ibid,  48.    34  

   and  incontrovertible  transcript  of  life."83  The  camera's  ability  to  capture  truths   about  the  way  people  lived  exposed  problems  such  as  child  labor,  the  insufficient   quality  of  housing  for  the  poor,  and  public  health  concerns.  The  Rochester   Herald  and   Albert  Stone  may  have  subconsciously  absorbed  some  of  the  era's  preoccupation   with  fact-finding,  and  presented  Stone's  photographs  as  a  measure  of  the   tuberculosis  day  camp  and  how  it  functioned.  

  "Up  at  Iola,  Where  Health  and  L earning  Go  Hand  in  Hand"  
      On  Sunday,  January  28,  1923,  the  Herald  published  the  photo  essay  titled,  "Up  

at  Iola:  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  in  Hand,"  also  featuring  one  of   Rochester's  tuberculosis  treatment  institutions,  the  county  sanatorium  (fig.  8).  Like   "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  it  was  published  in  the  rotogravure   section  and  contained  eight  photographs,  six  of  them  featuring  children  at  Iola   enjoying  the  outdoors  in  winter,  and  the  other  two  showing  Iola's  main  building  and   an  early  incarnation  of  the  day  camp  and  first  open  air  school,  respectively.  

                                                                                                                 83  Paul  Kellogg,  quoted  in  Stange,  Symbols   of   Ideal   Life,  51. 35  

  

Figure  8.  "Up  at  Iola  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  in  Hand,"  R ochester  Herald    (Rochester,  NY),  Jan.  28,  1923.

  

36  

   Visually,  it  is  at  once  noticeably  different  from  the  1909  piece,  primarily  in   the  use  of  hand  art.  Instead  of  the  typeset  title  of  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  Great   Plague"  (fig.  9)  the  title  is  drawn  by  hand  (fig.  10).  Below  the  title  there  is  a  hand-

Figure  9.  From  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  Rochester   Herald,  Sept.  26,  1909.

Figure  10.  From  "Up  at  Iola  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  in  Hand,"   Rochester  Herald ,  Jan.  28,  1923.

drawn  illustration  that  depicts  rolling  hills,  sporadically  dotted  with  lone,  spindly   trees,  and  a  small  cottage  nestled  into  a  valley.  The  photographs  are  set  against  a   backdrop  of  hand-drawn  speckles,  but  even  more  distinctive  are  their  borders.  In   contrast  to  the  single-rule  borders  of  the  1909  spread,  the  borders  in  1923  are  much   more  fanciful.  Six  of  the  eight  photographs  have  had  at  least  one  of  their  four  sides   partially  or  completely  replaced  by  hand-drawn  curlicues  that  change  the   photographs'  shapes  from  rectangles  to  curvy  polygons,  while  the  other  two    images   have  a  double-rule  border  and  no  border  at  all,  respectively  (Fig.  8).  While  the  use  of  

37  

   hand  art  to  embellish  the  printed  page  is  at  first  striking,  this  treatment  was   common  in  the  late  teens  and  early  twenties,  appearing  in  newspapers  from  coast  to   coast,  even  in  those  articles  about  tuberculosis.84      Despite  their  fancy  flourishes,  the  photographs  are  still  laid  out  in  rows:  two  

in  the  first  row,  three  in  the  second,  two  in  the  third,  and  one  in  the  fourth.  There  is   hardly  any  space  between  the  images.  Their  borders  overlap  with  or  touch  the   borders  of  neighboring  photographs,  creating  a  fluidity  in  the  layout  that  was  not   present  in  the  1909  essay.  While  this  fluid  quality  should  equal  the  presence  of  a   narrative,  it  does  not.  Instead  of  telling  a  story  from  beginning  to  end,  the  essay   presents  six  photographs  that  all  contain  the  same  idea,  that  the  children  at  Iola   were  happy  and  healthy.     While  most  of  the  images  in  the  essay  depict  the  children,  the  first  two  show   the  exterior  of  the  sanatorium  and  the  first  open  air  school  (fig.  11).  These  images  

                                                                                                                 84  "Wooing  Life  Anew  at  the  Potter's  Wheel."  San   Francisco   Berkeley   Call   (San   Francisco,  CA),  Oct.  27,  1912;  "This  Is  Tuberculosis  Day--How  Will  You  Help  The   Cause?"  The   Times-Dispatch  (Richmond,  VA),  Oct.  27,  1912;  "Salving  the  Kiddies."              38  

Figure  11.  "The  main  building  of  the  present  Monroe  County  Tuberculosis   Sanatorium--Iola,"  and  "The  first  Monroe  County  tuberculosis  camp  and  open   air  school,"  from  "Up  at  Iola  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  in  Hand,"   Rochester  Herald ,  Jan.  28,  1923.

   were  obviously  not  taken  in  the  same  season  and  perhaps  not  in  the  same  year  as   the  other  six.  Neither  image  is  particularly  relevant  to  the  main  focus  of  the  essay.   The  first  one,  of  the  exterior  of  Iola,  does  at  least  provide  some  context  for  where  the   children  live,  but  since  the  photographs  and  text  are  almost  exclusively  about  the   children's  physical  health  and  mental  well-being,  it  does  not  add  much  to  the  essay.   The  image  of  the  day  camp  and  open  air  school  is  only  peripherally  related  to  "Up  at   Iola,"  in  that  the  day  camp  was  also  an  institution  for  the  treatment  of  tuberculosis   and  children  were  also  educated  there.  It  may  be  that  the  photographs  were   included  simply  to  increase  the  number  of  images  in  the  essay,  or  to  confirm  that  the   children  were  products  of  Rochester's  efforts  to  combat  the  disease.   The  rest  of  the  images  show  children,  mostly  in  groups,  engaging  in  winter  

Figure  12.  "The  Iola  boys  are  keen  in  their  interest  in  their  bird  friends,"  "Who  says  

these  girls  are  not  healthy  and  happy?,"  "Experts  with  the  skis,"  "A  battery  of  winter   sports  enthusiasts,"  "Joe,  who  is  an  expert  at  weaving  baskets,"  and  "The  Christmas   tree  that  was  made  into  a  gift  to  the  birds,"  from  "Up  at  Iola  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go   Hand  in  Hand,"  R ochester  Herald ,  Jan.  28,  1923.   39  

   activities  (fig.  12).  The  three  second-row  photographs  present  children  in     pairs  or  groups,  looking  into  a  bird  house,  posing  on  a  sled,  and  posing  with  skis,  in   order  from  left  to  right  (fig.  13).  Below  them,  in  the  third  row,  there  are  two  images,  

Figure  13.  "The  Iola  boys  are  keen  in  their  interest  in  their  bird  

friends,"  "Who  says  these  girls  are  not  healthy  and  happy?,"  and   "Experts  with  the  skis,"  from  "Up  at  Iola  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  
Hand  in  Hand,"  R ochester  Herald ,  Jan.  28,  1923.

Figure  14.  "A  battery  of  winter  sports  enthusiasts"  and  "Joe,  who  is  an   expert  at  weaving  baskets,"  from  "Up  at  Iola  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go   Hand  in  Hand,"  R ochester  Herald ,  Jan.  28,  1923.  

one  a  photograph  of  girls  posing  with  sleds;  and  the  other  of  a  single  patient,   identified  in  the  caption  as  "Joe,"  holding  three  hand-made  baskets  (fig.  14).  The   lone  photograph  in  the  fourth  row  depicts  children  on  skis,  the  child  in  the  center  

  

40  

   leaning  over,  all  of  them  posed  in  front  of  a  tree  (fig.  15).    

Figure  15.  "The  Christmas  tree  that  was  made  into  a  gift  to  the  birds,"   from  "Up  at  Iola  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  in  Hand,"  R ochester   Herald ,  Jan.  28,  1923.

      Consistent  with  the  lack  of  narrative,  the  captions  do  not  appear  in  the  same  

physical  space  as  the  photographs.  Each  is  image  is  numbered,  and  above  the  main   text,  the  corresponding  captions  explain  the  images.  This  has  the  effect  of  making   the  photographs  even  more  completely  the  focus  of  the  essay,  despite  the  length  of   the  text,  as  it  removes  the  viewers'  need  to  switch  between  looking  at  the   photographs  and  reading  about  them.  The  viewer  is  free  to  let  his  or  her  eyes  roam   around  the  page,  moving  from  one  image  to  the  next  without  stopping.  While   isolating  the  captions  away  from  the  photographs  can  sometimes  make  it  more   difficult  for  the  viewer  to  understand  what  the  images  depict,  the  captions  in  this   essay  do  not  contain  the  kind  of  expository,  detailed  information  that  the  1909  story   41  

   did.  Instead,  the  captions  emphasize  the  children's  health  and  happiness.  Consider   the  caption  for  image  4,  a  photograph  of  a  three-girl  pile  on  a  sled:  "Who  says  these   girls  are  not  happy  and  healthy?"85  The  text  of  the  article  parrots  the  captions:  the   children  are  "ruddy  cheeked,  bright  eyed  and  filled  with  the  vigor  of  youth,"  "happy,   contented  and  ever  busy  in  their  Iola  home,"  "keen  and  eager  students  of  current   events,"  and  even  influence  the  attitudes  of  the  older  patients,  who  "imbibe   something  of  the  optimism  and  cheerful  bravery  of  the  youngsters  and  thus  fit   themselves  better  for  the  battle  they  are  waging,"  and  so  on.86     "Up  at  Iola,"  published  fourteen  years  after  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White   Plague,"  is  a  completely  different  essay  than  the  earlier  one.  While  a  specific  reason   for  the  differences  is  unknown,  there  are  several  speculative  explanations.  The  use   of  hand  drawn  art  and  decoration,  virtually  unused  in  the  1909  story,  had  become   popular  in  the  intervening  years.  Schuneman,  in  his  1966  Ph.D.  dissertation  about   New  York  City  newspapers  from  1890-1937,  explained  that  before  the  end  of  World   War  I,  "traditional  newspapers  made  widespread  use  of  fancy  `tricked-up'  picture   layouts."87       The  lack  of  narrative  in  "Up  at  Iola"  may  simply  be  the  editor  and   photographer's  creative  choice;  if  the  essay  strove  to  convince  readers  that  life  at   Iola  was,  at  least  for  the  children  who  resided  there,  an  overall  positive  experience,   the  essay  did  not  require  a  beginning,  middle  and  end.  One  explanation  for  the   essay's  optimism  could  be  that  after  fifteen  years  of  tuberculosis  treatment  in                                                                                                                    85  "Up  at  Iola:  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  In  Hand,"  Rochester   Herald   (Rochester,  NY),  Jan.  28,  1923. 86  Ibid. 87  Schuneman,  p.  264.    42  

   Rochester,  and  thirteen  years  of  Iola's  existence,  a  personal  view  of  coping  with  the   disease  could  be  presented,  instead  of  sterile  facts  and  reassurances  that  every   precaution  was  being  taken  to  contain  tuberculosis.  Rochesterians  had  had  almost   fifteen  years  of  some  kind  of  institution  that  removed  tuberculosis  patients  from  the   community  and  allowed  them  to  recover  (or  not--people  did  die  at  Iola,  but  at  least   they  were  removed  from  the  general  population)  in  a  place  where  they  were  no   longer  a  public  health  menace.  

The  Images  as  Evidence  of  t he  Treatment  of  t he  Disease  
   Before  addressing  how  Stone's  photographs  were  typical  portrayals  of  

tuberculosis  patients,  it  is  worthwhile  considering  how  they  upheld  the  emphasis  on   the  "tripod  of  treatment"  for  the  disease.  Fresh  air,  rest  and  good  food  were   paramount  to  patients'  recovery.  Consider  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White   Plague,"  published  on  September  26,  1909,  which  reveals  quite  a  bit  about  the  day   camp.  Rest,  fresh  air,  food  and  cleanliness  were  clearly  important  parts  of  recovery,   based  on  the  photographs  and  their  captions  in  this  story.  The  photographs  that   show  the  rest  tents  for  male  and  female  patients,  respectively,  with  patients  seated   in  reclining  chairs  outside,  demonstrate  the  importance  of  fresh  air.     The  photograph  "Lunch  Time  at  the  Camp"  depicts  patients  and  medical  staff   outside  what  is  presumably  the  dining  tent,  and  is  captioned  with  the  following  text:   "Patients  arrive  in  the  morning  at  8:30  o'clock,  and  a  lunch  of  milk  and  eggs  is  eaten   after  they  have  rested  for  an  hour  and  their  temperature  has  been  taken.  At  noon  a   meal  of  vegetables,  meats,  etc.,  is  given,  and  at  3:30  o'clock  another  lighter  lunch.  All  

43  

   the  dishes  are  sterilized."88  The  captions  of  three  of  the  photographs  emphasize  the   sanitary  procedures  carried  out  at  the  camp  to  ensure  that  the  disease  was   contained.  Two  of  the  captions  mention  the  sterilization  of  dishes,  and  the  last  one,   beneath  a  photograph  of  the  bath  house  and  kitchen,  states,  "The  incinerator  [is]   used  to  burn  all  garbage,  sputum  cups  and  waste  material."89     "Up  at  Iola,  Where  Health  and  Learning  go  Hand  in  Hand,"  published  on   January  28,  1923,  was  a  bit  different,  as  already  mentioned.  Because  it  was   concerned  less  with  proving  Iola's  state-of-the-art  status,  as  "Rochester's  Battle   Against  White  Plague"  was  with  the  day  camp,  than  with  depicting  the  bravery  and   vigor  of  the  young  patients,  it  does  not  provide  the  same  helpful  details  about  how   the  patients  spent  their  days.  While  there  is  plenty  of  evidence  in  the  institution's   Annual  Report  about  the  kind  of  treatment  provided,  the  evidence  is  not  abundant   in  "Up  at  Iola."  The  one  thing  it  does  demonstrate  is  the  "fresh  air"  aspect  of   treatment.  All  but  the  first  two  photographs  show  children  outdoors  in  winter--cold   air,  low  temperatures  and  snow  were  not  deterrents  to  healing.   While  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague"  shows  the  practical  side  of   the  tripod  of  treatment,  and  "Up  at  Iola"  depicts  happy,  healthy  children,  it  is   important  to  note  that  not  all  of  Stone's  photographs  display  the  same  optimism.  For   example,  Stone  made  at  least  two  photographs  of  delicate  children  bundled  into   deck  chairs  to  illustrate  the  short  article,  "Rochester's  Tuberculosis  Open  Air   School,"  published  on  March  20,  1910.  The  one  selected  for  publication  was  taken   from  in  front  of  the  children.  Not  all  of  the  children's  faces  are  visible,  and  if  they  are                                                                                                                    88  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  Rochester   Herald,  September  26,  1909. 89  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague,"  Rochester   Herald,  Sept.  26,  1909.    44  

   they  are  not  all  looking  at  the  camera.  However,  the  child  closest  to  the  camera  is   smiling  at  the  viewer,  and  this  gives  the  scene  an  air  of  contentment.  On  the  other   hand,  a  similar  photograph,  probably  made  on  the  same  day,  has  a  very  different   feel.  Taken  from  the  side  in  front  of  a  window,  the  edges  of  the  image  are  dark,  and   the  light  is  harsh.  The  same  rows  of  deck  chairs  are  visible,  and  many  of  the  children   have  turned  their  faces  toward  the  camera.  None  of  them  are  smiling;  their   expressions  are  resigned  and  glum.  While  both  photographs  essentially  illustrate   the  same  idea--the  use  of  fresh  air  to  strengthen  susceptible  children's  immune   systems--the  one  that  appears  more  positive  was  selected  for  publication.  Of  course,   it  is  impossible  to  know  exactly  why  one  image  was  chosen  over  another,  but  what   is  worth  noting  is  that  not  all  of  Stone's  photographs  had  the  same  qualities  as  those   discussed  in  this  paper.  

Identifying  Typical  Tuberculosis  Photographs  
   In  order  to  characterize  Albert  Stone's  photographic  portrayals  of  

tuberculosis,  it  is  important  to  define  what  actually  were  the  typical  photographic   portrayals  of  the  disease.  In  exploring  tuberculosis-related  imagery,  a  pattern   seemed  to  emerge:  among  social  photographs  of  the  disease--those  that  focused  on   picturing  people  instead  of  x-rays  or  autopsied  lungs--there  were  those  that  dealt   with  tubercular  people  living  in  tenements  or  other  substandard  abodes  and  those   that  depicted  life  in  sanatoria.  The  imagery  made  of  the  disease's  prevalence  in   crowded  urban  living  spaces  tended  to  be  published,  and  accompanied  text  that  

45  

   provided  fodder  for  moral  outrage  on  the  reader's  part,  while  photographs  of   sanatoria  and  their  patients  tended  to  focus  on  healing  and  recovery.    

Tuberculosis  Photographs  in  Reform  Publications    
   Reform  publications  agitated  for  social  change  with  words  and  images.  

Tuberculosis  was  a  known  scourge  of  the  tenements  and  other  substandard  abodes   that  plagued  American  cities,  and  these  appeared  frequently  as  subjects  worthy  of   consideration  in  journals  like  Charities ,90  the  publication  of  the  New  York  Charity   Organization  Society.  However,  dank,  overcrowded  tenements  were  not  the  only   instances  of  tuberculosis  being  addressed  by  socially  progressive  publications;   sanatoria  were  also  written  about  and  photographed.  Because  they  were  the  result   of  philanthropic  campaigns  to  assist  tuberculosis  victims,  they  were  not  targets  for   reform,  unlike  asylums  and  other  institutions;  on  the  contrary,  they  were  written   about  and  illustrated  photographically  as  solutions  to  the  problem  of  tenement   housing  and  the  poor  conditions  that  facilitated  the  spread  of  disease.  While  it  is   beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper  to  address  every  instance  of  tuberculosis  imagery  in   a  reform  publication,  it  is  nevertheless  worth  considering  several  examples  to   explore  how  Albert  Stone's  images  differ.   In  Weller's  Neglected  Neighbors ,  the  story  of  the  possible  spread  of  the  disease   via  a  tenement  airshaft  used  as  a  cuspidor  by  three  residents  with  tuberculosis  is                                                                                                                    90  John  Middlemist  Herrick  and  Paul  H.  Stuart,  "The  Survey,"  Encyclopedia   of   Social   Welfare  History  in  North  America  (Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  Sage  Publications,  2005),   403-4.  The  New  York  Charity  Organization  Society  launched  Charities  Review  in   1891  and  Charities   in  1897.  In  1901,  Charities   absorbed  Charities  Review  and  in  1905,   it  became  Charities   and   the   Commons .  After  the  publication  of  the  Pittsburgh  Survey,   it  changed  names  once  again  to  become  The   Survey   in  1909.  Survey  Graphic  was   launched  as  a  companion  to  The   Survey   in  1921.    46  

   related  as  follows:  "Six  families  drew  their  light  and  ventilation  from  this  large   cuspidor.  Baskets  of  food,  bowls  of  milk,  dish  cloths,  towels  and  clothing  hung  or   rested  in  the  shaft  beside  the  windows  of  the  various  families  and  gathered  up  the   deadly  germs."91  The  statement  is  illustrated  with  a  photograph  of  the  offending   airshaft,  looking  down  into  it  from  above,  showing  the  other  tenants'  use  of  it  as  a   space  that  provided  air  and  light  and  in  which  to  store  household  goods.  The  caption   reads,  "Bend  Your  Neck  and  Imagine  You  are  Looking  Straight  Down  the  Air-Shaft   from  the  Top  of  a  Tenement.  This  One  was  the  Spittoon  of  Three  Consumptives.  The   Bacilli  Fell  Upon  the  Clothes  and  Food  of  Six  Families."92  In  this  book,  however,   words  were  relied  on  more  heavily  than  images  to  drive  home  the  prevalence  of  the   disease.   Tenements  were  not  the  only  spaces  that  were  condemned  by  social   progressives  for  hastening  the  spread  of  tuberculosis.  On  March  18,  1905,  in  an   article  in  Charities   titled,  "Our  New  Congested  Districts--the  City  Hospitals,"  Paul   Kennaday  detailed  the  overcrowding  at  various  hospitals  in  New  York  City.   Kennaday  quoted  James  H.  Tully,  the  commissioner  of  the  New  York  Department  of   Public  Charities,  as  saying,  "Through  the  various  societies  and  newspaper  agitation   regarding  tuberculosis,  patients  are  coming  more  and  more  to  the  department  for   care."93  The  result  of  the  well-intentioned  agitation  was  an  increase  in  public   awareness  of  the  disease  and  its  treatment,  but  instead  of  patients  seeking                                                                                                                    91  Weller,  Neglected   Neighbors ,  139. 92  Ibid.,  146. 93  Paul  Kennaday,  "Our  New  Congested  Districts--the  City  Hospitals,"  Charities   13   [1905]:  581. 47  

   treatment  at  institutions  designed  to  care  for  them,  people  went  directly  to  city   hospitals,  which  felt  the  crunch.  Three  photographs  of  this  overcrowding  at   Metropolitan  Hospital  were  published  to  show  how  dire  the  situation  was  as  the   hospital  found  inadequate  solutions  to  the  problem:  the  first  photograph  shows  a   hallway  being  used  as  a  ward,  the  second  one  is  of  an  overcrowded  existing  ward,   and  the  third  shows  patients  on  the  hospital  floor.  Kennaday's  response  to  the   situation  was  to  call  for  sanatoriums:  he  wrote,  "Adequate  wards  or  hospitals  for   tuberculosis  patients  would  do  much,  it  is  plain,  toward  a  solution  of  this  problem  of   congestion;  they  would  also  remove  the  grave  danger  connected  with  the  present   failure  to  segregate  these  cases."94  With  this  statement,  Kennaday  ostensibly   pointed  to  sanatoriums  as  the  solution  to  the  problems  that  tuberculosis  posed  to   tenement  dwellers,  and  it  is  probably  because  the  institutions  did  at  least  remove   illness  from  the  population  that  they  were  lauded  in  this  manner.    

Images  of  Sanatoriums  
   Photographs  of  sanatoriums  sometimes  appeared  in  reform  publications,  as   discussed  above,  but  could  also  be  found  in  newspapers  or  were  never  published  at   all.  Many  of  the  photographs  are  currently  located  at  historical  societies  and   archives.  These  images  focused  primarily  on  the  patient  getting  well  in  the   institution.  Between  1880  and  1939,  photographs  of  sanatoriums  tended  to  feature   "the  restorative  benefits  of  open  air  and  the  companionship  of  fellow  sufferers,"  and  

                                                                                                                 94  Ibid.,  583.    48  

   did  not  usually  contain  visibly  ill  people.95  Additionally,  most  photographs  of  this   subject  matter  were  not  taken  indoors,  unless  to  "[suggest]  access  to  the  out-of- doors."96     The  Illustrated   Catalogue  in  particular  is  a  rich  source  for  photographs  of   sanatoria,  containing  29.  Almost  none  of  the  people  in  the  photographs  are   obviously  ill,  despite  frequently  being  pictured  in  bed  or  reclining  chairs.  Many  of   the  photographs  also  show  patients  outdoors,  on  open-air  porches  or  on  wards  with   windows  to  let  in  fresh  air  and  sunlight.  There  are  few  examples  of  photographs   showing  only  one  patient;  most  of  the  images  depict  patients  clustered  together  or   on  wards,  demonstrating  the  "companionship  of  fellow  sufferers"  that  Fox  and   Lawrence  described.  Of  course,  since  the  authors  of  Photographing   M edicine  used  the   Illustrated   Catalogue  as  one  of  their  sources,  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  photographs   in  it  would  uphold  their  statements.  What  is  more  compelling  evidence  for  the  truth   of  their  statements  is  whether  photographs  not  researched  for  Photographing   Medicine  do  as  well.   J.N.  Adams  H ospital  Scrapbook      The  Miner  Library  at  the  University  of  Rochester  has  in  its  collection  a   scrapbook  from  J.N.  Adams  Hospital,  a  sanatorium  in  Perrysburg,  New  York.  The   photographs,  from  the  1920s,  show  life  in  the  sanatorium  as  well  as  some  of  the   medical  procedures  used  at  the  institution.  The  images  largely  conform  to  the   generalizations  about  sanatorium  photographs  put  forward  by  Fox  and  Lawrence.                                                                                                                    95  Fox  and  Lawrence,  P hotographing   M edicine:   Images   and   P ower   in   Britain   and   America   Since   1840,  (Westport,  CT:  Greenwood  Press,  1988),  327 96  Ibid. 49  

   Many  of  the  photographs  depict  groups  of  patients  seated  on  porches  or  lying  in   beds  outdoors,  in  the  company  of  others.  There  are  also  several  images  of  children   out  of  their  beds,  at  play  outside.  The  photographs  that  do  show  the  institution's   interior  only  happen  to  do  so  when  the  photograph  was  taken  indoors  to  illustrate  a   medical  procedure  or  patient's  progress.  If  it  were  not  for  the  fact  that  the   photographs  are  known  to  be  from  a  sanatorium  and  the  occasional  presence  of   doctors  and  nurses,  it  would  be  difficult  to  tell  that  the  people  pictured  were  ill.     The  most  important  aspect  of  photographs  of  sanatoriums  as  a  general  body   of  work  is  that  there  do  seem  to  be  common  conventions  among  them.  This  type  of   photograph  focused  on  the  patient's  access  to  open  air  and  fellow  residents,  and   does  not  usually  contain  people  who  appeared  ill  or  the  interiors  of  sanatoriums  or   day  camps.  There  are  plenty  of  examples  of  photographs  that  uphold  these   conventions,  leading  to  the  belief  that  these  conventions  are  indeed  common  to   tuberculosis  imagery  in  general.  What  is  more  important,  however,  is  whether  and   how  they  apply  to  Stone's  images.  

Representative  o f  a  Genre:  Albert  R.  Stone's  Tuberculosis  Photographs  
   The  content  of  Stone's  photographs  of  the  day  camp  and  Iola  Sanatorium  is   similar  to  many  other  sanatorium  photographs.  The  patients  in  his  photographs  do   not  look  sick,  and  the  photographs  in  "Up  at  Iola"  were  deliberately  trying  to  provide   evidence  that  the  children  at  the  sanatorium  looked  healthy.  Stone's  photographs   especially  show  the  fresh  air  component  of  tuberculosis  treatment,  another   convention  of  sanatorium  photographs.  Additionally,  they  rarely  depict  the  singular  

  

50  

   patient,  instead  showing  them  with  other  people.  Finally,  there  is  only  one  interior   shot  out  of  sixteen  images,  also  in  keeping  with  this  kind  of  photography.        One  of  the  similarities  among  sanatorium  photographs  is  the  people  in  them  

do  not  appear  ill,  something  evident  in  Stone's  images.  Both  the  1909  and  1923  

Figure  16.  Albert  R.  Stone,  [Dining  tent  a t  R ochester's  tuberculosis  d ay   camp],  1909?  Digitized  glass-plate  negative,  9x7  in.      From  the  Albert  R.  Stone  Negative  Collection,  Rochester  Museum  &   Science  Center,  Rochester,  NY.

stories  contain  quite  a  few  photographs  of  this  nature:  patients  were  photographed   sitting  in  cure  chairs,  lining  up  for  meals  (fig.  16)  and  cavorting  in  the  snow  (fig.  17),   and  there  is  nothing  about  the  way  they  are  pictured  to  suggest  an  illness;  if  it  were   not  for  the  fact  that  the  photographs  in  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White  Plague"   are  accompanied  by  text  that  makes  it  clear  that  these  photographs  are  about   tuberculosis,  it  would  be  difficult  to  tell.  Despite  the  photographs  not  showing  

51  

  

Figure  17.  Albert  R.  Stone,  [Boys  o n  skis  a t  I ola ],  1923?  Digitized   glass-plate  negative,  5x7  in.      From  the  Albert  R.  Stone  Negative  Collection,  Rochester  Museum  &   Science  Center,  Rochester,  NY.

visibly  ill  people,  it  is  apparent  from  the  text  in  "Up  at  Iola"  that  sanatorium   residents  were  perceived  as  looking  and  behaving  sick,  which  the  text  and   photographs  deliberately  try  to  combat  in  departure  from  other  sanatorium  images,   in  which  patients  seem  to  happen  to  appear  well.  The  text  reads,     The  prevailing  notion  that  a  sanatorium  is  a  retreat  for  pale,  anemic  persons,   reclining  on  beds  and  with  nurses  and  doctors  ever  hovering  is  quickly   dissipated  by  a  visit  to  Iola,  where  boys  and  girls  revel  in  winter  sports   between  the  times  they  are  taking  `the  cure'  or  poring  over  their  lessons  ...   These  youngsters,  who  have  been  touched  by  the  ominous  finger  of  the  Great   White  Plague,  are  happy,  contented  and  ever  busy  in  their  Iola  home,  and   they  are  making  the  fight  against  the  disease  that  threatens  them.  Only  a  very   small  portion  of  the  juvenile  patients  are  confined  to  their  beds.97     

                                                                                                                 97  "Up  at  Iola:  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  In  Hand,"  Rochester   Herald,  Jan.  28,   1923.    52  

   Of  course,  tuberculosis  was  often  undetectable  to  the  naked  eye,  and  it  is  likely  that   it  was  difficult  to  tell  from  photographs  alone  whether  a  person  had  the  disease  or   not.   Another  commonality  in  sanatorium  photographs,  that  they  tended  to   emphasize  the  open  air  aspect  of  the  cure,  is  immediately  visible  in  Stone's   photographs.  The  1909  story's  various  views  of  the  tuberculosis  camp  were  almost   all  taken  outside,  and  in  most  of  the  images,  enough  of  the  subjects'  surroundings   appear  that  the  viewer  can  tell  at  once  that  the  camp  was  located  in  a  rural  area,  and   that  the  buildings  stood  alone,  providing  patients  myriad  opportunities  to  receive   fresh  air  (figs.  2,  3,  6,  7).  The  only  photographs  that  shows  the  interior  of  one  of  the   tents  does  not  include  patients,  who  are  pictured  outside  in  every  photograph  in  this   story.  In  particular,  the  two  photographs  of  the  rest  tents,  with  patients  seated   outdoors  in  cure  chairs,  emphasize  most  their  proximity  to  open  air.     The  1923  Iola  photographs,  too,  confirm  the  visual  trope  of  the  healing   properties  of  fresh  air.  With  the  exception  of  the  first  two  photographs  on  the  page,   which  show  the  exterior  of  the  sanatorium  and  the  day  camp,  respectively,  the  other   six  images  were  all  taken  outdoors,  though  in  winter  instead  of  summer.  The  

53  

   children  in  these  photographs  appear  delighted  to  be  outside  as  they  ski,  sled  and   engage  with  their  "bird  friends"  (fig.  18).  The  text,  also,  underscores  the  importance  

Figure  18.  Albert  R.  Stone,  [Looking  in  a   birdhouse],  1923?  Digitized  glass-plate   negative,  7x5  in.      From  the  Albert  R.  Stone  Negative   Collection,  Rochester  Museum  &  Science   Center,  Rochester,  NY.

of  fresh  air  to  the  children's  health  and  mental  well-being:  "It  is  a  wicked  day  and  a   desperate  doctor  that  can  keep  these  youngsters  from  the  outdoors  when  their   playtime  comes.  Fresh  air  and  plenty  of  it  is  their  best  medicine,  and  their  teachers   and  nurses  encourage  them  in  their  desire  to  be  out  in  the  open.  So  it  is  that  every   day  up  at  Iola  the  rosy-cheeked  boys  and  girls  make  a  lively  picture."98  While  no                                                                                                                    98  "Up  at  Iola:  Where  Health  &  Learning  Go  Hand  In  Hand,"  Rochester   Herald,  Jan.  28,   1923.      54  

   explanation  for  the  relatively  frequent  photographic  appearance  of  sanatorium   patients  outdoors  in  winter  has  been  offered,  it  is  conceivable  that  these  images   helped  prove  the  use  of  open  air  for  the  cure;  a  person  sitting  outside  in  clement   weather  is  simply  a  person  enjoying  a  fine  day,  whereas  an  individual  spending  a  lot   of  time  outdoors  in  winter  might  have  more  of  a  reason  for  doing  so  beyond   recreation.      Sanatorium  photographs  frequently  focused  on  groups  of  patients  to  

demonstrate  the  "companionship  of  fellow  sufferers,"  an  emphasis  that  is  evident  in   Stone's  images.  This  point  is  certainly  evident  in  "Rochester's  Battle  Against  White   Plague"--those  photographs  that  contain  people  do  show  them  in  groups--but  it  is   the  1923  Iola  story  that  displays  this  in  earnest.  Five  of  the  eight  photographs  depict   the  children  in  the  presence  of  other  youngsters,  partaking  in  winter  pursuits   outdoors  (fig.  19).  The  children  in  these  photographs  appear  happy  and  healthy,  

Figure  19.  Albert  R.  Stone,  [Iola  patients  with  skis],  1923?   Digitized  glass-plate  negative,  5x7  in.      From  the  Albert  R.  Stone  Negative  Collection,  Rochester   Museum  &  Science  Center,  Rochester,  NY.

55  

   their  spirits  bolstered  by  the  company  of  the  other  youngsters  at  the  institution.     The  majority  of  Stone's  photographs  that  show  buildings  were  taken  of  their   exteriors,  another  common  aspect  of  sanatorium  imagery.  There  are  many  shots  of   the  exteriors  of  the  tents  at  the  day  camp,  most  of  them  with  patients  outside.  The   one  indoor  photograph  shows  the  dining  tent  (fig.  20),  and  although  it  does  not  

Figure  20.  Albert  R.  Stone,  [Dining  tent  a t  R ochester's  tuberculosis   day  camp],  1909?  Digitized  glass-plate  negative,  9x7  in.      From  the  Albert  R.  Stone  Negative  Collection,  Rochester  Museum   &  Science  Center,  Rochester,  NY.

suggest  access  to  the  outdoors,  there  is  another  image  of  the  exterior  of  the  same   tent  published  adjacent  to  it  (fig.  16).  It  does  not  appear  that  Stone  photographed   the  interior  of  Iola  at  all;  neither  the  published  nor  unpublished  photos  taken  at  the   institution  are  of  the  inside.  One  explanation  for  the  dearth  of  interior  views  of   sanatoriums  is  the  limitations  of  photographic  technology  in  the  early  twentieth  

  

56  

   century.  Before  the  invention  of  the  flash  bulb  in  1930,99  it  was  difficult  to  create   images  of  interiors  with  minimal  natural  light.  While  Jacob  Riis  used  flashlight   powder  to  photograph  New  York  City's  tenement  dwellers  in  the  1880s,100  that   method  of  producing  artificial  light  was  difficult  to  control  and  does  not  seem  to   have  been  widely  used.    Albert  Stone,  photographing  the  day  camp  in  1909  and  Iola   in  1923  before  the  invention  of  the  flash  bulb,  would  probably  have  been  more   inclined  to  photograph  those  interiors  that  had  enough  natural  light  to  produce   clear  images.     For  the  most  part,  Albert  Stone's  photographs  uphold  the  conventions  of   sanatorium  photography,  although  because  they  are  used  in  conjunction  with  text,   they  take  on  a  greater  meaning.  The  photographs  in  "Rochester's  Battle  Against   White  Plague"  certainly  evince  most  of  the  characteristics  of  typical  sanatorium   imagery,  but  instead  of  upholding  the  notion  of  the  institution  as  an  "inviting,  sunny   resort,"101  they  actually  present  a  more  sterile  portrait  of  the  sanatorium,  one  that  is   bound  by  routine,  sanitation  and  schedules.  "Up  at  Iola,"  on  the  other  hand,  almost   goes  too  far  the  other  way;  its  cheerful  text  and  smiling  children  downplay  the   seriousness  of  the  disease.  

Conclusion  
      The  aim  of  this  case  study  was  to  determine  whether  Albert  R.  Stone's  

photographs  of  Rochester's  tuberculosis  treatment  facilities  were  typical  depictions                                                                                                                    99  Beaumont  Newhall,  The  History  of  Photography  From  1839  to  the  Present  (New   York:  Museum  of  Modern  Art,  1982),  231.   100   Newhall,  The  History  of  Photography,  133. 101   Fox  and  Lawrence,  P hotographing   M edicine,  182. 57  

   of  the  disease.  The  photographs  in  question  presented,  through  two  stories   published  in  the  Rochester   Herald  14  years  apart,  two  different  views  of  tuberculosis:   one  that  focused  almost  entirely  on  the  early  struggle  to  combat  the  disease,  not   straying  far  from  the  message  that  tuberculosis  could  be  cured  with  rest,  fresh  air   and  abundant  food;  and  the  other  that  abandoned  almost  entirely  the  idea  of   routines  to  portray  children  at  Iola  as  healthy,  happy  and  inquisitive,  hardly  slowed   down  at  all  by  their  disease.  It  does  appear  that  Stone  was  not  offering  a  novel  look   at  tuberculosis  in  either  story,  as  sanatoriums  in  general  were  depicted  as   welcoming  places  where  patients  could  enjoy  fresh  air  and  the  company  of  other   patients,  who  were  never  seen  as  obviously  ill.       Albert  Stone's  photographs  of  the  tuberculosis  day  camp  and  Iola  Sanatorium   are  only  a  small  part  of  tuberculosis  imagery,  much  of  it  unpublished.  In  comparing   them  to  unpublished,  archival  photographs  as  well  as  those  images  published  in   reform  publications,  I  situated  Stone's  images  within  this  larger  body  of  work.  I  have   also  demonstrated  how  a  small  selection  of  obscure  photographs  has  offered  entry   into  as  complex  and  broad  a  subject  such  as  the  history  of  tuberculosis.  Stone's   photographs  ultimately  contribute  to  a  general  understanding  of  how  tuberculosis   was  photographed,  both  for  publications  and  for  private  use.  Even  though   sanatoriums  were  seen  as  the  solution  to  the  overcrowded  and  unhealthy   conditions  of  tenements  and  slums  that  often  led  to  the  spread  of  tuberculosis,  it  is   surprising  that  photographs  of  the  institutions  did  not  emphasize  more  the   seriousness  of  the  disease,  particularly  with  the  aid  of  text  if  the  images  were   published.  However,  it  is  conceivable  that  sanatorium  photographs  served  the  

  

58  

   purpose  of  reassuring  the  public,  if  the  photographs  were  published,  and  the   institutions  themselves,  if  the  photographs  were  private,  that  sanatoriums  were   benign  places  in  which  real  progress  in  fighting  tuberculosis  was  made.  

59  

      Bibliography Apple, Rima D., compiler. Illustrated Catalogue of the Slide Archive of Historical Medical Photographs at Stony Brook. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1984. Baynes, Ken, Tom Hopkinson, Allen Hutt, and Derrick Knight. Scoop Scandal and Strife: A Study of Photography in Newspapers. Edited by Ken Baynes. London: Hastings House, 1971. Brady, David B., and Albert D. Kaiser, M.D. Fifty Years of Health in Rochester, New York, 1900-1950. Rochester, NY: Health Bureau, July 1950. Brown, Lawrason. "The Future of Tuberculosis Work in America: Presidential Address." American Review of Tuberculosis 7, no. 4 (June 1923): 215-29. Bushnell, George E. "The Treatment of Tuberculosis." American Review of Tuberculosis 2 no. 5 (July 1918): 259-75. Carlebach,  Michael  L.  American   Photojournalism  Comes  of  Age.  Washington  :   Smithsonian  Institution  Press,  1997. ______. The Origins of Photojournalism in America. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1992.    Daniel,  Thomas  M.  Captain   of   Death:  The  Story  of  Tuberculosis .  Rochester,  NY:   University  of  Rochester  Press,  1997.      Dormandy,  Thomas.  The   White   Death:   A   History   of   Tuberculosis .  New  York:  New  York   University  Press,  2000.      Dubos,  Jean.  The   White  Plague:   Tuberculosis,   M an   and   Society .  New  Brunswick,  N.J.:   Rutgers  University  Press,  1987.      Feldberg,  Georgina  D.  Disease  and  Class:  Tuberculosis  and  the  Shaping  of  M odern   North  American  Society .  New  Brunswick,  N.J.:  Rutgers  University  Press,  1995.      Fennessy,  Steve.  "A  legacy,  finally  unfolded."  Democrat  and  Chronicle.      Fox,  Daniel  M.,  and  Christopher  Lawrence.  Photographing   M edicine:   Images   and   Power   in   Britain   and   America   s ince   1840.  New  York:  Greenwood  Press,  1988.      Galbreath,  Thomas  Crawford.  T.B.:   Playing  the  Lone  Game  Consumption.  New  York:   Journal  of  the  Outdoor  Life  Publishing  Company,  1915.      60  

      Geiter,  Lawrence.  Ending   Neglect:   The   Elimination   of   Tuberculosis   in   the   U nited   States.   Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  2000.      Gidal,  Tim  N.  M odern  Photojournalism:  Origin  and  Evolution,  1910-1933.  Translated  by   Maureen  Oberli-Turner.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1973. Emerson, Haven. "The Causes of the Rapidly Increasing Fall of the Tuberculosis Death Rate in the Last Five Years." American Review of Tuberculosis 6, no. 4 (June 1922): 282-304. Ezickson, J.A. Get That Picture! The Story of the News Cameraman. New York: National Library Press, 1938. Hansen,  Bert.  Picturing   M edical   Progress  f rom  Pasteur  to  Polio:  A  History  of  M ass   Media   Images   and   Popular   Attitudes  in  America.  New  Brunswick,  N.J.:  Rutgers   University  Press,  2009.      Herrick,  John  Middlemist,  and  Paul  H.  Stuart.  "The  Survey"  in  Encyclopedia   of   Social   Welfare  History  in  North  America.  Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  Sage  Publications,   2005. Hoffer, Mary Jane. "Technical and Aesthetic Developments of the Photo-Essay." Ed.D. diss., Columbia University Teacher's College, 1984.      Hurley,  Gerald  D.,  and  Angus  McDougall.  Visual   Impact   in   Print:   How   to   M ake   Pictures   Communicate;   A   Guide   f or   the  Photographer,  the  Editor,  the   Designer.  Chicago:   Visual  Impact,  1971.        Iola Sanatorium, Monroe County Tuberculosis Hospital. Circular of Information and Annual Report. 1912-1960.    Jaycox,  Faith.  The   Progressive   Era.  New  York:  Facts  on  File,  2005.      Jussim,  Estelle.  `"The Tyranny of the Pictorial': American Photojournalism from 1880 to 1920." In Eyes of Time: Photojournalism in America, edited by Marianne Fulton, 37-74. Boston: Little, Brown, 1988.   Kemp,  Leatrice  M.,  and  Victoria  Sandwick  Schmitt.  Images   :   Afro-Rochester,   1910- 1935   :   f rom   the   Albert   Stone  negative  collection,  Rochester  M useum  &  Science   Center,   Rochester,   New   Y ork.  Rochester,  N.Y.:  Rochester  Museum  &  Science   Center,  1996.   Kennaday, Paul. "Our New Congested Districts--the City Hospitals." Charities 13 [1905]: 581-4.

61  

   Lee,  Samuel  D.  "The  Beginning  of  the  Herald."  Rochester   Herald  (Rochester,  NY),  Aug.   5,  1919.   McKelvey,  Blake.  "The  History  of  Public  Health  in  Rochester,  New  York."  Rochester   History   18,  no.  3  (July  1956):  1-28. Nadeau,  Luis.  "Rotogravure."  In  Encyclopedia  of  Printing,  Photographic,  and   Photomechanical   Processes:   A   Comprehensive   Reference   to   Reproduction   Technologies,   containing   invaluable   information   on   over   1500   processes.   Fredericton,  New  Brunswick:  Atelier  Luis  Nadeau,  1990.      Newhall,  Beaumont.  The  History  of  Photography  From  1839  to  the  Present.  New  York:   Museum  of  Modern  Art,  1982.   Ott,  Katherine.  Fevered  Lives:  Tuberculosis  in  American  Culture  since  1870. Cambridge,  Massachusetts:  Harvard  University  Press,  1996. Peck,  William  F.  History  of  Rochester  and  M onroe  County  New  Y ork,  From  the  Earliest   Historic  Times  to  the  Beginning  of  1907.  Illustrated  with  M aps,  Portraits  and   Views.   Also   Biographical   Sketches   of   Some   of   the   M ore   Prominent   Citizens   of   Rochester   and   M onroe   County .  New  York:  The  Pioneer  Publishing  Company,   1908.   Riis, Jacob.  How  the  Other  Half  Lives:  Studies  Among  the  Tenements  of  New  Y ork,  With   Illustrations  Chiefly  from  Photographs  Taken  by  the  Author.  New  York:  C.   Scribner's  Sons,  1890. Rothman,  Sheila  M.  Living   in   the   Shadow  of  Death:  Tuberculosis  and  the  Social   Experience   of   Illness   in   American   History .  New  York:  Basic  Books.  1994.      Sampsell-Willman,  Kate.  Lewis   Hine  as  Social  Critic.  Jackson,  MI:  University  Press  of   Mississippi,  2009.      Schuneman,  Raymond  Smith.  "The  Photograph  in  Print:  An  Examination  of  New   York  Daily  Newspapers,  1890-1937."  Ph.D.  diss.,  University  of  Minnesota,   1966.      Sheehan,  Tanya.  Doctored:  The   M edicine   of   Photography   in   Nineteenth-Century   America.  University  Park,  PA:  The  Pennsylvania  State  University  Press,  2011.      Sontag,  Susan.  Illness   as   M etaphor.  New  York:  Farrar,  Strauss  and  Giroux,  1997.      Stapp,  William.  "'Subjects  of  Strange  ...  and  of  fearful  interest':  Photojournalism  from   Its  Beginnings  in  1839."  In  Eyes   of   Time:   Photojournalism   in   America,  edited   by  Marianne  Fulton,  1-36.  Boston:  Little,  Brown  and  Company,  1988.  

  

62  

  

Stange,  Maren.  Symbols  of  Ideal  Life:  Social  Documentary  Photography  in  America,   1890-1950.  Cambridge,  UK:  Cambridge  University  Press,  1989.      Vitray,  Laura,  and  John  Mills,  Jr.  and  Roscoe  Ellard.  Pictorial   Photojournalism .  New   York:  Arno  Press,  1973.      Von  Ruck,  Karl, ed. The Journal of Tuberculosis: A Quarterly Magazine Devoted to the Prevention and Treatment of Tuberculosis 2 (1900).       Walters,  Frederick  Rufenacht.  Sanatoria  f or  the  Tuberculous:  Including   a   Description   of   M any   Existing   Institutions  and  of  Sanatorium  Treatment  in  Pulmonary   Tuberculosis .  Fourth  Edition.  London:  George  Allen  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  1913.      Warren,  Peter.  "The  Evolution  of  the  Sanatorium:  The  First  Half-Century,  1854- 1904."  Canadian   Bulletin   of  M edical  History   23,  no.  2  (2006):  457-476.      Weller, Charles Frederick. Neglected Neighbors: Stories of Life in the Alleys, Tenements and Shanties in the National Capital. Philadelphia: The John C. Winston Company, 1909.  

63  

