Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Demystifying immigrant youth representations : a look at mainstream and immigrant perspectives within literature and media
Carrie Natsu Kawahatsu
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Film and Media Studies Commons Recommended Citation
Kawahatsu, Carrie Natsu, "Demystifying immigrant youth representations : a look at mainstream and immigrant perspectives within literature and media" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 576.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

DEMYSTIFYING IMMIGRANT YOUTH REPRESENTATIONS: A LOOK AT MAINSTREAM AND IMMIGRANT PERSPECTIVES WITHIN
LITERATURE AND MEDIA

Carrie Natsu Kawahatsu, BA, BEd, California State University, Sacramento 2000, 2002

A Major Research Paper

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts in the Program of

Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009

© Carrie Natsu Kawahatsu 2009

RYEHSGtf UliiVa»TY USFWRV

""/ OF

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the
purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other
scholarly research.

means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose 01

Signature

DEMYSTIFYING IMMIGRANT YOUTH REPRESENTATIONS: A LOOK AT MAINSTREAM AND IMMIGRANT PERSPECTIVES WITHIN
LITERATURE AND MEDIA Carrie Natsu Kawahatsu

Master of Arts, 2009 Immigration and Settlement Studies
Ryerson University ABSTRACT

Firstly, this paper analyses two mainstream films, Gran Torino and Entre les Murs (The Class) and looks at how depictions of immigrant youth are often negative and perpetuate stereotypes and racist ideologies. Through the lens of whiteness, I will argue that mainstream media plays an

important role in maintaining white hegemony by othering people of colour, in particular, immigrant youth. Secondly, the paper analyses immigrant produced media and literary works and explores how they can offer powerful narratives that critique and analyze issues of social
inequality. Utilizing Freire's idea ofconscientization"I contend that youth learn to raise

awareness of oppressive conditions within their community and problematize those conditions within society. The counter-narratives that immigrant youth develop refute"othered'identities by
moving the focus away from the white dominant voice.

Key Words: counter-narratives, immigrant youth, mainstream media representations, othering,

white dominant voice

