Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Constructed identities and appropriated spaces : an exploratory study of South Asian identity and space in Toronto
Anne Katherine Herteis
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Race and Ethnicity Commons Recommended Citation
Herteis, Anne Katherine, "Constructed identities and appropriated spaces : an exploratory study of South Asian identity and space in Toronto" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 509.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

CONSTRUCTED IDENTITIES AND APPROPRIATED SPACES:

AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF SOUTH ASIAN IDENTITY AND SPACE IN TORONTO

by

Anne Katharine Herteis, BA, Mount Allison University, 2008

A Major Research Paper

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts in the program of

Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009
© Anne Herteis, 2009

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRABV

PROPERTY OF

Author's Declaration

CONSTRUCTED IDENTITIES AND APPROPRIATED SPACES:
AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF SOUTH ASIAN IDENTITY
AND SPACE IN TORONTO

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for
the purpose of scholarly research.

Anne Katharine Herteis
Master of Arts, 2009

Immigration and Settlement Studies
Ryerson University

Signature

ABSTRACT

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the
purpose of scholarly research.

"South Asian" is a term commonly used in Canada to refer to individuals with

ancestry in the Indian subcontinent and surrounding countries. The label has been created
through Canada's means of statistical data collection on visible minority populations.
Signature

Drawing from sociological, cultural studies, and geographic literature, this exploratory study seeks to determine the reciprocal relationship between South Asian identities as
they are considered in Canada and urban space in Toronto. The research has been conducted through a critical review of literature regarding ethnic identity, hybridity, the

production of urban space, and two key informant interviews. The key findings of the

research suggest that South Asian identities are often multiple/situational, and that certain

aesthetic aspects of South Asian identity are displayed in urban spaces in Toronto which
may be labelled South Asian. These spaces may be considered hybrid spaces.

KEY WORDS: South Asian, Identity, Ethnic Identity, Toronto, Urban Space

11

in

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I must first thank Dr. Sutama Ghosh who supervised this paper and offered

continued support through all of its changes between our first meetings and its final completion She provided countless hours of work and pages of feedback without which I
could never have organized my ideas or completed this project. Secondly, thank you to

Title Page

..

..

...........

i ii ..iii iv
v

Author's declaration Abstract Acknowledgements
Table of Contents ..

List of Appendices
Introduction

........v
...1

the two key informants who agreed to be interviewed for this work. I would also like to acknowledge the help of Dr. Harald Bauder, my second reader, for offering his help and
feedback in such a short period of time. Finally to Dr. Judith Doyle, Mount Allison University, who not only had the poster for the Immigration and Settlement Studies

1. Research Problem 2. The Research Project
Identity and its spatial expression:

...1 3

A literature review on ethnic minority identities,

multiple and hybrid identities, and urban space

5

1. Identity and ethnic minority identity

5
10 12
17
20

program on her office door, but always made me feel that my ideas were worth
considering, and more importantly, worth writing about.

2. Hybrid identities 2.1. Hybridity and Space
3. Urban space and identity
An exploratory study of South Asians in Toronto

1. Regional affinities and familiar spaces: Key findings 1.1. Defining and understanding South Asian identity(s) South Asian: An externally imposed and internalised identity Regional cultural affinities: Music, movies, and food
Hybrid or multiple identities: "Code switching"

23 23 24 . 26
28

1.2. (How) are these identities represented in space?
South Asian space Commercial space and Indian culture
Discussion and conclusion 1. Identity

30
30 33
34 34

2. Urban space
3. Areas for continued research
Appendix

37
37
41

Bibliography

..

;

42

LIST OF APPENDICES:

Questionnaire

41

IV

INTRODUCTION
1. RESEARCH PROBLEM

2004, p. 184), and shaped by both internal (inscribed) and external (ascribed) forces

(Nagel, 1994, p. 156; Verkuyten, 2004, p. 75). Identity is not necessarily singular. Instead

The fragrance of incense is everywhere inside GTA Square, Scarborough'sfewest mall The scent pervades shops selling vibrantly coloured saris, salwar kurtas (tunics with pyjama-like trousers) and framed pictures of Hindu gods and goddesses, while the Tamil
equivalent of Muzak - devotional tunes and songs from Tamil films - wafts from

it may be multiple and hybrid (Papastergiadis, 2000, p. 502). Hybridity is expressed both
through the possible creation of a new identity (Bhabha, 1996; AlSayyad, 2001) or as a

loudspeakers...GTA square is Toronto's first indoor mall dedicated to a South Asian clientele. Four more South Asian malls are scheduled to open by 2011, including the 240,000-square-foot Sitara and the 80,000-square-food T. Junction, both in Scarborough, the 160,000-square-foot Great Punjab Business Centre in Mississauga and the 220,000-square-foot Taj Centre in BramptoiL Sameer Patel... says these projects face challenges. 'Unlike the previous generation, the
new immigrants are young, savvy and have high household income,' he says. 'If they want to

choice between multiple distinct identities performed by a single person (Lotman, 1990;
Nagel, 1994; Song, 2003).

buy electronics, for example, they will go to the best store irrespective of who owns it. They will not shop in a South Asian mall just because they are South Asians.' (Radhika, Globe and Mail,
November 1st 2008, p. M2)

Canada's high levels of immigration mean multiple ethnic groups reside in the

country's metropolitan areas (Bauder and Sharpe, 2002, p. 205). These groups are often classified as ethnic minorities or visible minorities when compared to Canada's perceived
Caucasian majority population (Symmott & Howes, 1996, p. 141). Visible minorities are

I was curious about this article from November's Globe and Mail and what it

meant for Toronto: what is it about these malls that make them South Asian? What makes
the customers at the malls South Asian?; Other than these malls, are there more South
Asian spaces in Toronto? The article also led me to question ethnic and visible minority

ascribed both a racial identity and a minority identity in Canada which they may not have
accepted before migration. According to Sheffer (2003) and Vertovec (1999), diaspora

identities in Canada. What makes a visible minority and what does the term mean in
Canada?

identities are predominantly shaped through their existence as a minority population. Inter-group interaction in destination countries change migrant and diaspora identities as individuals alter their self-perception in a new location and are influenced by the norms

The questions created by Radhika's (2008) article appeared to address three

l

1

themes: identity, hybrid/multiple identities, and the expression of these identities in space.

of the destination country (Sheffer, 2003, p. 153; Vertovec, 1999, p. 20). These changes
often lead to a hybridization of migrant and diaspora identities.

In order to consider the questions raised by the article, it was imperative to determine

what identity means to immigrant and visible minority populations in Toronto. The era of
postmodern scholarship has rejected ideas of biologically determined identities (Phadnis
and Ganguly, 2001, p. 25) and conceptualized a subject with a continuously changing

Hybrid identities may exist in social space (Verkuyten, 2004), gendered space

(Butler, 1990; Rose, 1993), colonial space (Bhabha, 1996), and urban space (AlSayyad,
2001; Sandrecock, 2003); each position creating its own struggle to produce and define
space and identity. The urban spaces discussed in this paper are interpreted as socially constructed. Instead of a platform for social interaction, space is created by the

identity. In this framework, identity is "historically, not biologically, defined.. .formed and transformed in relation to the ways we are represented or addressed in the cultural systems which surround us" (Hall, 1996a, p. 598). Identity is "constantly in flux" (Davis,

interaction which occurs in it (Brenner, 2004, p.38, p.74; Lefebvre, 1976, p.31). Space is

produced by those who use, create, and appropriate it (Brenner, 2004; Lefebvre, 1976).

Doucet (2001) observes that Toronto is a city where multiple identities can be

Access to space however varies by different axes of social identities including economic class, gender, sexual orientation, and ethnicity (Hayden, 1981; Isin & Siemiatycki, 1999;
Purcell, 2003; Qadeer, 1997; Rose, 1993).

celebrated because multicultural policies encourage individuals to maintain their chosen

ethno-racial and cultural identities. However, despite such claims all immigrants and
minority groups may not be free to express their identities as desired, or to use space

Rhadika's article and the themes of space, identity, and hybridity which arose

equally in the city. As a result, many "immigrant groups in Toronto occupy a marginal
position in the social space" (Isin and Siemiatycki, 1999, pg. 5).

from it inspired three research questions: 1) is there a "South Asian" identity?; 2) is South
Asian ever considered a hybrid identity among those who have immigrated to Canada?; and 3) how is South Asian identity spatially represented in Toronto? The constructivist
approach to the research, emphasizing the social construction of identity (Davis, 2004;

When considering how Canadian statistics define South Asian visible minority

status and how individuals interpret their own ethnic identities one must ask a number of
questions: do people who are categorised as "South Asians" in the Canadian census

Hall, 1996a; Nagel, 1994) and space (Brenner, 2004; Lefebvre, 1976; Lefebvre 1991)
makes qualitative methods the best means through which to explore the research
questions. In this case the methods chosen were a qualitative literature review and two
key informant interviews.

accept and internalize this term? Are there any markers which can be used to recognize

South Asian identity in Canada and Toronto? Is there a single South Asian identity or is it
multiple/hybrid? Finally, how are South Asian identities represented in Toronto's urban
spaces?

It is important to consider the implications of how Canada uses the term "South
2. THE RESEARCH PROJECT

Asian," since, as Patel (2006) states, South Asians only become South Asian after they
migrate to Canada. There is outside pressure to conform to a recognised ethnic category

South Asians are the largest visible minority group in Canada.1 According to the
2006 census, there are more than 1 million South Asians in Canada, about 684,000

(p. 150). This imposition of an ethno-racial marker is investigated here in terms of its relation to how individuals claim, or have an ability to claim, their own identities postimmigration; an important concept as Canada's "South Asian" population grows (Tran et

residing in the Toronto Census Metropolitan Area (CMA). Arguably, Toronto is one of
the most ethnically diverse cities in Canada. The Toronto CMA receives more immigrants and refugees than any other Canadian city (Li, 2003, pg. 147; Hiebert, 2000,
pg. 27). This unprecedented level of immigration is undoubtedly "reshaping the city's

al., 2006) and ethnicity-based muiticulturalism becomes an increasingly contested policy
(Goonewardena & Kipfer, 2005).

self-perception" (Troper 2000, pg. 3), adopting the slogan "Diversity - Our Strength"
(City of Toronto, http://www.toronto.ca/diversity/index.htm).

This paper is divided into three major sections: first, an extensive review of the

literature from the fields of sociology, geography, and cultural studies outlines a number

1 This includes "'East Indian,' 'Pakistani,' 'Sri Lankan,' etc." (Reference 336, Census Definitions 2006).

of different viewpoints regarding ethnic identity, hybridity, and the production of urban
space. Second, the literature review is supplemented by two key informant interviews

identities are "about the relationship between the individual and the environment." Social identities often provide little information about how individuals consider themselves, but
rather place them into pre-existing categories (Verkuyten, 2004,42-43). Social identity is

summarized in section three. Interviews were conducted in order to gather personal opinions about the three research topics of identity, hybridity and urban space as they
specifically relate to South Asian identity and South Asian spaces in Toronto. The final

consequently formed through "categorical characteristics - such as gender, age, and ethnic background - that position people in social space" (Ibid., p. 43).
The two forms of identity can exist simultaneously. Hall (1996b) discusses
identity as "a sort of collective 'one true self" in which individuals who claim belonging in a particular group feel that they can best interpret themselves through collective traits

section offers a discussion of how the interview data relates to the literature and provides
avenues for further research inspired by the preliminary study offered here.

IDENTITY AND ITS SPATIAL EXPRESSION:

(p.211). This kind of collective belonging also means group identities are formed by illuminating the differences between self and other: "identity becomes visible as the point where.. .one subject or agent may come to see itself in others, to be itself through its mediated relationships with others, and to see others in itself (Gilroy, 1996, p. 228). If the identity in question is ethnicity, the above explanation means that it can be

A LITERATURE REVIEW ON ETHNIC MINORITY IDENTITIES, MULTIPLE AND HYBRID IDENTITIES, AND URBAN SPACE
1. IDENTITY AND ETHNIC MINORITY IDENTITY:

Paul Gilroy (2005) writes that current state-centred concepts of ethnicity make it "impossible to imagine that local, national, and ethnic connections and loyalties do not
exhaust any individual" (p. 23). Ethnic identities are becoming a key organizing feature
for social interaction; "This is a time in which what (no longer even who) you are can

determined individually and collectively by subjects both inside and outside the ethnic
group.

Defining ethnic identity is a difficult task; the idea is subjective and dependent on personal interpretations and societal definitions. Driedger (2003) defines ethnic identity

I'll

count for a great deal more than anything you might do, for yourself or for others"

(Gilroy, 2006, p. 384 emphasis in original). Identity need not be singular, however, and it
is increasingly possible and even expected that people will claim multiple identities
through hyphenated or hybrid identities (Hall, 1996a; Mahtani, 2002).

as "a positive personal attitude and attachment to a group with whom the individual believes he/she has a common ancestry based on shared characteristics and shared sociocultural experiences" (p. 137). Driedger (2003) proposes that inter-group interaction

Identities are both personal and social. Personal identities are formed through the

is a crucial aspect to post-migration ethnic identity formation which grows from interaction between three groups: 1) the original ethnic community; 2) the existing
community in the country of settlement; and 3) other ethnic communities located in that

ways individuals categorize themselves according to the roles they occupy; for example

identifying themselves as a student or an athlete (Sets & Burke, 2000, p. 225). Social

country (p, 125). This definition suggests that ethnic identity requires a personal attachment to the ethnic community and that international migration can change both the way ethnic groups are formed and the way individuals identify with their ethnicity. Race, "a category of physical characteristics" (Isajiw, 1999, p. 21) which
individuals may possess, and ethnicity, are becoming synonymous categories. Cultural and ethnic belonging is supplanting the term "race" in discourses of difference and belonging (Gilroy, 2005, p. 36-37). Nonetheless, both race and ethnicity are "products of interaction between diverse populations" and often formed by outsider interpretations
(Cornell & Hartmann, 2007, p. 32). Race, like ethnicity, is a social rather than a biological phenomenon. According to Isajiw (1999), people do not frequently form

included in the definition of visible minority iri the 1996 census included a number of
racially defined groups like "black"; nationally defined groups such as Filipino and

Japanese; and regionally defined groups like Latin American and South Asian (Ibid.).
The category of visible minority is problematic for a number of reasons; it racializes

those populations labelled visible minorities (Ibid.) and denies that Canada's Caucasian
population contains multiple 'minority' populations within it (Symmot & Howes, 1996). The idea of visible minority is not synonymous with ethnic minority, however, as not all ethnic minorities in Canada are visible as non-white (Ibid., p. 141). The use of the term
visible minority implies that Canada's Caucasian population is not visible (Isajiw, 1999,

p. 23)
The concept of visible minority identity is important to this research as South
Asian is a term used to signify a visible minority status in Canada (Bauder and Sharpe,

identities based on their physical traits and will consequently choose to identify with
racial characteristics only "as a response to being categorized and excluded by outsiders" (p. 22). Ethnicity on the other hand is not always an imposed classification; it often has
origins in a group's own process of self-definition (Cornell & Hartmann, 2007, p. 28).

2002; Tran, Kaddatz, & Allard, 2005). Categorizations such as visible minority status mean that immigrant groups often only gain an ethnic identity after migrating and being placed in a category which they previously did not know existed, or did not identify with.
The process of migration can consequently create ethnic and minority groups (Cornell & Hartmann, 1997, p. 31). Therefore, visible minority identities are only relevant in Canadian national space. The use of large, pre-determined categories of visible minority

Race and ethnicity need not be mutually exclusive (Ibid., p. 26), nor are the definitions of

li 1

i\

racial or ethnic groups fixed. For example, the Irish, currently considered a Caucasian
ethnic group, were once considered a non-white race (Ibid.). Cornell and Hartmann
(2007) propose, however, that when visible racial differences are present among a

minority group they tend to overwhelm ethnic differences in the eyes of the majority (p.
27).

identity in Canada, mean groups often choose to identify with labels such as "Black" or "South Asian" for the purposes of social action or because of a shared history which is

A number of racial and ethnic identities are defined in Canada as "visible minority" identities. The term "visible minority" was created to refer to any person in Canada who is neither Caucasian nor aboriginal (Bauder and Sharpe, 2002, p. 205). The groups

only recognized after migration (Isajiw, 1999, p. 22). In this sense, individuals adopt and
potentially internalize elements of multiple ethnic identities which are present in the
country of migration.

There are three primary means of considering ethnic identity: the primordialist,

conceptions of identity must be considered fluid and changeable as these multiple
interpretations frequently differ (Davis, 2004, p. 184; Phinney, 1996, p. 145).

constmctivist, and situational viewpoints. Primordialism assumes that ethnic identity is a biological rather than a social trait. In this case, traits such as skin or hair colour are

The final means of considering identity, situational identity, describes instances in which individuals choose which identity, personal or social, to emphasize in a given situation (Sets & Burke, 2000, p. 231). When considering ethnic identities, situational
identity means "ethnicity is something which may be relevant in some situations but not

attributed to ethnic identity. When considered in this way, individuals are said to be born
identifying with certain cultural and ethnic characteristics like "language, race, religion, customs, tradition, food, dress and music;" ethnic identity is inherent (Phadnis and Ganguly, 2001, p. 23). In naturalizing concepts like race, gender, sexual preference, and
ethnicity, primordialism is often blamed for stereotypical and prejudicial ideas which
render identity static and unchanging (Butler 1990; Gilroy 2006; HaU, 1996c; Verkuyten,

in others" (Isajiw, 1999, p. 31). For example, one may emphasize his identity as a father when claiming fatherhood is advantageous, or an individual can accentuate traits such as
an accent if they feel their ethnic identity is beneficial in a given situation. Georgiou

2004). Consequently, it is no longer used in most social scientific scholarship (Hall
1996a; Phadnis and Ganguly, 2001); it is deemed determinist and often racist (Phadnis
and Ganguly, 2001, p. 25).

explains a form of situational ethnic identity with a term borrowed from the study of
linguistics; "code switching" (Georgiou, 2006, p. 63). This concept is discussed in more
depth below.

The alternative viewpoint, constructivism, grew out of the field of sociology (Hall,

1996a, p. 597); in this case, ethnic identities are socially constructed, and occasionally
consciously chosen (Nagel, 1994; Phadnis and Ganguly, 2001; Verkuyten, 2004).

2. HYBRID IDENTITIES

Hybrid identities occur through a mixing and combining of multiple cultural identity traits outside of "exclusionary, fixed, binary notions of identity" (McLeod, 2000,

'*.
i

Constructivist interpretations state that ethnic identities are formed and maintained
through individual and group comparisons with non-group members and by the

pg. 219). The study of how hybrid identities are performed, created, and interpreted has
become a key characteristic of scholarship on immigrant and diaspora communities

interpretations and definitions of outsiders (Gilroy, 2006, p. 386; Nagel, 1994, p. 154).
Ethnic identity is "negotiated and constructed in everyday living" (Isajiw, 1999, p. 33),
and "conceptualized as the relationship between subjects and broader discursive

(Scheffer, 2003, p. 153; Vertovec, 1999, p. 20).
Nikos Papastergiadis (2000) synthesises the work of Hall and Bhabha and

practices" existing in society (Durham, 2004, p. 141). The use of constructivist theories
of ethnic identity formation means that both individual and outsider/insider group

discusses how Hall's theories of cultural identity are relevant to hybridity. Papastergiadis

writes: "According to Stuart Hall, cultural identity is always hybrid, but he also insists

interpretations are equally important in defining an ethnic identity. Consequently

that the precise form of this hybridity will be determined by specific historical

9

10

formations" (p.189). Hybridity is consequently a result of historical encounters between

2.1.Hybridity and space

groups either through colonial settlement or interaction between diverse populations in
countries of migration (Ibid,).

The literature discussed above considers concepts of hybridity as they relate to

individuals' interpretations of their own ethnic identity. However, in order to answer the research questions guiding this work, it is crucial to consider the ways in which hybrid identities are performed in and change physical spaces. The following section explores three areas of scholarship in hybridity and space: hybridity as a postcolonial theory; the
practice of hybrid identities in daily life and space; and existing empirical research.
Homi Bhabha, the seminal scholar in postcolonial theories of hybridity (McLeod,

Among minority and immigrant populations, Gabriel Scheffer (2003) states-

matter how members

identity' n°nQ °fthem

will be completely immune to the influences ofthe host-country culture and norms" (p.153). Vertovec (1999) emphasizes the fluidity of identity among diasporic peoples as

they construct "syncretic, creolised" identities when placed in new multicultural
situations (p. 20). Vertovec (1999), drawing from Stuart Hall, posits that the diaspora

2000)| describes hybrid identity in both literary and spatial analyses. Bhabha's (1996)
essay "Culture's in-between" summarizes how colonial and postcolonial population
movements have created "in-between" or "partial cultures" through mixing the cultural traits of colonizers with those of the local population (p. 54). According to Bhabha, the
new cultures were simultaneously similar to their original incarnations, but also unique; no longer recognizable or tied to a particular territory (Bhabha, 1996, p. 54). He questions assumptions that culture is a purely national phenomenon, noting that within this national

experience is entirely coloured by hybridity and cultural fluidity (p. 20). However, what
Vertovec and Scheffer do not emphasize strongly enough is that the process of
hybridization also works in reverse, changing how identity is experienced by newcomers

as well as the existing population in the country of migration. There is a reciprocal relationship between groups, producing hybridity on both sides (Bhabha, 1996, p.54).
Hybrid identities can also be expressed through personal choice, rather than

ascribed through country of residence or comparisons with other ethnic groups. Like the
above discussion of situations identity, hybridity can be expressed through choosing to

framework! global cultures seem unimaginable and impossible (Ibid.). Hybridity can
therefore remove cultural identity from specific national spaces; the "in-between" cultures created through colonialism have echoes of both the colonial metropolis and the

use or reject various traits in specific situations (Georgiou, 2006; Lotman 1990; Song 2003). Georgiou (2006) uses a concept borrowed from linguistics to illustrate a choice

colonies but could not claim a natural belonging in either location (Ibid.). However,
although Bhabha proposes denationalizing identity, he does not specify what happens

between multiple ethnicities or traits; "code switching." Within diasporic and hybrid
populations, individuals who employ code switching perform the identity which is most

once culture is conceptualized in a non-national, global framework.
Feminist geographer Gillian Rose (1993) writes of the potential for relocating

salient or beneficial in any given situation (p. 63). An individual can choose the most
relevant traits of multiple identities to express themselves.

identity to new spaces in a tone similar to Bhabha's. According to Rose, the feminine

11

12

subject is one in which multiple identities of "race and class, as well as sexual" interact in
one person (Rose, 1993, p. 153.)- Women are therefore not only women; they
concurrently perform and switch between multiple identities.

erased?" (Ibid.). Mitchell does not believe Bhabha's abstract work goes far enough to

consider this question and explain how hybridity crosses geographical borders.
Mitchell's second criticism against scholarship of hybridity is the frequent

Because of the multiplicity inherent in female identity, Rose defines the spaces

description of hybridity as a predominantly emancipatory strategy (Mitchell, 1997a, p.

inhabited by feminine subjects as paradoxical (Rose, 1993, p. 138). The interplay of

533). Mitchell articulates her disagreement, stating: "In much of contemporary cultural criticism there is a celebration of diaspora and hybridity as spaces of subversion" and offers her work as a critique to the notion that hybridity is necessarily a space of conscious resistance (Ibid.). Mitchell does not believe people always adopt or perform
hybrid identities in order to resist dominant and repressive discourses (Foucault, 1996).

multiple identities in a single person makes the spaces they inhabit "multidimensional,
shifting ...Spaces that would be mutually exclusive if charted on a two-dimensional map
- centre and margin, inside and outside - are occupied simultaneously" (Ibid.). Rose
explains that these paradoxical spaces are difficult to conceptualize because they are
created by the myriad intersecting identities performed there (Ibid.).
There are similarities in the images used by Rose and Bhabha, most notably the

According to Mitchell, hybrid identities and those who perform them cannot "always be
equated with a politically progressive agenda" (Mitchell, 1997a, p. 533). Mitchell (1997a) and Nezar AlSayyad (2001) believe that hybridity can simply be

concept of an "elsewhere" (Rose, 1993, p. 149) of hybridity, a place where identity can

be decoupled from territory. Both Rose and Bhabha posit that hegemonic masculine and
nationalized concepts of space prevent true consideration of how hybrid identity exists in
non-national or un-bounded space.

a personal identity, consciously or unconsciously chosen; it can exist in practice as well
as in protest (AlSayyad, 2001, p. 2). AlSayyad (2001) states that hybridity must be
considered in its tangible, daily expressions rather than just in theory (AlSayyad, 2001, p.

Geographer Katharyne Mitchell (1997a) criticises Bhabha for the abstractness of

2). Hybridity, then, is a lived experience chosen by individuals who wish to use it to achieve various aims performed in everyday spaces and places. Hybridity need not grow from a colonial past or a second generation immigrant

his work. Instead of simply imagining an "elsewhere" (Rose, 1993, p. 149) in which

hybridity can be located, Mitchell posits that the cultural boundaries of the nation must be
made clear before being erased by hybrid subjects (Mitchell, 1997a, p. 537). Mitchell
does not believe Bhabha's theories sufficiently acknowledge these cultural and national
boundaries. She consequently questions the role of geography in discussions of hybridity.

identity. It can also grow out of the struggles inherent in transnationalism and attempts to feel belonging in multiple cultures. Two exemplary studies explore the outcomes of

hybrid identity in practice: Sutama Ghosh, Lu Wang, and Minelle Mahtani. Sutama Ghosh and Lu Wang (2003) wrote an empirical study of hybridity and

She asks: "What are the actual physical spaces in which these boundaries are crossed and

transnational identity. Their paper's major strength is the unique research design chosen

14 13

The most significant element in this research is Mahtani's assertion that women

who claim mixed race identity "exercised their right to choose their own ethnic

tec was a particular moment in which they became transnational (Ibid, p. 270).
The res* of Ghosh and Wang's research highlight the ways in which the

allegiances" (Mahtani, 2002, p. 25). The women who spoke to Mahtani did not feel bound to claim a single national identity. Occasionally they chose to identify with a
single ethno-racial identity; sometimes emphasized multiple ethno-racial identities; often

formation ofahybrid identi* can closely follow the adoption ofat--ional M^
Ghosh writes tha, she felt he, Indian and Can»di» consciousnesses colhdmg once m

rejected all national or ethno-racial identities ascribed to them; and sometimes chose
another option, choosing to claim their own combination of important and significant factors in their identity (Ibid.) This result from her research is entirely compatible with

Toronto and tha, she immediately "adopted a 6- lifes*le» (.bid, p. 271-274). Ghosh's
and Wang's experiences * seamlessly into me literal ofhybrid identity, which often

uses examples ofcarrying mu,tip.e identities a, a time * be used a, «. (Georgiou, 2006;
Song, 2CK.3). These intern, of hybridity help move the wo* of Ghosh and Wang
out of the field oftransnational and into scholarship of identity and hybridity.
Mother empirical study on the performance of hybrid/multiple identities was conduced by MineUe Mah«uu (2002). He, wo* focuses on the ways mixed race women

many theories about ethnic hybridity and a subject's agency in choosing how and when to
claim certain identities (Georgiou, 2006; Song, 2003).

Interrogating the relationship between space and identity can take many forms. As

illustrated above, there are avenues available in literary, empirical, and geographic
scholarship. The work completed by Mahtani (2002) and Ghosh, and Wang (2003)

in Toronto experience their own identities and the ways non-national identity can he
consciously chosen, defined, and navigated in Canadian society.

illustrates the subjectivity of hybridity, and its contingency upon personal experience. Canada's urban centres, as the primary destinations for immigrants to the country (Bauder & Sharpe, 2002, p. 205) are natural sites for hybrid identities to form. The daily interaction between individuals of different ethnic groups (Goonewardena & Kipfer, 2005, p. 676) and the proximity of ethnic neighbourhoods to each other will undoubtedly
lead to this kind of reciprocal exchange (Scheffer, 2003, p. 153).

Mahtani required self identification by participants as "multiracial, bicultural,

biracial, multiemnic, racial mixed o, of mixed ethmc origin or ancestry" (Mahtara, 2002 p. 7). Although technically about women who identify as having mixed race

identities rather than hybrid identities, Mahtani's participants acknowledge the ways in

which identity is dependent on station and location. Like the choices outiined by Ghosh
and Wang (2003), Mahtani's participants chose which identity to emphasise * different

times: -ethnic' identity itself is intrinsically linked to a politics of location, with Ac
women's racialization shifting in different contexts" (Mahtani, 2002, p. 14).
16 15

3. URBAN SPACE AND IDENTITY

and hegemony used by Lefebvre, in which gaining the right to the city requires overcoming barriers prohibiting marginalized groups from fully participating in placemaking (Goonewardena & Kipfer, 2005, p. 676). Goonewardena and Kipfer (2005) state that Canada's doctrines of multiculturalism have falsely reified performances and
displays of hybridity in Toronto. Consumerist cosmopolitan doctrines have prevented any real intercultural engagement in the city, or a true appropriation of space. This
consumerist ideology has in turn prevented minority groups from gaining the right to the city (p. 675). Multiculturalism, according to these two authors, is a profit-driven creation
designed to promote commercial displays of ethnicity and hybridity (Ibid.). 'Cosmopolitan' has become the label of choice for major urban centres desiring to

This section reviews the literature regarding the production of space by different

social groups as well as the historical processes which have prevented the appropriation
and production of urban space in cosmopolitan and multicultural cities. Urban space is not distributed equally, nor does it equally represent all city residents (Isin and
Siemiatycki, 1999, pg. 5). There are two primary explanations for this inequality: a Marxist viewpoint which discusses unequal distribution of space based on economic class (Lefebvre, 1976,1991; Purcell, 2003); and a culturalist viewpoint which looks at inequality through the lens of cosmopolitanism and urban ethnic diversity (Qadeer, 1997;
Sandrecock, 2003)

Philosopher Henri Lefebvre uses class conflict to explain how space is used and produced in the modern city. Discussing neglect in urban planning, Lefebvre argues that space is considered normatively by governments and planners, without due consideration
for the social needs of those who would use it (Lefebvre, 1976, p.30). Brenner (2004) asserts that space is in fact political and representative of societies' power-holding classes. The exclusive representation of elite interests in urban space alienates its unprivileged

capitalize on their diversity (Beck, 2006; Calhoun, 2001; Sandrecock, 2003). Urban
governance, according to Binnie et al prioritises aesthetically cosmopolitan urban environments rather than the actual needs of transnational urban communities (Binnie et al., 2006, p. 16). In order to be marketed as cosmopolitan, diversity has to be visible in
urban spaces (Calhoun, 2001; Sandrecock, 2003). Within this framework, immigrant and

transnational groups can benefit by being encouraged to spatially display their ethnic

users (p. 79). In many urban settings ethnic minorities form these underprivileged groups
(Isin and Siemiatycki, 1999, p. 5). In order for urban groups to produce their own space, they must have access to

identity (Buzzelli, 2001; Collins, 2006) or be disenfranchised by spatial norms which are
not true representations of their needs (Isin & Siemiatycki, 1999; Mitchell, 1997b). Racialized and immigrant groups are often disadvantaged by hegemonic

full participation in urban life; the "right to the city" (Purcell, 2003, p. 577). Discussing
Toronto, Goonewardena and Kipfer (2005) and Goonewardena (2003) also posit that the

conceptions of space in similar ways to those described by Lefebvre. However, scholars

using Lefebvre's work in the context of cosmopolitanism and space consider racial and ethnic identity rather than class as the primary barrier to the production of space. Agrawal and Hathiyani (2007) discuss hegemony in the planning process as a method of

rights to produce space and to interpret space through one's own ideology and identity
are central to gaining rights to the city. They continue the Marxist understanding of space

JIYBISON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY GF

17

18

projecting the "mentalities" of dominant ethnic groups, rather than dominant economic

AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF SOUTH ASIANS IN TORONTO
In order to explore some of the themes emerging from this literature review, a
short exploratory study was conducted in the form of in-depth interviews with two key
informants during the summer of 2009 in Toronto. The key informants were chosen
because of their academic work in the fields of immigration and South Asian identity and because they had acknowledged some connection with the idea of South Asian.

classes onto space (Agrawal & Hathiyani, 2007, p. 135). Similarly, Isin and Siemiatycki
(1999), andQadeer (1997), explain hegemony in the production of space as aresult of

institutionalized discrimination and Eurocentric norms in aesthetic and spatial
preferences (Isin & Siemiatycki, 1999, p. 12; Qadeer, 1997, p. 482).

Leonie Sandrecock (2003) perceives a link between identity and space, especially
in multicultural and cosmopolitan urban environments. She explains: "When residents with different histories, cultures and needs appear in 'our' cities, their presence disrupts the taken-for-granted categories of social life and urban space" (p. 20). The above

Professors Sumir and Naseem,2 the informants who participated in this project, are based
in Toronto and work in one of the city's universities. They are in an age range of 31+, and both immigrated to Canada as adults from India and Pakistan respectively. Both

theories of hybridity and the production of urban space privilege agency and oppression
to different extents. However, no matter how these hybrid identities are produced, they require intercultural exchange between ethnic groups. Space and place are therefore particularly important. Urban space which has been constructed, produced and appropriated by different ethnic groups provides sites of intercultural interaction in cities;

participants have post-graduate educations and are in the income bracket of $80,001 $110,000. Each interview took approximately 30 minutes.

Qualitative techniques were the exclusive approach to this research and were

deemed appropriate for two reasons: first, since identity is a subjective and flexible
concept (Hall, 1996a, p. 598), I believe it cannot be satisfactorily explored through rigid

the ideal locales for forming hybrid identities. If immigrant and ethnic groups can gain
the right to the city and appropriate space, the locations in which this cultural exchange
occurs will multiply, as will the different forms of identity. The theories of Lefebvre,

or highly structured interview techniques. Secondly, my goal was to explore broad
research themes and not prove or disprove a hypothesis (Neuman, 2006, p. 158). By

.ill

adopting qualitative methods, the in-depth discussions allowed a personal dialogue to
develop between the participants and myself.

Sandrecock, and Bhabha, among others provide the framework from which to consider
the reciprocal roles of urban space and ethnic identity in shaping each other.

Since my data relies heavily on the personal experiences and opinions of the two
participants, there is a risk the data collected will not be entirely truthful; be influenced

by participants' preconceived notions of myself as a researcher; and not be applicable to
other individuals or populations. However, the personal narratives collected through the

The informants' names have been changed.

19

20

interviews provide a thick description of the how the informants interpret and experience
South Asian identity and its relevance to urban space in Toronto. Two major themes were covered in the topical interviews; the exploration of
South Asian Identity, and the identification of South Asian Spaces in the Toronto CMA. Under the first theme, the participants were requested to describe how they felt about the term South Asian, the specific situations in which they were likely to self identify as South Asians, and markers of South Asian identity. Under the second theme, the

By grounding my research in constructivism and theories of socially constructed identities, I am likely to challenge many commonly accepted ideas of how individuals
navigate their own identities and understand life in Canada. Such epistemological and

ontological predispositions lead me to question the utility of a multiculturalism based on

national, or in this case regional, ethnic identities, and common understandings of ethnic
identity as singular and national (Beck, 2006, p. 27; Gilroy, 2005, p. 23).

The research project was altered considerably due to a lack of response to my
calls for participants. The original research proposal was for an empirical project drawn
from focus group research with South Asian youth in Toronto. However, I did not suspect

informants were asked to discuss their impressions of South Asian space in Toronto.
One interview was tape-recorded and transcribed. The second informant, however,
preferred not to be recorded. As a result, extensive notes were taken during the interview.

there would be so much ambivalence and reluctance to participate among potential focus
group participants. Multiple requests to student groups and individuals who had
previously expressed interest in the project went unanswered over the course of recruiting. I believe there are multiple factors which may have caused this ambivalence; one being

The interviews were thematically coded and analysed based on the three research
questions previously outlined.

When positioning myself in this research, it must be noted that I am not part of

the South Asian community in Toronto or a member of a visible minority group. I am a second generation Canadian, however, and my personal experience of feeling belonging

my positionality. Not being South Asian myself, the individuals I contacted may have
been reluctant to discuss this topic with me. If the poor response stemmed from more than ambivalence, I do not doubt that my outsider status was a factor. Consequently, the

in multiple cultural milieus informs the way I perceive narratives of hybrid and multiple
III!1"

identities. My position as a student interviewing university professors likely influenced
power relations during the interview sessions. It was challenging to address such personal

research is drawn from only two key informant interviews and not a larger sample.

questions to senior academics, and my discomfort likely led me to miss opportunities to

probe further into concepts I found unclear. This discomfort was magnified by the subject under investigation; I am not myself South Asian and was at times uncomfortable

questioning others about an identity I do not share. It is possible that the informants'
answers were influenced by the fact that I do not share a South Asian identity.

1. REGIONAL AFFINITIES AND FAMILIAR SPACES: KEY FINDINGS

21

22

The scholarship reviewed above illustrates how individuals navigate multiple
ethno-racial identities and how these identities may be variously expressed in physical
spaces. The two interviews were conducted to further explore these ideas and the three
main research questions that have guided this project

Dasmohapatra, & Shakir, 2004; Ghosh, 2006)3. The key informants confirmed these
ideas to a large extent.
South Asian: An externally imposed and internalised identity

Corroborating Ghosh's contentions about South Asian identity, the key
informants pointed out that the term South Asian is created by the Canadian census. Although they would not consistently want to identify themselves as South Asian, they

In the following sections the information collected from the key informants is analysed and presented in two primary categories: the first deals with the key informants'

definition and understanding of the term South Asian and the specific phenotypic and socio-cultural characteristics that they identified to be a part of a South Asian identity in
Canada. Emerging from this discussion is the idea that South Asian identity in Canada is multiple and potentially hybrid. The second section considers the spatial expressions of
South Asian identity in Toronto.

are forced to do so in certain situations (Bauder &Sharpe, 2002; Ghosh 2000b; Patel,
2006). Naseem, for example, stated: "[I became South Asian] after I arrived in Canada

and it was after I discovered how I was being labelled, particularly in the census data" (Interview with Naseem, 2009). Sumir suggests that Canada's means of data collection

on ethno-racial and visible minority populations have "created" the ethno-racial category of South Asian in this country; being South Asian is not inherent in an individual, but "is

1.1. Defining and understanding South Asian identity(s)

a term adopted in Canada" (Interview with Sumir, 2009).

Ghosh (2000b, 2006, 2007a, 2007b) contends that although South Asian is a commonly used term in Western societies such as Britain, Canada, and the United States

Theories of ethnic identity formation propose that although imposed, members of a minority group may internalise a specific identity in particular situations to further their
access to various social, economic and political resources (Ghosh, 2000b, p. 9-10;

to identify immigrants from the geographic region including India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka,
Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and Afghanistan, the term is controversial. There is little
agreement among researchers regarding the region's boundaries or the connotations of

Modood, 2001, p. 68). This type of identity is called situational identity (Sets & Burke, 2000, p. 231). Naseem substantiated this theory by stating that she would only claim to be

the term South Asian. Scholars including Ghosh also argue that although South Asian is seldom used for the purpose of individual self-identification, the term may be used as a

South Asian in particular situations, such as when faced with limited categories or

options: "If responding to census categories then yes [I am South Asian]" (Interview with

group identity in specific situations to gain economic and/or political benefits (Chatterjee,

Naseem, 2009). Sumir states that due to the ways in which ethno-racial identities are
In her doctoral dissertation Ghosh (2006) questions the connotations of the term South Asian, arguing South Asia is an imaginary place and South Asian is a census category that homogenises a diverse group of people from various countries of birth; diverse linguistic and religious affinities; and different economic backgrounds. Ghosh (2006; 2007) demonstrates that South Asian subgroups in Toronto have different
reasons for and processes of migration, settlement patterns, and transnational ties.

23

24

interpreted and race-based statistics collected in Canada, South Asian is something which must be "adopted." Thus, for both key informants, "South Asian" is an externally
imposed identity.

When you go and meet somebody and they say 'oh, I know somebody from South Asia' as if I was, you know, the same as that person because of my skin colouring or my country of origin or whatever... .Has some ideas about what South Asian-ness is. So that they might think of me as a curry eating woman, or a woman who is oppressed in a patriarchal society, or

somebody who is struggling in Canada to make a living. So whatever those stereotypes might
be, when somebody labels me as South Asian! think those stereotypes are being evoked by

putting me into that particular slot. (Interview with Naseem, 2009)

During the course of the interviews, however, the informants listed specific

Naseem states that this stereotype of South Asian "essentializes" her mid does not allow
phenotypic features as well as some socio-cultural and regional commonalities that are
her to express other parts of who she is (Interview with Naseem, 2009). Naseem

frequently understood in Canada as markers of South Asian identity. Sumir stated that understands the Canadian-made category of South Asian and its attendant stereotypes as "there are three things: first is colour, second is accent.. .third is demeanour" (Interview
monolithic and homogenizing.

with Sumir, 2009). Naseem explains that "skin colour, body shape, hair, eyes, etc" are
These stereotypes, Naseem says, in no way represent who she is, nor do they

often considered markers of a South Asian identity (Interview with Naseem, 2009).
represent the elements of South Asian culture with which she identifies. Naseem,

Naseem also refers to instances when she is interpreted as a South Asian because therefore, does not feel that she fits into the Canadian idea of what makes a South Asian

someone else did not know her background or to which nation she belonged "because of
person and consequently chooses not to claim a South Asian ethnic identity.

[her]... skin colour" (Interview with Naseem, 2009).
Illustrating an instance of situational identity, Sumir states that to avoid being

Naseem pointed out a number of inscribed characteristics of South Asian identity.
stereotyped he will answer questions regarding identity differently in different situations.

For example, a South Asian identity may be represented by aesthetic choices in clothing:
Sumir believes that as a multicultural identity, South Asian can in fact deflect stereotypes
A lot of colourful clothing. Saris, shalwar kamiz, men wearing sort of longish shirts, kurtas, and shalwar with them, a small skull cap, not like a Jewish skull cap which is pretty small, but a slightly larger one. (Interview with Naseem, June 16,2009)

which attach to better understood national identities like Indian:

Naseem thus echoes Pnina Werbner's (1999) contentions that identity may be expressed

"I would not call myself Indian. I would rather use a broader term like Canadian or South Asian... People have a specific idea of Indian. I become compared to some other person. They will say 'I thought all Indians are vegetarians. I prefer not to [identity myself like that]." (Interview
with Sumir, 2009)

through transnational aesthetic choices such as clothing -which are not only a way of
expressing cultural belonging, but of "making places travel, of making contiguity out of
distant locations" (p. 25).
!

Regional cultural affinities: Music, movies, andfood

Naseem, while rejecting the Canadian stereotypes which attempt to reify South

illiil llili

The key informants suggested that certain stereotypes were evoked by using South Asian as an ethno-racial category; many outsiders consider it a unified group. This homogenization prevents Naseem from internalizing a South Asian identity.

Asian as an ethno-racial identity, does feel a strong connection to the region's material and aesthetic culture. For Naseem, it is this kind of cultural commonality which truly
exemplifies the idea of South Asian rather than the racial, religious, or historical ideas

which typically define ethno-racial identities (Hall, 1996a, p. 616). Naseem lists many

25

26

l\

"common" cultural elements of South Asian identity with which she feels an affinity,
such as food, music, film, clothing, and television programmes (Interview with Naseem,
2009). Naseem states that these elements create a link between herself and the aspects of South Asia with which she wants to identify. The material and aesthetic cultures of South

based in racial and ethnic terms, but rather determined primarily by traits such as "music,
food, dress, and customs"(Phadrris & Ganguly, 2001, pg. 19).
Hybrid or multiple identities: "Code switching"

Although I did not ask a direct question about hybrid identities during the

Asia are what create Naseem's "nostalgia" for past experiences (Interview with Naseem,
2009).

interviews, it was a topic I hoped to investigate through descriptions of South Asian identity. Both informants in describing situations in which they felt South Asian or the

For example, Naseem sought the familiar aesthetic of the Gerrard India Bazaar
upon moving to Canada in order to connect with her past in Pakistan:
Take the Gerrard India Bazaar. Shortly after I eame to Canada I learnt about this and I went there to explore it, to see what was there, to see if I could recognize anything that was familiar to me. Not necessarily to buy stuff but to see the colours, the smells, the food, that would connect me in a nostalgic way with the country of my origin and the area around that. (Interview with Naseem
2009)

different ways South Asian identities were expressed and represented in Canada offered
examples of multiple identities. The answers were surprising, however, as neither

participant stated that they ever felt more than one identity concurrently. The interviews
instead provided evidence that the participants identify with more than a single marker of

Naseem is happy to discuss some traits which she considers tangibly South Asian.

national, regional, or ethno-racial identity, illustrating multiple identities and instances of
"code switching" (Georgiou, 2006, pg. 63) or situational identity (Sets & Burke, 2000).
Sumir discusses modulating his cultural performance in different situations:

However, these traits are those which she seeks out and chooses to claim for herself. In

the example above, Naseem decides for herself what is South Asian, how she interprets
these elements, and how they relate to herself and her past.

"Circumstances may cause me to modulate my accent or my demeanour if I am among
South Asian people or people who are not South Asian" (Interview with Sumir, 2009).
However, he does not specify how or why he alters his accent and demeanour; whether

I!

The phrase "music, movies, and food" came up a number of times in my

conversation with Naseem. In conjunction with these three cultural ideas, she frequently

used the word "affinity" to explain her relationship to these traits (Interview with Naseem,

he wishes to appear more or less South Asian to other South Asians, or more or less
South Asian to those who are outside the group. When identifying himself, Sumir explains that "I don't refer to myself as South Asian but if someone else like you uses it,

2009). Naseem says that "people from South Asia tend to.. .gravitate toward each other in

social contexts, so there must be commonalities like food or movies or music" (Interview with Naseem, 2009). These ties connect people "between India and Pakistan, to some
extent with people from Bangladesh" and that the Urdu language connects Nepal and

it is fine" (Interview with Sumir, 2009). Naseem also makes decisions about how to

identify herself in different situations. When asked about whether or not she is South
Asian, Naseem says, "It clearly depends on which context I'm located in at that point

Pakistan (Interview with Naseem, 2009). It is, therefore, possible that a South Asian

identity might be more acceptable if it was not considered a homogenized ethnicity,

27

28

when that question is put to me and who is the person that is putting that question to me"
(Interview with Naseem, 2009).

aspects of an identity but have a degree of control and choice over how they express
ethno-racial markers.

South Asian appears to be a flexible concept which can be used or not used

depending on the situation (however, both respondents concede that this level of choice is
not present in the collection of official statistics). While this flexibility does not necessarily confirm that South Asian identity is hybrid, it does suggest that some who

L2. (How) are these identities represented in space? The second half of the interview sessions with Naseem and Sumir focused on urban spaces in Toronto; the existence of South Asian spaces in the city and the ways
which one can recognize those spaces. However, despite being asked the same questions, the two informants offered answers which differed drastically. Sumir disagreed with the notion of South Asian space as something concrete and identifiable from other forms of
space. Naseem stated that simply attracting a large number of South Asian people was enough to make a space South Asian. However, it is possible to draw themes of private and public spaces and the preponderance of Indian cultural traits in South Asian space

perform various aspects of South Asian identity may switch in and out of it when it best
suits or represents them.

The literature reviewed in previous sections states that hybridity can be
considered in two ways: through the creation of new "third" identities based on a combination of traits from multiple sources (AlSayyad, 2001; Vertovec, 1999); and as a

choice between multiple traits based on their appropriateness in various situations
(Georgiou, 2006; Song, 2003; Vertovec, 1999). While examples of choosing relevant

from the two interviews.4
South Asian space

facets of identity appear frequently in the two interviews, the creation of new, "syncretic"
(Vertovec, 1999, p. 27) identities does not seem to be important to the two participants. It

Qadeer (1999, p. 19) and Bauder and Sharpe (2002, p. 216) argue that Toronto's South Asian population is dispersed within the metropolitan area, ^identifying one

may be possible to speculate that, since neither of these participants felt a particular

affinity to South Asian identity or a strong affinity to another ethnic or national identity,
these performances of hybridity do not apply.

specific location, Qadeer (1999) and Lo et al (2000) discuss the role of the Gerrard St.
area of Toronto as a location of South Asian commercial activity. Their scholarship posits that this area is a centralized South Asian commercial space; however, many other South Asian spaces are spread throughout the city. Qadeer, (1999) explains that these dispersed commercial areas, rather than being localized in South Asian residential neighbourhoods,

The idea of "code switching" (Georgiou, 2006, pg. 63) is used in discussions of

hybridity to imply switching between multiple identities or emphasizing different aspects of oneself at different times or for different audiences. Situationally modifying how one
performs their identity or how one refers to their identity was discussed by both Sumir and Naseem during our interviews, suggesting that one may not consistently perform all

serve instead as "pivots of community life, drawing customers from wider areas and

4 This section focuses only on the spatial representation of South Asian identities in Toronto. It does not
seek to undertake a geographic analysis of the spaces themselves.

29

30

catering to other ethnic groups" rather than residential centres (Qadeer, 1999, p. 19).

Naseem considers ethnic spaces in terms of recognizable enclaves or commercial
areas like Ghinatown. She states that since Toronto's South Asians are residentially
dispersed in "pockets" around the city that the community cannot appropriate space in the
same way as other groups with a more localized population: "[South Asian space] isn't as large as I would say like a Chinatown which is much larger, much more well-established. But these are smaller pockets but you do see artefacts of South Asian culture in those
spaces" (Interview with Naseem, 2009).

Naseem's comments below appear to directly echo this research and indicate that there is a separation between South Asian commercial spaces and dispersed residential space, as
well as a large number of South Asian commercial areas spread around the city. South

Asian public and private spaces were differentiated by the key informants: defining residential spaces as private space and commercial spaces as public space. Sumir sets apart "South Asian identity in public" from South Asian identity in

general (Interview with Sumir, 2009), suggesting that South Asian identity is best
represented and recognized in public space. Sumir states that there is very little which is recognizable in private South Asian space, and that the material and aesthetic

Sumir and Naseem emphasize that South Asian space is recognized by aesthetic, material, and commercial goods. Naseem again mentions the Gerrard India Bazaar as a South Asian space in addition to Thorncliffe Park, and parts of Scarborough and Mississauga. She identifies the presence of stores and shops selling South Asian food and products as definitive signifiers of South Asian space (Interview with Naseem, 2009). Within public space, Sumir says that representations of consumer and material culture are the predominant ways in which South Asian space is recognized, and possibly the only things which make public spaces South Asian. Without these uses and traits
"space is just space;" it is neutral:
Space is just space. Is it private or public? Space encompasses many things. There can be a South
Asian mall or a store, but spaces are the buildings, structures, roads, surrounding areas. Spaces

demonstrations which make up South Asian identities are found only in public: "Public
spaces have a public display of South Asian culture and physical form. Private spaces are not recognizable as South Asian. Homes and houses have very little display of South
Asian culture outside" (Interview with Sumir, 2009).

Naseem says that residential concentrations of South Asian people are an

important way to recognize South Asian space. When asked if there were South Asian
spaces in the city, Naseem responded by describing an area with a large South Asian
residential population:
There's a very large grocery store and there's a mosque, and in the buildings surrounding that area there's a lot of residents from South Asian background....so if you go to the school you see a lot of children from South Asian backgrounds so it seems there's a concentration of people from
South Asia in Thorncliffe Park area. (Interview with Naseem, 2009)

have been adapted for South Asian needs and to be used by South Asian people. I would be
careful saying South Asian space, though. (Interview with Sumir, 2009)

Therefore, according to Sumir, places where South Asian products are found, or where South Asian People go to receive services, are as close as one can get to South Asian
space. For Naseem, these kinds for spaces are definitively South Asian.

Although one may not immediately recognize private spaces as South Asian spaces, a
large South Asian residential population is enough for Naseem to consider space South
Asian.

31

32

Commercial space and Indian culture Work by Werbner (2004) and Punathambekar (2005) discuss the importance of Hindi/Bollywood films to the South Asian diaspora. Indian film, according to

is interesting that Naseem specifies the importance of Indian film and Indian culture when discussing a South Asian space. It is possible that India, as the largest state in South

f

Asia, has dominated the region's culture. However, it is also possible that spaces may be
simultaneously Indian and South Asian, appealing to a South Asian population through

Punathambekar (2005), allows audiences to "maintain... temporal continuities with the
imagined homeland" (p. 156) while being able to engage immigrant and second generation youth with their Indian heritage. She concludes that "Hindi film consumption

Indian culture. Naseem's intertwined discussion of Indian culture and South Asian space
illustrates that it may be possible for Indian space and South Asian space to exist
simultaneously. There is the possibility that this is simply a preponderance of Indian
cultural elements in Canada's South Asian community (Chatterjee et al. 2004, p. 7; Tran

in the diaspora speaks to first generation Indians desperately trying to sustain a value system and inculcate the same in their children" (Ibid. p. 158). This importance of Indian film in South Asian diaspora communities is discussed at length by Naseem; the visibility
of Indian film in South Asian space is particularly important.

et al., 2005, p. 21); however, it is also possible that there is evidence of hybridity in the
spaces Naseem claims are simultaneously Indian and South Asian.

Naseem's descriptions of South Asian space suggest that it is defined by Indian

culture more than that of any other South Asian country. This is illustrated in an example regarding a theatre which shows only Indian films. Naseem defines this as South Asian
space. She describes the theatre:
There is a cinema... the Albion Cinema. And if you go see a movie there, they show Indian movies.. .And over there the audience used to be primarily people from South Asia. Even the food that you'd buy there for snacks would be Samosas and so on rather than popcorn (Interview with
Naseem, 2009)

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The above analysis offers multiple explanations of South Asian identity and its spatial expression in Toronto. When read in light of the literature review, a number of

similarities and connections can be found between the theoretical scholarship on the
topics of identity and space and the answers given by Naseem and Sumir.

The theatre showing Indian films for a South Asian audience is an example of a space

which "would definitely indicate the presence of people from South Asia," but Naseem clearly says that the theatre shows "Indian" and not South Asian films (Interview with
Naseem, 2009).

1. IDENTITY

The interview analysis demonstrates that South Asian identity can be formed through a combination of inscribed and ascribed traits. As explained by Nagel (1994), ethnic identity "is a composite of the view one has of oneself as well as the views held by
others about one's ethnic identity" (p. 154). Some aspects such as aesthetic choices or

Naseem says that in order to recognize a South Asian space one should look for

evidence of film: "That is a big thing particularly in India. Not so much in Pakistan... .but
Indian film is a very strong feature of Indian culture" (Interview with Naseem, 2009). It

demeanour may be preferred and emphasized, while other "phenotypic" and ascribed

33

34

traits such as skin colour are not subject to the same kinds of individual choice and may
be assigned meaning by those outside the group (Marshall, 1994, p. 25). Therefore, as Naseem's and Sumir's answers illustrate, South Asian identity as it is perceived in
Canada is represented through inscribed traits such as dress in conjunction with traits

Naseem and Sumir believe stereotypes and preconceptions have developed which colour
the way Canadian discourse considers South Asian as a racial and ethnic identity (Ghosh
2000b, p. 4; Ghosh, 2007, p. 224; Patel, 2006, p. 150.

Phadnis and Ganguly (2001), drawing from the scholarship of Keyes, emphasize the need for members of an ethnic group to claim belonging in the collective in order for
it to be useful as a means of political organization or a tool for nationalism (Phadnis and
Ganguly, 2001, p. 25). Keyes (1981) in Phadnis and Ganguly (2001) states: "The most

over which one has less control like skin colour. As the informants have noted, they do
not accept these kinds of traits as equally salient, and will often prefer to identify with the inscribed traits they choose for themselves.

Both Sumir and Naseem emphasize that South Asian and its constituent national identities are imperfectly understood in Canada (Ghosh, 2007; Patel, 2006); neither participant wants to be identified with stereotypes and caricatures. Therefore, when given
the opportunity, they will situationally choose how they refer to themselves rather than
accepting the South Asian identity ascribed to them in Canada/Canada's long-standing categorization of South Asian as a visible minority/racial marker (Bauder and Sharpe,

crucial aspect of ethnic identity creation is that 'the symbols of ethnic identity must be
appropriated and internalized by individuals before they can serve as the basis for orienting people to social action'" (p. 25). Since South Asian is a category whose history and commonalities have been determined in Canada (Ghosh, 2000b, p. 4; Patel, 20069 pg. 150), the shared traits which would usually be accepted as representative by members of a given ethnic group are denied by a number of South Asians. The ethnicity has not been
internalized by either Sumir or Naseem, and if this is true of others in Canada, it may not be possible to consider South Asian as an ethnic identity at all. The interpretations of identity explained by Naseem and Sumir, however, echo

2002, p. 205; Tran et al, 2005, p. 21) means that the identity has become fixed. Markers

of visible minority status are not, however, enough to signify ethnic identity (Hall, 1996a,
pg. 617). Scholarship interpreting ethnicity and culture as biologically predetermined has

fallen out of favour to allow for more constructivist and non-racist explanations (Gilroy,
2005; Hall, 1996a; Phadnis & Ganguly, 2001). The two research participants appear to

the conclusions put forward by Mahtani (2002). Like Mahtani's participants who
"exercised their right to choose their own ethnic allegiances" (Mahtani, 2002, p. 25), Sumir and Naseem discuss the different situations in which they are willing to claim a
South Asian identity. Although they are not of "mixed race" like Mahtani's research

believe that Canada's creation of a visible minority category of South Asian has denied flexibility in defining the identity by endeavouring to produce a coherent ethnic group out

of disparate and diverse populations. Canada's categorization of South Asian as an ethnic
identity does not allow for the fluidity in group composition which is crucial in
definitions of ethnic identity (Davis, 2004, p. 184; Marshall, 1994, p. 202). Consequently,

participants (Ibid., p. 7), their responses do illustrate the ways in which identity is situational (Sets & Burke, 2000), as well as instances of choosing a desired identity from

35

36

the a collection multiple identities which each could perform (Nagel, 1994; Song, 2003;
Vertovec; 1999).

themes and determine questions for further investigation. While the two interviews
conducted generated rich data, the participants could not offer insight into all of the perspectives and opinions held by Toronto's south Asian population.

2. URBAN SPACE

If the same research questions were to be investigated more intensively, the
number of participants would be increased. Input would be sought from participants born
in Canada as well as those who had immigrated. Ideally, such a project would include
discussions with 12-16 participants who would share their experiences with hybridity, South Asian identity, and urban space in Toronto through guided focus group discussions.

Like South Asian identity, South Asian space was not uncritically accepted by

Sumir. It appears from Sumir's answers to questions regarding South Asian space that his
ideas of space are counter to theories put forth in the literature by Brenner (2004), Lefebvre (1976; 1991), and Purcell (2003) which explain a struggle to achieve "rights to
the city" (Purcell, 2003, p. 577) and appropriate urban public spaces. Sumir's statement

Focus groups would be the best method with which to approach these questions in
a larger project as they would allow me to study "how individuals collectively make
sense of a phenomenon and construct meanings around it" (Bryman and Teevan, 2005, p.

that "space is just space" that can only be "adapted" rather than claimed suggests he does
not believe that space in Toronto can be or has been appropriated by the South Asian
community. For Sumir there is no such thing as South Asian space.

195). Since the research questions seek to determine some of the specifics of a particular
group identity, it makes sense to query it in a group setting. The interactions which occur

If one considers "the right to the city" as Purcell does - rights to claim space

simply by living in a city and performing daily tasks (Purcell, 2003, p. 577), Naseem

in a focus group will illustrate similarities and differences in experiences and opinions which may not arise in a one-on-one interview setting. Power structures are different in one-on-one interview situations, which can discourage challenges and additions to

appears to agree that there are South Asian spaces in Toronto. If a large residential
population indicates a South Asian space, Naseem's answers imply that space in Toronto

has in fact been appropriated in the way defined by Purcell; claiming space simply by
living in a city (Ibid.).

interview questions, meaning that valuable insights may not come to light as they would
in the presence of others with similar ideas (Bryman and Teevan, 2005, p. 194).
The two informants interviewed are both immigrants from similar socio-economic

3. AREAS FOR CONTINUED RESEARCH

and educational backgrounds. If the research questions were addressed in a focus group

Due to time constraints and difficulty in recruiting research participants from

format with a larger sample size and participants with different immigration histories,

Toronto's universities in the summer months, this research project was scaled down from the original proposal. It took the form of a smaller preliminary study to investigate major

questions of South Asian identity could generate a wider array of results. A larger project

37

38

could consider the same questions with recent immigrants to Canada; with South Asian youth; and with second generation Canadian members of the South Asian population.
Information regarding hybrid identity and space in Toronto did not arise to the
extent expected in the two interviews. If focus group studies were conducted, specific

research questions addressed in this project are large in scope and the research conducted
merely scratched the surface of the topics under consideration.

It appears from this preliminary study that there is room for further exploration
into the research questions. Both informants have offered some criticism of Canada's use
of South Asian as a category for ethnic belonging and believe that its uses in this country are not amenable to internalizing South Asian as a personal identity. It may therefore be
possible to determine through further study a) why some in Canada choose to identify themselves as South Asian, and b) what they believe that claim illustrates about
themselves. Although the research project has not managed to fully address the questions arising from November's Globe and Mail article, it has helped create a better
understanding of some aspects of South Asian commercial spaces in Toronto. The interviews with Sumir and Naseem have created a framework from which to understand what makes South Asian space. They have also helped develop an understanding of what
the term South Asian actually means in Canada. If the malls described by Radhika (2008) really do focus on providing customers with clothing, food, and music (p. M2) which

questions could be asked to draw out experiences of hybridity among participants.

Questions developed for expanded focus group studies could query different aspects of

hybrid identity and its spatial representation, including asking participants to identify
specific spaces which represent or in which they perform multiple identities. Naseem's

discussion of spaces as simultaneously South Asian and Indian suggests that there may be
avenues for continued investigation on this point. As well, there is room for further

consideration on how Canadian norms of spatial representation and planning, such as discussed by Agrawal and Hathiyani (2007) and Isin and Siemiatycki (1999), are

incorporated in the kinds of South Asian spaces discussed in the key informant interviews.
The work included in this project is highly critical of Canada's homogenized use of South Asian as a marker of visible minority status. Continued research on the
connotations of the term and how it is interpreted by South Asians in Canada could have

policy implications. Continued study may be able to provide policy options for statistics
collection in Canada which better reflect diversity and self-identification within the
country's South Asian and other visible minority populations.

represents South Asia, then it appears, according to the evidence and explanations collected above, these spaces are in fact South Asian.

The literature review and two interviews included in this work are not intended to

be exhaustive, and are not in-depth enough to constitute a complete case study. However,
this research does lay the groundwork for a potential future project determining in what
ways hybridity and South Asian identity are represented spatially in Toronto. The

39

40

APPENDIX: QUESTIONNAIRE
1. I have contacted you because I am interested in knowing about the idea of "South Asian". Can you tell me what "being" South Asian means? a. Prompt: Is it something that is sort of given--because you belong to a certain culture, or race?
Would you consider yourself South Asian?

Bibliography
Agrawal, S.K. & Hathiyani, A. (2007) Funeral and burial sites, rites and rights in multicultural Ontario [Electronic version]. Our diverse cities, 4,134-138. AlSayyad, N. (2001). Hybrid culture/hybrid urbanism: Pandora's Box of the "third place". In N. AlSayyad (Ed.), Hybrid urbanism: On the identity discourse and the
Beck, U. (2006). Cosmopolitan vision. Cambridge, UK: Polity.

2.

built environment (pp. 1-18)! Westport, CT: Praeger.

3.
4.

Which aspects of "South Asian-ness" appeal to you the most?
Are there aspects you do not like as much? a. Why?

5.

How and when did you become South Asian, do you think? a. Prompt: Was it your own choice, or do you think you simply started calling yourself one because people in Canada are more accustomed to this term?

Bauder, H. & Sharpe, B. (2002), Residential segregation of visible minorities in Canada's gateway cities [Electronic version]. The Canadian geographer, 46(3), 204-222. Bhabha, H. (1996). Culture's in-between. In S. Hall & P. du Gay (Eds.), Questions of cultural identity (pp. 53-60). London: Sage. Binnie, J., Holloway, J., Millington, S., & Young, C. (Eds.). (2006). Cosmopolitan urbanism. London: Routledge. Brenner, N. (2004). New state spaces: Urban governance and the rescaling ofstatehood. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bryman, A. & Teevan, J. (2005). Social Research Methods: Canadian Edition. Don Mills ON: Oxford University Press Canada. Butler, J. (1990). Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion ofidentity.New York:
Routledge. Buzzelli, M. (2001). From Little Britain to Little Italy: An urban ethnic landscape study

6.

Do you think you belong to the South Asian community in Toronto or Canada?

7.

Are there any South Asian Spaces in Toronto? a. What is it about them that makes them South Asian?
Where can I find these spaces?

8.

in Toronto (Electronicversion]. Journal ofhistorical geography, 27(4), 573-587. Calhoun, C. (2001). Cosmopolitainism is not Enough: Local democracy in a global context [Electronic version]. Presented to the International Studies Association, 23 February 2001. Retrieved March 25, 2008 Available: http://www.unc.edu /oldanthro/talks/calhoun.pdf. Chatterjee, A., Dasmopapatra, S., & Shakir, U. (2004). Insurgent communities: South Asian construction ofsocial inclusion [Electronic version]. Toronto: Council of Agencies Serving South Asians, Alternative Planning Group, and Community social Planning Council of Toronto. City of Toronto. (n.d.). Diversity. Retrieved August 17, 2009, from

http://www.toronto.ca/diversity/index.htm Collins, J. (2006). Ethnic diversity and ethnic economy in cosmopolitan Sydney. In D.H. Kaplan & W. Li (Eds.), Landscapes ofthe ethnic economy (pp.135-148). Plymouth: Rowman and Littlefield. Cornell, S.E, & Hartmann, D. (1997). Ethnicity and race: Making identities in a changing world. Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge Press. Davis, H. (2004). Understanding Stuart Hall. London: Sage. Doucet, M. (2001). The anatomy of an urban legend: Toronto's multicultural reputation [Electronic version]. CERIS working paper 16.

Driedger, L. (2003). Race and ethnicity: Finding identities and equalities (2nd ed). Don
Mills ON: Oxford University Press.

Durham, M. G. (2004). Constructing the "new ethnicities": media, sexuality, and diaspora identity in the lives of South Asian immigrant girls [electronic version]. Critical studies in media communication, 21(2), 140-161.

41

42

Foucault, M. (1996). Sex, power, and the politics of identity. In S. Lotringer (Ed.), Foucault live (Interviews 1961 -1984). New York: Semiotexte. Georgiou, M. (2006). Diaspora, identity and the media: Diasporic transnationalism and mediated spatialities. Cresskill, N.J.: Hampton Press. Gilroy, P. (1996). British cultural studies and the pitfalls of identity. In H.A. Baker Jr,, M. Diawara, & R.H. Lindeborg (Eds.), Black British cultural studies: a reader (pp. 223-239). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gilroy, P. (2005). Postcolonial melancholia. New York: Columbia University Press. Gilroy, P. (2006). British cultural studies and the pitfalls of identity. In M.G. Durham & D.M. Kellner (Eds.) Media and cultural studies (revised edition) (pp. 381- 395). Oxford: Blackwell.

Lefebvre, H. (1991). The production ofspace. D. Nicholson-Smith (Trans.). Oxford:
Blackwell. Li, P. (2003). Destination Canada: Immigration debates and issues. Don Mills, ON:

Oxford university Press. Lo, L., Preston, V., Wang, S., Reil, K., Harvey, E., & Siu, B. (2000). Immigrants' economic status in Toronto: Rethinking settlement and integration strategies [Electronic version]. CERIS working paper 15. Lotman, Y.M. (1990). Universe ofthe mind: asemiotic theory ofculture. New York: I.B.
Tauris. Mahtani, M. (2002). Interrogating the hyphen-nation: Canadian multicultural policy and

Ghosh, S. (2000a). Methodological issues in discerning South Asian subgroups in Canada, paper presented at the Annual Meeting of Asian American Association, Toronto,
Canada.

"mixed race" identities [Electronic version]. CERIS working paper 20. Marshall, G. (Ed.) (1994). Oxford dictionary ofsociology. Oxford: Oxford University
press.

Ghosh, S. (2000b). Rethinking South Asian Identity in Canada, paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Canadian Association of Geographers, Toronto, Canada. Ghosh, S. (2006). We Are Not All The Same. The Differential Migration, Settlement Patters and Housing Trajectories ofIndian Bengalis and Bangladeshis (Doctoral
dissertation). York University, Toronto, ON.

McLeod, J. (2000). Beginningpostcolonialism. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.

Mitchell, K. (1997a). Different diasporas and the hype of hybridity. Environment and planning D: Society and space, 15(5), 533-553. Mitchell, K. (1997b). Conflicting geographies of democracy and the public sphere in Vancouver BC [Electronic Version]. Transactions ofthe institute ofBritish
geographers, 22(2), 162-179. Modood, T. (2001). British Asian identities: Something old, something borrowed, something new. In D. Morely & K. Robins (Eds.), British Cultural Studies (pp. 67-78).New York: Oxford University Press. Nagel, J. (1994). Constructing ethnicity: Creating and recreating ethnic identity and

Ghosh, S. (2007). Transnational ties and intra-immigrant group settlement experiences: A case study of Indian Bengalis and Bangladeshis in Toronto [Electronic version],
GeoJournal, 68,223-242.

Ghosh, S. & Wang, L. (2003). Transnationalism and identity: A tale of two faces and multiple lives. The Canadian geographer [Electronic version], 47(3), 269-282. Goonewardena, K. (2003). Urban space and political consciousness: a report on theory [Electronic version]. Review ofradical political economics, 36(2), 155-176. Goonewardena, K. & Kipfer, S. (2005). Spaces of difference: Reflections from Toronto on multiculturalism, bourgeois urbanism and the possibility of radical urban politics [Electronic version]. Internationaljournal ofurban and regional research, 29(3), 670-678. Hall, S. (1996a). The question of cultural identity. In S. Hall, P. Held, D. Hubert, & K. Thompson (Eds.), Modernity: An introduction to modern societies (pp. 595 633). Oxford: Blackwell.

culture [Electronic version]. Socialproblems, 41 (1), 152-176.
Neuman, W.L (2006). Social Research methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches (6 ed.) Boston: Pearson.
Papastergiadis, N. (2000). The turbulence ofmigration. Cambridge, MA: Polity.

Patel, D. (2006). The maple neem nexus: Transnational links of South Asian Canadians.

In V. Satzewich & L. Wong (Eds.), Transnational identities andpractices in Canada (pp. 150-163). Vancouver: UBC Press.
Phinney, J.S. (1996). Understanding ethnic diversity: The role of ethnic identity [Electronic version]. American behavioral (sic.) scientist, 40(2), 143-152.

Hall, S. (1996b). Cultural identity and cinematic representation. In H.A. Baker Jr., M. Diawara, & R.H. Lindeborg (Eds.), Black British cultural studies: a reader (pp. 210-222). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hayden, (1981). The grand domestic revolution: a history offeminist designsfor American homes, neighborhoods, and cities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Hiebert, D. (2000). Immigration and the changing Canadian city [Electronic version]. Canadian Geographer, 44(1), 25-43. Isajiw, W. (1999). Understanding diversity: Ethnicity and race in the Canadian context. Toronto: Thompson Educational. Isin, E.F., & Siemiatycki, M. (1999). Fate and faith: Claiming urban citizenship in immigrant Toronto [Electronic version]. CERIS working paper 8. Lefebvre, H. (1976). Reflections on the politics of space [Electronic version]. Antipode, 8(2), 30-37.

Punathambekar, A. (2005). Bollywood in the Indian-American diaspora: Mediating a

transitive logic of cultural citizenship [Electronic version]. Internationaljournal ofcultural studies 8 (2): 151-173. Purcell, M. (2003). Citizenship and the right to the global city: Reimagining the capitalist world order [Electronic Version]. Internationaljournal ofurban and regional research, 273, 564-590.

Qadeer, M. (1997). Pluralistic planning for multicultural cities: The Canadian practice [Electronic version]. Journal ofthe American planning association, 63(4), 481 494.

Qadeer, M. (1999). The bases of Chinese and South Asian Merchants' entrepreneurship and ethnic enclaves, Toronto, Canada [Electronic version]. CERIS working paper
9.

43

44

Qadeer, M, & Agrawal, S. (2006). Ethnic enclaves and social cohesion [Electronic version]. Canadianjournal ofurban research, 15(2% 1-17. Radhika, V. (2008, November 1) Step aside, Pacific Mall, there's a new Taj in town. The
globe and mail, p. M2.

Rose, G. (1993). Feminism and geography: The limits ofgeographical knowledge.
Cambridge, UK: Polity.

Sandrecock, L. (2003). Cosmopolis II: Mongrel cities in the 21st Century. London:
Continuum.

Sheffer, G. (2003). Diaspora politicsrat home abroad. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Sets, J. & Burke, P. J. (2000). Identity theory and social identity theory [Electronic version]. Social psychology quarterly, 63(3), 224-237. Song, M. (2003). Choosing ethnic identity. Maiden, MA: Blackwell. Symmott, A. & Howes, D. (1996). Canada's visible minorities: Identity and representation. In V. Amit-Tali & C. Knowles (Eds.), Re-situation identities: The politics ofrace, ethnicity, and culture (pp. 137-160) Peterborough, ON: Broadview. Tran, K., Kaddatz, J. & Allard, P. (2005). South Asians in Canada: Unity through diversity [Electronic version]. Canadian social trends, Autumn 2005,20-25. Troper, H. (2000). History of immigration to Toronto since the Second World War: From Toronto 'the good' to Toronto 'the world in a city [Electronic version].
CERIS working paper 12.

Verkuyten, M. (2004). The socialpsychology ofethnic identity. New York: Taylor and
Francis.

Vertovec, S. (1999). Three meanings of diaspora', exemplified among South Asian religions [Electronic Version]. Diaspora, 7(2), 1-37. Werbner, P. (1999). Global Pathways. Working class cosmopolitans and the creation of transnational ethnic worlds [Electronic version]. Social anthropology, 7(1), 17-35. Werbner, P (2004). Theorising complex diasporas: Purity and hybridity in the South Asian public sphere in Britain [Electronic version]. Journal ofethnic and
migration studies 30(5): 895-911.

45


