Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

The social construction of masculinity and boys' struggles in school: a content analysis of children's TV shows
Caitlin Grzeslo
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Film and Media Studies Commons Recommended Citation
Grzeslo, Caitlin, "The social construction of masculinity and boys' struggles in school: a content analysis of children's TV shows" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 595.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF MASCULINITY AND BOYS' STRUGGLES IN SCHOOL: A CONTENT ANALYSIS OF CHILDREN'S TV SHOWS

by

Caitlin Grzeslo.

B.A., Dalhousie University, 2007

A Major Research Paper

Presented by Ryerson University

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree

Master of Arts

in the program of

Early Childhood Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009

© Caitlin Grzeslo 2009

PROPERTY OF

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by

photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or
individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

n

THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF MASCULINITY AND BOYS' STRUGGLES IN
SCHOOL: A CONTENT ANALYSIS OF CHILDREN'S TV SHOWS

© Caitlin Grzeslo 2009 Master of Arts Early Childhood Studies Ryerson University

ABSTRACT

The gender gap in education has been widening over the years as girls push
ahead, and boys lag behind. Various factors are considered when attempting to explain this trend as well as how it can be addressed. This study focuses on the role of media, specifically children's TV shows, how they portray masculinity and how those portrayals may shape boys' identities and behaviour in school. A content analysis of six boys'

television shows has been conducted to document some of these messages. With the
exception of one show, overall findings illustrate that the television shows included in this study do not represent a range of masculinities, providing limited messages to young viewers. This study does not assess the direct relationship between these messages and behaviour in the classroom but considers one possible explanation for the gender gap, and makes suggestions aimed at transforming practices in the classroom. Even with research suggesting the need for exposure to different types of masculinities, such issues cannot be addressed until society believes that young boys need encouragement and support in forming their own individual gender identities. Keywords: boys; education; gender; gender gap; masculinity; television

m

Acknowledgements

I would first like to thank my supervisor, Dr. Patrizia Albanese, for the guidance and support that she has provided me throughout the writing of this Major Research
Paper. I am so thankful for her constant encouragement and the "gentle nudges" that

helped me get through in completing this process. I would also like to express my appreciation to my professors and fellow classmates who have supported me on this
journey and inspired me to write on this topic. A special thank you to my mom for her

tireless editing and to my entire family and my friends for their endless love and support.

IV

Table of Contents

Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents

ii iii iv v

Chapter 1: Introduction Chapter 2: Review of the Literature
Gender and Education

1 2
2

Race, Class, and Gender

3

Explanations and Approaches to Understanding Boys' Educational Struggles.5
Social Construction of Gender 7

Role of the Media in Promoting (anti-intellectual) Masculinity
Theories Explaining How Media Impacts Children

10
13

Research Questions Chapter 3: Methodology Chapter 4: Findings Limited Displays of Masculinity

16 17 22 22

Conflict, Anti-Intellectual Resolution, and Indirect References to School....23 Female Characters as Saviours
Limited Racial and Class Diversity

25
25

Spongebob Squarepants: In a league of its own Chapter 5: Discussion

26 28

Chapter 6: Conclusion and Recommendation for Further Research and Practice
Appendices Appendix A: Findings Chart - Anime Shows Appendix B: Findings Chart - Traditional Shows References

33
36 36 38 40

VI

CHAPTER 1: Introduction

For years, debates have been raging about the causes and consequences of gender roles and differentiation: who should play what role in the family? Who is a better athlete? Who is more rational? More emotional? Smarter? Statistics and media reports highlight educational differences between boys and girls and their suitability in the academic learning environment. Evidence, although at times anecdotal, has shown that the gender gap in education has widened over the past decade, with boys becoming

increasingly disadvantaged. Tests show that boys' math scores have dropped/worsened, behavioural and disciplinary issues have risen, and reading levels and social skills have
all taken a turn for the worse (Galley, 2002). If a boy seems not to be reaching academic, behavioural, and social expectations,

there is an inclination to diagnose that child with a learning disability, behavioural
disorder, or to find a label that places him in a category that supposedly provides both a

reason for these apparent "delays," and answers as to how to address them. At the same
time, these boys often get punished for their behaviour, both at home and at school,

making their struggle that much more challenging.

There are many explanations as to

why the gender gap has widened and how it can be addressed; and it is important to gain

a holistic and balanced understanding in order to properly determine the most effective practices and programs for implementation. Special attention will be placed on one of the factors, assessing the possible role of the media, and especially popular "boys'" television shows, in shaping boys attitudes about themselves and their identity, education and
learning, and their future aspirations.

CHAPTER 2: Review of the Literature

Gender and Education: Whether anecdotal or scientific, evidence suggests a recent increase in the gender gap in education that disadvantages boys. The US Department of Education has declared the under-achievement of boys a national concern (Tyre, 2008). As Kafer (2007) states:
Girls surpass boys in reading, writing, civics and the arts. Girls get better grades
and more honors; they have higher aspirations, are more engaged in school and are more likely to graduate from high school and college. Boys, on the other hand, are more likely to be suspended or expelled, need special education, smoke, drink and do drugs, repeat a grade, commit suicide, become incarcerated,

leave school without attaining literacy, drop out of school or be unemployed.
Marginal advantages in math and science for boys pale compared to the sheer advantage girls enjoy throughout school, (p.l)

There is strong evidence that when it comes to special education, boys are more likely to be enrolled in such programs, as well as diagnosed with behavioural and attention deficit disorders (Tyre, 2008). With these labels, boys fall further behind and it is difficult for
them to ever reach or surpass average standards; for boys, more time in school results in

increased academic gender gaps (Tyre, 2008).
Both Canadian and US statistics document this ever increasing gender gap. The

National (US) Centre for Educational Statistics show that girls outperform boys in grades

and homework at all levels of schooling; boys are thirty percent more likely to drop out
of school than girls (PBS Parents, 2009). In addition, Macnamara (2006) cited Sommer

(2000) noting that girls outperform boys in arts and music, and are more inclined to read
books. In some opinions, reading is the most valuable indicator of academic success

(Statistics Canada, 2008; Tyre, 2008).

Looking at US statistics from 1974-2004, it is evident that boys trail behind in reading, therefore rank low in academic success (Tyre, 2008). This was found to be true in Canada, Germany, and France, where the gender differences in reading scales are much larger than in math and science. A study done to assess school performance in

OECD countries (which include Canada) also showed that boys fail to perform at the same standards as girls in literacy tests, specifically in reading comprehension and
writing (Martino, 2008). Surveys conducted by Statistics Canada (2008) also touched on attitudes and behaviour towards school and found that overall, males, particularly drop

outs, had more negative school experiences, felt less engaged, were uninterested,
unmotivated, and had weak relationships with their teachers. This being said, there is a risk in generalizing boys as an undifferentiated group,

as other variables do come into play when assessing academic achievement, including aboriginally, geographical location, poverty, and most importantly, socio-economic background (Martino, 2008). Froese-Germain (2004) wondered about girls in lowincome families, noting the possible impact that race and class have on the gender gap.
The possibility of other influences prompts the question: Which boys face the greatest
struggle?

Race, Class and Gender

Part of a study conducted by Griffin (2000) highlighted the concern over the

failure of young working class boys of Caucasian background as she examined the crucial yet hidden role that class plays on academic achievement of boys. Griffin (2000)

1 A few articles have been published in Macleans Magazine regarding this gender gap. Although Canadian publications, they refer to research and writings by American physician Dr. Leonard Sax (2007).

noted that a small number of young men who do enter higher education are not part of the underachieving group, and numbers show this gap to be lower in upper class areas. She made a point in saying that although gender is highlighted as the primary characteristic of the group of underachievers, class, in fact, plays a central role as the hidden factor of this decline. The discourse that Griffin (2000) used to explain this debate about underachieving boys is one of crisis and loss. Griffin identified masculinities that are lost
and misrepresented in the degradation of the class. With the 'feminization of society'

comes the loss of some virtuous male characteristics such as 'dignity, responsibility, and gravitas' (Griffin, 2000). In the debate about 'underachieving boys,' these lost forms of masculinities result in these boys as "...lost in themselves, as losing their own potential," and at the same a loss experienced by society as a whole (Griffin, 2000).
In her study, Griffin (2000) also considered race as she looked at West Indian

Underachievement in the 1970's and 1980's and how parents of black students were

criticized for not doing enough with their boys to help them achieve good academic
standing. Griffin was critical of the conclusion that black parents, rather than schools and teachers, were responsible, pointing to a cover up for institutional racism (Griffin, 2000). From this, it can be inferred that teacher attitudes and beliefs regarding race impacted on how well these young black boys did in school. In the end, race too, ends up being a key factor in the gender achievement gap (Griffin, 2000).

While looking at social class, Swain (2005) reminded us that masculinities and femininities are created in relation to one another. A study conducted by Swain (2005)
found that boys and girls had little engagement and mostly negative feelings for each other in an "upper-class" private school compared to a working-class school. In the

working-class school, the two genders interacted very frequently and enjoyed doing so, especially the boys who were friends with girls most like themselves (cited by Albanese, 2009). This finding may create a challenge to the proposed solution of single sex classrooms to improve boys' performance in the classroom. While one side is saying that single-sex classrooms will strengthen and expand the various forms of masculinities while breaking down stereotypes (Sax, 2007), another (Connell, 2000) suggests that because masculinities and femininities are produced together, the integration and
interaction are necessary (cited by Albanese, 2009). Thome (1990; 1993) also supported

this as she recognizes gender as inter-relational, stating that similarities between boys and girls are often overlooked, differences are inflated, and the importance of staying clear of forming simple dichotomies, especially in the classroom, is too often ignored. Be it class,
race, and/or ideas about gender and sexuality, there are many aspects to this debate and a
gender gap that cannot be understood if one dismisses these variables, and their
intersection are dismissed.

Explanations and Approaches to Understanding Boys' Educational Struggles: Currently, there are four bodies of literature that examine boys and education: (1) popular-rhetorical literature, (2) practice-oriented literature, (3) theoretically oriented
literature, and (4) feminist and pro-feminist literature (Weaver-Hightower, 2003; Froese-

Germain, 2006). The first area, popular-rhetoric literature, takes an essentialist perspective, dominating the field as it argues that schools fail boys and are too focused on
accommodating the needs of girls. This perspective falls victim to antifeminism and conservative politics but uses accessible language and is widely available (WeaverHightower, 2003).

Practice-oriented literature can be seen as the more practical, action-based

component of popular-rhetoric theory. It provides mostly academic solutions for the
classroom, to counter-act the so-called feminization of schooling. Some examples of these solutions include reading clubs for boys (Bodkin, 2004), the use of "boy-friendly" resources (Martino, Lingard, & Mills, 2004), same-gender classrooms and increasing the number of male teacher (Froese-Germain, 2004). Theoretically-oriented literature looks at types of masculinity and how schools and society modify them. Although important, the literature focuses on visible types of masculinity as constructed by society, is not readily available, and does not use very accessible language. Feminist and pro-feminist responses view the gender gap through a social justice lense and often lead to heated debates. They question the idea of
underachievement and whether or not there is reason to panic over the so-called "boy-

turn," (a recent shift in research, focusing on educational and social experiences of boys
rather than girls). While there is validity to this perspective, it tends to overlook the

positive side of boys' reforms (Weaver-Hightower, 2003). Although the popular rhetoric literature is most commonly available and most commonly referred to, and the programs noted above, such as reading clubs, are responsive to the public and allow for quick and relatively cheap solutions for educators
(Weaver-Hightower, 2003), both approaches (the popular rhetoric and the programs)

have been highly criticized as they fail to account for other important factors such as race, class, family, and end up being band-aid solutions, not addressing the causes. Martino and Kehler (2007) saw a few problems in this area as well; first of all, it is far too general, secondly it is based on widely accepted social constructions of masculinity and

gender identity, and thirdly, as stated above, they agree that it does not take into account
other possible influences.

Froese-Germain (2004) challenged the notion of "broken school not broken

individual" and asked important questions that shed light on areas that get lost amidst
generalizations. He called for an investigation into gender differences in levels of interest and student engagement and other areas that touch on social/emotional rather than purely academic aspects. This explanation remains at the level of the individual, and does not
take into account broader social factors contributing to the gender gap.

Social Construction of Gender It seems plausible to say that the same individualistic brush that was used by teachers and schools to paint Black students twenty years ago, as stated in the Griffin (2000) example above, is being used with boys today. The result is a homogenous picture of how they should act, what is expected of them, and the mold they are being encouraged to fit. Theories concerning the effect of the social construction of gender and masculinity are gaining more and more attention as they have become strong counter arguments to the widely accepted popular-rhetoric and practice oriented perspectives. The attitudes and beliefs of teachers and schools are based on and feed into these social constructions; the result is that boys have few options, and are being constrained to a space that gives little room for movement. Blye, Kehler, Lovell, and Davison (2003) suggested that social construction of gender began as far back as the 1600's. For over 400 years, boys have been told that they must be strong, tough, masculine, funny, and not too smart but smart enough (Blye et al,

2003); it is little wonder that popular-rhetoric and practice oriented theory dominate this

field. While there have been changes over time, society has become entrenched in these ideas and imposes them on boys, who are not encouraged to challenge them but rather to
abide by them without question. The programs and responses that have been most

commonly used to address the gender achievement gap, as highlighted above, contribute to the social construction of gender and masculinity and, therefore, perpetuate the cycle. A document that was produced by the Ontario Ministry of Education offering guidance to educators as to how to improve boys' literacy skills has been criticized for committing this very act. It fails to explicitly address normative assumptions and ideas about masculinity and the role it plays in the field (Martino & Kehler, 2007). These ideas are in fact recapped throughout the document when outlining claims about boys. These 'claims' include: "Boys take longer to read than girls do, boys read less than girls, and

girls are better than boys at reading narrative and most expository texts" (Martino &
Kehler, 2007, p. 415). In relation to this, as well as the other standard "solutions,"

Francis and Skelton (2005) argue, ".. .simply accommodating traditional masculinity in
the classroom is not going to produce better educational or social outcomes for boys" (as cited in Martino & Kehler, 2007, p. 411).

Also speaking to this, Van de gaer, Pustjens, Van Damme, and De Munter (2006) conducted a longitudinal study that followed over 6000 students for over 10 years to assess the relationship between boys' underachievement in language and their negative
attitudes toward school. Various forms of testing were used to attain data which verified

that boys in lower tracks (non-academic streams) scored lower in language than those in higher tracks. It was concluded that the lower track reflects an anti-school culture which

r
means those particular boys were exposed to negative attitudes about school. Surprisingly, post hoc analysis showed that the boys who were the least motivated, the least interested, and the least attentive in class achieved higher than expected in the lower track. This was attributed to social constructions of masculinity
and the notion that being smart was not widely accepted as being cool. These boys compensated for their achievement by acting out in class and bullying other students so that they would not be bullied themselves. Fulfilling another characteristic of society's construction of what it means to be a boy, these boys fall victim to being labeled with having behavioural and/or disciplinary issues. Deconstructing these social constructs is

extremely important to begin to understand boys' underachievement. When attempting to determine who is responsible for such notions, FroeseGermain (2004) suggested that the load should be taken off schools and placed on

broader influences such as society and the media. To gain insight about the impact of teacher knowledge and beliefs about boys and education, Martino, Lingard, and Mills (2004) looked at one example of an all-boys program in a coeducational school in Australia. The school program was based on the following: Principal driven reforms, a boy-friendly philosophy, an activities-based curriculum, the idea that boys are disadvantaged, and an overall essentialist perspective. Teachers in the program did not
carry out any reflective practice nor did they even acknowledge normative ideas about masculinity and in turn, the programs encouraged this type of thinking to continue. In

this case, the principal guided how the program was run, and teachers had no say in the matter. The lack of teacher reflection and unwillingness to deconstruct dominant views was clearly a shortcoming.

Role of the Media in Promoting (anti-intellectual) Masculinity:

As noted above, when attempting to determine who is responsible for promoting
limited and anti-intellectual notions of masculinity, Froese-Germain (2004) suggested

that the attention should shift from schools to broader influences, such as society and the
media. Not surprisingly, the bulk of literature on gender and the media focus on the

gender stereotyping and under-representation of women and girls. That being said, there
are some studies that address male and female representation in children's television

programming.

As cited in Calvert, Kotlet, Zender, and Shockely (2003), many content

analyses of children's shows report a stronger presence and advantage of males over females (Berner, 1999; Calvert et al.,1997). Calvert et al. (2003) took these results even
further, working directly with children and assessing their reports about their favourite

TV shows for the presence of gender stereotyping.

Overall, they found that this gender

stereotyping carries over into children's own reports about television shows, therefore
supporting the idea that these messages are certainly being consumed, processed and

accepted

by

children.

The

children

reported

remembering

gender

stereotypical

representations of males and females, supporting the gender schema theory, as well as

nontraditional representations of female characters only, also supporting the drip and

drench hypothesis.2
Another study conducted by Zarini (2005) compared gender and racial representation in children's television programming between PBS and Toon Disney. After a thorough content analysis of shows airing on these two stations, Zarini (2005)

The drip and drench hypothesis is used to explain the influence of media on ideas and behaviour. The

"drip" refers to the consistent and frequent portrayal of stereotypical images and the "drench" refers to an
alternative image that appears every so often. In some cases the drench can be more influential overall than

all of the drips combined (Greenberg, 1988).

10

found that females and non-whites were underrepresented on Toon Disney but shown

quite equally on PBS. In addition, results revealed that shows airing on Toon Disney displayed gender stereotypical portrayals of both male and female characters more so than on PBS. From this, it was concluded that girls and children of colour watching Toon Disney may interpret themselves as being less important and having few role models to identify with from television. The most disconcerting result related to this, as other studies also show, is the consistent negative stereotyping of females, with intentional masking of any relationship between being female and being empowered. Although the overrepresentation of male
characters and the more positive portrayals of males in these shows warrants concern and

attention (it is possible that how males are being portrayed is not only harmful and limiting to girls, but boys, as well), many unwilling boys may feel pressured to be dominating and controlling and those who do not fit the roles may not have the strength
to share their opinion.

Kundanis (2003) included examples from studies on gender representation in the media, finding that both young males and females are strongly affected by these representations, despite the overbearing underrepresentation of females and the focus on physical appearance. She (Kundanis, 2003) also cited Pollack (1998) who talks about a

"boy code" that is followed in the media. This boy code consists of four stereotypical
male models of behaviour: The "Sturdy oak," the "Give 'em hell", the "Big Wheel," and the "No sissy stuff." The "Sturdy oak" means that no boys should show weakness or soft emotion. "Give 'em hell" portrays a brave and daring ideal where the character steps

outside the expectations of his society. "Big Wheel" refers to boys staying calm and

11

rational during high stress situations, avoiding shame at all times; and "No sissy stuff capturing the stereotypical put down: "You throw like a girl." Although four different
ideals, this boy code provides no room for any other forms of masculinity to be represented in the media or television programming.

Along with representations of masculinity, there is body of literature on boys and TV violence. Citing news stories such as the Columbine shootings and scientific
evidence proving the link between TV and behaviour, Miedzian (1992) suggested that "the connection is obvious" (p. 212). Both boys and girls engage in "copycat" behaviour

as a result of something they view on TV or film. The negative impact of being exposed to violence has been reported on for years, as Miedzian (1992) included a report from
1982 done by the National Institute of Mental Health stating just that: violence on

television leads to aggressive behaviour. With the statistics included above on the
number of children who watch TV, being exposed to such violence, usually without adult

supervision, it is easy to agree with Miedzian (1992). Briefly touching on this connection can shed some light on the impact that television messages have on children and youth, from individual behaviour to forming one's own identity. It is important to note how girls and women are depicted in the media because boys and men are often constructed as polar opposites to girls and women. Just as women are inaccurately and stereotypically depicted as weak, passive and domestic, men are

equally incorrectly/inaccurately and stereotypically constructed as macho and antiintellectual. The lack of critical literature on the social construction of masculinity, and especially boyhood, in the media also suggests the need for more studies to be conducted

12

on how media directly impacts males and boys, including the messages they receive and
the expectations they are required to meet. Children of almost all ages have access to television and other forms of visual

media (Albanese, 2009). A study done by the Canadian Teacher's Foundation (2003),
called "Kids Take on Media," found that young children are most likely to choose a media activity, compared to other activities such as reading, to fill their free time - boys being more likely to do so than girls. Overall, the study determined that 75 percent of

children, male and female, from grades three to 10 watch television daily. This
accessibility combined with daily consumption increases children's exposure to social constructions and stereotypes of gender as depicted in television shows.

The media seeks to deliver various messages when it comes to gender and what is expected from boys. One study highlights the top ten leading messages about men in the media, most of which are highly unfavourable. Some examples include men as criminals,
violent, aggressive, sexual abusers, oppressors, stupid, and insensitive (Macnamara,

2006). This is problematic for various reasons but as Swain (2005), and Gilbert and
Gilbert (1998) indicated, boys, especially in school settings, are not often encouraged to

resist traditional stereotypes (as cited in Albanese, 2009).

Theories Explaining How Media Impacts Children
These limited and negative portrayals of masculinity result in an assault on boys'

identities providing them with little choice in who to be other than the "flawed male" (Macnamara, 2006, p. 191). Theories have been developed to explain this impact that media has on children; these include social learning theory (Kundanis, 2003; Macnamar,

13

2006), schema theory, (Kundanis, 2003; Albanese, 2009) and the drip and drench
hypothesis (Calvert, Kotler, Zehnder & Schokey, 2003).

Social learning theory, as developed by Bandura (1977), consists of four steps: attention, retention, motor reproduction processes, and motivational processes (cited by Kundanis, 2003). According to Bandura (1977), children learn through observation. Once attention is attained, children begin to retain the simplified messages and images that are repeatedly displayed which then brings about the third step where symbols are
converted in action. In certain television shows, there is either an interactive component

or what is shown can be easily re-enacted. The last stage relies on motivation and
encouragement from others (Kundanis, 2003). Looking at the example of boys learning

how to be boys, socially accepted male behaviours are encouraged and reinforced
everyday at school, at home, and in the media. Overall, social learning theory suggests

that positive images result in positive effects, while negative images result in negative effects (Kundanis, 2003). Schema theory refers to how a child develops his/her identity (Kundanis, 2003). According to this theory, children build knowledge of schemas that relate to gender,

forming their gender identities based on these schema and socially constructed roles and
behaviours (Albanese, 2009). The media is a key player in the development of the

schema when it comes understanding gender, as the images portray various messages and send lessons to viewers beginning at a very young age. Often, these messages are
culturally dominant, offering few positive and very limited role models for both males and females to identify with (Kundanis, 2003). Schema theory is relevant when it comes

to assessing and understanding the impact of the media.

14

Another interesting hypothesis to explain television influence on individual

beliefs is called the 'drip and drench' hypothesis developed by Greenberg (1988) and cited by Calvert et al (2003). The drip component supports the idea that throughout their childhood, children are exposed to a constant "drip" of socially constructed gender stereotyped images, which encourages and strengthens stereotyped beliefs. The 'drench' component serves to counterbalance the "drips," proposing that beliefs about gender can be changed by infusing a number of not usually socially accepted images on gender

(Calvert et al, 2003). This hypothesis also serves to suggest methods of how to challenge
traditional images, therefore providing alternate identities for children to learn about and
choose from.

An abundance of studies exist on how the media affects females, almost so much

so that boys and the struggle they face as they attempt to fulfill certain roles and act in
certain ways are forgotten. As one of many explanations for the increasing gender gap

in education, the media serves to create a disconnect between what is acceptable boy

behaviour in society and what is acceptable behaviour in the classroom. As Professor of
Early Childhood Education at Arizona State, Dr. Tobin recognized, it is important to ask, "In what ways are we disapproving of boys' interests in our classrooms" (PBS Parents, 2009)? To assess the relevance and applicability of some of the theories above, the

following content analysis will explore socially constructed messages and images of masculinities in boys' television shows, to see if the images and identities they offer may
contribute to some of the challenges that boys face in school.

15

Research Questions: There is relatively little Canadian research on the educational challenges faced by boys today. There is also little Canadian research on the role and impact of the media on
boys' attitudes and perceptions of masculinity, which might then affect how they approach and perceive school. To begin to add to this sparse literature, I decided to

conduct a content analysis of children's shows that are popular among Canadian boys today. I hope to better understand what kinds of messages, and the range of messages, boys receive from the programs they watch. Are boys exposed to a range of messages
that allow them to explore a range of attitudinal and educational possibilities, or are the messages narrow, fixed and anti-intellectual? Are the main messages boys receive though

these shows indeed narrowly "macho" and anti-intellectual--limiting their educational horizons and sending them the message that being interested in school, or being smart is
not 'cool' ? I believe that answering such questions is an important first step towards

helping us better understand why boys may be doing less well in school.

16

CHAPTER 3: Methodology

I conducted a content analysis to measure the various messages delivered to

children, and especially boys, through "boys'" television shows. Content analysis is a
quantitative method (with some qualitative elements) of research that measures specific

aspects of a body of text (Gill, 2007). The form of text can vary, and accounts for anything that acts as communication from spoken to written to visual. Examples of texts
commonly assessed using content analysis include books, magazines, newspapers,

advertisements, photographs, films, and television shows (Neuman, 2006). Content
analysis may, for example, involve comparing the relative numbers of heterosexual couples to homosexual couples as displayed in television commercials. Beyond this, and

more qualitatively, a researcher can measure or assess how various couples are depicted,
and possibly depicted differently.

There are a number of subjects that act as the focus of a content analysis - trends in media coverage, themes in popular songs, religious messages in films, gender

stereotyping in magazines, and dominant messages in television shows (Neuman, 2006).
Content analysis also allows the researcher to find alternate ways of seeing or reading a
text (Neuman, 2006).

As can be seen from the some of the examples above, content analysis is

commonly used for this type of research. It has been used extensively in feminist research to determine how women are portrayed on TV and in the media, from the roles they play to the behaviour and character traits they possess. The three Global Media Mentoring projects are the largest and most well known examples of the use of content

17

analysis to analyze gender. These projects were developed by the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing and took place in 1995, 2000, and 2005. They
provided variables for which to measure gender portrayal in the media and gave women

all over the world the opportunity to critically analyze the media. In the end, it allowed groups of people to come together to support their overall struggle against stereotyping in the media. Content analysis allowed them to document the gender stereotypes and misand under-representation in a systematic way, in hope of strengthening their case (Gill,
2007).

Another example includes the content analysis of the fifty most popular US films
in 1996 as done by Eschholz and associates in 2001 (Neuman, 2006). This study examined whether main actors in these films reproduced traditional gender and racialethnic stereotypes by comparing percentages in the US population with gender and racialethnic representation in the films. After coding the data that was collected, it was

concluded that the fifty most popular US films in 1996 reinforced and reproduced traditional cultural stereotypes while misrepresenting important aspects of social life
(Neuman, 2006).

In this study, I analyzed boys' popular television shows that air on YTV and
Teletoon. In particular, I looked at six shows in total - three 'traditional', North

American shows: Fairly Odd Parents, Spongebob Squarepants, and Johnny Test, and three equally popular, Japanese-style anime shows: Pokemon, Bakugon, and Digimon. When looking into which shows to select, I looked at the show schedules on the websites
of each television network. I specifically focused on the after school time slot starting at

3:30pm and Saturday morning as well--both being time slots most commonly targeting

18

school-aged children. From this, I generated a list of television shows found on the two

networks. I grouped together the Japanese Anime shows and thought it would be interesting to compare them to the more 'traditional' boys' television shows. Based on
that, I looked at timing of the Japanese Anime shows and found that they played more consistently every day after school as opposed to Saturday mornings, which led me to

focus on the more traditional shows that also played most consistently every day after
school--for comparison purposes. I analyzed two episodes of each television show, for a

total of 12 episodes, again, in order to compare the Japanese Anime to the more
traditional North American shows.

The chart below outlines the variables measured in this content analysis. Each of

the variables was chosen based on their relationship to what is socially accepted as "masculine." Many of these variables were also selected because a number of other
researchers included them in their research (Zarini, 2005). For comparison purposes, I
decided to include them in my analysis as well. I focused in particular on whether or not these shows send "anti-

intellectual/school" type messages to the viewers as I am interested in assessing the

possible impact these messages have on boys' behaviour and attitude toward school. By comparing the Anime shows with the traditional North American shows, I would like to

see which ones are more likely or less likely to send such messages. To do so, I have included variables that cover actions, words, and resolutions in the hope of addressing the
intellectual and physical aspects of each show.

19

HYERSON UIOTERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY OF

Table 1. Sample Findings Chart Traditional/Anime Show: Name of Show
Variable
Name of episode Number of males Number of females Human or animal/creature Personality of Protagonist

Episode 1

Episode 2

Personality of Antagonist
Dress of Protagonist

Dress of Antagonist Main "dilemma" to be resolved Who resolves the "dilemma"
How solved(physical or

intellectual resolution) Language used
(physical/intellectual)

Violence? Number of punches Number of kicks

Number of use of weapons
Is there blood/bruises shown?

Are there consequences when
violence is used? Role of other (adult) women Role of other (adult) men

Any reference to school, training,
education Anti-intellectual/anti-school

language or actions

Although content analysis is an effective method of collecting data to capture the

messages that are sent to children, in this case boys through television shows, it cannot

20

account for or assess how the messages are actually received by children. My study will not ask children what they think or feel, nor will it note how they actually behave after

watching the shows--future research can do this. My research can and will however, lay the ground work for future studies of this type. Once the messages that are sent out are

established, future research can determine how children behave after watching certain shows and what the messages mean to them. A longitudinal study tracking boys' behaviours and development of identity as they get older can be conducted. Another shortcoming of content analysis is that the generalizations formed from
such a method of research are confined to cultural communication. Although the content

of the text is exposed (forming the generalizations), its significance cannot be properly interpreted. In reflecting back to the first drawback mentioned above, it becomes problematic when determining the truthfulness of the findings and how they directly impact those receiving the information. As well, the researcher must keep in mind that

content analysis is nonreactive, meaning that the consumer may read/watch a text while the creator develops the text, both without having any knowledge or intention of its
content ever being analyzed (Neuman, 2006). Having said this, I believe that content

analysis of these popular children's/boys' programs may shed some light on why boys may be performing less well in schools compared to girls. Of course, other factors, in
future research, need to be considered as well.

21

CHAPTER 4: Findings

After watching two episodes of each television show, the results reveal there are

various similarities and differences within and between the categories of "traditional" North American shows and "anime" shows. Although only a small sample, as a whole, the "traditional" shows do a slightly better job of displaying various types of masculinities than the "anime" ones. One significant difference that gives some positive weight to the "anime" shows is the value placed on knowledge and training. For example in Bakugon the most highly regarded character is "Noble Lion." This being said, the knowledge and training commonly refers to which powers to use to battle an enemy, for

example, in Pokemon there are training sessions to learn about powers. Unfortunately,
skills such as communication and listening, although paid lip service, are not used when
facing a dilemma.

Limited Displays of Masculinities

First, looking at the "traditional" shows, two {Fairly Odd Parents and Johnny
Test) out of the three involved similar yet limited types of masculinities. Both

protagonists in these shows were either engaged in or interested in some sort of violent activity, for example, wrestling. In one episode of Fairly Odd Parents, the boy even bonded with his grandfather over violent cartoons while learning about the past. In
Johnny Test there is reference to the notion that the main character is naturally "drawn to
danger."

22

T
The protagonists in each of the "anime" shows have similar builds as well as personalities. They are young, have lightly toned muscles, medium length dark hair, and

dress in slacks, a t-shirt, and a vest. They all take leadership positions, and are great problem solvers. They are intelligent, rational, and always in control. Other adult males
that appear in the show act as teachers or trainers, and possess much wisdom, providing

the young males with sound advice. For example in Pokemon there was power training
sessions that were run by adult males.

Conflict, Anti-Intellectual Resolution, and Indirect References to School
The "anime" shows are all very similar, with a goal of battling using super human powers to achieve success and resolve dilemmas. There is, however, quite a bit of

reference to training, and knowledge seems to be highly valued. This knowledge and
training is always practical and useful for battle. Although all the "anime" shows referred to training, Pokemon stresses it the most as the characters took lessons on how to train their "Pokemons", practiced various moves, and also learned the importance of self
care.

On top of this, wisdom and nobility are admired in the "anime" shows. In Bakugon wisdom was referred to many times and a character called "Noble Lion" was a

very important figure in the community. This being said, when faced with conflict, due to lack of time and other restraints, the characters resort to physical rather than intellectual means to solve any problems. In a Digimon episode, one character says, "We

could talk, but there isn't any time," when trying to figure out how to protect a young and
vulnerable character. Another example of this from Bakugon occurs when the characters

23

were searching for solutions as to how to balance restoration of their world and one says, "We should use wisdom," but never does. No blood or bruises are shown in any of the "anime" shows, although weapons are used in Pokemon (guns and missiles) and Digimon (javelins).

As for the "traditional" shows, the protagonists in two out of the three solve conflict either by directly engaging in physical contact or by talking about violent situations (as mentioned above in Fairly Odd Parents). The bonding over violent TV
shows that took place between the grandfather and the protagonist did slightly speak to an

interest in knowledge about the past but this knowledge was focused solely on a history
of violence. Also in Fairly Odd Parents, punching is used, as are weapons, including

everything from household objects to a sawmill. Despite the use of violence, there are no consequences depicted when it is used. In one episode of Johnny Test, however, the main
character gets a light punishment of being grounded from watching TV for having

experimented with various anti-intellectual techniques to resolve his dilemma of needing
"HD TV" to be able to watch a wrestling program. Unlike in Johnny Test, Fairly Odd Parents contained many anti-school/antiintellectual messages. These included reference to how the main character never reads a

book, and wants to go to as little school as possible as he is always sleeping through the lessons. He also labels himself as the "dumb kid of today" saying there is too much hard
work involved in order to get what you want.

24

T
Female Characters as Saviours A pattern that emerged in all the "anime" shows and two out of the three "traditional" shows had to do with the presence of female characters and the roles they
played. Female characters seemed only to serve the purpose of assisting or saving males.

In a Digimon episode, one female character was a mother who took in all of the
characters when they needed protection, providing them with comfort, saying she would cook them anything they wanted. Pokemon included female characters who were servers and nurses. They all had a strong attraction to the stereotypical handsome male character,

who in turn, had a very hard time staying away from these female characters. These
women were portrayed as needy and irrational. In Johnny Test his twin sisters solved all of his problems using their scientific and mathematical skills as he struggled with thinking logically or reasonably about how to achieve what he wanted. Similarly in the "anime" shows when the males were on their

last legs, they had a female character come to them, providing strength through food, love or support. In both "anime" and two of the three traditional shows, the males made the decisions about whether they needed the females around or not, as they were always in control. Surprisingly, in Spongebob Squarepants, there were no female characters in either episode, nor were there any references to females.

Limited Racial and Class Diversity All of the characters in Fairly Odd Parents and Johnny Test were white and either middle or working class. In contrast, there was much diversity in the animals and creatures in Spongebob Squarepants, suggesting that no one "race" was dominant among

25

the characters. In Spongebob Squarepants when it came to class, most characters seemed
to be middle or working class with the exception of a wealthy CEO as well as another

boss-like figure. In the "anime" shows, the majority of human characters were Japanese with various skin tones. These individuals looked as though they were of middle and working class as well. Interestingly, other human characters, acting as enemies or antagonists, were predominantly white and of a higher social class. For example, in Digimon the antagonist was an older white male who carried a sense of entitlement.

Spongebob Squarepants: In a league of its own Spongebob Squarepants appears to be in a category of its own. In only two episodes, diverse examples of masculinity were shown, and the messages given were

more intellectual than in the other shows. The main character is a made up cartoon
sponge wearing a shirt and tie with a goofy, playful and adventurous personality; yet at

the same time, the character has the ability to think critically and have a conversation to resolve a dilemma rather than resort to physical violence. As mentioned, other male
characters present in this show represented various examples of masculinity. There were characters that were competitive and athletic, one macho muscle man with a sensitive side, a controlling and angry boss, a wealthy CEO, supportive fans, and caring and kind friends.

When it came to messages and solving dilemmas, the one episode was focused around the depletion of natural resources (jellyfish, in this case). Greed was the reason
for the depletion, and once this was realized, the main character was able to have a conversation with the last jellyfish, listening to his feelings, understanding why he was

26

upset, and then going on to have another conversation with his boss, the character who was responsible for the depletion. The boss, although usually angry, was able to listen and also understand the negative impact his greed was having on the jellyfish. This episode contained messages on an intellectual level, valuing respect, kindness, and
understanding.

The other episode was based on a sports competition and touched on more

stereotypical male behaviours and feelings, but in the end, after some physical interactions, the two opposing characters decided to stop wrestling, and let go of their desire to win, focusing on their similarities and what they have in common in order to be
friends. Neither episode contained anti-school references and both quite clearly promoted intellect and critical thinking.

27

CHAPTER 5: Discussion

The goal of this study was to document the nature and range of masculinities presented to boys between the ages of 7 and eleven when watching a selection of
televisions programs. One of the aims was to draw attention to some of the limited and

anti-intellectual messages they are exposed to; another was to alert those involved in creating and producing these programs to re-examine show content and assess the potential impact these shows may have on the classroom experiences of young boys. Finally, the study hoped to alert parents and teachers to the roles they may be able to play in opening dialogue with boys, which both affirms their experiences as boys, and assists them in critically deconstructing the messages they receive. With the exception of Spongebob Squarepants, the other two "traditional" shows all contain similar patterns and trends when it comes to examining types of masculinities, conflict and resolution, reference for or against schooling of any kind, and female characters. The "anime" shows also display similar patterns and trends as two of the

three "traditional" shows {Fairly Odd Parents and Johnny Test) in all of the themes
except for reference for or against schooling of any kind. The main finding that stood out was the value placed on knowledge and training in the "anime" shows; something that

was not apparent at all in the "traditional" shows. In accordance with Pollack (1998) and
Zarini (2005), this study found that boys are exposed to a limited range of masculinities
and most of these are anti-intellectual and macho. Specifically when looking at the range of masculinities, Pollack's (1998) boy code can be referred to, as the four main stereotypical male ideals are included in these

28

shows. The main characters possess qualities of bravery, strength, reason and control, farthest away from any feminine characteristic or variation of masculine ones - a perfect of example of what Pollack (1998) described (cited by Kundanis, 2003). Although this study did not explore the impact that these findings have on young boys, the theories mentioned earlier can help to explain how the messages are received. As Bandura (1977) suggested with social learning theory, boys watching these television shows retain the images that are displayed, whether positive or negative, and in turn are
impacted in one way or another. Being exposed to only the stereotypical examples of masculinity over and over again, as explained by social learning theory, will result in

reproduction of these roles in real life. Characteristics of these masculinities build inside
of each child and shape his gender identity. The danger of being exposed to the "anime" shows and "traditional" shows that were looked at in this study is that it limits boys and what they see as acceptable behaviour while still feeling masculine. Given the findings, it is evident that boys are not exposed to a range of masculinities, resulting in possible
limitations on how their identities are formed.

With its more intellectual messages, along with the array of masculinities and various examples of how to resolve conflict, Spongebob Squarepants offers a glimmer of hope, and seems to acts as the 'drench' factor in Greenberg's (1988) 'drip and drench' hypothesis. The other five shows provide consistent 'drips' of socially constructed gender images to boys but if they get a chance to watch Spongebob, they also have the chance of expanding their understanding of what it means to be a boy. This does not mean to say that stereotypical portrayals of masculinity are not acceptable; the need for

29

alternative portrayals is crucial. Even boys who naturally fit the stereotype, need to be reassured that if they need a break from being "the brave one," that is okay.

As Griffin (2000), Swain (2005), Connell (2000), and Albanese (2009) all pointed
out, it is important to relate issues of gender to race and class. Although these variables were not observed as extensively as others relating to masculinity in general, it did appear
that when it came to race and class there could be some connection between these

findings and underachievement as most messages, with the exception of Spongebob Squarepants, were anti-intellectual. With such a small sample size, this conclusion does not hold enough strength to be supported by the literature reviewed earlier. Based on this, future research should include more shows, specifically ones that include a broad
representation of race and class (if they exist). Only then can more solid conclusions be made connecting the two.

Reflection and critical thinking must be practiced at all levels. A suggestion to
those involved in creating and producing these television shows would be to include

more "drenching" and a broader range of masculinities; this may even attract more

viewers, therefore benefiting both the viewers and the shows. In the end, it would be
idealistic (and most likely disappointing) to rely solely on the hope that these shows will
change anytime soon. The importance of the (social) responsibility that individuals like

teachers and educators of all kinds have in preparing young boys with the proper skills to challenge these messages and embrace and nurture the individual within them becomes evident. The focus is on teachers and educators for two reasons. First, they play a

significant role in children's lives and second, because this study is looking at the social
construction of masculinity in TV shows in relation to boys' struggles in schools.

30

When these gender identities are tested out in the classroom, a whole other range
of complications can take place, which then likely means outside support will be needed. As mentioned earlier, the study by Blye et al (2003) examined how and when four young, white, middle-class men challenged notions of masculinity. Results showed they were willing to negotiate and stand up to conventional ideas of masculinity supposedly due to their positions of privilege. These results support the idea that young men can and should have a say in reconstructing beliefs around masculinity. Teachers can learn from this
example by having discussions with their students about such ideas and giving them opportunities to voice their beliefs and practice critical reflection. Beliefs, values, and knowledge lay the groundwork for program development and implementation, therefore continuous self-reflection should be mandatory. If educators
believe in the importance of challenging messages and ideas, model the practice

themselves, encourage students to ask questions and provide them with a safe environment to explore who they are without even knowing it, they teach this type of critical reflection to their students. With a change in these beliefs, so too will come a
change in action and a move away from hegemonic practice. As mentioned earlier,

feminist and pro-feminist responses touch on this as they seek to work towards social justice (Weaver-Hightower, 2003).

In addition to deconstruction of societal values and self-reflection, there are other
recommendations as suggested in previous research that can apply to the findings in this study. Froese-Germain (2006) puts forward the need for participatory action research to gain more insight in this area of concern which will then hopefully provide a stronger connection between theory and practice. As well, in order to truly attain educational

31

equity, there is a call to address the needs of both boys and girls (Martino et al, 2004). Froese-Germain (2006) agrees with this arguing that a "girls then boys now" attitude is not effective in striving for equity in education and suggests an attitude that focuses on all
children, all the time.

In the end, practices and programs used in the classroom must be for all students. The true barriers to this must be recognized and deconstructed. Failure to do so will perpetuate the cycle and there will always be a group of individuals who are seen as disadvantaged, and because of these views, will fulfill their social expectations and end up as just that. Everyone is different - it is as simple and complicated as that; and children's television shows should do a better job of depicting this. What is needed subsequent to this realization is two fold and lies in the hands of teachers: (1) having the

knowledge, beliefs, attitudes and confidence to go against the grain and (2) initiating dialogue with students and providing a safe and respectful environment where their needs are met, their strengths recognized, and they feel valued and appreciated for who they are. No child should come home from school everyday thinking that unless they change
who they are, they will not be valued nor will they be successful. After all, it is much

easier to be who you are when someone influential believes in who you are and allows you to shine brightly every time you enter the classroom.

32

CHAPTER 6: Conclusion and Recommendations for Further Research and Practice

This study has sought to answer questions relating to the social construction of masculinity and how it is presented in children's (boys') television shows. Based on the six shows chosen to address these questions, overall, it can be concluded that there is a limited range of masculinities being presented in these television shows and those that are most prominent display stereotypical images providing a limited range for boys to build their schema around gender identity. This overall finding is not absolute as there were some exceptions, specifically the diversity of masculinities and the inclusion of
intellectual behaviour and messages in Spongebob Squarepants. One shortcoming that, if addressed in further research may reveal different findings, is the sample size. Future research should include more shows and possibly explore more than two episodes of each. This being said, it was surprising to see that in only two episodes of Spongebob Squarepants, there was such diversity. Along with the inability to generalize these findings because of the small sample size, we must also keep in mind the risk of treating boys as an undifferentiated group. As Martino (2008) reminded us, aboriginally, geographical location, poverty, socio-economic background and other variables come into play when assessing academic underachievement. It is important that future research look into other factors that moderate and
counterbalance the negative impact of exposure to stereotypical images of masculinity from family involvement, to critical thinking, to exposure to alternative forms of

masculinity by other means. This study in no way implies that television is the only factor contributing to the underachievement of boys in the classroom, nor does it imply

33

that without television, the boys will improve. As covered throughout the paper, and
more in depth in the discussion, other factors must be present to help support and guide
our young boys.

The findings of this research lead to some practical recommendations as well.

Along with self reflection (as mentioned earlier), teachers may do well to allow boys the
space to bring the even limited range of masculinities available to them through popular culture, into the classroom. This would go a long way towards legitimizing who they are

as boys, but also creating a space for critical dialogue. Creating a space to have open conversations, discuss images and recognize the strengths in and value of accepting "boy
culture" is essential in deconstructing masculinity. Rather than asking boys to leave popular culture and parts of their identities outside the classroom teachers need to

encourage and accept boys' interests, having a dialogue about them, and at the same time
providing options and alternatives. Boys should be allowed to share what interests them and the reasons for these interests in a safe and comfortable environment. It is possible

that in the end, not only can students learn from their teacher, but their teacher can learn from them in return, expanding their own knowledge and understanding of every child
that walks into their class.

As Martino et al (2004) suggested, there must be a focus on boys and girls at all times if we are to achieve any progress in the underachievement debate. For now, I hope

this study can contribute to the literature focusing on boys, and how we understand what
they are being exposed to through television. Although I have hope, I am concerned that young boys in our society are left feeling misunderstood with very few options for creating an identity that truly reflects who they are. Without these options, as they grow

34

up they will continue to learn from other forms of media, including magazines such as
"Esquire", who's May 2009 issue featured the article "How to Be a Man" (Chiarella, 2009). The article began:
A man carries cash. A man looks out for those around him -- woman,
friend, stranger. A man can cook eggs. A man can always find something good to watch on television. A man makes things -- a rock wall, a table, the

tuition money. Or he rebuilds -- engines, watches, fortunes. He passes along
expertise, one man to the next. Know-how survives him. This is immortality. A man can speak to dogs. A man fantasizes that kung fu lives deep inside him somewhere. A man knows how to sneak a look at cleavage and doesn't

care if he gets busted once in a while. A man is good at his job. Not his work,
not his avocation, not his hobby. Not his career. His job. It doesn't matter what his job is, because if a man doesn't like his job, he gets a new one.

What if you read this in your mid-twenties and you do not know how to "sneak a look at
cleavage?" Are you less of a man? What if you read this and think back to when you

were young, at school, fantasizing about or acting out kung fu but you got punished for doing so? Did those consequences skew your understanding of what it means to be a man? In the end, the message is clear: boys need to be 'drenched' numerous times in order to counterbalance all the 'drips' they have been exposed to over so many years. Along with this, they need more support and encouragement in forming their own individual gender identities.

35

APPENDICES APPENDIX A: Findings Chart - Anime Shows
Anime Show 1: Pokemon
Variable Episode 1 Episode 2

Tally

Anime Show 2: Digimon Episode 1

Tally

Anime Show 3:

Tally

Overall Tally

Bakugon Episode 1 Episode 2 "Good

Episode 2

iName of episode "Tanks tor
I i

"A Lean Mean Team

"The Wrath of Saber Leomon"
4

"The Final
Bio Hyrbid

"Soldiers
Rest"

the

Niglit Baby"

Memories"
Number of males 6
Number of females

Rocket Machine"
3

Battle"
3
i

2
Fewer females than males
4

3
3

2/3 more males
More

5

3

Fewer

4

2/3 females
under-

females
than maleb

females

than males represented

|Human or

Main

Main, character: human
Assistant (Pokemon):
creature

2/2 human Human and mid
creature

Human and 2/2 animal human and
creature

Humans,

Humans,

2'2 hiuiian 3/3 contains and
creature

| animal/creature

character: himiaii
Assistant (Pokemon):
creature

"falcomon"

dragon, lion, dragon,

humans and
creatures

Bakugon
creatures

other
creatures

[Personality of Protagonist

rational, always stays calm, smart,

rational, always stays calm

2/2 rational and calm

- takes leadership,
protector

- brave,
protector

2/2 braves - smart, leaders brave,

- smart,

2/2 smart and brave

3/3 rational,
brave, calm

brave,
wants to

rational,
seeks knowledge

insightful,
patient,

be a hero

understandin
Personality of
Antagonist

controlling,
greedy

rude, greedy 2/2 greedy

- angry

2/2 angry

- greedy

- angiy,

2/2

3/3 angry.
Greedy, negative

controlling,
angry

manipulati negative

ve, leader,

demanding
Dress of
Protagonist

jeans, t-shirt, jeans, t-shirt, 2/2 jeans,
cap, vest cap, vest

-jeans, t-

- jeans, t-

2/2 jeans, - soft brown t-shiit.
vest, cap
eyes, wears

- same as

2/2 t-shirt
eans, cap

3/3 basic outfit,
eans. t-shirt. cap

t-siiiit,
vest, cap

shirt. vest,
cap

shiii, vest,
cap

episode 1

dark colours,
ean, t-shirt,
cap

Dress of Antagonist

ong hair, 'sleezy"

slick haii. tight iifiuistic leeded to the

- older, glasses, lab
coat

- lab coat, glasses, older - keeping lie human 2/2 intellect!! al

- creature

- creature

2/2
creatiues

Varied dress of
antagonists

looking
Alain "dilemma" team rocket to be resolved

- save and

- balance
estoration,

- same as

2/2

Majority of

was stealing

etiieve all of nteliectua protect

episode 1

intellectual dilemma's were

ill the Pokemon

iilnerable
character

world and he Digimon
world

bring down antagonist vho is causing protagonist
2/2

intellectual

Pokeballs

Who resolves the Protagonist " dilemma "

Drotagonist

2/2
notagoms

protagonist. urotagonist

3';3 protagonist

uid

and friends

jrotagoni
st

with the

protagonist

>rotagonist

^okemon of
>rotagomst

ts mid 'okenion

lelp of a
girl)
2/2

How solved

Jse of \5kemon
secret
lowers --

5okemou
)owei*8

2/°

Digimon
kliting
)owers

- Digimon
Ighting
>owers

*)/"»

powers

powers

V3 shysica I/powers

(physical or
intellectual

>hysical

physical

ised to
battle

ised to
battle

)h}fsical

resolution)

battle

"should ise wisdom
over

caused )hysical damage

physical..,"

36

Aninie Show 1: Pokemon

Tally

Aninie Show 2: Digimon

Tally

Aninie Show 3: Bakugon
Episode 1

Tally

Overall Tally

!

Variable
Language used

Episode 1

Episode 2

Episode 1
2/2

Episode 2

Episode 2

Intellectual: nalists"

Physical and
intellectual

- intellectual
and physical

- physical intellectual and
physical

-physical
and

2/2

I (physical/intellec "conversatio
jtual)

3/3 physical and intellectual language used

physical
and

physical and intellectual

mid intellectual

physical

intellectual and intellectual

intellectual
Violence?

yes

yes

2/2 ye.

yes

yes

2/2 yes
0

Yes

Yes 0

2/2 yes
0

3/3 violence used 1 /3 contains punches
1/3 contains

Number of
punches

0
1

2
1

0 0

0

0

Number of kicks 0 Number of use of 0 (but
weapons

0
javelins

0

0

0 0

0
0

0 (but Pokemon
powers

No
weapons

0

'/; weapons 0

1 /3 weapons used

Pokemon
powers

caused damage) Is there
blood/bruises
110

caused damage)
no

2/2 no

No

No

2-'2 no

0

0

2/2 no

3/3 no

blood/bruises
shown
no no

shown?
Are there
consequences

2/2 no

No

No

2/2 no

- lose Noble No

t /3 consequence
consequen ces

Lion (the
wisest
creature)
servers

of losing an

when violence is
used?

elder

Role of other (adult) women

nurse

2/2

Mother

n/a

lA mother

- saviour

n/a

--> saviour

3/3 traditional,
saviour roles

traditional roles
- encourage

positive
iioughts

Role of other (adult) men Any reference to school, training, education

trainer

teacher,
raiuer

2/2 trainers 3oss. teacher Teacher,
rainer

2/2 trainer

- wise

- teachers, givers of
advice

2/2 trainer

3/3 trainer type oles

eachers,
JOSS

- lessons on low to train Pokemon

- gaining Pokemon aiowledge

2/2
eference to training
ind

- reference to No

/> reference - a lot of

- wisdom
and aiowledge of how to solve dilemmas

2/2
eference
0

3/3 shows refer
to value of aiowledge

he
importance of
die

to widsom

reference to
wisdom sought from
tfoble Lion

aiowledge
and

enow ledge importance of

visdom

visdom

37

APPENDIX B: Findings Chart - Traditional Shows
Traditional Show 1:
Fairly Odd Parents

Tally

Traditional Show 2: Spongebob Squarepants Episode 1 Episode 2 "The Fiy

Tally

Traditional Show 3: Johnny Test Episode 1
Episode 2

Tally

Overall Tally



Variable
Name of episode

Episode 1

Episode 2

"The Good
01' Days"

"Stinkin
Johnny"
3 3 4
Fewer girls than boys

"Jellyfish
Hunter"

"Johnny Dodgeball"
3

"Future Lost"

Cook
Games"

I Number of males | Number of females Human or
animal/creature

All men
0

All men
0 No giils

Boys outnumber giils
1 Many

**

Guts underrepresented in all but I

fewer girls than bovs

- human

- humans

2/2 human - animals

- animals

2/2

- humans

- human

2/2 human 2/3 all human

animal
- energetic, - innovative,

1/3 all animal - controlling, - energetic, '/; goofy
competitive

Personality of
Protagonist

'/: goofy

- goofy,
playful,
messy,

- same as

2/2 goofy

high energy and goofy common in all shows

goofy

"bad boy"

episode 1-

goofy

adventurous
Personality of Antagonist

- greedy girl

- caveman:

!-i anti-

- angry,

2/2 angry
competitive,
angry - same as

-n/a

- n/a

-n/a

-2/3 negative
characterist ics

violent/grunt intellectual greedy,
ing

controlling - shirt and tie
(sponge) - dress pants, dress shoes

Dress of Protagonist

- green

- baggy

2/2 male

- shorts, tbaseball cap

- same as

pants, piiik shirt, hat, buck teeth

jeans, t-shirt,
cap

episode 1

like clothes shirt.

episode 1

Dress of
Antagonist

- kilt, pig tails

- leather loin cloth

- business
suit

- sport

- n/a

- n/a

- varied dress of antagonist

unitard

Main "dilemma" - have the
to be resolved

- need to get

- restore

- win "Fry Cook
Games"

- need to

-·'save the
world"

Each show has
intellectual at least one

ability to get HD TV to be intellectual jellyfish
along with liis grandfather

intellectual defeat female classmate in
dodge ball

able to watch
wrestling
match - sisters help, '/; main

intellectual dilemma

Who resolves the - boy and "dilemma**

- main character

- main character

2/2 main
character

- sisters of
Protagonist

: main
protagonist character

All shows main

grandfather
together

dad comes to character
save, and

characters solves
at least one

and his \ 2 family
support

mom ends up sealing the
deal with a

father

dilemma,

otherwise family
steps in to
support

body slam to
die caveman

after Johnny got in a fight
iie couldn't ;iandle How solved(physicn 1
or intellectual

- bond over
violent
cartoons

- physical,

2/2

- talking to

- skills

2/2

- twin sisters - physical with some talking physical super dodge ^all arm

1/3 intellectual
resolution

wrestling,
smashing TV

physical

lellyfish and
talking to
joss;

competition intellectual create a

resolution)

intellectual

- ui the end.

- cheat, to
win

alking to
opponent

38

Traditional Show 1: Fairly Odd Parents

Tallv

Traditional Show 2: Spongebob Squarepants

Tally

Tradilion.il Show 3: Johnny Test
Episode 1 - physical Episode 2

Tally

Overall Tally

Variable
Language used

Episode 1

Episode 2

Episode 1

Episode 2
- name

- bathroom

- physical;
all about

2/2
physical

- intellectual

- "dumb kid of

2/2
physical

2/3 physical

(phvsical/intellec language
tual)

calling. bickering

intellectual

wrestling and beating

todav"
- too much hard work

Violence?

- yes.

Yes

2/2 yes

No

Yes, man on fire.
some

% yes

Yes

- yes;

2/2 yes

All shows refer

exciting and
encourased
Number of

"fighting
sidekick"
0 0

to some sort, of
violence

wrestling
4

0

4

0

0 0

0

0 0

0
0

1/3 contained No kicks

Number of kicks 0

0

0

0
0

0
- Dodge

Number of use of 1; saw mill
weapons

none

1

0

0

.

X

4

2/3 contained
weapons

balls used as household
weapons

objects
No

Is there Are there
consequences

Yes

No

V-j, yes

No
n/a

No
- no, but

2/2 no
n/a

no no

2/2 no
2/2 no
consequen

2/3 shows Generally no
consequences

No

- grounded
from TV for

%
consequen

No

learn thai
feelings are
n/a
n/a

when violence is

a month - n/a - mother

ces

ces

when violence is

Role of other (adult) women

',4 mother

n/a

n/a

- teacher.

'/; teacher,

2/3 traditional

maid, mom maid, mom female roles

Role of other (adult) men
Anv reference to school, training,

- grandfather - father,
wrestler.

2/2 traditional
male roles
'A

- boss, CEO,
customers

- athletes. fans, boss
- training

Variety of roles

- father

- father. school custodian

2/2 father

2/3 more

traditional roles
2/2 no reference

bouncer - learning
about the
past

No

- no

*/> reference No
to training

-no

2/3 slight
reference to training/learning

references

for spoils

education
Anti-

to learning
No

- "drawn to

lA antiintellectual language

No

no

2/2 no

No

- as little
school as possible
- all about

!4 anti-

2/3 antiintellectual/anti-

intellectual/a nti- dmiser"

school

school language
or actions

language

school language

TV and eating
- never

read a

book
- fall
asleep

through
lessons

39

References

Albanese, P. (2009). Children in Canada today. Toronto: Oxford University Press. Blye, R, Kehler, M., Lovell, T., Davison, K. (2003). A tangle of trouble: boys',
masculinity and schooling - future decisions. Educational Review, 55(20), 99-

133. Bodkin, B. (2004). Responding to the complexity of boys' learning: promising practices from school districts. Orbit, 34(1), 30-32. Canadian Teachers' Federation. Kids' take on media overview. Retrieved June 17, 2009, fromhttp://www.ctf-fce.ca/e/resources/MERP/overview.pdf Calvert, S., Kotler, J., Zehnder, S., Shockey, E. (2003). Gender stereotyping in children's
reports about educational and informational television programs. Media

Psychology, 5, 139-162.
Chiarella, T. (2009) What is a man? Retrieved August 14, 2009, from http://www. esquire.com/features/what-is-a-man-0509 Connell, R. W. (2000). The men and the boys (Cambridge, Polity). Froese-Germain, B. (2004). Are schools really shortchanging boys? Reality check on the
new gender gap. Orbit, 34(1), 3-5.

Froese-Germain, B. (2006). Educating boys': Tempering rhetoric with research. McGill
Journal of Education, 41(2), 145-154.

Galley, M. (2002). Boys to men: Some researchers question how attuned schools are to
boys' learning needs. Education Week, 21(19), 26-27 + (4 pp).

40

Griffin, C. (2000). Discourses of crisis and loss: Analysing the 'boys' underachievement' debate. Journal of Youth Studies, 3(2), 167-188.
Kafer, K. (2007). Taking the boy crisis in education seriously: How school choice can boost achievement among boys and girl. Independent Women's Forum, 1-22. Kundanis, R. M. (2003). Children, teens, families, and mass media. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers.

Macnamara, J. (2006). Media and male identity: The making and remaking of men. New
York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan.

Martino, W. (2008). Boys' underachievement: Which boys are we talking about?
Retrieved on June 13, 2009 from, www.edu.giv.on.ca/eng/literacynumeracy/
inspire/research/whatWorks.html

Martino, W., Kehler, M. (2007). Gender-based literacy reform: A question of challenging

or recuperating gender binaries. Canadian Journal of Education, 30(2), 406-431.

Martino, W., Lingard, B., Mills, M. (2004). Issues in boys' education: a question of
teacher threshold knowledge? Gender and Education, 16(4), 435-452. Miedzian, M. (1992). Boys will be boys: Breaking the link between masculinity and
violence. New York, NY: Doubleday.

Neuman, W.L., (2006) Social Research Methods: Qualitative and quantitative
approaches. Boston: Allyn & Bacon / Pearson.

PBS Parents (2009). Understanding and raising boys. Retrieved on June 15, 2009 from
http://www.pbs.org/parents/raisingboys/school.html

Sax, L. (2007). Boys adrift: The five factors driving the growing epidemic of unmotivated
boys and underachieveing young men. New York: Basic Books.

41

Statistics Canada (2004). The gap in achievement between boys and girls. Education
Matters, 4. http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/81 -004-x/200410/7423-eng.htm

Swain, J. (2005). Sharing the same world: Boys' relations with girls during their
last year of primary school." Gender & Education, 17(1), 75-91. Thome, B. (1993). Gender play: Girls and boys in school. New Brunswick, Rutgers
University Press.

Thome, B. (1990). Girls and boys together...but mostly apart: Gender

arrangements in elementary school in men's lives (3rd ed.). M.S. Kimmel and
M.A. Messner. Allyn and Bacon, 61-73.

Tyre, P. (2008). The trouble with boys: A surprising report card on our sons, their problems at school, and what parents and educators must do. New York, USA:
Crown Publishers.

Van de gaer, E., Pustjens, H., Van Damme, J., De Munter, A. (2006). Tracking and the effects of school-related attitudes on the language achievement of boys and girls.
British Journal of Sociology of Education, 27(3), 293-309.

Weaver-Hightower, M. (2003). The "boy turn" in research on gender and education.
Review of Educational Research, 73(4), 471-498.

Zarini, S. (2005). A comparison of gender and racial representation in children's

television programming between PBS and Toon Disney. Retrieved from ProQuest.
(UMI1428292)

42


