Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Skilled play : positioning the player at the centre of the digital game
Chris Clemens
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Psychology Commons Recommended Citation
Clemens, Chris, "Skilled play : positioning the player at the centre of the digital game" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 506.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

SKILLED PLAY:

POSITIONING THE PLAYER AT THE CENTRE OF THE DIGITAL GAME

By

Chris Clemens

Hons. Bachelor of Arts, English Literature & Communications Studies Wilfrid Laurier University, 2005
Waterloo, Ontario

A thesis presented to Ryerson University and York University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Masters of Arts

in the program of Communications and Culture

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008

© Chris Clemens 2008

PROPEfflYOF

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or

individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.
CHRIS

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by
photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or

individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.
CHRIS CLE

-n-

Skilled Play: Positioning the Player at the Centre of the Digital Game
Chris Clemens Masters of Arts, Communications and Culture Ryerson/York Universities, 2008

Abstract
This thesis argues that a focus on the player and the skill sets required to play video games - a player-skill perspective - provides a productive framework from which to examine and address many contemporary 'problem areas' within games studies. Familiarity, social performativity, and material mastery form three crucial, interlocking junctures where skill and mastery are framed as essential components for understanding games. The game controller is positioned as a 'gatekeeper' between player and game; a precluding factor in engaging with the medium. Participant responses from original
qualitative research, which places a primacy on female voices, are framed within a

gaming climate of historically increasing complexification of game genres and material components, and point to several trends in how women can (and do) contend with
gendered technology.

-111 -

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to the two Jens (Brayton and Jenson), who helped me plenty along the Master's road. Many thanks as well to ScutterK, who is amazing and getting pretty good at playing guitar on 'hard' to boot. The family should also get a nod for smilingly
tolerating my unwillingness to get a real job, and for the high-speed access once upon a
time.

I guess Ryerson University, too. Yeah!

-IV-

Dedication
This thesis isxiedicated to my old friend, the Konomi Code: Up, up, down, down, left, right, left, right, B, A...
Start.

- v -

Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
1.1 Positioning the Researcher: A Narrative of Self

1
1

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW

.

5

2.1 Games Studies 2.2 What is a Game? 2.3 Skilled Play 2.4 Skill and Narratology 2.5 Skill and Ludology 2.6 Skill and the Player's Voice... 2.7 Games as Text 2.8 Social Traversing 2.9 Games Without Goals?
2.10 The Importance of Mastery in Research , 2.11 Workable Conceptualizations and Models of Skill 2.12 Cultural Aesthetics and Performativity 2.13 The Pleasures of Flow v 2.14 The Controller Between Player and Game

9 15 17 18 ....20 22 -- 25 26 29
» 32 34 37 ,..38 40

2.15 On Materiality 2.16 Overview
CHAPTER 3: RESEARCH AND METHODOLOGY

43 44
47

3.1 Participant Selection 3.2 Study Design

..'

3.3 Limitations 3.4 Overview

·

49 50

56 57
58

CHAPTER 4: DATA ANALYSIS - SKILL AND FAMILIARITY

4.1 On Familiarity 4.2 Familiarity and Discourse

,

58 60

4.3 Genre..

4.4 A Ramping-Up of Sophistication 4.5 A Ramping-Up of Familiarity 4.6 Genre and Configurative Practice

·

63

66 70 72

4.7 Overview
CHAPTER 5:

75
78

DATA ANALYSIS - SKILL, SOCIAL PERFORMATIVITY, & GENDER

5.1 Sociability.....

78

-VI-

5.2 Gender, Access, and the Next-Gen Divide
5.3 Skill and Performativity 5.4 Performing Intuitively 5.5 Overview
CHAPTER 6:

83
87 91 92

DATA ANALYSIS - SKILL, MATERIALITY, & TECHNICAL FAILURE.
6.1 A Brief History of Control

95
95

6.2 Material Responses

98

6.3 Problematic Hardware and Technological Failure
6.4 Material Shifts 6.5 Materiality Matters CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSIONS
REFERENCES

102
107 112 115
122

- vn -

- Vlll -

Chapter 1: Introduction
It should be no surprise that video games are considered Big Business: even in an
economic decline, game sales soared in 2007 to outpace both movies and music in the U.S. More than 18 billion dollars were spent by consumers on video games and the

console systems to play them.1 Such figures are often referred to in games studies to
defend a more-than-casual interest in the medium. After all, financial clout indicates

cultural impact, which in turn justifies academic interest. For me, the video game
represents a surprisingly accessible avenue of study: accessible not only because, in such
a newly-formed, loosely-aligned discipline, there is much work to be done, but also
because of my own longstanding experience and interest in gaming.

1.1 Positioning the Researcher: A Narrative of Self

As a child console games were largely inaccessible to me for financial reasons
(we were poor). Nonetheless, I had access to a Colecovision, which doubled as a computer, and spent many fruitless hours trying to bend the early programming language

of Logo into a space-shooter. Meanwhile my friends, boys and girls, enjoyed the early
exploits of Mario on their Nintendo systems and at every opportunity I would invite
myself over to their houses to play. It frustrated me that they could play whenever they wanted and were, for the most part, better than I. For many, a lack of access might have

led to indifference; for me, it became somewhat of an obsession. I borrowed old copies of
Nintendo Power magazines and pored over them, eager to learn strategies and hints for
games I never played, just in case someone I knew might get them. When the Super

1 For an overview of sales figures, see here: http://arstechnica.com/news.ars/post/20080124-growth-ofgaming-in-2007-far-outpaces-movies-music.html

-1-

Nintendo was released (into the homes of others), I even wasted a great deal of time trying to turn the game Secret ofMana which, to me, seemed a wonderful adventure, into a board game in my basement. The best games were the ones I never got to see for more

than a few introductory moments, mostly because they "had a story" and "took too long
to get into", as I was told. Instead of those games, I was usually treated to a series of
defeats in some competitive sports title.

On the computer gaming side of things I am proud to say that I was involved in
the early stages of contemporary online gaming, somehow tricking my parents into

purchasing a hyper-powerful computer (for the time). We must've been slightly richer
then, or perhaps they thought it would be 'educational'. As Quake was becoming a PC

first-person shooter phenomenon, I was there. Eventually I joined a semi-professional Quake Team Fortress clan - semi-professional in that we were good, we practiced and
strategized and stole players from other clans and won money in tournaments - and the sociability of video games emerged in power struggles, in-fighting and a steady rotation of players who fell away from the rigours of the game only to return later. The technological component of games was also highlighted by these experiences: several times during important ranked matches against other top clans, one of my family

members would try to use the telephone and instantly kill my modem connection to the
internet, rendering my avatar frozen in-game and our defences weakened. We became

early adopters of high-speed internet access. Our clan's medic was a female, a real-life
nurse from South Carolina, and it was here that a gendered component of gaming was first apparent to me: she put up with digital harassment and lewd text insinuations,
suggestions that she could not be as skilled as she was and still 'really' be a woman.

-2-

Later in life, when I worked, made money and was able to buy all the gaming

equipment I wanted, the obsession slowed. There is something especially alluring about
restriction, whether it is financial, practical or whatever. I had many systems but did not

play any of them with the fervour I once experienced. I became a part-time gamer, a casual player, although I still wrote about games occasionally as a columnist for the
university student paper, and later made special allowances for game-related material as

editor of the entertainment section. I have lived with roommates who I could beat,
consistently, at any game we cared to play, and roommates who epitomized the elite

player in every respect (who I could never beat). I have watched my girlfriend struggle to
understand what I found so interesting about video games, begin playing herself, and

later explain to her own friends what she had learned about gaming culture. I have seen
multiplayer games like Rock Band transform how social get-togethers, local bars, and
parties are experienced and configured.

In short, this thesis is my attempt at further exploring skilled play: what it means

to be skilled or unskilled as a player, and how mastery characterizes the experiences
which people have when they encounter video games within their own socio-cultural sphere. The research question embedded here asks, "What happens when you position the player at the centre of the game, and extrapolate the role of skill as an area of primary importance? How can established problems within games studies be readdressed from this perspective?" My own narrative characterizes many of the issues which will be discussed here, from lack of access to competitive play to the frustrations of being consistently terrible. It is a reflection of the multivariate ways in which players might
come to games, with differing levels of expertise and at different times in their lives. A

-3-

perspective which focuses on the player and the player's abilities reveals a number of

interesting ways to address this loosely-amalgamated medium, and this thesis explores
several of these ways. Firstly, a discussion of skill necessarily incorporates a gendered analysis of technology; how masculine interests dictate and frame what 'skill' entails. Next, a selective review of games studies literature demonstrates a recognizable need for
closer attention to be paid to the role of the player and mastery within many dominant

frameworks. Several conceptualizations of how player skill might be addressed are
brought in here, alongside an examination of the pleasures which such skills facilitate. A handful of areas emerge as particularly fruitful for a player-skill analysis, including

familiarity, social performativity, and materiality. Throughout, player voices and observation from original qualitative research will be included for analysis, alongside
games studies texts and popular discourse about video games.
Let's get started.

-4-

Chapter 2: Literature Review
Tied closely to socio-cultural formations of mastery is the '133t', or elite, gamer.
L33t parlance has roots in the BBS (Bulletin Board System) role-playing games of the

1980s: text-based MUDs (Multi-User Dungeons) were, in many ways, precursors to
massively multiplayer online games such as the popular World ofWarcraft. '133t' was a

term used to denote a player who was better, or more skilled, than other players. Many
contemporary usages of 133tness also stem from competitive online first-person shooter

games of the mid-1990s. Drawing from my own experiences playing semi-professional
Quake Team Fortress, 13 31 players were those who were able to master complex

techniques which, in many cases, circumvented conventional understanding of the game's physics. For example, it was discovered that concussion grenades - originally intended to disorient the screen perspective of victims - could be used to jump oneself to previously unavailable areas. This tactic became a necessity in competitive play as core offensive strategies revolved around extracting the opposing team's flag quickly. In the standard competitive map 2forts, players who had not mastered the concussion jump
were forced to run the flag up a long, arduous series of ramps where defenders were sure

to be waiting. A skilled player, on the other hand, could use grenades to jump up an elevator shaft and circumvent these choke-point defenses. Of course, team strategy quickly adjusted to anticipate such maneuvers and thus 133tness came to play a reconfigurative role, as players sought to explore and master the game's physics system
and develop new tactics with which to surprise opposing clans.

The 133t, or elite, player was thus seen to be defined both in terms of the game's
rule structure (mastery of nuanced physics resulted in the completion of the tangible goal

-5-

of capturing the most enemy flags), but also through socio-cultural formulations of the

gaming community. Writing on cheating and circumvention of game rules, Mia Consalvo adapts Bourdieu's notion of cultural capital to describe the value ascribed to certain skill sets by other gamers as "gaming capital" which, as she states, is, "highly flexible, able to adapt to different types of gameplay, various games, and changing notions of what's

important to know about games ... depending on a player's social circle, that capital can
be quite valuable in building a reputation" (p. 184, 2007). The discourse surrounding the

elite player, in other words, is often formed through that player's expertise in exploring the depths of a video game's capacity, but the status is ascribed via social acknowledgement and recognition of these masteries. The very notion of elitism in any
capacity is, of course, problematic, as it implies a hierarchy of skill which players are

slotted into regardless of whether or not they desire to pursue the same goals or abilities
that the 'best' players possess. Game culture tends to privilege such players and skills in a social setting, and discounts those who play in different or subversive ways as poor

players or 'nOObs' (newbies), who are seen to be foolishly unaware of dominant standards
and conventions of play in a particular arena regardless of their actual experience. A nOOb may well be a player with a deep understanding of a game who refuses to play by

standard rules of engagement; their status as nOOb is socially assigned. Skill mastery, then, can be seen in some instances to foster a set of restrictive mores, where the 'right way to play' is delineated and reinforced socially through ascription (or lack of) gaming
capital.

Brayton rightfully points out that expertise with technology, including digital games, is an inherently gendered cultural construct, "dominated by an ideological belief

-6-

system that assumes men are the developers, producers, and primary users of technological products and processes" (p. 763, 2006). The Entertainment Software

Association reports that forty percent of all surveyed gamers are women2, although
contextual information about what kind of games being played by these respondents is

problematically unclear. While women form a significant user base for video games, it is
widely understood that games are designed primarily by men (Haines, 2004). If skill is conceptualized and acknowledged within largely patriarchal game and community spaces, a player-skill perspective must necessarily take on board gender considerations. Of particular interest here is a perceived "female technophobia", where the "social
construction of technology as masculine has negatively impacted upon women" (Brayton, p. 761, 2006). Within gaming this can be characterized by an 'opting-out' of play: a

refusal to adapt to male-centric perspectives of pleasure and normalcy, or an underwritten
resignation that game play entails conforming to a system of skills and masteries already

^ell-established and practiced by male counterparts. Bryce and Rutter (2003) suggest that many factors contribute to a systematized understanding of video games as a male technology, from masculine-oriented representation of in-game characters to recycled and
reproduced essentialist social mores about gender appropriate interests. More specifically, "contexts in which gaming occurs are gendered in such way as to prevent

female access to the technology, and communicate the view that gaming spaces are male
spaces" (p. 8, 2003). Males are permitted access 'naturally' whereas females must

somehow negotiate their way into games, although Bryce and Rutter note that stereotypical formations of gender constraint are relaxing somewhat. As Taylor (2006)

and others point out, females can and have adapted to and reconfigured these systems in

2 Statistic found on ESA's 'Industry Facts' page: http://www.theesa.com/facts/index.asp

-7-

multivariate ways, sidelining reductionist generalizations about 'how girls play' versus 'how boys play'. Still, Jenson and de Castell, in examining the play habits of pre-teen

girls, identify a gender predicated trend in permission: "Women and girls have been and
are playing, very often supported in their play by their male relations (brothers, uncles,

fathers, boyfriends, husbands)" (2008b). The notion that male figures take a central role
in encouraging (or, conversely, discouraging) females to play video games is problematic
to say the least, particularly where mastery is involved.

If skilled play is seen to fundamentally require active experience with games, systematic male gatekeeping of access to, and 'ownership' of, gaming hardware and

knowledge heavily implicates gender within a hierarchical construction of ability. To be
'133t' one must learn and demonstrate complex understanding of a game, but sociocultural expectations of technology precludes this degree of involvement for many

potential players. Research suggests, for example, that women are underprivileged in
distribution of leisure time, particularly in relation to technologically mediated activities

such as gaming and internet usage (Bannert & Arbinger, 1996; Schumacher & Morahan,
2001). In many cases, gaming capital is reserved largely for men by default: an intricate

weaving of social encodings continue to frame video games as a masculine domain, and

skill mastery - predicated by access to experience - is similarly masculinized as a result.
From a player-skill framework it is clear that gender cannot merely be addressed and then

pushed aside, but must rather form a foundational point of inquisition alongside
familiarity. These areas will be returned to in later analysis but, for now, a disclaimer:
skill is always gendered, even when it's not actively highlighted.

-8-

2.1 Games Studies

The state of video game studies (or digital game studies, as some prefer) has yet to crystallize into a formalized discipline. Indeed, one of the advantages of working in

this 'field' is the sheer breadth of multidisciplinary approaches which have been, and
continue to be, applied to the medium for the purpose of generating relevant new discourse and meaning-making practices. Long before Espen Aarseth declared 2001 to be "Year One of Computer Game Studies as an emerging, viable, international, academic

field" (2001) in the premiere issue of Game Studies, video games were occasional objects of study for sociologists and cultural anthropologists. The historical timeline of
humanities research on epistemological and ontological conceptions of'game' and 'play'
goes back even further.

Johan Huizinga's Homo Ludens: A Study ofthe Play Element in Culture, first published in 1938, is one of the earlier texts pertaining to video games studies which is still frequently cited by contemporary scholars to this date and, in fact, represents an
ongoing site of theoretical contention. Huizinga's book explores the relationship between

play, culture and ritual, but of particular interest to games studies is his formulation of game space: the contention that a "magic circle" separates participants of play (and the 'make-believe' rules which they simultaneously follow and enforce) from the external,

everyday rules of the 'real' world (p. 113, reprinted in Salen & Zimmerman, 2006). Play
forms an essential component of human socialization, Huizinga argues, but in order for

play to exist, the players must temporarily suspend their ordinary socio-cultural
expectations and roles. A boundary must be set in place between the two.

-9-

However, more recent thought has moved away from game play as a delineated

space and towards an increasingly holistic conceptualization. T. L. Taylor, among, others, argues that contemporary practices of play are more likely imbued with a liminal quality; that the negotiation of play space is wrapped up tightly in the real-life experiences of
participants. As part of an immersive ethnography research project within Everquest, a Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game (hereafter referred to as an
MMORPG), Taylor interviews players and concludes that:

People are very adept at moving back and forth between on- and offline spaces
and relationships, even while being ambivalent or unsure of how to frame the experience online life produces. These nuanced practices of negotiation, of

flexibility in the face of emerging technology, are quite different than early rhetoric, which mostly framed online life as a bounded-pff zone of
experimentation, (p. 18, 2006)

Taylor clearly sees little advantage in limiting understanding of a game to the interactions

which take place within a bounded space; for her, the gamet>leeds out into real life in a
myriad of relevant ways. In fact, many of her most insightful observations of players take place outside Everquest, albeit at a convention where folk gathered to meet online friends
in person and spent most of their time discussing in-game events and history. Mia Consalvo also takes exception to what she sees as an over-simplifying of the

relationship between player and game. She sees danger in reductionism, asking, "If we

acknowledge that games can provide such opportunities in 'walled off spaces, is it
appropriate to judge games or game player actions by an external set of rules - rules that originate outside the magic circle?" (p. 189, 2007). Games which model themselves on

real-world systems (such as Grand Theft Auto IV, which reflects the experience of
traversing a twentieth-century New York City crime underworld) necessarily refer to a

player's preconceptions of what such a space might entail and what actions may or may

-10-

not be appropriate while playing. Part of the fun of a killing spree in Grand Theft Auto is
generated from an innate awareness of, and the game's contrast to, the social mores of a

player's everyday life. Even if behaviour does not necessarily translate from one space to
another, each informs the player's experience concurrently. From this perspective
Huizinga's magic circle is, at best, porous and permeable.

Seeking to explain how players can autonomously transition in and out of

established game space, Huizinga notes the dilemma of the "spoil-sport", a once-player
who "shatters the play-world itself. By withdrawing from the game he reveals the

relativity and fragility of the play-world in which he had temporarily shut himself with
others" (p. 106). While this 'shattering' clearly cannot hold true for online-persistent games - who could reasonably expect an Everquest player to remain, in character, at their keyboard for six hours without ever once taking a bathroom break? - Consalvo argues

that every player transgresses or 'shatters' the rule-boundaries of their chosen game at
some point, in some manner. She borrows a textual strategy from Gerard Genette, the "paratext", to frame experience with video games which players have outside the game's

boundaries: review websites, FAQ lists and hint books are just some of the external
resources which inform how players understand games (p. 21-22). Consalvo even

suggests that paratexts, such as early gaming magazine Nintendo Power, were largely

responsible for shaping North American cultural perceptions about what a 'good' game
was, what types of knowledge were to be valued, and how people could begin to identify

themselves as game players (p. 28-31). The video game, then, is positioned as a cultural
text, the experience of which is informed by numerous, fluid sources of peripheral

paratexj: knowledge about the game. As games become more complex, players are

-11-

increasingly compelled to 'shatter' the rule-boundaries, to seek external expertise, in

order to return to the game's more difficult challenges and develop their own mastery.
Steven Jones, who adopts a similar perspective in TheMeaning of Video Games: Gaming and Textual Strategies, suggests that, "it's important to remember that the

playing is always in the social world, always a complicated, highly mediated experience, never purely formal, any more than a text is purely a verbal construct" (p. 9, 2008). He applies Genette's paratext to video games, like Consalvo, to select case studies of
contemporary gaming culture: emphasizing the importance of the mysterious I Love Bees meta-game, for example, in generating fan interest and hype for forthcoming blockbuster

title Halo 2.1 Love Bees was simultaneously an Alternate Reality Game (ARG) and a marketing strategy, driving intrigued players to scrutinize cryptic web pages and even travel to (real life) phone booths across the United States for clues. In the end, successful
participants were given tantalizing bits of information pertaining to the Halo narrative:

back-story which would ultimately prove useless to players in a ludological, actuallyplaying-the-game sense but nonetheless provide a bit of additional meaning to key plot
points in the game's story. That thousands of players were willing to dedicate hours of

their lives to collectively uncover this information, however, prompts Jones to conclude
that, "This is why I have been arguing that truly studying Halo ... has to include more

than the formal features of 'the game itself - that anyway, those features, when properly understood, are thresholds to the possibilities represented by vectors of the expanding Halo universe..." (p. 96, 2008). For Jones, meaning-making practices for Halo and other video games must expand beyond the television screen into auxiliary novels, fan sites,

-12-

reviews, anticipatory marketing, documented player experiences, and other paratexts
which actively work to shape a player's experience of the core game. It is difficult, therefore, to accept Huizinga's contention that all play must take

place within a carefully delineated, encircled space. If anything, Taylor, Consalvo and Jones provide examples which suggest that the boundaries between contemporary video
games and real life are permeable necessarily, that meaning-making practices which

expand to encompass the wide variety of tactics which players use to negotiate a video game more richly and accurately describe actual experience with the medium. No game is an island; the rocky outcroppings of paratexts connect games both to each other and to a

wider media ecology landscape. The magic circle, however, has remained useful as a foil
against which games studies scholars have tested new theoretical hypotheses on play and space. And, in fact, Huizinga's influence does not end here, as his work on enclosed ruleboundaries was an important foundation for one of the more influential and conflictive
disciplinary formalisms in games studies: ludology.

Ludology, loosely defined here as the study of game rule systems, structures and mechanics, has had an historically nuanced development (see, for example, Avedon & Sutton-Smith, 1971), but much work moving towards its theoretical maturity has taken
place in the past decade. This contemporary ludological formation, wrapped tightly up in

games studies, can be seen as a reaction against Janet Murray's 1997 Hamlet on the Holodeck, a book which positions video games within an Aristotelian framework for interactive drama. Murray was particularly interested in notions of interactivity and immersion within what she called the "cyberdrama", or the enactment of a story within the particular fictional space of the computer (1997). This, along with other narrative-

-13-

focused works which seek to apply literature, theatre and film story-theory to games, was

seen to be an unacceptable challenge by many proponents of the ludological approach, who envisioned games studies moving in quite a different direction.
Jesper Juul, for example, questioned the ability of games to form a cohesive narrative without depriving players of control, given that in most video games the story is both unfolding and 'told' synchronously (1999). Gonzalo Frasca was more interested in framing computer games as simulations than story, with users playing with rule structures which enabled experimentation within complex modeled systems (2003a). When

addressed, the brief, exaggerated struggle between 'ludologists' and 'narratologists'
within games studies was rarely productive, often set in polemical terms, and, at times,

could be inflammatory. Markku Eskelinen framed the debate as a battle against the colonization of narrative theory, and suggested that games studies must "annihilate for
good the discussion of games as stories, narrative or cinema" (2001a).

However, Gonzalo Frasca, another leading ludologist, eventually wrote a conciliatory piece suggesting that ludology and narrative were not necessarily at odds;
that, in fact, many who worked under the ludological framework had used narrative

terminology and comparisons, including himself (Frasca, 1999), Jesper Juul (1999), and
even Markku Eskelinen (2001b). For his part, Frasca suggests that, "One thing is not

favoring narratology as a preferred tool for understanding games and a whole different
one is to completely discard it" (2003b). Most games studies texts since deign to mention the theoretical struggle, choosing rather to move onwards with respective frameworks and avoid further direct confrontation. Within games studies it would appear as though

the debate has settled down, if not been satisfactorily settled, and that interdisciplinary

-14-

work is now free to continue without being generalized as a binary and forcibly set on
one side or the other of the ludo-narratological divide.

2.2 What is a Game?

The reason I briefly mention this debate is not to re-open discussion on what a

video game is, in a formative sense, whether it might be a narrative construction or a
simulation or an assembly of rules or anything else. I am far more interested in the how of games than the what: how they are used, and by whom, and under what technological and materialauspices. Nonetheless, a contextual understanding of the disciplinary spaces

within which games studies operates is important, just as the experiential context of an individual undertaking a new game play challenge is important. I follow Steven Jones in taking the broadest possible definition of what a video game, and the study thereof, might
entail; the game as an "articulation of material form with larger cultural and social meanings" (p. 9, 2008). This framing emphasizes both the material components of playing contemporary games (hardware, input/output devices), and pays specific attention to how games operate, as a technological entertainment medium, within a sociocultural setting.

Bernard Suits' definition in his article 'Construction of a Definition' adds a more ludologically concrete, complimentary perspective: To play a game is to engage in activity directed towards bringing about a specific state of affairs, using only means permitted by rules, where the rules

prohibit more efficient in favour of less efficient means, and where such rules
are accepted just because they make possible such activity, (p. 184, 2006)

The key component here is that a video game is an activity conducted within a delineated
system of rules. As for the rest, it seems enough to address digital games in the culturally

-15-

mediated sense; that is, the player acknowledges that they are playing a video game,

which was produced, published and perhaps advertised as a video game, and reviewed by
a print or web source as a video game. Espen Aarseth suggests that, "rather than being a

newcomer, computer games are games in a new material technology, just as print novels were literature in a new technology 500 years ago" (p. 46, 2004). Video games, he decides, are difficult to consider as a whole, given that they appear on a range of
technological devices, often encompass other media (print, video), and are played in a wide range of social contexts. The materiality of contemporary video games is simply a new way of presenting game models which have historical roots far preceding the home
game console or the arcade machine. Aarseth does, however, note that "Games are, at

best, a somewhat definable cultural genre" (ibid). This, to me, seems like a perfectly reasonable mode of categorization. If shops exist which exclusively sell video games, and the objects within are discs containing experiences which are popularly considered to be video games, then why must theory attempt to rearrange and reclassify such cultural instances? The physical presence of a console controller on the living room floor baldly signifies 'video game'. It is too late for the medium's everyday presence to be renegotiated or couched in divisive, polemical terminology. This is somewhat of an expansion on Mark Wolfs observation on genre, that video games are categorized through consensual, informal agreement between producers and audience (p. 113, 2001).

Of course, there are experimental projects (cybertexts and the like) which lie on
the periphery between game and something else, but I will leave it to others to draw

formative categorical boundaries in the sand - which will undoubtedly need to be
redrawn and redrawn again as technological innovation drives creative output in new

-16-

directions. However, I acknowledge here that popular gaming encompasses a wide
variety of formats and media: children's interactive websites, virtual worlds, handheld

devices, arcade machines, and much more. For the purpose of this thesis the primary site

of analysis will be the interactive console video game, which represents the largest financial piece of the puzzle. According to the Canadian Video Game and Computer

Industry site, these consoles are present in more than 40% of all Canadian households.3
This resource, maintained in part by established games scholar Nick Dyer-Witheford,

also notes that an even greater percentage of Canadians play games on their home
computers. Occasionally examples and comparisons will be made with popular PC (computer) games, as many video games have a tendency to migrate from platform to platform.

2.3 Skilled Play

In his foundational book Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature, Espen
Aerseth refers to the process of manipulating a game world or "cybertext" as

characterized by the "non-trivial effort... required to allow the reader to traverse the
text" (p. 1, 1997). It is the nature of this "non-trivial effort" on which I wish to focus
primarily. In what ways might a player exert such an effort while playing a video game?

Does a "non-trivial effort" refer to the material conditions of handling, say, an Xbox controller efficiently, or accumulated knowledge of specific genre conventions which
might render certain game challenges more recognizable and therefore easier to

overcome? Is it enough to "traverse the text" halfway, falling short of completing a game

because of its difficulty? Aarseth has changed his position on the textuality of games

3 http://publish.uwo.ca/~ticdyerwi/

-17-

somewhat since (see Aarseth, 2004), but the questions remain relevant. His key claim

evokes questions pertaining to player skill: what it takes to play a game well, or at least
competently. While games studies literature rarely addresses the notion of skill directly, hints at the manner in which players interface (or are expected to interface) with video games are nonetheless present in a number of texts. The next part of this review consists of selectively revisiting theoretical

frameworks within games studies, specifically well-established narratological and
ludological perspectives, and observing how player skill is addressed or, alternatively,

ignored. The following examples are by no means an exhaustive review of how
discourses on skill unfold within games studies literature; they were, however, chosen both for disciplinary prominence and for the simple criteria that they mention player skill in any capacity. A cross-section of the literature demonstrates the need for more in-depth
focus on this aspect of digital games.

2A Skill and Narratology

Janet Murray works towards positioning the computer as a site of fruitful

storytelling, appropriating the term "agency" to describe the level of control users might
wield within this system. "When the world responds expressively and coherently to our

engagement with it, then we experience agency," she writes. "Agency requires that we

script the interactor as well as the world, so that we know how to engage the world, and
so that we build up the appropriate expectations" (p. 10, 2004). Michael Mateas, also building on an Aristotelian framework for interactive drama, adds that:

-18-

If, in manipulating the interface elements, the player does have an effect on the
world, but they are not the effects that the player intended (perhaps the player

was randomly trying things because they didn't know what to do, or perhaps the
player thought that an action would have one effect, but it instead had another),
then there is no agency, (p. 21, 2004)

Clearly a position of expertise on behalf of the player is expected here. 'Button-mashing' - or pushing the buttons on a controller haphazardly in hopes that some positive result
will occur on-screen - does not constitute agency just as, in common video game play parlance, it would not generally be considered a skillful tactic. Of course, the very notion

that button-mashing is an inappropriate style of play is a socially situated understanding,
but in this case it describes a player who wields little to no agency over a game world. Exactly how agency might be acquired and demonstrated by players (or interactive dramaticists) within this framework is not addressed. From a narrativist perspective, a player's skill might be represented by their

ability to manipulate a game world according to their personal goals, which may or may not reflect the goals inherent to the game's structure. In multiplayer games, however, this
perspective is problematic: an individual's agency may be constrained somewhat in the interest of a fair competition, but within those boundaries of 'fair play' one can still

demonstrate the a superiority of skill (by winning, or taking out the most opponents, or
collecting the most items). Skill must be something that not only the game acknowledges

and respects, but which is respected by other game players as well. If we look to fandriven communities for examples, GameFAQs.com ties skill in closely with
completionism: while multiple authors might write Frequently Asked Question

documents (FAQs) on the same game, it is the FAQs with the most information (and, generally, the largest file size) which are labeled with a star symbol of approval, which

-19-

denotes user recommendation. Expertise is thus tied closely to the range of possibilities set out within a game's rule systems and structures, and skill is represented by the most
expansive exploration of these limits. Narrative assumptions of player skill involve a

presumed level offamiliarity with the controls and conventions of a given game, but neglect an important socio-cultural element of how skill is recognized and understood amongst players.

2.5 Skill and Ludology

Roger Caillois, whose writing predates video games, is an influential source for ludological work, primarily for adopting Greek categorical terminology in 'The Classification of Games'. He argues briefly, on play, that, "It provides an occasion for
training and normally leads to the acquisition of a special skill, a particular mastery of the
operation of one or another contraption or the discovery of a satisfactory solution to

problems of a more conventional type" (p. 142, reprinted in Salen & Zimmerman, 2006).

This statement, at least, has depth: Caillois points to the usefulness of games in developing "special skills", but also in developing related expertise with a material or technological object ("contraption"), and in the cross-application of knowledge gained through games to be applied to similar, presumably external, problems ("of a more
conventional type"). Caillois was watching children at play, like Johan Huizinga, but his

observation that play could be linked to the acquisition of skills and mastery provides a useful starting point. More recent ludological work on games, however, rarely returns to
skill as a topic of interest.

-20-

'(piqi) wa^ssureSsipxpiM§uipej9;ui jaAqdaq;joaouEisuiquo saureS 'sAtss jntif se 'juauxap (;u9iu9auooui AijiqSqs ji) Xjbsssoqu

e ijijs si jsABjd aip 's^JOAvaramj jeoipjoaq; ;oBj;sqB ui usAg '(^003 'b£l '&) tfyp
9Aipxj ^ jo joAeui sq; osp 9jb noA" ;nq 'ssnoui jnoA q;iM ypip noX 'ssuibS jo
si sxqx -pi^OAv aureS b o;m popdCoid sjb suojpb pTO sun; sf
si

sq; §ui;ejndiueiii ui sisXBjd jo sjoj aq; uo A|jB;u9ppni saqono; 'X^d oum2 oapiA ui
ui

suopipuoo

;snui jo '

ui 3ouvt[o joj

o;

pire soi;ob; jbii;ob

o; A;lun^oddo aq; azraSoosj'o; sj^addB 9J9q ;mod Xi^uiud sqx "(17003
'£9 '$) M9suodssj puB cuoi;BAj9sqo 6uoi;u3aj9;ui jo sdooj snonupuoo unpi
xajdinoo 9;BpidniBui o; sou^qo aq; Suusjjo 69Ai^jnSijuoo sjb Xsq; asn^osq
ui ssxix^S J9;nduxoo - saui^o,, ';^q; S9;ou doiq;jno]Al
·p9;u^j§ joj U93p; si /Quvijiwvfmu'Bu qouq *
(Avoqauxos) jjim 9|do9d 4;Tjnq si uopBpiuns ^ ji -psuinss^ si 9pBin 9jb saoioqo ssaq;

qSnojq; sonreqoaui ppos Suipj^Saj sjsipq

siq Suiquosap si X^yd o; pj^q A*puxai;x9 si ;^q; jo;Bpiraxs 95[u;s v. suSissp J9A9oqyw,,
pjnoo saoioqo ssaq; ;^q; s;s9§§ns ^h *J9¥^ pappoxii
si uo ;no

;q§iux sjsXBid Avoq

uoi;Bpiuiis uo

joj 'bosbjj ot^bzuoq

that self-identified ludologists rarely address the player as more than a component of a

feedback loop with video games. While this perspective is concurrent with the
discipline's intent focus on the 'game as game', or the placing of primacy on rule
structures and game mechanics, the player's experience, skill, and expertise is largely

absent in these texts. Ludologists leave it to others to address the player in a more holistic
manner.

2.6 Skill and the Player's Voice

Far more consideration of what it means to be skilled at video games comes from
informal player accounts than from formal academia: voices from the playing field have
more to say on mastery than any overtly scholarly source. Indeed, part of the

multidisciplinary breadth of games studies comes from the inclusion of such accounts

alongside work on semiotics, ludology and narrative theory. The short story 'Bow,
Nigger', by an author who goes only by his screen name, alwaysblack, is one such example. The story revolves around a one-on-one light saber duel between alwaysblack and another player in Jedi Knight II, where his opponent tricks him into 'bowing' his

character's head pre-fight and then, evilly, attacks during the traditional show of respect.
'Bow, Nigger' reflects a rich understanding of the expertise and skill required of Jedi

Knight IIplayers, as well as detailed knowledge of the ritual elements which evolved and

solidified on multiplayer servers. After catching always_black chatting a few times and
getting in several more 'cheap' hits, his opponent begins using overly-flashy attacks, "Which is a mistake on his part. It's total overkill, even though he doesn't know I have

only five points left, and I happen to know that the very end of the move leaves you very

-22-

vulnerable indeed" (p. 607, 2006). always_black, predictably, fights back to victory. Skill
and an intimate mastery of social conventions lies at the centre of this piece which,

although very specific to a particular game, at least begins to address the complexities of
the player's role in a video game from a storytelling angle.

'The Evil Summoner FAQ vl .0: How to Be a Cheap Ass' is another player account of game mastery, albeit in a different form. Mia Consalvo's conception of the
paratext describes resources external to a game which nonetheless inform players about

the game; FAQ pages are just one example of such a source. The Evil Summoner FAQ is
an amusing walkthrough of a game which even the author finds to be sub-par. 'Mochan'

introduces his FAQ as follows: "Most people write FAQs for games they love and
worship and adore above all else. However, being unlike everyone else, I have taken it
upon myself to write this FAQ with the sole intention of utterly trashing Summoner

because I totally hate the game" (p. 271, 2006). Nonetheless, Mochan has clearly played
enough to have built up a high level of expertise with the game's intricacies. He offers
suggestions like,"* The Fire Wall Technique * It's slow, boring, but works all the time

and has a 100% safety rate. You will NEVER lose with this technique ... Because of the
stupidity of the enemies, you can creep up on any non-boss enemy to cast Fire Wall on it, and it will not see you!" (p. 279, 2006). This FAQ is interesting because it openly detaches enjoyment from familiarity, although Mochan seems to take a certain pleasure in dismantling what he sees to be inferior game mechanics. More importantly, the FAQ
covers a wide range of skills players will need to play the game, from prescriptive

configuration (the most efficient abilities to bestow on avatars), to context-specific tactics (the best ways to defeat particular enemies) to a critical review of the game's underlying

-23-

code (the Fire Wall technique/bug). FAQs are a useful entry point into considerations of player skill and expertise; what players themselves consider important to know or
necessary to do while playing a video game.

The accounts of Mochan and always_black are included here because they have

been formally published, but their importance lies in the fact that they represent the tip of
a much, much larger iceberg of player-generated conceptualization of what it means to be skilled in video games. A brief search through any community portal or forum will yield thousands of similar accounts: instruction on how to turn glitches or bugs in a game's rule structures to one's advantage, stories of great perseverance or expertise during game play, an immense, shifting repository of knowledge about video games and how to defeat them. Academic theoretical consideration, on the other hand, seems to have arrived at a scant few observations about the same topic although interest appears to be picking up (for example, see Jesper Juul's Tear of Failing? The Many Meanings of Difficulty in Video Games' in The Video Game Theory Reader 2 [forthcoming 2009]). Contemporary ludological and narrativist frameworks indicate a problematic assumption offamiliarity on the part of the player, while informal player texts fill in the contextual gaps. Consequently, the remainder of this thesis will draw upon both types of sources for analysis, recognizing player narratives as crucial to a more expansive look at how skill intersects with video game play. For now, however, I turn to some difficult areas within games studies that a player-skill perspective might reformulate and which, in turn, reflect upon how skill and mastery can be conceptualized in a more nuanced manner. Applicable

theories of pleasure, as explanations as to why players might seek to develop such skills,
are integrated throughout.

-24-

2.7 Games as Text

If games are, as Aarseth contends, "open, dynamic texts where the reader must
perform specific actions to generate a literary sequence, which may vary for every

reading" (p. 1, 1997), what then fundamentally separates a video game from any other media 'text' in terms of the "specific actions" required of the reader/player?
Poststructuralist literary theorists such as Roland Barthes, for example, might suggest that reading print is simply a less strictly delineated practice in interpretation than playing a

game; a book can be 'understood' just as a game can be 'won'. Indeed, Barthes notes that, "The most subjective reading imaginable is never anything but a game played
according to certain rules..." (p. 31, 1989). Likewise, a popular movie might be viewed

by anyone but it takes a certain degree of culturally-sanctioned expertise in filmmaking,
knowledge on the intricacies of celebrity and/or 'authorship and/or film theory, for one to position their particular meaning-making practices of that movie as more important than others. Skill, in other words, can play a role in the interpretation of any media and is most

manifest in the output of discourse: the skilful reader demonstrates accumulated
knowledge in a review, in a post-performance discussion with others, or perhaps in operationalizing their understanding through a critique or addendum to a text in their own

creative works. Expertise is granted through what Pierre Bourdieu termed "cultural capital", which describes the ways in which dominant interests and opinions are
disseminated, classified and reproduced amongst social groupings (1984).

Where the video game differs from other media is in an inherently evaluative

functionality; that is, the game itself plays a role in assessing and responding to the
player's non-trivial efforts. Through what Martti Lahti describes as a "cybernetic loop

-25-

with the computer" (p. 163, 2003), video games are distinguished from printed and other
texts by a process of tangible feedback and response: at its base level, the player inputs a command which the game then responds to, which prompts the player to input another command and so forth. The game plays an essential role in mediating this play. A book or

a film, conversely, cannot dynamically assess a reader's progress, although the
materiality of the book can signify degrees of completion through the number of pages

evidently remaining to be read. Still, the reader might skip every other page, say, or choose to only watch the last half of a film, and while expertise (or lack thereof) on the reading of said texts will be assigned in the discursive, cultural realm, the material artifact
that is the film or the book has no say in how it is used. The popular, contemporary console video game tends to anticipate and expect a prescribed set of actions on behalf of the player; without these corresponding inputs the game rests, idle, or perhaps the

player's character, frozen in indecision, is horribly killed time and time again. Sometimes the game may revert to showing a cycling montage of action-packed clips, a demonstration of the experiences a player might enjoy as they progress further through
the game (should they prove skilful enough). The game plays itself in an endless,

disjointed loop, displaying over and over the necessity of a player to close the circuit.

2.8 Social Traversing

Understanding video games as texts must be predicated upon an acknowledgement that games often 'spill out' over the borders of Huizinga's magic circle as players seek to discursively explore the possibilities afforded by their entertainment.

Players talk. They read. They learn about games while playing, but also through dialogue

-26-

which takes place when the console is shut down and the game is over. Like other media,
video games take on additional and more nuanced meaning through the paratexts which inform them: previews, reviews, FAQs, community forums, advertising, and more. However, the "non-trivial efforts" which players must exert in order to "traverse"

a video game, as Aarseth puts it, serve as a functional division through which video
games are differentiated. Lahti's "cybernetic loop" (p. 163, 2003) describes the player's

input-response pattern with the game: every action, even cheating or subverting the
system, results in tangible change of some sort. This thesis deploys the term 'interface' in

this sense: an interface with the game refers not only to the input device but also to the
various mechanisms of feedback (mostly displayed on-screen) which respond to the

player's actions and inform them of the game's dynamically altering status. The process of navigating the text of a video game, then, is one which constantly demands the employment of a specialized skill set, a kind of video game literacy, which is honed and
refined by a procedural feedback loop of evaluative response from the game. This evaluation may be augmented by other humans: an action which the game acknowledges

as valid, for example, may be considered a socially-situated taboo in some instances.
'Button-mashing' in a one-on-one fighting game may result in a number of awkwardly strung together attacks, as the machine faithfully reproduces the player's inputted commands, but other players present will quickly perceive such actions as skill-less (a potentially loaded area in terms of gendered perspectives on technology). Mia Consalvo,
returning to her framework of the paratext, emphasizes that player skill has been

historically formulated through extra-textual material:

-27-

The magazine made visible a key activity: delineating the varying skill sets of players, and carefully playing to each of these groups... apprentices who
successfully completed the route may have been encouraged to replay the game, first exploring the devotee route and finally progressing to the master level, (p. 29, 2007) Guides thus became an instruction manual in how a player might hope to employ their game controller in a specific way, to overcome specific obstacles suited to a self-

identified level of expertise. Variable difficulties in video games were introduced as a
voluntary effort on the part of the player to artificially make the game harder, and were eventually 'hard-wired' into the game's mechanics. Consalvo points out that the paratext's role in framing difficulty and the skills players need to develop in order to
surmount game play obstacles should not be underestimated: socio-cultural aspects of gaming are prominent in defining mastery. Formalized evaluation from the game is often wrapped-up in conceptualizations

of progress: the player is told she is 45% part-way through a task, perhaps, or new

challenges and areas of exploration are seamlessly unlocked and revealed as play
progresses successfully. Contemporary consoles take steps to enumerate and quantify

ability, prescribing skilled play through 'Achievements' (Xbox 360) or 'Trophies' (PlayStation 3), where points are attributed to a player's universal gaming profile based
on completion of game-specific tasks. In this way a kind of meta-mastery emerges to

typify gamers based on a wide range of play experiences. Successful play requires the
accumulation of relevant skills and knowledge (both through in-game experience and through discursive engagement with other players) which are then applied towards the

actual "traversing" of the game text. If one wishes to watch only the ending sequence of a film or read the final five pages of a book they are welcome to it; if a game player, on the

-28-

other hand, wants to complete a game they will first need to demonstrate to the game some show of mastery. This statement, of course, embeds the assumption of a 'closed
narrative', in which a game can indeed be played to some sort of end point. While many

popular console games do indeed take this format, there are many examples of 'open

ended' narratives as well; games which can be played indefinitely, without an identifiable
conclusion.

2.9 Games Without Goals?

As Jesper Juul notes, a widespread assumption is held in games studies that "video games are goal-oriented, rule-based activities, where players find enjoyment in

working towards the game goal" (2007a). He then argues, using the blockbuster titles
Sims 2 and Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas as examples, that making such goals optional or even removing them entirely allows for more expressive play. In Sims 2 a player is not

critically evaluated by the game on what type of chair they buy for their character; the choice is, rather, an aesthetic one and unbounded by formal constraints. Juul does,

however, acknowledge that, "The game has no imperative, no demands on what the
player should do, yet Sims (the characters in the game) generally become miserable if the player does nothing" (2007a). As for Grand Theft Auto, Juul sees experiential possibility in its 'sandbox' style, where players are encouraged to progress through the storyline but are, in fact, free to go cycling, swimming, exploring, or ignore the game's direction in
any number of other ways.

While I agree with Juul in that broader, more unbounded play lends itself well to a greater range of player experiences, each of his game examples nonetheless carries an

-29-

evaluative weight which evokes a critical assessment of a player's skill. In Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas the player can indeed ignore the game's primary goals. If he or she
attempts to explore too far away from the game's starting point, however, police will

instantly target and kill them: certain areas of the game's geography are considered
functionally inaccessible until 'unlocked' by progression through the story missions. Likewise, certain weapons and vehicles only become available after the player has completed certain missions, challenges which, I might add, require the player to employ a particular set of game play skills against in order to be completed. Behind the supposed freedom of Grand Theft Auto lies a complex, quantified evaluation system through which the player is reminded of their accomplishments: 5% of the game's story completed, and
so forth. As the game's protagonist develops his own expertise and skills alongside the

player (riding a bicycle lots, for example, will be reflected in a numerical assessment of the character's mastery which grows with use and, in turn, makes it easier for the player
to perform more complex maneuvers on a bike), it becomes impossible to escape some
sort of progressive feedback from the game. \

Sims 2 enacts evaluation in a more transparent manner, but nonetheless pushes

players towards developing skills which lead to positive outcome for their avatars. The
game's packaging, for instance, features a number of happy-looking Sims engaging in

conversation, dancing, playing and the like. This paratext, along with socio-cultural

expectations of what the 'good' life entails and a strong online community feature which
prescribes the creation and exchange of virtual luxury consumption items, supplants the game's goal-less claims with a strong imperative for characters to succeed. If one does

indeed, as Juul suggests, seek pleasure in subverting the 'optional' goal of maintaining a

-30-

good life for their Sims, many of the game's features remain inaccessible. House and

interior design, formatively, cost Simoleans (money). The survival of one's characters is predicated upon in-game accomplishments which are tracked by Aspiration points, which can be traded for a longer lifespan or other unique rewards. Without effort, and without

the micromanagement ability to enact these efforts, the game descends inevitably into
squalor and death, outcomes which most will understandably perceive as a type of defeat or failure. Suburban decay may be fun to model, but it is difficult to accept as a definitive
conclusion to one's game play experience. Juul concludes that Sims 2 is a game promising, "absolute freedom, but is a game with many constraints and resistances to the

player's plans" (2007a). Navigating these constraints and resistances becomes an
imperative skill here; understanding well the mechanisms of a Sim-ulated life maybe a game play success in and of itself. Raph Koster's A Theory ofFun (2005) is based on the premise that people seek to

find the pattern - and compare it against previously examined patterns - in any system;
once the pattern is exposed in a video game, it may become boring. It is difficult to

believe that a player might possibly unveil the patterns of Sims 2 without ever once
attempting to reproduce its (implied) model of success. Too much of the game experience remains inaccessible through inactive/subversive play techniques. To 'succeed', then,

will inevitably require a certain accumulation of experience, expertise and mastery, even in games without explicitly rendered goals such as Sims 2. Additionally, any video game with an 'open-ended' narrative is quickly seen to have some sort of demand on the

player, pertaining to masteries which may be socially situated within the boundaries of

-31-

what the game allows players to do. Neopets4, for example, is a casual virtual pet website,
where users accumulate aesthetic items for their online charges. Collecting these items requires a certain degree of expertise with the game system: knowledge of which minigames may yield the most currency, integration into the Neopets community to the point

where a player knows which prizes are considered to have the most subcultural value,
and so forth. Although these skills are far more cognitively and socially aligned than

those required for most console games, they nonetheless represent an accumulated
experience with the patterns of possibility afforded by Neopets. Beginning players

traversing the forums of Neopets will use the status of other, more advanced players as points of comparison, as an indication of where they might get to, given enough time and effort. Success is seen to be far more personalized and dynamic here than with 'closed narrative', linear games, where the game itself is specifically evaluative, but always precludes the notion of mastery over some aspect of the game. Accumulation of expertise, whether social, cognitive, or technical, is valued and embedded in even the most casual of games. Without appropriate skill sets a game can be traversed only superficially; this will definitively influence the player's experience.

2.10 The Importance of Mastery in Research

The analysis of video games also requires a baseline understanding of skill.

Steven Malliet, paraphrasing Kucklich (2002), suggests that researchers must crucially develop the same masteries employed by players when conducting qualitative content analysis on video games. Malliet writes:

4 Neopets can be found (and played) at: http://www.neopets.com

-32-

A game has to be played in order to be understood, and playing a game implies

making active choices another player or researcher would not necessarily make. Kucklich claims that there exists no such thing as an ideal player, because it is
an essential part of games that players are allowed (and required) to be creative

within the framework provided by the game rules. As a consequence it is not
possible to grasp the meaning that is formulated in a game, without taking into

account specific details of the player context. (2006) Here, Malliet steers away from reductive formalism, acknowledging that many different
players will work their way through an identical game in many different ways. While challenges posed by a video game might be structurally similar, the way in which skills are employed to surmount these challenges can vary. A player-centric focus is needed. Similarly, Espen Aarseth (2003) notes the importance of researching games from

a number of different play styles and positions of expertise. For quick classification purposes, a few minutes with the game may be enough, but for more in-depth analysis of meaning production or rule structures of a video game, the researcher may need to be prepared to play repeatedly and acquire a set of masteries, or skills, in order to do so. I
agree with these perspectives, as it seems ludicrous to assume that one could hope to understand a game without playing it sufficiently enough to understand and appreciate its

challenges, and the skills necessary to overcome them. A blogger for townhall.com
named Kevin McCullough, for example, raised ire in gaming communities for publishing

a story on the presumable sexual depravity of the game Mass Effect. McCullough describes lesbian orgies and graphic rape scenes, none of which appears in the game

whatsoever.5 McCullough's misinformation was based on hearsay and YouTube videos;
he had no contextual basis for his understanding of the game's sex scenes which
comprise an extremely small percentage of the player's overall experience. Eventually

5 The full story (with external links) was published at: http://kotaku.com/344873/mass-effect-politicaldickery-corrected

-33-

FOX News picked up the story, making equivalent claims based on an equivalent (non

existent) degree of expertise in actually playing the game.6 Electronic Arts, the publisher
of Mass Effect, would eventually file a formal complaint alongside the wave of Internetbased fan indignation.

Without the skills (or the inclination, it seems) to experience a video game on its
own terms, to play the game, important context is lost and analysis can only be conducted

on a superficial, representational level. Someone who has never once played Starcraft, a Real-Time Strategy (RTS) game which is immensely popular in South Korea, will have

trouble watching a broadcast of a professional match on public television there. Masses
of critters move about the screen and an announcer screams, incomprehensively, with
excitement at seemingly random moments. However, a viewer who lacks the language

skills but holds expertise in playing the game will view the scene from an entirely different, strategically rich, angle: the announcer is excited because the Protoss player has
v

just scouted out the Zerg player's resource expansions, and a tide-turning battle is

forming for control of the area and, most likely, the entire match. An appreciation of video game skill thus demands, in turn, a comparative level of expertise with the game
under consideration. As Aarseth, Malliet and Kiicklich argue, to properly understand is to
play.

2.11 Workable Conceptualizations and Models of Skill

Craig Lindley, writing from a designer's perspective, points out that games can be

partially characterized by a recursive learning loop he terms the "gameplay gestalt,

More on the FOX News and Mass Effect story is available at: http://kotaku.com/347350/keighley-setsmass-effect-record-straight-or-tries-to

-34-

understood as a pattern of interaction with the game system" (2003). Although the gameplay gestalt is only part of a greater design taxonomy which includes simulation,
ludological and narratological components, Lindley states that there are a number of complexities involved in examining the player's role:

A gameplay gestalt can have many forms for a particular game, capturing different playing styles, tactics and approaches to progressing through the game and (perhaps) eventually winning. In general, it is a particular way of thinking about the game state from the perspective of a player, together with a pattern of
repetitive perceptual, cognitive, and motor operations. A particular gameplay

gestalt could be unique to a person, a game, or even a playing occasion. More generally though, recurrent gameplay gestalts can be identified across games,
game genres, and players. (2003)

Lindley, in many ways, is tracing the paths of what has previously been termed player
skill in other frameworks. He acknowledges the multivariate approaches people might, and will, apply against game challenges. While Lindley understandably avoids a comprehensive list of gaming gestalts, he offers some rudimentary examples of how

gameplay gestalts might emerge for games within specific genres. The action game, he suggests, follows the pattern of, "shoot while being hit, strafe to hiding spot, take health, repeat", while for Role Playing Games (RPGs), the pattern might be, "send fast character to lure enemy from group, all characters kill enemy, take health, repeat" (2003). These looping actions are greatly oversimplified, obviously, and ignore the many, many

intermediate decisions that must take place in between: working one's way through a
hostile environment strategically, for shooters, or the social squabbles which occur in online RPGs over distribution of character-enhancing loot. It was not Lindley's intent to create a formalized typology characteristic of all games of a genre, but rather to point out that such repetitive systems of player interaction form the core of video game play. The

skills required to enact such patterns - what Lindley identifies as "repetitive perceptual,

-35-

cognitive, and motor operations" - are the foundation of a video game. The designer must
first ask herself what the player might find themselves doing, whether just once or twice

or throughout the entire play experience, and build the game's rule structures and narratological context around these mechanics. As Lindley points out, these core gaming
gestalts are frequently reproduced across games and genres. Clearly the type of mastery needed in order to win a Guitar Hero contest is drastically different from the micromanagement abilities necessary to play Starcraft, the

visual pattern recognition skills needed to play most casual puzzle games, or the lightning-fast twitch-speed needed to play most First-Person Shooters (FPSs), like Quake ox Halo, effectively. The numerous genres and play styles which can be subsumed under
the label 'video game' do not lend themselves well to formal typologies: solidly delineated categorization will be routinely thwarted by new games which hybridize

genres, remap gaming conventions, and introduce unprecedented game play challenges to
players.

Still, along the same general lines as Lindley, I believe individual case studies on
long-standing genres such as the aforementioned real-time strategy and first-person

shooter video games will reveal 'clusters' of skill sets which, rnore or less, can be transferred from one individual game iteration to the next. Player familiarity factors
heavily here. James Paul Gee takes a semiotic approach to understanding this clustering

of skills in his book What Video Games Have to Teach Us about Learning and Literacy:
In the larger semiotic domain of video games, first- and third-person shooter games are a well defined subdomain. However, such games often have elements

that are similar to features found in arcade games, games (like Space Invaders,
Pacman, and Frogger) that involve a good deal of fast hand-eye coordination to
move and respond quickly. (In fact, one of the original first-person shooter
games, a game that helped start the genre - Wolfenstein 3D - operates very

-36-

-LI'

A\oq :siu9ouoo jpq; mo\oo uoxpmxsqt? jo suoxissn^) -sjaad jo iuojj in suieS sqx gux
spadst? ^;u9uiuojiau9 sqx saou oqAV 'si3Av\d uojmpAB^ douvQ douvQjo uoxiEAiasqo put?

SAvaxAiaaux uo uoxiusxuoo sxqi sassq 9fj '(LOOZ '9££ '$) ,Pm^ ospiA sq; q;iM ;U9UI9§^§U9
jo a;is sq; ;^ uoi;bj9;x9j aAi^uuojiad ;u9S9jd-sXBM|B s;x ux sszi^uq^ui ye\\\ - suijdpsip

isud puB 'uopxpBj; ;s^d 4sj9;unoou9 ;s^d - ;s^d aq; jo s^jluwl A^iq/a sq;
Xpoq siq; ;Bq; pSioj joinreo sav,, 4;^q; 3up^;s 'S9ipn;s aoueiiuqiiad spnpux ;snxu jo SAxpadsjad oxisqoq sjoui u ;t^q; sati&re ussnt^qsu^jqag *A\i9;sBin x^oxuqo qoxqM C9|^xs jo uopsanb b jo 'lusuodxnoo oxpqxs^ we 9q osjb Aeiu

soi}aii}sa\f lejnynQ zi 'Z

UX

aq; uo

'snojsuinu qoxqAv j^pun Bjpjqum

jo §uxai^9m sxeoxaaux we sb xiT^s §uxpu^;sj9pun oiux ;uxod Xjxus ut^ sspxAOjd
'jsqxo qixAY /Quvijiwvf te/Lv\d xsuxbSb p9;q§X9AV siu suox^psdxs

iusxsAs uurexuopqns,, J9xt?9i§ b jo xit^d st^ pUB 'S9xx][noxjjxp japieq i>[s A\ddu 01 uo sqaoui puB ssSu^tpqo S9p|draoo j9XB|d sqx sb jxax ux, qioq
ux

rarep sxq

ux psppoiu

ux

ux

9J0XU

sx ;nq '

ux

sx

SB 6

AVOU

qons qgnoqx 'ssuibS isiooqs joj ureuiop josjnosid jo uxEiuop sqx p9J9;s^ui st^q oqM auosxuos 6snqx ('

si^q squi^S
i\ qonui

is DDR like dancing? How is it different? A socio-cultural evaluation of one's finesse, or the ability to look 'cool' while playing, runs parallel to a player's quantitative score.
Similarly, the Major League Gaming competition for Guitar Hero adds a performative aspect to the game's innate scoring system, with judges rendering decisions in categories

such as 'showmanship' for each contestant. Consequentially, the gamers artificially increase the difficulty of their challenge by choosing to play using different styles: with
their controllers behind their head (disorienting), without watching the notes on the screen (memorization), and switching hands between fret and strum bar (dexterity). Here, skill seems to partially detach from the game's rule structures and become imbued, as

well, in the materiality and performativity of play which is then subjectively evaluated by
others. As I have previously pointed out, skill and mastery are, in large part, socially

formulated and recognized by peers and other players, but a closer focus on localized group play highlights social performativity as a particularly fruitful area of investigation. What happens when a player succeeds, according to a game, but looks foolish to others in
the process? Or, conversely, how might players gracefully negotiate failure in front of

their peers? Social performativity emerges as another nexus point of analysis for a playerskill perspective, intertwined with questions of gender and familiarity.

2.13 The Pleasures of Flow

Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi's conceptualization offlow is theoretical framework
frequently employed within games studies texts to explore the pleasure which players might take from a video game. In Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, Csikszentmihalyi suggests that participants who are wholly engaged in an activity, that is,

-38-

in a state of flow, demonstrate the most positive and productive mental state. A state of flow is characterized by a decreased awareness of passing time or external concerns (the need to eat, for example), and can be brought about by situations such as a "challenging activity that requires skills" (p. 49, 1990). Other relevant aspects of flow include the necessity of realistic goal-setting by the participant, and an inherent belief that mastery of a task is indeed possible for them. Importantly, a state of flow is only achieved when a player feels that their skills are adequately challenged: too little challenge results in boredom, while too much challenge leads to frustration and anxiety (p. 74, 1990). Csikszentmihalyi's observations interlock well with Koster's (2005) claim that players
are pattern recognizers who grow bored with a game once the underlying patterns have

been revealed and interpreted; the player, by this point, will be reduced to mechanistic reproduction of predictable actions, stripped of the need for cognitive exploration. In
short, a benchmark degree of automaticity is implied here: before the player can move on

to more complex cognitive tasks, they must first internalize and automate basic
communication with the game. It is easy to see how the mind might more easily wander

to other activities under these circumstances; 'farming', or repetitiously performing the

same looting operation over and over, in MMORPGs is often described by players as
"work" rather than "play", and the automaticity of such activities lends itself to players

simultaneously working on other things while their avatars grind away on-screen.7
While Csikszentmihalyi's flow model augments and informs an understanding the
pleasures to be taken from playing video games, it also points to the necessity of skill in facilitating these pleasures. Is the player who is constantly looking down at their

7 See Nick Yee's Daedalus Project on the psychology of MMORPGs, specifically the section outlining the
blurring of work and play here: http://www.nickyee.com/daedalus/archives/000819.php

-39-

controller, hunting for buttons that correspond to prompts on the screen, ever able to enter a state of flow? Are they able to engage with what Mia Consalvo terms "epiphanic
moments" in video game play? (p. 90, 2007). Not right away, certainly, until they have

gained an initial mastery of how use of the controller corresponds to the perceptual and cognitive functions of the game on-screen, and move past the unfamiliar material object
in their hands.

2.14 The Controller Between Player and Game

One type of ability emerges as an area of primacy in the formulation of a skill-

based approach to games studies. If the game can indeed by characterized by a
"cybernetic loop" (p. 163, 2003), as Lahti argues, between player and game, where, then,

is the choke point in the looping model between a player's physical and the machine's virtual chatter? In the controller, of course, where player intent is remediated into an
intelligible response to a game state. Gee's reference to the "fast hand-eye coordination"

(p. 47, 2003) needed for arcade games points to a key characteristic of skill development
in video games: the question of how such skills are enacted, how they are materially

inputted into the technological device which is the video game system. Lindley, as well,
notes the "motor operations" (2003) which, alongside cognitive and perceptual abilities, is an essential part of a player's gaming gestalt. Before one can enact cognitive mastery

by interpreting and responding skillfully to patterns in play, the cycle between player
input and the game's perceptual feedback must be intelligible; Janet Murray's "agency",

where the game world responds "expressively and coherently" to the player's influence,

needs to be in place (p. 10, 2004). Even 'open-ended' or casual games require initial

-40-

interface competency, although experience with basic computing devices (the mouse and keyboard) can often be adapted easily here.
Any given video game may be a triumph, in terms of narrative complexity or

ludological structure, but without the expertise required to play the game - that is, to engage meaningfully with the game through a controller - the player's experience is prematurely arrested. Maureen Thorson, for example, recalls her problematic childhood
experiences with the two-button Nintendo Entertainment System gamepad:

I sucked. And not just because I hadn't played before. I could see that sucking
was going to turn out to be a permanent condition. I realized, sadly, that the same quick-thinking hand-eye coordination one needed to play, say, soccer was

also needed to excel at video games. The virtual, pixilated enemies relieved you
only of the need for muscles, not reflexes. Hand/eye coordination has never been my strong suite, (pp. 162-163, 2004) Thorson's memory clearly indicates that mastery of (or its absence) the NES controller was a prohibitive interjection between her and the game: without an adequate level of

hand-eye coordination, Thorson was relegated to the position of observer as her friends
conquered Super Mario Bros. In many console games, interface agency is a precluding factor. In a similar example from PC gaming, the blog 'How do I play game? Adventures of a Non-Gamer' highlights the material mastery of the game controller as a

crucial barrier between player and success. This account, written by a self-identified male with the handle 'PapaBoo', consists of the author playing an hour or so of the PC firstperson shooter game Half-Life, and then blogging about difficulties he encounters during his session. In PapaBoo's first play session, he immediately encounters problems with the standard control scheme for PC FPS games:

-41-

Controls configured? - not checked yet

See this is where my first problem begins. I can type, pretty well. But using the keyboard to move around in a game, well that's a little un-natural to me. My first instinct is to move around using the arrows. I confer with pupismyname who sends me his default gaming configurations that uses e,s,d,f to move around. I play around with this a little while and am o.k. with it. But when I start
training I still want to use the arrows -- frustration ensues. (2008)

Months later, PapaBoo is still wrestling with the material concerns of controlling his character (although a large number of his problems stem from problem-solving puzzles, or not understanding many of the navigation conventions of the genre). He refers back to

the difficulty of configuring his keyboard, admitting that, "Something as simple as
getting into a crawlspace posed a new challenge when trying to use WASD. I wanted to crouch without moving my right hand off the mouse. My default setting has been the

cntrl key but I think may move it over to the mouse some way or maybe use the A key and switch the movement keys to ESDF. Who knows?" (2008). PapaBoo's documentation of his learning process while playing Half-Life shows that, for some players, it may take many hours to master a game controller to the point where its configuration and material difficulties are no longer a preoccupation. The video game controller thus presents a site where player skill can be most readily practiced and
observed. For the player, learning to manipulate a controller is a precedent for developing

other types of mastery in video games; it is the gatekeeper between player and game. This is not to say that there are not other gatekeepers - genre conventions in on-screen

interfaces and the necessity of maintaining concentration on one's avatar amidst colourful
carnage also come to mind - but mastery of the controller is a more universal gatekeeper,

a skill set which precludes any other type of meaningful engagement with any video
game.

-42-

2.15 On Materiality

Giddings and Kennedy take a 'technist' stance in pointing out that there must be middle ground somewhere between the interpretationalist tendencies of a textual approach and the dangers of lapsing into the trap of technological determinism which often accompanies materialist analysis. They state explicitly that, "Media technologies
are not only decoded, they are used, they facilitate new uses and activities ... In
important ways their effects are both limited and facilitated by their physical form and

capabilities" (p. 131, 2006). A material perspective on games must therefore examine,
specifically, the technological and material conditions under which a medium such as the video game is brought into, and used, within the social sphere. The acknowledgement that technology presents facilitation rather than deterministic prescription is important;
people will dynamically adopt new, unforeseen ways of using and 'playing' with

technology. Still, materiality informs and intersects with other areas singled out for
player-skill analysis. Familiarity with the game controller is seen as a crucial component

of acquiring experience and skill. The material aspects of a game playing environment prescribe and/or preclude certain performative actions. Access to technology - to gaming consoles - is linked closely with gendered notions of 'ownership' which, in turn,
influence and characterize development of gaming abilities. Faulkner (2001), in

synthesizing many feminist perspectives on technology, concludes that, "technological
artifacts can be gendered, both materially and symbolically", and the game console

represents a teehno-material site of such gendered contention. Furthermore, technological failure can drastically influence the way players experience and perceive video games: the materiality of video games is never more noticeable than when a system glitches, or

-43-

when a controller has orange juice spilt on it and becomes 'the sticky controller', generally avoided and reserved for unsuspecting household guests. Materiality of

hardware represents a third synthesis point which this thesis will explore in further depth.

2.16 Overview

A selective review of games studies literature points to the oversimplification or outright omission of the role of the player's abilities within several prevalent frameworks. Nonetheless, several 'starting points' for a player-skill perspective can be identified.

Consalvo (2007) and Jones (2008) rightly note that gaining skill in video games is often a socio-cultural experience, and that players look to each other and to paratexts for
assistance, to varying degrees, as part of their gaming sessions. Skill is not bounded-off

within the confines of the game; indeed, formulations of I33tness suggest that skill
represents a set of socially prescribed norms as to how games should 'properly' be

played. Formal and informal hierarchies of skill which emerge through socially ascribed
recognition are deeply tied to existent systems of patriarchal 'ownership' of technology,

where access and permissibility emerge as significant barriers for many potential female
players.

The video game itself plays a large role in how a player's skill is determined,

challenged, and evaluated. High score lists, specific conditions of victory and defeat, and

the successful advancement into later, more difficult, stages of play are only some of the
mechanisms of feedback implicated in video game rule structures against which player

skills are quantified. Indeed, most games demand mastery before they can be
experienced, or traversed, to a satisfactory degree. To appreciate and understand the

-44-

ux ljnssj wso aguaxjEqo jo SJ9A9J s^udojdd^ isuxbSb npp jo Suxisa; aqi jeqi sangje (066t)
xsQ pue 'saxnptuis qtu s69uieS 12 in iusjsxjux sinaiied aqj puBisjspun 01

o; s^utod (iooz) oa{bsuo3 rsni^s pa^pj-anreg ajinbo^ jo dopA9p o;
/Cz//u pu^;sj9pun o; psAojdiua sq ubo S9uib§ m ajnsESjd jo ssuo^q;
·isjdeqo ;u9xinouoo 'oijpads b uxq;iM pauxniExa aq ^xav sbsjb ssaqa pire

'suox^nuoj J9pu9§ ux dti psddmAV AyiqHx; sx A;xAxaBxiLiojJ9d ibxoos -jCixAxpe p9SBq-j99d b st^

oapxA 90U9U9dx9 sjsA^jd Aubxii sb 'soxureuXp dnojg Xq psaBxpaui se
spsfqns 9|qt^xoos s9Axpt^ sb s

0Bqp99j 9xiiB§-J9XB|d sqi o; uox;xpp^ ux '

ssBdxnoouQ oi t|X5[s jo suoxiou SuxpuBdxs jo aSusn^1!0 ^IJP^ds aqa pj^oq uo
iiiojj

oi ;nq

ux ;u9uodxxxoo

jo

xA qaxM /Quvijiwvf\uouo33y30 v sb p^zXjbub put? paxxxnsqns sq ubo
o;

uiojj sps TJX

JO

01

sureujopqns jo uoxssnosxp

·p9pjdj9;uxsxux

jo pooisjspunsxxxx a*jssoj§ sq X jnpsn X||B9J iou sx uox;bxjjjojux 'joqouB |Bx;u9U9dx9 'jtmixaiuoo
soxpt^i jo

a pleasurable flow state. Pleasure in video games is seen to be necessarily precluded by a material mastery of the game controller, a device which facilitates interaction between player and game but which, nonetheless, can be framed as a gatekeeper. Without initial control a player is effectively barred from further inspection of a game, including a majority of its rule structures or narrative storytelling. Player recollections of their gaming experiences often highlight the material conditions of video games as prominent features of the medium: one writer (Thorson, 2004) notes that her lack of hand-eye coordination relegated her to the role of video game spectator. The material and

technological components of video games, with a particular focus on how the failure of
these devices influences experience and perception, forms a third area of further
inquisition into player skill.

-46-

Chapter 3: Research and Methodology

The research for this thesis was conducted partially in response to a perceived lack of skill-based inquiry within games studies, particularly relating to the practice of play in small groups. Games scholarship is currently focused heavily on single-player
experiences or, if addressing the social realm, online communities such as those found in popular MMORPGs. Expanding qualitative analysis further into localized play, the 'living room' environment where video game consoles are most commonly found,

seemed to be a worthwhile endeavor. While work has been done on social game play and
children (Walkerdine, 2007) and pre-teens (Jenson & de Castell, 2008a), young adults playing in small groups remain relatively understudied. This study also serves to introduce a greater variety of Canadian playing voices into the field of games studies; although responses are not positioned here as uniquely

Canadian (versus, say, American gamers), their situated experiences are nonetheless
valuable as wholly Canadian qualitative data. Furthermore, women formed the majority

of respondents here. Rather than engage in gender tokenism and generalization, I wanted to specifically emphasize these perspectives in order to tease out a more nuanced range of
female responses to video games. This research thus takes a feminist approach in its design. As Brayton states, the expressed goals of feminist research are to "take women's

standpoint as the perspective and restructure power imbalances in the research relationship" (2008); privileging female voices seemed to be a good way to begin such a
restructuring.

-47-

The project was conducted as a qualitative, exploratory study, purposefully
designed to facilitate 'rich' data-gathering. A constructivist paradigm was employed

during research design, meaning that the study did not pursue statistical significance to be
applied to a generalized majority but was instead interested in gathering the opinions of participants who were understood to come from a wide array of multivariate, sociallysituated locations. As Edith Ackermann identifies, constructivist methodology following

the work of Piaget focuses on "auto-determination and negotiation - i.e. self-expression and exchanges", and acknowledges and privileges an understanding of learning and knowledge as "experience that is acquired through interaction with the world, people and
things" (2001). Individual context and agency, in other words, are important. Both
participant observation and qualitative interviews were conducted with a minimum of

researcher intervention to best tease out 'real-world' practices of game play and discourse
participants might experience in everyday life, despite the contrived premise and environment of academic study. Similarly, topics of discussion during interviews were

very loosely arranged, allowing for a degree of fluidity, or 'play', in how conversations
amongst participants were navigated. In short, this research was not intended to be used

to make widespread claims about the characteristics of Canadian game players, or women
in general, but rather to serve as a set of unique social intersections out of which, it was expected, fruitful interactions and observations would emerge. Recruitment began

following approval of the project through the Ryerson University ethics review board.

-48-

3.1 Participant Selection

Criteria for subject inclusion in this study were quite broad: potential participants
were young Canadians, between the ages of twenty and thirty, residing in or near

Toronto. This selection was made with the express intent of gathering data from people who had ostensibly grown up with an acute awareness of video games, either through direct experiences with play or simply by perceiving video games as a cultural medium
peripheral to their lives.

Potential participants were gathered through a snowball sampling methodology, reflecting the constructivist nature of the study. Snowball sampling, here, describes the informal practice of gathering willing participants through existing interpersonal connections and outlying networks of criteria-fulfilling, available candidates. It is most useful in social science work for examining 'hidden' populations; nonetheless, with qualitative data gathering it can also represent a speedy way to gather rich data (Salganik & Heckathorn, 2004). Demographically, it was understood that it would not be difficult

to find appropriate candidates and, since this research group did not require precise
representation for statistical or quantitative purposes, snowball sampling was more than adequate for locating and recruiting subjects. The social networking site Facebook was

used as an organizational staging ground for the introduction of interested candidates, as
well as interpersonal, casual interactions in day to day life. Participants tended to be 'one

stage removed' from the researcher (for example, family members of friends), or
acquaintances such as former students in undergraduate classes for which I was a
Teaching Assistant.

-49-

Sex, as previously mentioned, factored heavily into the selection process: eighteen females participated in this project, as opposed to only five males. While severe

lopsidedness might appear to present methodological difficulties in a quantitative or reductive study, for the purposes of gathering a diversity of qualitative perspectives it was ideal. Diversity, it must be noted, extends well beyond gender issues into questions of race, disability and other social locations which certainly influence play experiences; the focus of this study, however, was on gender and gaming. The culture and, indeed, the

medium of video games are predominantly considered to be a masculine pastime despite

the gender breakdown in North American game players approaching parity.8 Women are
dramatically underrepresented in the gaming industry, which contributes significantly to gendered assumptions of the medium (Haines, 2004). Given these features of the
contemporary gaming landscape, skewing exposure in the opposite direction - giving

primacy to female voices - seems to be less of a problematic methodology than a long overdue auto-correction. Females were actively recruited in order to form a majority of total participants and, as Cook and Fonow identify as a key caveat of feminist research
design, "validate a new perspective and definition of events" (p. 5, 1986).

3.2 Study Design

Participants were asked to attend a two hour evening session, and groups were

compiled according to subject availability. Every group ended up containing a 'pair': two
participants who had had previous social contact. Although it was anticipated that these individuals would be more comfortable than others and perhaps dominate the group, it

seemed as though this dynamic spread quickly to other participants and, in fact, resulted
Gender data for game players taken from http://www.theesa.com/facts/index.asp

-50-

in a greater level of ease amongst all subjects. This configuration was a result of limited
subject availability (times, dates) for participation. However, upon completion of data analysis, the participation of two friends (in one group), a couple (in another), and

colleagues (in the third and fourth groups) added an unanticipated richness to interview data and, in fact, more accurately represented everyday practices of video game play. It is rare indeed that six strangers spontaneously gather to play games together, but far more common for small groups to coalesce around a few mutual friends and use video games as a social icebreaker, serving a social integrative function. If the project were to be redesigned with additional resources, I would choose to reproduce this particular dynamic: it seemed to facilitate good-natured interaction and, in one case, participants even exchanged phone numbers at the session's conclusion so they could perhaps get together in the future. Two groups consisted of six females each, and the other two groups comprised a male-female split: one with three males and three females, and one
with two males and three females due to a no-show participant.

All sessions were conducted in television studios at Ryerson University. This
environment posed somewhat of a design problem as I was hoping to reproduce a typical

'living room' setup for game play, with couches and other props intended to put participants at ease (as with Saxe, 1994). Instead, the study backdrops were heavy
production curtains, rows of high-end camera equipment and, in one studio, a vertical lift

crane. In short, the environment served as a close replication of an actual socio-cultural gaming space rather than a material one. This setup was both practical (with storage space for video game and audio-visual equipment) and convenient for participants
(Ryerson University is easily accessible by public transit and car). Accessibility to all

-51-

participants resulted in a higher degree of participation. Each session was furnished with
six chairs and a few tables in the centre of the room, with the television cart and video
game systems set up at one end. Snacks were also provided to give non-playing

participants something other than the game to focus on, if they wished.

Each session was divided into two halves, each consisting of one hour. The first

hour was dedicated to participant observation. As subjects arrived, they were introduced
to the environment (and each other). One of my primary concerns was that participants would be able to develop an 'ownership' of the space; that is, to feel free to reconfigure the area to their liking. Participants were encouraged to move chairs and tables around as they saw fit. Video data shows that most participants were unlikely to explore the space and begin moving things around until well into the hour, perhaps reflecting a growing
sense of confidence and comfort within the environment. All reconfigurations were practical: chairs were moved so participants could sit and see the screen at the same time,

and video game equipment was moved out of the way once a new game had been chosen.
One group avoided the chairs entirely and stood the entire hour. Regardless of how the

room was changed, I felt it important to explicitly provide the option to help participants
feel more 'at home' despite the unfamiliar surroundings. In each session, the television set was flanked by two video cameras on tripods.

These gathered the research data, as the researcher (me) was not present during the study.
From standard social science convention, the researcher represents an authoritative figure that can drastically alter subject behaviour unless given enough introduction and acclimatization time; similarly, a male figure conducting research with an all-female
participant group can be terribly problematic (see Hesse-Biber, 2007). I also recognized

-52-

that I might be tempted to pose myself as the 'expert' should I be present, and domineer situations which would be more richly (data-wise) resolved by the participants
themselves. This decision also had its basis in feminist research principles, as Brayton

notes: "The location of the researcher also plays a significant role in the research process through the dynamics of the interactions between researcher and participant" (2006). By
removing myself as a male authority figure, I hoped to avoid replicating existing power

structures related to technology.
y Before each session began, participants were encouraged to use the two cameras if they wished; to zoom and change angles and configure their own documentation of play. While I felt that participant camera control might make the data more interesting or,

perhaps, aesthetically appealing, this design was also intended to help participants share
ownership of the study: to feel less like lab-rats and more like active, autonomous

individuals. 'Empowering' actions are well-situated and derived from within feminist action research techniques, where participants are encouraged to inquire of each other: to
interview and analyze alongside the researcher (Reinharz, p. 185, 1992). Several

participants assured me at the end of their session that they had managed to capture what they perceived as "interesting stuff and have been unflinchingly persistent in pursuing
their own copy of the research video since, claiming partial authorship. In each session, a variety of games were provided for play, selected both for mass

appeal (critical and financial) and, more importantly, because each facilitated or encouraged four-player action. Available games included Rock Band (Xbox 360, music/rhythm), Mario Kart Wii (Wii, racing), Super Smash Bros. Brawl (Wii, fighting) and Wii Sports (Wii, casual sports). Although several two-player games were also

-53-

considered for use, I decided that since the study was to focus on gaming in small groups, it would be best to provide only games which would be inclusive to the majority.
Additionally, each game available to the group was characterized by popular genre or
series precedents: the game play in Rock Band is largely preceded by the Guitar Hero series, and both the Super Smash Bros, and Mario Kart franchises span numerous

Nintendo consoles and generally reiterate the same representational features, play mechanics, and gaming gestalts. Wii Sports, on the other hand, represents a unique foray
into gaming convention, although it is packaged with the Wii and often serves as an

introductory vehicle to showcase or demonstrate the features of the motion-sensing
Wiimote controller. It is, nonetheless, a game which many people will end up playing

upon first encountering the Wii. These games were selected with the hope that at least

one player in each group would have some familiarity with them - a referent basis - and
be able to assist other players during the session if necessary.

After participants had arrived, I began recording on both cameras and removed myself well away from the research environment. The group was left entirely to their
own devices for an hour, after which I returned to set up the second half of the study.

Following Reinharz, who suggests that, "For a woman to be understood in a

social research project, it may be necessary for her to be interviewed by a woman" (p. 23,
1992), I selected a female participant in each group to serve as a discussion facilitator for

the qualitative interview hour prior to each study. As I had already decided to actively
remove myself from the research, a feminist perspective indicated that a female participant would be the best choice to facilitate discussion, both for consistency (men

were only present in two of the four groups) and to avoid replicating any sort of

-54-

-99-

oqa jo uox^jod isjij sip qaiM sy -Ajbssooou sb dnoj§ oqi punojB podui b uo joq apxsoq

pooBjd bjouibo b SuxuuBd 'jsiuouinoop puB spinS uoissnosxp qioq sb SuxpB
oqi qjiM oxpnas qoBO ui popiAOjd 9{q^; 9q; putlog papnpuoo sjsay
o;

suuoj

o;

-oo

sq; SuiAjOAUi S|re;u9 diqsuoi^pj i9Avod

, :ss;ou

sb

o; qo^ojddB ;sxurai9j ^ q;iA\ auq ui ;eqAV9iuos os|B si

p

jbuiiojux ux U91U0AY 9ssq; SuxApAiii -suosuEdnioo §uxis9J9aux 9IH0S §ux^J9U9§ 'uoxssnosxp

joj ^uxod jjo-§uxduinf jtijssn ^ sq o; psAOjd sxqx *§ux^; 9|xqM qjxM Au\d pu^ sux
o; s;uedppjed joj 63\qvi sqi uo sj9|joj|uoo siubS jo sousssjd {^oxsXqd 9qa ;ssq 9q pjnoM a;i[BU3;bui jo uoxssnosxp lt^qi paissSSns 69\dvaBxo joj 4
·jttpsn sq pynoAV ;pj Asq^ lusiuoo psppB A||B0xuiBuXp 'sast^o Xu^xn ux cpuB savoxajsiux

Suxd^qs ux 9[oj 9§j^| b 5[ooi sjoit3;qpt2j :9jna^u ux ;siAxptuasuoo sbav soxdoa uoxssnosxp jo

uossB oq; 'Aptus sxqi jo sbojb joq;o 95[xq -(4tsdnoj§ ppos n^uxs ux A*ejd uo suoxpoxjoJ put^ soaopoout^,,) guxiueS jo XixAx^uxiojJod/X;qxqBpos oqi pws '(joiB^qpt^j qot^o 01 dn
sonssx jtqnoxiJBd y:9j j) jopuoS c(u9JBAVpjBq puB sjoypjauoo oui^S q;xM soououodxo,,)

pspnpux soxdo; p9;q§qq§xq Joq;o 'sajnpB SunoX sb 'Ai

uoxibsjoauoo jmouoS b puB '/Lv\d jo jnoq isjxj oqi uo uoxpoxjoj b q;xAV uxgoq oa sbav uoxssos oqx *joaoo 01 soxdoa lUBOJoduxx jo ouqino jjoqs b q;iA\ xuoq; opxAOjd sj0A0A\oq
'pxp i -ojn^Bu ux jbujjojux XpgjBj sbav qoxqA\ 'Suxjouq joj uBxfoq Apnas oqi ojojoq A*jiqgqs qoBg -X;xjoqitiB pOMOisoq qgnojqa souBuxuiop jo sxuoisXs

study, I helped configure the area and then left for an hour. Upon returning, participants were asked to sign consent and release forms and the study was concluded. Oftentimes several participants would ask to keep playing, post-interview, and many had additional
interesting reflections during this 'free' time which were informally noted.

3.3 Limitations

Certainly there are limitations to such a study, particularly given the limited resources and time available to a Masters project. More time could have been spent
discussing cognitive content in games, for example, as opposed to a direct focus on

hardware and controllers. The space within which the study took place was not especially
conducive to replicating a 'living room' environment. A larger number of participants

would have provided a greater range of opinions and experiences, and at least one group
containing only males would be useful for comparative purposes. More detailed

demographic information might expand the usefulness of this study into quantitative !
areas, or simply provide more data for analysis. Participants could have been contacted

for post-session feedback interviews, extending the usefulness of the project significantly. And, finally, data analysis would have benefited from having more researchers present to offset the biases of a single qualitative interpreter (me). All of these limitations could be
addressed by moving the scope of the project beyond its current form into a more wellfiinded and staffed venture.

-56-

eaep p9;B|noi^ put? jmiox:iEAJ9sqo jo psxpu sqx ajxdsap 'spsfqns sjraxjo

iiiBd 'saousxjsdxa jo ps guxSum-peojq ajora b joj sdnojg jo jaqranu sq; piredxa
[ *XB|d dnojS psjapuoS o;ux ssuinbut 9ApB;xpnb ainitij joj

Suojis Abj 'qdiHExs joj '(^8003) H9^0 9P PUB uosusf Xq S9xpn;s qSnoq;^ '
9^pj-9xu^§ ;soin o; ;sm;uoo ux sx uoppsps sxxjx -sspjad

qoi b ux pauoxaxsod J9q;BJ ;nq s;x sind (8003) uoiA^jg se 6uuoxiBnb9 oa psppB Xjduiis,, iou 9Jt^ usxiioav amp ssinsus sssuods^j puB s^oxoa 9{bui9j jo Aiuofexn
§ux;sxjug ·sm9xaj9;ux joj sjojeixjxoej spuisj jo asn 9q; XyiBpiopiBd 'sAxpnpojd sb ssoxoqo

SBAV

, JO

put^ uoxptuasuoo stXptias
pso^jd ugxssp ;sxAxptuasuo3 *^jom

ux X|psjxp sau^dxoxaJi^d Suxajoaux uo sx SunoA
ux

uu

jo 5[o^| e oa asuods^j
Moq anoqt^ t^;^p 9Axat^;x^nb '^A

ssui^S oapxA /Lu\d sdnojg xpuis
oa sbav qojB9S9J sxqx

Chapter 4: Data Analysis - Skill and Familiarity

The remainder of this thesis consists of a systematic analysis of observational and

interview data. Reflecting topics identified in the literature review to which a player-skill
approach in games studies might be fruitfully applied, this data comprises three distinct

areas of inquiry: familiarity, social performativity and gender, and materiality. Participant
responses often traversed these categorizations, revealing a complex, interrelated system

of understandings about video games: seeking to definitively delineate video game
experiences with formal boundaries is reductionist and most likely unproductive. Arranging data into these foundational areas of interest necessarily demonstrates how

they intermingle and inform each other in a myriad of ways. Relevant theoretical

frameworks and texts serve as support or, alternatively, contrast to prominent participant
viewpoints. Findings from the literature review suggested that player accounts represented a fruitful source of anecdote and opinion on skill and mastery within gaming

culture which academic alternatives did not necessarily address. Consequentially,
informal sources such as blogs and game community texts will fill out the remainder of

analysis. It should be noted here that in accordance with privacy wishes, all participant
names have been changed.

4.1 On Familiarity

Familiarity initially appears to be a problematic way to characterize skilled

experience with video games; the term is difficult in that it can simultaneously describe a brief observational encounter with a game, many hours exploring that same game's

-58-

-6S-

sb

suxpsBq b Aq psptipaid aq 01 uass si squibS ;?20<p asanoosip anq 'ssuibS

qaxAY Axxjbxijiubj xajdxuoo saora b 01 xuxod sssoob xsaq aqx saussaids.! ABjd jBtipB 'asinoo jo

·HuiSmnoosip X|[Bi;u9;od pire Suxsnjuoo os^ ;nq '
souauadxa ub 9;b9jo o; jaqpHo; suioo jjb s;uourap o objjo;ux sq; gui||oj;uoo joj spoxpsui 'soipt^; S

pue §ux;px9 sq

(LOOZ '96 *<*)

·quit; ^sjij 9qi joj sailing sd^I Q£ °^ sqaoui jsuibS uiioj^id qz
sb tpns 'jnooo u^o sai^noijjip Aejdatireg 6si3/Lu\d ;ssq sq; Suouib

UI SUOlSlAip TJ2X

UX

UX c9J9qAY9SJ9 p9^0X|d9J 9JB SUJd^Bd qOtlS AVOq 9q; jo xtuo sq; nxioj qoxqM uoxprnaiux jo simfted Xjxauspx o; uxSsq
oa

Suxpnpux '

sdxqsuox;Bpj jo xxxaip^ds p^ojq b ssquossp X^treiiiuiBij #|pAV sb

pnnoj S1U9J9J9J uodn SAVBip jsuff&i xnq' jps;x qxiibS, sqi Xq pspnnoq ;ou sx Axubxjx ·jpM sb sqxiibS oa jmnsixs sssn joj 6X|qxssod 'puB sshibS oapiA qxxM jsq;o 0} qioq '9|bj§xixi ubo ;xs;uoo ABjd sxiibS b ux sssoons jaABjd ox ;uBA9pj sjyx^s sano

sjuxod (£003) "O ln^d ssuiBf sy *ABjd jbh^ob o; sjsad qxxAV ssjnoosxp {Bunojux o\
SAV9U

-pJXq^ IXIOJJ :S9XIIB§ 09pXA qXX 9pXAV 9qi §UXP9XJ9J pUB §UXSSBdlU00U9 ux §uxqxAuB X|guxxxi99S pUB '
SB UBO ;X SUOSB9J

JO

xM puB 9U0|B q;oq ss

4.2 Familiarity and Discourse

Familiarity tended to heavily frame topics of discussion with many research

participants, who demonstrated varying degrees of knowledge about conventional gaming genres when discussing their favourite games. Some participants chose to describe their preferences in terms of technological affiliation; for example, one player, Cornelius, noted that he mostly played "nostalgic games", characterized by their appearance on
early console systems. Others adhered to a vague classification system ("strategy games",

"role-playing games") but often added additional qualifiers to clarify what they meant by
each term ("you know, where you command armies and have to take out the other team's base", "like collecting items for your little guys and building them up and such"). The most frequent way in which participants expressed their gaming preferences was through evoking the name of a popular game title which they felt properly described the types of experiences they enjoyed. For example, Emily stated, "I always liked the jumping and running, you know, like Mario and that." Although such games could be wrapped up in

the 'platform game' genre, the player instead employed a few verbs which described the
primary activities involved in these games, and used an example to characterize them. If

she had mentioned a 3D run-and-jump game such as Ratchet and Clank rather than
Mario, the meaning behind her description would have changed significantly. As it was,

other members of the group picked up on her intent and quickly volunteered other

examples of platform games to flesh out the definition:
Cornelius: Oh, like Mega Man.

Sunni: Yes Mega Man\ Oh, or Castlevania.

-60-

-19-

qixM Axxjmnxirej Suxssed uodn psipj sxuedpxiiBd qBiuaj Kub]ai -sdnojg isqio ux

sba\ xeqi uouauxouaqd b 'uoxibsisauoo sqi oiux luxod ssaooe ub se - sousxasdxa A*tqd
uodn 019A^q noA '
s9suods9i pssnjuoo q;x

op }ij§nn quo |BqA\ jo uoxiduosap pajreasp Jaip^j ^ o;ux qount^j 01
-UX JO

o;

uoihihoo

qaxM Au^qiuiBjun gux^oxpux C

xs piEA\3[A\E qaxM pspuodsaj dnojg

uo 9j4noA ;nq 'ssuo jsqao ssoq; 9>[X{ s ji 'ou 'ojs[ :

jpq; Ajtrep oi japjt^q 5[joa\ ox pt^q s^u^dpxiJBd araos 'p9^0A9 §upq soum2 sq; qaxM

sj9qui9iu dnojg j^qio jbijiuibj A\oq uo SuxpuadsQ -|reau9 aqSxiu ssuibH qons guxXBjd
jo sxsdouAs (ou;u9O-qj9A) jsxjq b jsjjo ox jo 'Xjoisxq SuxuibS uavo ipqi xuojj S9|xxx q;x

;sq sqi put^dx9 oisQ\dumx3 p9J9jjojd sq; qixA\ ssxijsdxs jo/put^ 9§p9|A\ou5[ joud uodn
Avaip sxuBdpxiJBj ·s90U9XJ9dx9 jb|xuixs 9q ox p^Apojsd sj^Bjd ^qAV jo jsxsnp
b oxux jsqpgoi S9|duiBX9 suieg oxjpsds A\9Jp qoxqA\ 5[uq e

games for discursive contribution, facilitated by the play habits of male figures in their

lives. As Jessica, in another all-female group, noted, "Yeah, my boyfriend plays all these
shooting games and there was one, yeah one, where he just totally got into it and forgot to meet me downtown." Familiarity, for Jessica, consisted of a brief assessment of what her

boyfriend was doing within the game ("shooting") but, more importantly, represented a
standing assessment of video games as a socio-cultural competitor for his time and
attention. Several others in Jessica's group shared similar stories. In this case video

games were framed prominently as a negative pastime, reflecting an opaque, one-track

familiarity with "shooting games" and, additionally, providing distinct context for an instance of feminine "reticence to technology" as identified by Brayton (p. 761, 2006).
Data showed that the more familiarity a participant had with a game -

characterized by time spent observing or, more likely, playing - the more they were able to discursively reflect on their experiences in multivariate ways. That is, a fair degree of familiarity permitted participants to talk about things like comparative rule structures,
narratives and story, anecdotal play experiences, and genre/game similarities and

differences, whereas less familiarity limited discourse to accounts such as Jessica's,

where video games represented a vaguely nebulous and often inconceivable formation of
activity for others. This is similar to the Mass Effect example referred to in the literature

review, where FOX News took representational elements from the game - in this case,
sex - and demonized them 'as such' without contextual awareness of their miniscule role
within a larger play experience.

Likewise, Ernest Hilbert, who writes extensively on experiences with arcade shooters, nonetheless has difficulty in exploring contemporary games with any real depth

-62-

because of his lack of familiarity. He writes, "Games today are so sophisticated, and so
damned fast, that I generally back slowly out of the room when I encounter one.

Whatever their athletic merits, they do not seem to require much imagination at all. The game does all the work. All you have to do is play" (p. 61, 2004). For Hilbert, then, the arcade titles he played are worthy of discussion, whereas "games today" are lumped
together and superficially attacked for their sophistication and speed. Jessica, like Hilbert, noted that she had historical intersections with video games with which she was more

personally involved; she recalled playing Super Mario Bros, for hours on her family NES console. These examples show that familiarity with games can take many forms across a
spectrum of technological and socio-cultural framings, that, as Gee puts it, "mastering a

precursor domain" (p. 47, 2003) does not necessarily translate into a pace-keeping
familiarity with the games and gaming communities.

4.3 Genre

A surprising finding from the research data suggested that genre was only infrequently referred to by participants when attempting to describe various games. Genre

is a particularly problematic formulation within games studies, in part because categorization of games in popular discourse is very loosely standardized. A cursory examination of three prominent game website reviews of the popular Xbox 360 game Gears of War illustrates this haphazardness: the game is classified as "sci-fi shooter" by

GameSpot9, "action" by Game Revolution10 and "third-person shooter" by IGN11. Some
descriptors reference representational characteristics ("sci-fi"), some note

9 GameSpot review can be found at http://www.gamespot.com/xbox360/action/gearsofwar/review.html 10 Game Revolution review can be found at http://www.gamerevolution.com/review/xbox360/gears_of_war 11 IGN review can be found at http://xbox360.ign.com/articles/744/744356pl.html

- 63 -

perceptual/interface convention (the "third-person" perspective), anieven the type of
game play one might expect from Gears of War is articulated using varying terminology ("shooter" versus "action"). It is consequentially rather difficult to address game genre

from established theoretical stances. While genre theory in film, for example, creates
taxonomy based on representational similarities such as visual style, iconography and

common themes - film noir, the spaghetti Western, and the sci-fi flick - popular genre

classification in video games most frequently refers to ludological constructs ofplay. By
this I mean that genre classification will reflect the degree and type of agency a player
can commonly expect to have within the game world, the rule structures that define the

limitations and effects of a player's actions, and the visual and control interfaces that
facilitate a feedback loop between player and game. Moreover, genre fundamentally indicates what type of skills will be required of players who play these games; it functions by evoking familiarity with other, similar play experiences. Mark Wolf suggests that video games are dynamically categorized through an informal process of mutual consent between game producers and their audience; in other words, genre is constructed 'as needed' rather than formally typified by any centralized

discourse (p. 113, 2001). More precisely, Thomas Apperley claims that video game genre
is best understood in terms of player interactivity rather than by representational or visual aesthetic criteria (2006). Both of these claims seemed to hold true amongst participants

when genre was addressed: use of the word "like" was more frequently employed to help
participants informally construct their own understanding of game categorization through collective assembly of familiar examples.

-64-

-99-

sqi jo luoxudopAop jo/pus jo SuxpuEisjopun tre 'Axpxjuonbssuoo 'put?

qiXAY AiumjxuiEj jo suxpseq v 'Apjxius Av\d oxueS jo 9(K; luojojjxp b jo §ux>[uiqi dn pus put} heiuo ixjjfrra suoxiEoxjxssep asaip ;b^av jo sSuxput^sjopun uavo jpqi uo A\EJp jCbuj Aoqi
uoximoqep JoqiJnj ;noqiXM ;nq 'Suiu^ui jo ^dj^q 9uibs sq; ux sjaqjo ;nd
jo uX3q;bj;s,, sb qons
jo

ou 9Aeq sjaqio jx ssapxnjj aq 01

six

01

ux

93[n« s!9m^ ^ ^^P SuxXt^s *iuxod oousjqjsj
;no^» asjtioosxp ux psAjOAux sjaAejd 'ssxubS SuxApnis

ux

9quos9jd (£003) qpsjey put^ (900^) PHFW s^
jo §ux;;9s sb qons sainjeaj ogpods-aui^S Suxssnosxp o;ux
01

dppjed 'sjnsBoid §ux;^;xnoBj jo a*jo;s b Smjp; jo

Suppxp itioqt^ o2 ;q§xxu oum'E v Moq inoqt^ Suxput^isjapun psjt^qs jo joqout? uu 'Av\d

jo luxod 90U9J9J9J ^ lnoqix^ 'u^P ^qi ux Ajbos,, sb jps;x ;uss9jd pjnoo aouauadxa ub
qons Avoq ssnosxp o; uo Suxaoxii ojojoq (joiooqs uosjsd-isjxj) pojojjo yooifsoig oououodxo fa\& 9uje§ jo odXi oqi Ajtrep 01 poou oqi ;pj xuun§ u* · *pu^ Suxaoxu Suxqpxuos Jt^oq
osnt^oog -SMopuxM oq; \\u puB 'po^ooj ojb sjoop jnoA* pun ;nqs SuxqiXjoAO qixM 'iq§xu

ye sx ix tie\d 01 a*em isoq sqx i>[JBp oq; ux Xjbos os s jx puB yooifsoig oum2 sxq; st '* d§ oqi ujojj uox^xxjjxjjYjj. ^ixjSxj 6sjo;ooqs uosjod-isjxj avou5[

b qons ux \i poonpojiux 'ssoAvojd ox^xuoqi puB 3uqp;Ajois s;x joj poxurep sbav qoxqAV ^oot[soig oujbS oqi Suxssnosxp 'xuuns -siu^dpx^d ;soiu Aq pooisjopun

j^ddB) puB ps^Bppnp. uooq ptrq ouibS jo odAi JBynoxiJ^d b jo Aixax;ob Av\d SuxApopun

oqi ssojun guxiios jo oxuoqi sc9Xub§ b dn iqgnojq /Lpxei siu^dpxiJBd 'osx

types of skills and masteries which lead to play success, appears to be a prerequisite for

informed discussion of video games and genres.

4A A Ramping-Up of Sophistication

Discussing genre is predicated on participants and players having a wide range of

familiarity with video games, an informed expertise about how game rules, challenges,

and interfaces reproduce themselves through and across genres. Even Hilbert's scrolling
shooter games have next-gen console iterants such as Ikaruga, which was critically
acclaimed for its panache in returning to arcade levels of difficulty and skill

requirement.12 Just as Hilbert identifies a ramping-up of sophistication within video game
genres, many participants noted similar concerns. Jerry, for example, pointed out, "I think

you have to spend a lot more time starting from the ground up to get into these games...
Like I've played those Sim games for years, and they all basically have the same

interface and you can figure them out easily, but with other stuff like on the Xbox I

basically have no idea [where to start]." Contemporary games are indeed, for the most
part, more complex than their historical precedents, although modeled on familiar modes

of play and requiring similar skill sets. If familiarity and expertise can be transferable
across genre lines, repetitive, consistent exposure and play nonetheless seem to be

important in maintaining and updating the skills and abilities required to take on newer,
contemporary games.

12 See Ikaruga review at GameSpot: http://www.gamespot.com/gamecube/action/ikaruga/review.html
-66-

My own experiences with the Vortex game design competition13, which takes
place annually as part of the McLuhan International Festival of the Future in Toronto, informs how game genres are steadily and systematically complexified. In this contest,
participants submit proposals for original game design and are treated to lectures and assistance from various Canadian industry professionals on subjects such as pitching, marketing, and developing games. More than once we were told by well-established publishers that a good pitch required reference to genre: What kind of game is it? What

games is it like? This necessity was described as being interlocked with profitability, as publishers are generally unlikely to introduce a game into the market without a precedent for financial success. Furthermore, a 'good' game pitch should evoke a successful iteration of a genre (such as Halo for first-person shooters) and then list a few ways in which the new game would be markedly different in some way: its primary selling points. An ideal pitch, then, would sound something like, "It's like [insert popular game example], but with [insert original feature or variation]." If this is the way in which the
video game industry develops, it is no surprise that traditional, long-standing genres with decades of history have become so complex: the addition of new caveats to existent

forms of game play occasionally result in critical or financial success, these caveats become a near-standardized feature of the genre and, as a whole, the genre progresses to
demand more and more skill sets and types of mastery from its players.

Tracing a cursory path through the Halo series of console first-person shooters

illustrates a series of systematic complexifications which hold true for most other
longstanding game .franchises. The original Halo was very much an exercise in porting

13 More information on the Vortex Competition can be found here:
http://www.mcluhanfestival.com/vortex.php

-67-

the first-person shooter, a staple of PC gaming, to the console. It contained many of the
necessary skills players expected to deploy in PC shooters such as Quake: movement and orientation within a three-dimensional environment, ammunition and weapon acquisition

and tactical choices about the use of these resources, and twitch-speed aim in mowing down hordes of enemies. Halo 2 added the ability to duel-wield weapons, one in each
avatar hand, which deepened its strategic element and, consequentially, rendered the controller configuration slightly more difficult. Halo 3 introduced a brand-new class of

auxiliary grenades (which required an additional button to deploy). While this
progression might seem 'natural' to fans of the game and, indeed, changes to game play

are demanded with the release of new series iterations, it nonetheless begs the question: what about players who are coming to first-person shooters for the first time via Halo 31 They are entering a gaming environment which is predicated on assumptions of
accumulated mastery, of prior experience 'building up' skill within Halo and Halo 2.

While new players could surely spend the time and effort in building up their abilities,
competitive multiplayer (which, as any seasoned Halo player will say, is the bread and

butter of the series) poses a difficult challenge. One research participant, Greg, fondly
recalled his early experiences with Halo 3 online: "Oh yeah, it was great then... all these people had just got the game, and it was clear they weren't very good eh? They were just
sitting at spawn, looking around, not really playing right. And I would come up behind

them and BAM! Whack them in the back of their heads. They would get so mad and yell
at me on the mic, but I just kept killing. Gotta get that score up, right?" Greg mentioned

that he had played the previous Halo games extensively, and noted that he was not the
only "newbie hunter": other expert players were also quickly building ranks by killing

-68-

-69"

iAv J9A*Bjd guxuuixfeq y -suoxiBpadxa paiBoxjduxoo ssaj AjixjSxjs sc9uib§ Sm
qoB9 J9AO 'jsAbi A*q J9A*bj 'psqxjosux uaaq 9ABq qoxqM

jo suoxidxunssB Ajjbo ssjusS psppoxu-sjd uxqixM sqxubS ayqu sb '

sx - 9§t^d ;duosnuBXU sjqt^snaj u - ls^sdxixx^d sqx *90trenu
ox;oxxii9s ux sa|tis9J x^oxqAV 'Suxut^sxu 01 Suxut^sxii 'sjnit^q; oa

ssxut^S ospxA J9;ooqs uosisd-isjxj jo AS^xmis sxnxx-^9J ux suoxieaoxixix dsis-suo jo ^ ut^qa 9joxu :usqx souxs passsaSojd st^q 9JU9§ 9qi cjqa9avoh *S9;xjnoABj pooqpjxqo
9XII0S SB M/OO(7 pUB Q£ UpiSUdflOjft 95[X| SgJ^J QJ 6OISS12-p, 01 J9J9J0

AV9J v, SuoxxiB sbav ^tJiqs <«6ll9ll 9ll^ ^^AV, ^Rl Pub ax op
xsnf i ··'

j Sux5[00| sqa put^ Suxxiixb 9qx 'pJBq ooi Xbav 'qt^aX ;nq * * ' 'suoxixqxxijix psiou xnq sj^aooqs uosj^d-xsjxj Ajmodxusiuoo ux joj 'Xsyjxqs ·psiixxnpE sau^dxoxiJBd Xu^xu sb '^Axaxqxqojd lEqAvsxuos sb U99S sq
ueo S9JU9§ ssaqi uxq;iM saxnt^S - sojd p9qsqq^;s9-||9AV 4iB9q put^ 'uo 9^1 01

;x '

axnojxo

uo

, aou

szxiEuoxiBJsdo 01 ssxijsdxa |BXJ9iBxu 9q; put? 'ssujbH ssaqi
qoxqM soxpt^; put^ ssobjj9;ux pUB suox;u9auoo

Xjsisbxu p9;B|tixunooB we 'uoxixsxnboB ijpp jo Xjoisxq Suoj b sjaAtqd sxuos

ux

sq pinoqs Xijnoxjjxp jo JBq 9q; lBqi 9J9q §uxti§JB iou xub

9qi jo ^Bp isjxj Xjsa sq; uo psssBpino 9J9M

only the surface, while those familiar with the genre (unless, as was the case with Shirley,
experience is characterized by large gaps of absence) will see the tablet.

4.5 A Ramping-Up of Familiarity

As Jesper Juul notes in examining the role of abstraction in games, beginning

players decode on-screen elements primarily througtifiction, the graphical elements they

can identify through previous everyday knowledge and deduct what roles those elements
might play. Conversely, the experienced player will recognize the genre: the "interface layout" (usually a map and command bar located along the bottom of the screen) and the "birds-eye view" (a top-down perspective of many little units, and generally a base of operations) immediately signify the core characteristics of a real-time strategy game. In
other words, the representational features of the game indicate what kinds of agency the

player can expect within the game world, whether they will control the fate of one avatar
or entire armies. Juul summarizes:

The experienced player comes to the game with an idea of the rule structure of the game, and the general limits in which the interaction take place: Tell units where to go, but don't deal with the path finding of the individual unit. Deal with battles, but not with making food. Accept that human units can be "built" in a few minutes. However, the experienced game player does not know where the borders lie in this specific game. Perhaps this is a game that adds political or social structure as new component to the real-time strategy genre? Perhaps in this game, resource units become fatigued? This means that the player's view of the game changes over time, while playing the game. (2007b) Juul makes an important point here: although video games within a certain genre will possess, by definition, certain recognizable characteristics, each iterant will twist the rule
structures in some way, add new features, or otherwise distinguish itself as a 'new' game. From a player-skill perspective, herein lies a crucial form of pleasure in video games: to

-70-

take existent skill sets within a familiar game environment and apply them against new

challenges. To understand, as Koster (2005) would put it, the patterns of each new game;

how experience vary, and how they are the same. Each game iterant within a genre will
allow players to develop core competencies such as material expertise with a controller, to retest old strategies and tactics, and to generally become more skilled with a particular type of play. In short, the genre represents a formation where a necessary set of player abilities are trained, each game iterant a new arena where a player's understanding of the genre is expanded in some way and who is required to recall and adapt these skills in
order to play successfully.

As Emily noted, "To get good, I think you just have to play it, over and over, until it just makes sense. And then other ones get easier and before you know it, you aren't going out on Friday nights anymore." Emily also pointed out that many of the games she sees her (male) friends playing have little to no referent point for her, that she has trouble identifying goals and objectives from her casual observations. Her friends, on the other
hand, are "playing something different every time... and just as good, like they've been doing it for forever and it's no trouble at all."

Gee's claim that, "Active learning in a domain also involves preparation for
future learning within the domain and within related domains" (p. 39, 2003) appears to

hold true: genres do indeed "prepare" gamers for a certain type of play, and learning the
mechanisms of one video game can transfer into a speedy understanding of another, similar game. Interestingly, many contemporary console games have begun to combine or amalgamate skill sets from multivariate sources. More and more console video games

can be seen as coming from hybridized genres. Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas, for

-71-

example, is first and foremost about driving and shooting, but also contains a character
stat-building element taken from role-playing games, a handful of rhythm-based

challenges, a dating simulation and much more. Blue Dragon is primarily a role-playing
game but features several shooting scenes which require controller expertise and
interactive cut scenes, like those popularly pioneered in games like God of War or Resident Evil 4, which require precise input at certain points during an otherwise non-

interactive clip. If genre was ever once 'affixed' to a player - that is, if players could focus specifically on one set of masteries revolving around a favourite genre of game,
calling themselves a 'strategy gamer' or 'sim gamer' - it seems that many genres are now

becoming affixed to each other, demanding a more universal set of expertise from players. It is easy to see how games like these, featuring amalgamated genre conventions,
might elicit confusion in participants like Emily: without a wide range of game-related

familiarities, many contemporary console games are rendered largely incomprehensible.

4.6 Genre and Configurative Practice

Just as a baseline of familiarity appears to be necessary for players conducting

discourse about games, a self-perceived degree of expertise with a genre (or lack thereof)
is seen to influence how people will configure new games. One Rock Band play session involved the following discussion while players were selecting a skill level for their
instruments:
Sara: Are you playing medium?

Megan: Easy... I've never played this before!

Felicia: You want to play hard? You guys are hardcore.

-72-

~£L"

ue,, sq puB uA*jqiJjoq >pns,, pjnoAY aqs paAjOAUi 9J9A\ STjpp iuqxA*qi a"ue jx aeq}. 'jreura ut? ui 'pajsaSgns ;iredppjBd auo 'ajdxuexa jo^j -Ajuado (joaiaq; jpu\ jo) saijinqe ipqi anoqt?

uot}Buuojui p9J99|unpA ssapqpuou s^iredpi^d Xubjaj -jnpsn aq pynoAV sousuadxa jo 9§ubj apiAV ^ |Bq; c;obj ui 'pu^ saui^S q;iM sspjsdxs §ux;sxx9 9A^q o; psau ;ou pip A*aq; 9J9AV spafqns |Bi;u9;oj ·ut^Saq usas suoissas qoi^ssaj sjojaq Apn;s
(\\p\s 'uoia^

ux '
JJBUIS OS S4
UXM

uo

S12AY

XXIJ,

uo

q;iA\ A;u^x

qSnoiqa

ux

joj 'As^iqs "
ux

si uopBJ9;i pixq; aq; ;nq

;sjxj 9qi uo jejT

S9;ou jaAt^jd aqa sb 'psuoiausui os|B si
uy *qaiA\

ssoiob pA9i np[s ux

si

o;

A\oq o;

uo

si

uo

i si £ *pj^q ooa si £ '

uo

iou ;nq ojdjj aviihq uo pieq op ut^o

op ubo noX
·qonui os aou · * *suitup joj

uo

embarrassment" but would nonetheless come and "try anyway". Others showed

enthusiasm for particular games mentioned in the study outline, declaring mastery, and
one even pledged to practice some of these games before attending. Nearly everyone, at
one point or another during the recruiting process, felt the need to voluntarily front-load, or characterize, their relative abilities with video games. Situating or configuring

themselves within gaming culture was seen to be a fundamental 'entry point' into the research for these players; an initial self-disclosure placing them along hierarchal lines of
experience and mastery. By identifying themselves as nOOb or 133t (or somewhere in

between) before the study even began, these participants were actively buying in to a
perceived skill-based ranking system.

Gender did not emerge as a prominent aspect of how familiarity and mastery were

distributed amongst participants. In both mixed-gender groups, males appeared to be
equaled or, at times, bested by women in displays of gaming capital, or multivariate

knowledge of different games and game-related phenomena. There were no distinct
patterns in genre or game preference (contrasting findings by Barnet, Vitaglione et al., 1997; Yates and Littleton, 1999, among others], although a subsection of females had

only superficial experiences with games as technological 'roadblocks', like Jessica. These
accounts were often tied to a tendency to identify gaming technology as a masculine

pursuit, as evidenced by stories of familiarity with video games as a by-product of encounters with male friends and family. Participants were, however, largely able to

avoid reductionist formulations of video games based on what 'girl games' or 'boy
games' entail, working against perspectives of how gender roles translate essentially into
game play preferences (as with Jenkins, 2006).

-74-

More telling were reactions from all-female groups to participants who demonstrated a nuanced familiarity with games and gaming culture. Maria, in particular,
met with a type of resistance from others in her group: many demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to engage with video games to the degree which she proposed. After the

session, one of these participants told me, "That one girl... [Maria], she knew a lot. Like,
a lot about games and game stuff. It was a little strange." This response speaks to the

position of technology writer Sherry Turkle, who suggests that women framed as experts in 'unfeminine' fields can be negatively perceived to have exchanged their womanhood
for said expertise (1995). "Strange", in this case, represents a break with 'normal' framings of what level of acceptable experience women should have with video games. Men, predictably, did not receive such responses. Discourse and configurative practice was seen to be characterized by a 'sweet spot' for the women in this study: too little

familiarity and knowledge inspired other female participants to flaunt their expertise, but
too much represented a transgression into a perceived 'male' domain of experience. As Brayton suggests, "dominant cultural ideology connects technology with masculinity" (p. 760, 2006); amongst these women, gaming capital and familiarity appeared to reflect similar delineations of gender appropriateness. To bolster these findings, gender will be addressed more closely in the next chapter.

4.7 Overview

From a player-skill perspective, familiarity is seen to have a significant impact on

the way players describe game experiences. The most applicable formation for familiarity within game-related discourse appears to be genre, although many research participants

-75-

constructed genres based on immediate needs, using referential examples to dynamically build a grouping of games which best described their intent. A degree of expertise with
games and game genres emerges as a facilitating aspect of fruitful discourse and, indeed,

an understanding of how a game is played seems to be a prerequisite for further discussion of a game's narrative, say, or thematic concerns. Familiarity with genres also serves as reference points for how players assess and predict their own abilities, and thus
characterizes how they may approach new games.

Genre describes the way in which games are fundamentally similar in terms of play, and appears to be developed through a systematic process of complexification in

which previously successful games are remodeled and enhanced with new features and
caveats. Longstanding genres such as first-person shooters and real-time strategy games

have undergone many such revisions and may represent a prohibitively difficult learning
curve for new players, who must not only contend with assumptions of pre-existing expertise by developers but also other players who have a long history of experience with

similar games. One of the pleasures of video game play is to take existent skill sets within a familiar game environment and apply them against new challenges; genre serves as a formation where additional challenges emerge as 'new' games, where player skills can be transferred, adapted, and trained further. Contemporary genres have begun to hybridize
somewhat, borrowing game mechanics from other, often radically different, genres. Many participants reported 'losing touch' with once-familiar genres of video games, citing newly complexified layers of game play and additional functionalities.

Finally, although many female responses contrasted with academic findings, reflecting a
nuanced set of perspectives, familiarity is seen to take on board a gendered component

-76

where a trend in framing gaming capital and knowledge was seen to be appropriate for
females to a certain degree.

-11 -

Chapter 5: Data Analysis - Skill, Social Performativity, & Gender

This chapter briefly points a player-skill lens at issues of social performativity and gender in small group play. Although playing video games is often seen to be a passive,

reclusive solo activity in mainstream discourse (the 'lonely basement nerd' archetype),
video games are represented here as a socially vibrant site of interaction between players, similarly to Bart Simon's sociological work on cyber-spatial places (2007). Skill - with
the game, with the console hardware, with the controller - is, however, seen to be a primary site of negotiation and mediation amongst participants in many instances.

Reflections on gender are not meant to be generalized and applied to a reductive
understanding of 'what girl gamers want': this tactic has been attempted before (Ray,
2004; Jenkins, 2006) with arguments ranging from essentialism to outright support of

stereotypical formulations of masculinity and femininity. Continuing the constructivist

paradigm of this research, observations of gender are represented as a small sub-section of the experiences players have in a larger social sphere rather than serving a prescriptive
or instructive function; it acknowledges that there is much more to be said and heard on
the topic.

5.1 Sociability

A significant divide was seen to colour research participant perception of console
systems compared to other video games (handheld devices, PC games): participants

repeatedly indicated that they preferred to play console games in groups, with other

people, while computer games and handheld systems such as the Nintendo Game Boy or

-78-

Portable Sony PlayStation represented more private experiences. Levels of engagement

emerged as a key point of comparison, as Emily noted: "I think I'd rather play with other people, like maybe that was why computer games weren't as fun as video games, because
with video games most of the time you are playing with other people, there's more

interaction." Liz, in another group, independently correlated this observation, stating, "For some reason I feel that with video games I just got more into it, whereas with

computer games you feel like you're just sitting in front of a screen, clicking on stuff."
Even when participants noted that they played computer games online, with or against other humans, the console was still acknowledged as a more social venue due to its facilitation of numerous players in close physical proximity. Console gaming was

compared to other activities which were also perceived to be enhanced by the presence of
others. Cornelius pointed out that, "For me it's a social thing, it's like drinking... you need to have someone else around. I just can't get into a video game if there's not
someone else there, for commentary or whatever."

Even single-player console games were posited as an experience which was

enriched by the presence of others. Gary noted that, "Back when I had the Nintendo I'd be playing with my brother constantly, even if it was a single player game like Zelda.

We'd be sitting there, just telling each other what to do, how to fight the bad guys, stuff
like that." Maureen Thorson similarly addresses the pleasures of watching others play,
which for her were characterized by a certain degree of frustration: "She was pretty

hardcore... she spent all her time playing it, but only one person could play at a time. So I

spent a lot of time watching it, my thumbs itching to master the classic plus-sign-andbutton format of the Nintendo controller..." (p. 162, 2004). Later in her life, Thorson

-79-

recalls becoming a "back-seat driver" for her boyfriend, which was more positively
framed as a bonding experience:

Rockstar Games, creators of Vice City, had done the impossible. They had turned a first-person shooter into an interminable buddy-buddy roadtrip. Driver.
Navigator. "No. Your other left." And you could argue over which of Vice

City's fine 80s-rock radio stations to listen to. Being a Vice City gun moll wasn't that different from regular passenger-side existence, except that instead of clicking my tongue over run-through red lights, I clicked it over run-over cops. "Was that really necessary?" (p. 165, 2004).

Thorson played a directorial role in her gaming sessions: she would decide the
strategy, while her partner would enact it (often, as she notes, imperfectly). It may very

well be that long-term observation of a game provides pleasure in the form of a deeper
understanding, or familiarity, of the game's mechanics, where the recognition of patterns lends itself to feelings of accomplishment and mastery. Still, the frustrations inherent in
operationalizing tactics 'one step removed' from the game - mediated first through

another player - seem to be a prohibitive experience. As Thorson notes, barring her handeye difficulties, she would have liked to play herself. Gary, who played Zelda with his brother, pointed out that they constructed a

complex system of what can be described as 'meta-rules' concerning swapping of the
controller back and forth, a sharing of control. Completing what was perceived as a 'major' task within the game constituted a temporary conclusion of one's play time; acquiring a new weapon or defeating a boss meant that it was the other player's turn.

Failure (in the form of avatar death or, less frequently, an inability to pass a particular
puzzle-solving problem), as well, represented a turn-ending event. When asked by the

facilitator whether he would've spent as much time with the game if he hadn't got to play
at all, Gary answered, "Probably not." The playing or doing of a video game is once

-80-

again seen as an important factor in long-term cohesion and familiarity with the medium.
Males and females alike reported near-identical preferences for playing console video
games in groups.

However, not all participants reserved console game play as a primarily social
experience. Many of the best-selling contemporary games feature single-player

components which require upwards of thirty hours to complete: it is difficult to believe that such endeavours might be undertaken in a group environment without a significant

degree of planning and coordination. As Sunni pointed out adamantly, "I always liked to
play by myself." A female participant in a different group also echoed this sentiment,

along with three males. Is this a gendered response? Yes, once issues of hardware
accessibility are considered.

These participants each pointed out that they had unfettered access to a television
and game console, which indicates a factor of environmental and material access in

facilitating solo play. The everyday conflicts of multiple young adults seeking to use

limited technological entertainment resources (roommates or couples fighting over the TV, for example) characterize a player's potential level of experience with video game. If, for example, acquisition of skill sets are developed through prolonged play, the player who rarely, if ever, has an opportunity to sit down with a game and explore it on their own terms will have difficulty mastering these necessary abilities. A gender-based analysis becomes more useful once access is highlighted in this manner: a large study by
the Kaiser Family Foundation (2005), found that only 33% of surveyed girls had

unfettered access to a console (in their bedroom), compared to 63% of their male counterparts. Qualitative responses from my research pool reflect a similar degree of

-81-

disparity in console ownership between groups; male respondents reported owning more consoles than female respondents over the course of their respective lives, particularly

during teenage years. The problem of technological access as a site of gendered
inequality appears to migrate across generational gaps. Bryce and Rutter note that the,
"invisibility of female gaming may also be reflected by a more casual commitment to gaming as a leisure activity, and also reflect the lower numbers of females who are

frequent consumers or purchasers of gaming hardware and software" (p. 11, 2003). Purchasing power, in other words, may be an important factor in shifting video games
away from masculine-oriented themes.

A player-skill perspective illustrates the problems which a lack of access might
pose. Many console games introduce new players to game concepts and mechanics

procedurally, through tutorials and challenges which are designed to become increasingly

difficult in conjunction with a player's expertise. These learning curves are useless to the player who only encounters console games in a social context, where competitive or
cooperative multiplayer play is characterized by a simultaneous deployment of all of a
game's tactics and controller functionality. As Tina noted, "For me it's all about

confidence. If I've done something before in a game, and I know I can do it, then it's okay. But if you just throw me in and I have no idea what's going on, and I'm getting

killed or beat or whatever, it's a little demoralizing, you know?" Familiarity with a game, then, usually requires experience with the single-player component; effective social
gaming is predicated upon, and assumes, that players have developed appropriate skills
over time against ability-appropriate challenges. If a player does poorly in a social environment the usual recommendation from others is that they "play more" or

-82-

£8-

y #9uojb Suiuuiav ireip SuijEaddB ajora si sisqjo ipiM. Suisoj ;£qi uoi;euuijje isq qgnojq; saojojupj mpqdo qoiqM SAipadsjsd e 6Au\d jmoos spj^Avo; ssApsuiaqi juaiio o;

9I0UX 9JB S9JEIH9J ySVfi JS9§3tlS (8661) SU
turn's osp ia
ops t? o; 9|(qBJ9J9id

SBM §1ipps

|Bpos x2 in ;b9; f9p

U9A9 ;Bq| §Ul|S9J9;Ul

si ;i u*qotiin sb }B

;6up|noM A*jqB<^ojd i 'jpsXin Xq ii7\Y Sui^Bjd 'uAvop §ui;;is
-

f ;nq ·**9iujBaqsj{BM|B

9q J9q;ojq Ain iq^iAV paABjd

[ USqAY

;nq 'uavo Am uo ireq; os

9|dO9d J9

guiXt?|d Aofus ppo^, XjqBqoid i,,

jo sq;uoux pips

j99 :pii9

aso&md aps aq; joj p|noA\ Ajpmsn aqs

9jBin Suiquossp sssjnoosip ;umnuxop Sui

uoissnosip jo oido^ ^uanbaij b osjb sbav sapin ;suib§b uoi^i
pire S

o;ui SuppS ui
joj 'BSiq *p9||i5[s 9J0U1 sq snq;

siq; ui SuiuxbS o; uoisjsab
sjoui X^yd pjnoM
Suouxy

uoi;duinssB

em pue 'sseoov 'japuoQ z'

jE.in}jno-opos ipq; uiq^i

S90iA9p asaq; Avoq Suiuiuuapp ui

i pip

sjiredppjred puB 6uoi;ismboB {ji5[s ui jopaj ;uByoduii uu si suis;sXs SuiiubS apsuoo o; SS900B jo pA9| s^XBjd v ^ t/z7o Xaq; ji pqM :uoi;s9nb sq; sSaq qoiqAV ^poi

discourse which arose out of these qualitative interviews was that many of these females
reported feeling competitive while playing games (against males), but simultaneously perceived themselves as lacking the play experience which would lead to success, except
- like Katie - in a very few instances.

Most female participants reported their gaming experiences as being facilitated by

males or playing alongside males, once again highlighting access as an important site of
gendered analysis. As Jenson and de Castell found in conducting similar group sessions with younger, pre-teen, girls, "even when they did claim to have played., upon further questioning, many would say that they played by 'watching' their brothers, or uncles or

fathers or male cousins play" (2008b). Among the young adults here there were similar
claims, characterized by the following summary by Kim:

I think I have every opportunity to get reintroduced into gaming, but I need a male figure... like a boyfriend probably, a catalyst. If it's there and he can teach me without me having to pay for it, then I'd do it, but I'm not going to go out and get it myself. I wouldn't know where to begin, I want somebody to teach me. I don't want to go out on that limb financially unless I know what I'm doing. Even if I had a roommate who was a girl, that'd be okay, but at this point
in my life that's not going to happen.

Kim is not necessarily looking for a male entry point into games, but seems resigned to

the fact that her socio-cultural context precludes female equivalents. Others also referred
to financial cost when justifying a lack of console ownership, in addition to referencing

their own self-perceived lack of gaming capital, or expertise: "They update too often...
it's like you buy a Nintendo Wii and then something else will come out and top it. And

it'll be socially unacceptable because it's old." Rapid technological progression was
framed as daunting by many female participants who did not self-identify as gamers. These accounts inform, in part, the Kaiser figures which indicate that a predominance of

-84-

- £8 -

punoj

aqi 9J9qM put? 'ranxpaxu aq; ux pazxpJBpueis pue paonpojiux qjsay siu9ujuojxau9

JOJ1UOO

xAV spuodsauoo X||B;u9ppui squibS q;iAV aousuadxs ux d^H sxqx H*S9Fm J° %06
Suunp S9in^§ apsuoo guiXBjd p^^od^J s^uapuodssj
jo %ot7 ^I«o ;bh; punoj s^y oxuojpajg ^q pspnpuoo

ux ximSu 2ui/Lu\d ^jodsj Aubxii qSnoqa^ 'Av\& axn^S ospxA q;xM ;no-gux|^j ox^xua^sAs

- S066I 9^l °^ "PTM ^ - SIE9A* 9§^U99; JXSq;
9saq; Suoxny u*

Xxn puoA'sq A\io;sxq ^ jo qonxn 9Amj ;cuop Ajpsj \
*;uxod ;^q; yv sailing jo ;no ao§ i,, :p^9asux uox;u9

soxxnoo

Xqqoq
noA

pg u*J9A9;BqM jo s^ods Av\d noX jo dn
paAvojs jo pux5[ ;j,, 6p9ure|dx9 bux^ sy
jo qjoxxi

q;oq '

xq sxxxxpjq jxsqj

·xiox;tqos sjq^JOM

axj^xxii sxqi sd^qjsd pu^ 'uox^zxuqnosBxn-sp spj^Avoi da^s SuxxxuxSaq ^ sb sp^ja^

uoxptuisuoo puB ixSxssp sqi uxq;xAV opj s^xuaj j9;b9J§ b o; s;nxod
#p9p99u Xpjos sx juxod Aj;u9, xry -luspxAQ sx soxn^S qixM dxqsxxox^pj
J^q^tlJ ^ Suxnsjnd ux js&isaux spij 4p90JOjux9J puB psunoj sje s9x;xjBqxxxiBj qons

xM anq 'sjeMpj^q 9XiiB§ jo dxqsj9UA\o pu^ ssEqojnd 9qi
§p9|AV0XI>[ 9J9qA\ cU9UI0AV 9S9qi JO A"U12UJ JOJ 90Byd

ux sx spXo snoxoxA ^ ^q^ sxii99S ;i 'sso^ds suqnos^xu uxqixAV jesddB sayosuoo 9Uit^§ 09pXA

console gamepad added more and more buttons and functionality. While a few female
participants reported playing through their teens and experiencing these changes, the majority noted that they lost interest or access to console games during this formative
period. As Sara realized:

Up until I moved out of my house, around the time of PlayStation 7,1 had full access to my brother's various gaming systems. Then I moved to university and got stuck in an all-girl's residence where nobody had anything. I lost touch with the new technology and the new systems and the new games coming out. There was a gap, and I basically stopped having access at the pinnacle... like right before they became so complicated. They're like movies now. The game and the controller became so intricate, like a Blockbuster hit. A wasn't just jump anymore. Basically, I had an interest in them -1 was an avid player, when my brother wasn't home I played a lot - but by the time I became old enough or had the money to buy my own system, I didn't know where to begin anymore.

For these female participants, the divide between childhood and adult play was often

characterized by an absence; a lack of experience and a lack of access. From a playerskill perspective this gap might represent a disjunction in game-related skill training and
mastery between genders, a period of time in which male players were more likely than

females to spend time with video games during an historical period in which games
steadily became more complex. Although several female participants reported spending

plenty of time with next-gen consoles, comparable with male subjects, many felt they had
"missed out on something" between the simplicity of their early console systems and
now.

The now-common trope of representational misogyny also factored into many

female participants' aversion to contemporary games. One subject pointed out that, "I
don't know if this is relevant, but every girl in a video game has huge boobs." Heavily sexualized gendered representation within games is often referred to as an exclusionary

-86-

factor for female players (see Greenfeld, 1996; Kafai, 1996; Dietz, 1998). Groups also
tended to attribute 'ownership' of the most popular console games to a male audience: Gary: I don't really know any girls that do play video games, but I think that's mainly due to the types of games that are out there - Grand Theft Auto.

Edith: Yeah, they kind of seem more directed to that. Beth: Anything they put out girlie is like a Barbie thing... you know, it's dress up or
like a shopping thing.

Female participants in groups tended to deride 'pink' video games as painful stereotyping
or token displays of inclusion; not "real games". When asked about how gender

representation in video games has changed over the past decade, respondents didn't seem
to think it had. As Sunni noticed, "I don't think it's changed very much, at all. I guess because women's issues are becoming more important in society, and I don't really see

video games changing as much as maybe some other mediums, like movies or TV shows." For a majority of these females the video game represented a distinctly prohibitive space during their teenaged years: faced with predominantly male-oriented representation and thematic concerns in games, reduced access to gaming consoles, and a steeper learning curve in mastering new controllers and complexified genres, video games were essentially no longer seen as a viable form of entertainment. A distinct deviation from this perspective referenced social play, as most participants recalled occasionally gaming in small groups with others in recent years.

5.3 Skill and Performativity

Ian Bogost writes that, "Performativity in video games couple gameplay to realworld action. Performative gameplay describes mechanics that change the state of the

-87-

world through play actions themselves..." (2008). In other words, personal

performativity15 in games encompasses a distinct embodiment during play, an awareness
of one's physical movement within a game playing environment whether socially

'loaded' or not. It addresses the material manipulation of controllers by players, and the

bodily interactions between participants in a game-playing environment. Performativity
might describe kicking over a table in frustration over losing a competitive game, or
visible facial reactions to on-screen action; it eschews a dichotomous player-game

relationship in favour of a more contextual, holistic perspective of what type of
interactions might occur during a play session.

Paul Zumthor, writing from materialist standpoint in addressing performativity in

theatre, suggests that, "Performance is, in this sense, play. It is ... a mirror, a doubling
split between action and actor. Beyond an intentional distance often marked by regulated signals, the participants reciprocally observe their play, they enjoy a play that is free of normal sanctions. The latent threat of reality disappears for the short reality of the play" (p. 224, 1994). Observation and interviews in this study, however, contrast this notion:

players did not report enjoying "a play that is free of normal sanctions"; the "latent threat of reality" was, in fact, a very real concern for many during play. As Megan put it, "You
want to do well, but you also don't care to look stupid either." In a socially-mediated

space, players reported a simultaneous tension between in-game success and an embodied
awareness of their surroundings, particularly in mixed-gendered environments.

Behrenshausen, who takes a performance studies approach in analyzing Dance Dance Revolution players to describe the nexus between body and game, uses a similar example:

performativity. The complexity of her text, however, precludes direct assessment for the purposes of this
thesis - work for the future.

15 Judith Butler's Gender Trouble (1990) is perhaps the most prominent theoretical framing of

-88-

She critiques her own performance, noting the awkward and precarious position of her arms while playing--movements prereflectively enacted to help her
"keep her balance" and simply comply with the machine's instructions. She is not "makin' it fancy," not performing in line with cultural definitions of dance

that she feels would somehow legitimate her practice... She experiences her performative movements always in relation to cultural imperatives,
(p. 344-345, 2007)

Social awareness, then, colours and characterizes the way games may be performed. Rock
Band, which simulates playing an instrument in a full-piece band, is a good avenue for exploring these tensions. One all-female group was by far the most rambunctious while
playing, kicking their legs out, head-banging, and generally performing as they thought

an actual band might. These actions were closely linked with mastery: group members
who had professed previous experience with Rock Band (or similar games like Guitar

Hero) seemed more comfortable, more familiar, with the game and seemed to be more likely to include movement and active performance into their play. It is also relevant to
note that the two 'paired' participants in this group, Megan and Sara, were both well-

versed in this type of game and benefited from the comfort of having a friend present;
their familiarity may have led the way in inspiring more performance activity from other participants.

Contrastingly, other groups tended to be somewhat less explicit in their social
theatricality. Some players nodded their heads in rhythm with the song, others added

flourish to their play (windmill arm strums on the guitar, for instance), and still others
appeared to be concentrating deeply on their task. Orice again, newer players tended to be less performative and more static, immersed in game play challenge, while those more

familiar with the game's structure clearly felt more comfortable adding embodied, performative motion as they played. Differences along gender divides were not apparent,

-89-

despite many participants, both male and female, suggesting in interviews that mixedgender environments heightened awareness of how they moved and acted while playing. Social performativity was seen to be linked most strongly to a given player's level of comfort, which in turn was correlated with familiarity and expertise with the game being

played. Of course, performance while playing video games must be framed as socially
contextual: in certain groups some actions will be seen as more appropriate than others.

In observing casual Rock Band get-togethers over the course of a year, I have noticed an overwhelming tendency amongst male groups to avoid using the microphone unless at

least one female was playing, even when more than enough potential players were
available; 'permission' to sing required a mixed-gender environment. This is a distinct reversal of feminist perspectives on technological artifacts as masculine gendered: the
microphone (and singing) is culturally constructed within these groups as a female domain. Gender differentials are nonetheless clearly at work here.

A handful of female participants effectively performed 'helplessness', usually as a
response to the game telling them that they had failed. Silvia represented the most

prominent example: video data shows her failing on Rock Band's drum kit time and time

again, each time throwing her drum sticks up in exasperation until finally she quits in the middle of a song, handing control over to Tina (who, it must be noted, was all too willing
to step in and try herself). Contrastingly, no male participants ever responded to failure

with a similar display of helplessness - comparative persistence in mastering the game
ties into gendered understandings of how men and women are expected to come to terms
with negative feedback.

-90-

5A Performing Intuitively

Some players appreciated how motion-based games using the Wiimote translated

their natural inclinations and tendencies towards bodily performance into actual game
play. Emily encapsulates this perspective: I get overly frustrated, and I guess that's because I don't play a lot. And you can

only move so much on the screen and I think that's why I move my body when
I'm playing games, because it frustrates me ... why isn't my guy moving? And I'll be running into a wall... knowing that I can't physically do something, I have to push the buttons to make them do something. That's why I like the Wii, because you actually can physically move. A recurring topic of discussion during interviews was a perceived tendency (particularly,

as both male and female participants noted, in female players) to 'jump' gamepad
controllers alongside a character's movements, or to 'steer' a controller left or right when

playing a racing game, even when such motions had no in-game effect. As Karen
explained, "I always pushed down the button to make my car go so hard, like, even when people would explain to me that it didn't change the game at all, I still felt like it would

somehow speed me up." Tactility and the material controller can facilitate a type of 'skill-less' performativity, an over-enthusiastic set of input responses which are often
associated with a lack of experience. Gary pointed out that his brother would engage in

such practices while playing NES games until taunts from his peer group resulted in him actively learning to avoid moving the controller while playing. In this instance, mastery was framed as a demonstrated bodily control in conjunction with game control; a 'good' player would accomplish goals using a modicum of perceivable effort. Arnold and Faulker suggest such restrictions embody a gendered component, as, for men,

-91-

technological interaction evokes a, "means of learning to 'dominate' their feminine
emotions, and as an outlet for them" (p. 50, 1985).

Console controllers such as the Wiimote and Rock Band instruments upend this

understanding, shifting game play into a necessarily performative space where the body is required to be in motion, and where this motion not only corresponds to in-game
success but also invites peer scrutiny and/or approval. If video game practices related to mastery can be framed as masculine, including prescriptive standardization of how

controllers 'should' be used (a minimum display of effort), then a gendered perspective

might highlight devices such as these as inclusive of female players; recognizing and
rewarding actions more people will perceive as "intuitive", acknowledging a wider range

of material interactions which take place within existent understandings of embodied
motion.

5.5 Overview

The experiences of many participants position video game play as a social

activity, where games facilitate group interaction. However, familiarity with a game

characterizes the level of enjoyment a player may take from the experience, and oftentimes issues of access influence a player's ability to practice playing games and
engage with single-player content, which can be framed as a, far more effective way to

learn game-required abilities than throwing oneself directly into social multiplayer
situations. Those who put time into a console game's solo play, then, are understandably
seen to be more skilled when it comes to social gaming. Access and ownership of

-92-

6-

uu qxxj\\ *9J9q /Lu\d oxux saxuoo Axumjxrat^ \uzxoji9d, XpAipe ox Suxxjxav
se puvgyoo}[ a^xj soxiibS qxxAY ajqexiojuioo xsora ssoqa p9j£9A9i uoxxBAjasqo

sb 'jjp[s ox psaepi 9q ox uass sjsav xuaraxpoqxiis put^ X;xAi;^uuojJ9d
·saxpnas Sarahs ux 3[joay jspusS joj injaxaij sq Xexn 5[ooy jssop

spxAxp 9q; q;xAv paajSe jo pj^AVjqj and Xpn;s sxxja xiiojj sau^dxoxxj^d Auuui os
;nq 'axiix; sxq; Suunp ssxiibS qixM dxqsuox;Bpj e ure;uxBxu p99pux pxp
jstrai ii *4

spxAxp 9q; 9J9qAV 'Xbav b ux ';uxod Ajiu9-9j b ;u9S9jdsj 'pedsxireS sq; jo Xjaast^xu xxxojj

qoxqAv sqxiibS jsq;o sb \\q/a sb 'xx^ opu9;uxjs[ sqx 'usxu 6;B9j9p put^ 'qixAV spduioo
o; xnsqa \to/AO\\v qoxqM snp[s psjEpj-aiireS jo Xjqisbxu xuBoxjxugxs ux paajtisaj soxpmd
'qduinu; jo siusuxoui ;no paauxod a\9j 12 '
apj s;u^dxoxiJBd sjbuxsj ;soui qoxqM ux sbqjb oayi

guxzxuSoosj ux

xunxpsxu 9qx jo uano p^ooj,, apj 9Aeq oa uiiup siu^dxoxiJBd spuraj \jbjqaos

9josuoo qoxqAV ux 9xnx; e Suutip 90U9XJ9dx9

nI 'avou xiinxpsui 9q; oa Suxujnisj 9jb Xsqx Abs Xubxu xi^noqx^ 'OAxxxqxqojd
qons quibjj oa uisqa ps\ J9a;Bxu pafqns |BuoxaBau9S9jd9j 9Axstipux-uou
snouBA joj

'sui9;sXs spsuoo qaxM ux u9pxAxp,, b paxjxiuspx Aptus sxqa ux
o;

ospxA q;xAV dxqsuox^pi Huopjx}
aJBd oqM ss^uiaj sqa jo XuBj/y[

q;xAv bsjb oxxexusyqojd X|§ux|XBA9jd
sbav '

sx qoxqM 'ureuiop

understanding of how a game operates, players seem to be more able to have fun with their controllers, to merge game play with social interaction. Conversely, inadvertent
performance, such as reflexive motions of a gamepad which have no bearing on in-game
events, was generally framed as unskilled; that is, perceived as uncontrolled. Motion and

gesture-based material interfaces such as the Wiimote, which facilitate and reward such

actions, were described as positive, socially inclusive experiences by female and male
participants alike.

-94-

Chapter 6: Data Analysis - Skill, Materiality, & Technical Failure

This chapter further explores the notion that the game controller represents a

gatekeeper between player and game, a fundamental access point within Lahti's model of

the "cybernetic loop with the computer" (p. 163, 2003). Of particular interest here is the
material functionality of the controller and game consoles, a reminder that such devices
can often break or behave in unforeseen ways. Material devices are understood to carry,

as Giddings and Kennedy put it, a socially inscribed and contextually mediated function: "they are used, they facilitate new uses and activities ... In important ways their effects
are both limited and facilitated by their physical form and capabilities" (p. 131, 2006). In

other words, material artefacts do not dictate activity, in the technologically determinist sense, but rather inform and guide usage. With the game controller positioned as a precursor to, and executor of, skill, a brief overview of the systematic complexification of
these controllers is important here.

6.1 A Brief History of Control

The gamepad setup has become a standard icon for the console gaming medium. This precedent was clearly set by the archetypical arcade machine, where the joystick

(and motion) would be controlled by the left hand and action buttons manipulated by the right. This echo can be construed in skilled-based terms as a technological migration of
material mastery from one venue of gaming to another: the transfer of expertise with an

arcade joystick to the gamepads of the home console. If game players had already become accustomed to moving their avatar with one hand and deploying game-specific

-95-

actions with the other, Nintendo and Sega were clearly unwilling to challenge or

drastically alter this material component of play. The NES controller, by today's
standards, represents an emblem of simplicity in gaming: only two buttons to contend with? And yet there were still those unable to muster the ability to play; recall Maureen

Thorson, who resigned herself to the fact that a lack of hand-eye coordination would

forever represent an impediment to playing Super Mario Bros, with her friends (p. 162163,2004).

Predictably, participants reported that early experiences with video games were provided by parents who purchased a console for the family or, for those with no household access, facilitated by friends who owned an NES or Master System. Recollections of play were heavily wrapped up in sociability; when asked about

childhood play practices, most participants reported that they rarely, if ever, played alone and video games represented a group activity with their siblings or peers. Three male
participants and two females indicated that they did, occasionally, play alone, although
Gary qualified this statement with reference to a social dynamic: "I wanted to, you know,

get good so I didn't look like a tool when my friends came over." Others in his group nodded approvingly at this, a collective understanding which signified that even at a
young age comparative levels of mastery played an important role in how video games

were deployed and used in a group setting.

In what is commonly termed a 'next-generation' movement in console hardware,

the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) built upon the worldwide popularity
of the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) and Sega Master System in the 1980s. The
SNES was released in the early 1990s with enhanced graphical and processing power,

-96-

-L6-

sppoxix put? sa^rax 3ui/Ljua jo sjsijojiuoo Jtioj o; paqotniE ajosuoo

u 99S oa pnsnun loxi si ;i 'Av\d pooj joj ui91sa*s jpqi joj sJ9Tj°Jiuoo puoiaippe

0} dn A"nq uaijo oqM sjsAejd joj 9ai;buj9^b ajqxgire; b jqjjo osp Aaq; 'sisj|oj;uoo

';uxod aoud ui pu^ uSissp ui q;oq 'jad^sqo Xn^nsn sj^ s^jaqdud Ad
-pjiq; 'pauSisap Apuspuadspux joj p^ra ^u^oxjxuSxs e si
ui pp |p; ;j jjj p

*UOi;d90X9 OU ^saqi ^ddns qoiqM sapsuoo p p9^oi;siqdos sjoui

'(£003 '6 #c0 cP0^^ PI^bj b ;b pue
S9iub§ sqx,, 'sszuBiuiuns 999 sy -

ws ;ou q§noq;p 'pws J9;pq sJ9§§xq se pspn^t sbav sapsuoo
jo uoxiejsax

9Axss9Oons qot^g 'ojvtf s^ijosojoxjaj jo A;uB|tidod asusinxxxx aq^ A*q

99jq; uxqxxAv iushisaoxh japt^jt^qo psout^Apt^ §uxonpoj;ux jo psdse
b aq oi psAOjd S5[oxis Sopuy *uox;oxn joj ped-ssojo jbiiiuibj-mou sqa o; uoxaxpp^
ux S3[ox}s pj^uoo SopuB p9zxpj^puB;s p9onpoj;ux xoqx st^osojoxp\[ *suo;;nq
pg

'8 J°
ux xjxqs

sax uo

q; psuxof sjoaxpdxxxoo

jo uox^ogxx9|dxixoo Suxsbsjoux sq; ux apqsput^j b u^Ssq snqx *(A"Ejd Suxjnp pssn

;ou 'sixoiinq pops Pu^ V^S s11!^) x!s °^ I^^0^ 9Ll^ SuxSuuq 'sjsSuxj xspux st
pa^yndxuBiu sq o; j9||ojiuoo oqi jo doi 9q; ;b pspnpux 9J9av sixoianq jopjtioqs

oav; puB 'uoxaejngxiuoo s4gg^[ sqa o; suoiinq oayi psppt^ c9ixqAvuB9Xii 6j^\\oj^uoo ·9J0SU00 sq; joj pss^spj squibS xix uoxiEiu9S9jd9j puoxsu9iuxp-99jqa puB sijxqs SAx

A*JB;uoixxxptu joj paAvojp '9jdxxiBX9 joj 'guxjaXej ^spojAl *^|d jo spadst?

which only superficially resemble one another. This aspect of video games is underexamined within games studies criticism, particularly in the arena of localized play. What

happens when the system's owner reserves the 'good' controller for herself, with guests
required to use the controllers with the broken D-pad, with the sticky buttons, or with the

ludicrously oversized design? How do the use of third-party peripheral controllers affect
competitive play, or even social gatherings around the video game console? As Sunni noted, her favourite Xbox 360 controller took on a personalized aspect: "It's your controller and you play with it better, and if someone wants to use it you're like 'No, it's

mine!'" Like the buggy disk that needs to be carefully configured by physical ritual

before the game can be accessed, or the NES cartridge that will only work if it is jammed halfway into the console's receptacle, the material features of controllers and games - the
understanding that technology is fallible and that games are, indeed, technology - must . factor into a conceptual understanding of how games operate and are worked upon.

6.2 Material Responses

Research participants tended to view their historical experiences with early home

consoles favourably. None volunteered that they had issues with a longstanding inability to use these controllers and, in fact, many pointed to the simplistic design as a reason for why they frequently, when able, returned play to 'classic' games on these systems. Several participants pointed out that the NES systems they had grown up with were still in use in their family household, intended for younger siblings. As Jerry asked

vehemently, "Why do these ^Holding Xbox 360 controller* have so many buttons? We

did fine with just a few." Other participants in the group suggested in return that the

-98-

complexification of the gamepad was closely related to technological advancement of consoles ("3D graphics make it harder") and, inadvertently, referenced a ramping up of player skill ("maybe people want to have more to do?"). Study participants demonstrated a more wide-ranging set of responses to more contemporary gamepads, in contrast to the near-universal approval of the simplicity of
the NES controller. As Kim summarized, "They've become more ergonomic, and more

complicated. I don't like that." Familiarity emerged as a recurring theme in conversations about these controllers. Some respondents expressed preference for one system's controller over another and, when asked by facilitators for clarification, referred to issues
of tactility in justifying their opinions. For example, one group had the following exchange:

Cornelius: "The PlayStation controller just makes sense in my hands, you know? The
Xbox one I'm always having to look down."

Julie: "I don't even know the difference between the two."
Cornelius: "There's two sets of triggers, right? Going up and down, it's kind of a strain. I'm sure you build it up." Emily: "I can see a little bit of straining going on. But I have small hands."

In this case, "always having to look down" refers to an unfamiliarity with the Xbox controller: the button configuration and placement on the device is slightly different from
that of a PlayStation controller, and these differences represent a lack of material confidence, a site of concern for the player. The shoulder triggers on the Xbox controller, additionally, were perceived to be a "strain" on the index fingers although the participant acknowledged that with enough practice and experience, one could "build up" their mastery of the use of these triggers. Mastery in this case, then, refers to a strengthening of

-99-

the specific muscles used to materially manipulate an (often) crucial aspect of the
console's interface. Emily also brings up a valid issue, in that one's hand size may

directly pertain to access and, thus, to the development of skill and familiarity with a
particular controller. In fact, the original Xbox console was widely criticised for

including a controller which was seen to be too physically large for the average gamer.16
Microsoft would eventually replace this device with a smaller version, which was

originally intended solely for the Japanese market. A feminist analysis must take into
account that material devices such as controllers are primarily designed by, and marketed to, males, catering to a masculine ideal of ergonomic structure. This may partially
account for gendered practices of play. Michal Erickson points to the controller as a fundamental site where skill is

enacted, referring to the example of his brother who was unable to apply his expertise

with first-person shooter games to console equivalents: "Much to my surprise, he really
struggled with the controls and barely qualified as a 'recruit.' This was interesting. He

had played Halo on the PC several years ago, but he had no appreciable experience with dual-analog first-person shooters" (2008). It is telling that Erickson noted the controller
as the key point of skill separation between himself and his brother. Ostensibly, playing Halo on the PC, Erickson's brother would have had at least a basic understanding of the core mechanics (or gaming gestalt) of first-person shooters. Even if appropriate cognitive

and perceptual skills were in place, the motor operations required to enact strategies and
achieve goals were not yet developed and, consequentially, the player was deemed to

have low skills by the game and, "barely qualified as a 'recruit'" (2008). Participants in

See GameSpy's 'Designing Shaq's Controller' for an overview of critical responses to the original Xbox controller: http://archive.gamespy.com/articles/june03/dumbestmoments/index9.shtml

-100-

- TOI-

pire uv32b 3um3 aqx jo sjsasj Xiopnpojxux sqx guxA^jdaj psj^osj sqs 'Av\d jo ainpunf
urexiso b xe azsaij AjqBoxjdxsux pjnoM 'ajosuoo 009£ P

pooqpnqo axunoAEj jaq xeqx psxou xuuti$ -ssoxAap §uxA*t3jd-9xuBg pu^ saui^S ipq; q;t
d Xu^iu ux
9];q^;sun pszipj^put^is se qjsav ssjosuoo

b sxxja pxp

ux 5[0^q ax xtid 'ix uo AVQ^q 'ino 5[sxp 9q; 5[ooi sm 'psusddBtj
·oxsnxu

sax jo siou pixq; sq; uo 9Z99jj h qoxt^AV 01 Ajuo 9uxb§ sqx pt^oj o; ssxnuxxn

joj AysnoxxuB xxbav pjnoM i puB sj9;sxs Am usxjo #51S!P Addoxj A§§nq Aj^a b uo
pssnoq sbav 'uoxiu9i;b pspXAxpun A*xu sinadBO ox xusqx jo xsjxj aqx 'us^unpd^^ :9|dxxiBX9 joj

'pod psqsxjqexss W3 'qssxua^sQ sx;^ -9.reMp.iEq ^uaxt^ui qixM p95[uq 9jb ssureS
O9pXA

SJUtlOOOE

AVOq

SX H '
ub jo

uodn

uiojj ssno jx

Aweui
UX U99S S9XOU

q;xAV sax^noxjjxp

uiqx^qj-oxsnui

U99J0S

uinip put^ j^xxng sqx jo ssn jpqx 4dn \\p[s, ox xM jEX|xxutgun A^oqM sxu^dxoxxJEd U9A9 'ApsisAuoQ -sxuBdxoxxiBd ssaqx
jo xuxod ^xotuo v p9;u9S9jd9J i9jjo;ixuoo sqx '(psqM saxxxsuss uox;oxii

AV9U ^ Suxsn s9x§9xejxs puE soxp^x jexjxxiibj peus ox §ux;dxii9XXE
9Il^ J°
Xpnxs

again, each time hoping that the hardware would "come through", although it never did.

Other participants remembered computers locking up during play, or times when their
consoles broke outright. Technological failure, in other words, formed defining instances in how games were recalled.

6.3 Problematic Hardware and Technological Failure

Steven Jones, as part of his exploration of the multivariate experience the Halo

series offers fans, spent some time with players. He quickly realized that the materialism

and availability of technology had a noticeable effect on his research subjects:
It seems significant that John's engagements with different versions and experiences of Halo on different platforms are determined in large part by the material conditions under which he can play ... His friend's large-screen TV, his roommate's console, lapsed subscriptions to Xbox Live, the absence of the infrastructure to allow for system-link LAN parties, all determine what part of

the Halo universe is available (and perhaps interesting) to him, and these have further effects based on the different processors and different sound cards of the different systems, (p. 88, 2008)
Here the controller is not foregrounded as the primary site of material importance, but

rather fits into a larger system" of technological access. The enjoyment taken from

playing Halo is predicated upon perceptual access (television display), social access (the
game console belongs to a friend), and connectivity (no Xbox Live, so no internet-based

play). It is easy to expand this point to consider that many game players may have only
one or two controllers, and thus will never experience, for example, four-player games,

unless facilitated by a friend bringing over a few extra gamepads. As Jones notes, players
will have different experiences with the same game due to limitations in technological

and material access; game reviewers and academics alike must remember that their own

-102-

- £01 -

jojjuoo jo uosuedraoo u joj njfa uvjj oudj^jo av9ia9j

U0ISS3S i|0B9 Xbm aqj papajp AjjuEOijiugis qoiqAY suopnjos p9^i;o§9u-dnoj§ '
jo A&uba u paMoqs siBAVpj^q 'BuiuneS jo
jo

o; SuipjoooB 9§^;u^ApB Av\& suibS ^ spiAOid o; uAv
'5[nqounu b ipiAv J9|joxnioo m;x9 sip
Y9U b o;

si

auiaqos jojjuoo

oj ssoip sdnoi§ ou '

Suiptrcq ^ 66'ss9j ?pns sui dpq

99iq; Xjuo ipiM 9UiB§ sq; dn ps dnoiS

:ps;ou Bpipj sb 'sSb^u^ap^ /Lu\d jo ^os auios spiAOjdo; usas s^av
12 sb psApojsd sbav snp qSnoqjp fiJ9|pj;uoo sssf-paqM sq; ssn o;

9uo uo paxpj dnojg suo 'sXbav ;u9J9jjxp jo jaqiunu b in Xoua^sisuooui siqi
ssapqpuou sdnoj§ '(paqAV oi;sB|d e m psppaquia
uo

Ayuo s;u9S9jd9J psqM 9q; qSnoqqv '
jo

o inq 'S9;oiini/W

q;tM pso^j 9J9M uoissas qoes ux

(inoj) ps ipijB ss^qoind o; sjq^un sbav i so;uojox putuxre
m

ux

'ssdoov jo SUII9}

spafqns jo uoi^Aissqo ;iredppjBd Suunp sXbav
ui

ui c

q;iM suopipuoo

i \\i/a suoxssss As\d

The second issue which each group faced was a technological, material problem:

the Rock Band bundle I purchased for the study included a faulty guitar. These guitar
controllers are designed to deploy a feature called 'energy' ('Star Power' in Guitar Hero games) when the neck of the guitar is lifted skywards or, in more common gaming

parlance, "rocked out". If a player is consistent in hitting their notes, they accumulate this
energy, which can be used to either increase their point total or, if another band member

has played poorly and failed, 'revive' that player or bring them back into the game. Using
energy at appropriate times plays an important role in successfully playing Rock Band.

However, one of the guitars used for the study lacked this component right out of the

box: the accelerometers used to detect the guitar's orientation did not respond. This

resulted in a number of hyper-theatrical motions, in which (knowledgeable) players who
were aware of the necessity of this game play element wildly waved their broken guitar
in the air, prompting others to ask what they were doing. In every single group, participants who were seen to possess more experience

with games like Rock Band identified the problem and shared this information with their
peers. This did not appear to be an actively gendered decision, but rather one simply

predicated on familiarity. In one of the all-female play sessions, Megan, who had visibly
suffered difficulties with the guitar controller, offered a solution when passing the device to the next player: "That controller, I found, doesn't turn on star power... you have to hit

the button... and I kept trying to put it up and it didn't work. Press like the button... no,
no, not the start button... *Megan moves to point to the appropriate button on the controller*". The select button on the controller does indeed offer an alternative solution

to the traditional motion-based approach to deploying energy, but in each session this

-104-

- so i -

qons

o;ux psuiumigoid put? paiejnojBO psjjo 6

qiiM 'ps uoisiAsp; uoiaiuxiap-qgiq b joj psinSijuoo ussq X|snoiA9jd p^q uo
XOCIX
a snssi

\nd\no pu^ ;ndui aq;ji ·auiBg sq; Aq pswiuia 5[obj; oisnin

;ndut jo Suran; sspajd punoie
suioosq u^o anssx siq; 'XpcpioijiBd 'puvq^oo^f u\ -pspBua si uoipB

-uo 9;BudojddB aq; uaqM pUB jsjjoj^uoo jpq; uo uo;;nq b ssqsnd suo uaqA\
uo Q\w[A 'stqiSqSsu sx 90U9J9jjip snp
9UIOS uo *^{dsxp puB jndui ussAvpq ^i;u9J9jjip suit; v, ajBOtpux o; spuoossqnui

ui p9;u9S9jd9J A*Tjtmsn jsquinu m '9ulij. dsuodsdu jpq; Xq pazuapmBqa sq u^o suoisiAsp;

uoi;iuij9p qSiH *(^s uoisiAsp; 'sjsspsds 'jSAposj) punos put^ (ps uoisiAsp;) X^ydsxp 95[ij
S90iA9p pptuo jaqao ipiM. S90BjJ9;ux 9j^AVpj^q SuiuibS qoxqAV ux Xbm sqa '/Qijiqvjddojatm
lvotSojoutf09ijo imp :9tissx ^uox;xpp^ ub ipiAv p^o^j 9J9av uoissqs pspnpuoo ;sjxj

ux siut^dpxiJBd 'j9A9avoh 'uosu^duioo puB uoxaEAissqo jo bqjb qou-^^p ^ 4p9J9Aoosxp souo 'pspajjoo aou 9J9M ssnssx snoxA^jd oav;

J9|yojiuoo sq; jo uopBpidiireui 9J9qA\ o; paxisjsp 9J9a\ 'spj.oAV jsq;o ux '^nd^o SuiureS
9;Bj;suoui9p oqA\ ssoqx 'JsiniBui psquossjd oq; ux Jt^axng XaytiBj sqi 9sn uaq; oa p9pu9i steAu\d J9q;o sb 'Ajsiseiu pszxuSoosj-AnBpos sb p^axsod snq; sba\ SuxXBjd jo uop^piumooB uy ·AixjBuoipunj 9JBA\pjBq sax puB 9xub§ aqa jo
§ux;sxx9-9jd passassod oqA\ si3A%\d asoq; Xq psiBUXiuassxp seav uoxitqos

study was conducted using older technology, a CRT (Cathode Ray Tube) television
which does not display a lag differential between input and output. The game was configured incorrectly: my fault. The group, understandably, failed every Rock Band song they attempted to play due to this idiosyncrasy. As Cornelius realized after several
attempts, "Something off. There's a way to calibrate the controls so they synch up with

what's up there on the TV. I know you can do that in Guitar Hero. Something not... it's out of whack. We're better than this." Interestingly, this player had the prior experience and expertise to identify the problem, but not the game-specific method of correcting it.

The group consequentially abandoned the game in favour of another, although they felt
better about attributing their failures to a material concern rather than sub-par abilities. I recalibrated the game for other groups accordingly, but the one-time occurrence was nonetheless a good example of how hardware failures can Impact performance and success, which may then in turn influence how play is enacted. Expertise and knowledge, or lack thereof, with configurative practices in 'setting up' these devices was seen to play
a significant role in determining participant experience.

Although I provided no instruction on the operation of the cameras, at least one
participant in each group took this role upon themselves while not engaged in actively playing. These were more often women than men. In most cases, their camerawork

contributed greatly to the study, capturing subtle moments of teamwork or competition

between players or focusing on material confusion with game controllers. One
particularly poignant shot consists of Kim complaining loudly that her Rock Band guitar isn't working, followed by a close zoom to her strumming hand which reveals that she

has not, in fact, been strumming at all which is causing her to fail. Blaming the

-106-

"LOl-

^avou5[ noX '11 qiiM saoui 01 dsuas S93pui 11 ayou Avoq saoj i os ax qaiM saoui pjnoAV

pips aqi isnf sbav ji usqAV uqaq s^xq 's/Lu/aAws leq; op i puB 'ai q^iAV qaoui
os '

I,, 'pajou 3\vey[ sy *suoxp^ 9iire§-in unojjsd o; ^IPIIA^ ;suav jpiij 9^qs jo pire dn pu^;s o; paSmnooua avou sie Aaq; 'sjqSuij jpq; jo suoi;om pxd^j aq; joj
ssquoijoui vss Apsuxioj sja^yd ojaqAV :Av\d sui^S j^xoos jo ^uqjb sq; ojux

jo ;u9Ui9p AV9U e S9onpoj;ut ps 9Jti^9j siqx 'Sui/daid ayiqAV suopoB paipoquia umo

jo 3j^avb 9joui uiaq; aapuai pu^ spsuoo sq; uiojj sjaAejd qo^pp o; Suxp^^j
pire XSojouqoa; q;oopnjg ssspjiAv 'sj^puiojapoo^ qjiAY suo;;nq jo moqpjd

spsuoo ux suot;u9Auoo 9o^jJ9;m Xtreui uiojj
9UIBS 9qi UO s9UIi; J9Uq B JOJ '
AV9U

SX

*!!AV 9ll^ Sin^Bjd uaqAv ^x^usnbasuooux XpSiBj psjapuaj sx pBdoui^S ^ q;xM
jo Xjo^sxq §uo| 12 ;Eqi !A^|d sui^S jo spsdsB pdsvq-puiuoD 'djqiSuvi sq; ux

^auauiBpunj ^ s;u9S9jd9J xx^vV 9lP J° P^duix pitmno 9qi lt^qx sjsq u^sui i 'ljxqs tJ3x Ag *§uxujb§ sujoq ux ^xqs ptra^ui b sb p9;n;x;suoo sq ;q§xux scsj9Uib§, sq o;
iou sjdosd lsguoui^ XiiepiopiBd 'xij\V opus;uxjs[ sq^ jo Xaxj^yndod pB^jdsspxAv

p'9

*S90ub;sux qons ux ASopuqo^ o; %ouqjl ov.pssoddns,

A\oq jo Suxpuadn uu psaejjsuoxuap Xptus sxq; ux usuioav SunoX sqx jo Xut^ux 'ureSt^ aouo

·(1661 'neuiofe^vv s^s) A§o{ouqo9i jbxjsieuj q;xM spssjsaux J9pu9§
1SXUXUI9J |buox;u9Auoo uiojj ojnxj^dsp puxasxp b si jpsiaq ut^q;

also pointed out the way in which the Wii drew upon everyday experiences in facilitating
control of games: "This was my first time playing the Wii... I liked that it was sort of
intuitive, you can figure it out -1 mean, it takes a lot of time to master obviously - but
you can figure out how it works in two minutes, I mean it's a steering wheel, right?" A

steering wheel mechanism, for Sara, represents an area of existing expertise where skills

and familiarity developed while driving a car can be roughly approximated and deployed
within a game setting; a technological referent point.

Interestingly, the Wiimote's gesture-based configuration can be linked back to

some of the earliest developments in virtual reality technology, where Jaron Larnier

hoped to enable participants to intuitively play music in VR and, "wanted to find a way to use the human body as a musical instrument" (Rheingold, p. 160, 1991). Steven Jones, however, notes that the Wii represents more than a simple technological alternative to
established control conventions:

In the end, the button combinations are not that much less complex than on any other system (especially once you add the nunchuk), and the movements do not map as precisely as in virtual-reality simulations (players quickly learn that you can just flick your wrist to hit a baseball; it's not necessary to take a hitter's stance and swing with two hands using the controller), but what is important to many new users is the relative sense of "freedom" conveyed by the controller as a symbolic object, which means in part relatively freedom from long-established controls and the serious technical expertise with those controls possessed by hardcore gamers, and at a lower price. The difference, in other words, is as much cultural as technical, (pp. 134-135, 2008)

The Wii, then, does require material expertise on the part of the player, especially once one learns that there are motion-based 'shortcuts', or alternatives, to full-body exertion.
In Mario Kart Wii, the experienced player will quickly realize that the game is most

easily controlled with small, subtle motions, rather than the big, sweeping turns of the wheel which characterize driving an actual car. It is also true that the representational

-108-

- 601 -

isnui Suxjooqs aiuos ieqj uox^oxjxugxs sb souasaid stuti§ sqj puBisjspun ssspqpuou xjxa\ 'ssxubS qiXM 9ouoiJ9dx9 joud ou pus un§-iqgq 9§jej b qjiAY paddxnbs qosuoo

ue qaxM paoty: 'jatojd e :a*bav jejxxuxs e ux paAxaojsd aq ireo sj^n 9ureS- aq; ux sjqxssod 9Jt^ suoip^ jo sdX; ;^qAv pu^;si9pun oj uoipxj
Xbui 9iu9§ 9q; o; pssn ;ou jaX^yd ^ ;nq 'qjusS b uo uoi^tjba b sb sui^S sq;
uy,, s
0} Ul UX
jntif sy

S

h 'S-raaS jo suoxaou put^dxs oa s9aj9s ;x sb asnf '

oiux ;uxod a\iiu9 poo§ b sx (q/,003) 4PuibS ^ jo sspu sqa ux
ux p9;u9S9jd sx ysvfi |U9;uoo 9q; pu^ TBuopog Xpitid sx leq; ;u9;uoo
SUJ90UO0,, qoxqAV '
ux uuoxpej;sqe jo spA9{,, jo uox;B|tiuxioj s

uoxpxj

o;

sps

oi 90BjJ9;ux |bxj91buj 'jBOxsAqd sqi qixM

a\9u

o; pasu jjiav

x§ 6A^|d SAxaxpdxuoo ux sjouibS 4iJ9dx9, q;xA\ apdxuoo o; U Abav sxq; uj *5[sb; ;^qi jo uox;BinxxojddB oxiusoooioxxu
jo 'put^q ux J9|pj;uoo jpq; qjxM \\v(\ u SuxAvoxq^ oxxuxui o; ja^Byd sqj ssixtibsj psapux ssed b

^j|s pspsps SuxzxjBuoxxBjado jo psdsB Av\d sxubS jmoruo aq; ssaBxpsxxxsj

spu^dn 'i3A9A\oq 's^oiunjw ^m 'ypoj. os puB XpAjp9jj9 sXt^yd §ux;u9Ui9|duix '
}E uox^n;xs sqi joj AB|d pauoo sq^ Suxsooqo :j}Bqiooj jo ^ods aqa 4p99pux

09 £ XOCIX Pu^ £ uoi;b;sX"Bu. aqx xxiojj ssojob ssxijsdxa jo suox;duxnss^ 9q; jo
joj '§Qt udppvj/y sxxx^S |jBq;ooj sqx 'sajosuoo §uxxu^§ j^q^o uo
suoxausAuoo oqoa \\\t& 'nud ;soui sq; joj '
sainptuas ^\vu pws

done. In time, the player will come to replace this understanding with a more contextual,
game-specific awareness of how the gun might best be used, what on-screen interface conventions indicate, and so forth. Meaning-making practices drawn from the game's

fiction are eventually replaced by meaning taken from the game's rules. But for the beginning player a controller which prescribes a certain play style can be an inclusive
device, couched in popular representation which reaches beyond gaming culture to tap
into a broader set of cultural understandings ("it's a steering wheel, right?").
Music-rhythm titles like Guitar Hero and Rock Band work in a similar manner,

providing entirely new controllers (in the shape of tiny, plastic guitars or simplified drum

kits) which share few precedents with the gamepad tradition in home video gaming. The drum kit, in particular, departs from existent forms of game mastery: keeping rhythm
with drum sticks is, as any player will confirm, a drastic change from the tactile, thumb-

driven experience of using a gamepad. I have personally witnessed drummers come to Rock Band without ever having played it, or any music-rhythm video game for that
matter, set their skill level to expert and, after a brief cognitive and perceptual struggle

with the interface ('reading' the beats), perform well beyond my own level. Real world
experience with drums is, in this case, more valuable than weeks of expertise with Rock

Band. Of course, mastery of an historical genre iterant of Rock Band drumming, such as
Konomi's Beatmania (an arcade drumming title), might be seen as an equivalent
precursor to success, but the important point is that these controllers provide a more

representationally comprehensive 'entry point' into gaming than the ubiquitous gamepad.

The level of abstraction in using a video game drum kit is seen to be far less than with the

-110-

gamepad, where a single button might correspond to any number of actions (shooting,
jumping, talking, etc.) depending on the game.

This is what I mean by a material shift in gaming: the highly abstracted, specialized gamepad with which many long-term players have accumulated expertise

over the course of its procedural complexification no longer has a tyrannical grip on cpnsole game play. A skill-based approach to understanding video games positions such
a 'shift' as an industry move towards including new players; leveling the playing field somewhat so it becomes easier for these gamers to come on board and participate

meaningfully regardless of prior experience with video games, '13 31' or not. New control devices such as the Wiimote and Rock Band drum kit controllers take an important role in promoting (or discouraging) competitive and/or social play, and new controller
technology such as the Wiimote or Guitar Hero guitar lean away from accumulated expertise with gamepads and towards acquisition of a new set of masteries. Of course, while reducing the level of abstraction of controllers might seem to facilitate a more open field of play, the console system - the material computer -

nonetheless remains a technological artefact laden with configurative aspects which can
still prove problematic for inexperienced players. One group in the study contained no

members who had had prior contact with the Wii. This group spent nearly ten minutes trying to interface the Wiimotes with the system, interlock the Wiimotes with the plastic wheel coverings, and generally wrestling with the hardware. At one point the Mario Kart
Wii manual was brought out for reference and, as Felicia realized when finally inserting her controller into the wheel correctly, "That.... makes a whole lot more sense." As with

actual play, the doing of configuring a console system is how experience and expertise

-111-

are gained. Other groups had difficulties setting up Rock Band to recognize and include
all instruments, with those possessing expertise with the game seen to be primarily

directing activity. The process notably sped up as each play session progressed, with each
player learning when to hit the appropriate button to move forward in menus and select options for their plastic instrument. It would be interesting to see what many of these

players would do if, alone, faced with a console that needed to be configured for play; as
it happened, each group was able to pool collective knowledge to get the job done. One

video log reveals an all-female group, encountering a technical problem, looking for me
in the hallway outside the television studio: the male 'expert'. Because of my

unavailability they were forced to resolve the issue themselves (which they proceeded to solve very quickly). While socio-cultural gendered expectations might have caused these
women to instinctively look for assistance with the technology, a little practice and

experimentation revealed that they were more than equipped - as a group - to operate the

hardware. The social element of console gaming is very much an important part of how
such material expertise is shared and disseminated. However, such problematic experiences demonstrate that the systems themselves have a long way to go before

matching the reformed, inclusive nature of new controller technologies like the Wiimote.
The technology, in other words, remains prohibitive to some.

6.5 Materiality Matters

If, as Csikszentmihalyi (1990) suggests, a player's engagement and level of
happiness is predicated upon their ability to maintain a state of flow, then the material function of controllers seems to play a large role within this model. When a player is

-112-

continuously sidelined from their game, preoccupied with the physical aspects of their controller - startled by vibrations, hunting for buttons - then it seems obvious that any significant degree of flow is impossible. If, on the other hand, a player is well in-tune with the configuration and material nature of their controller to the point where its machination becomes almost second nature, then the link between game and player is

strengthened; the cybernetic loop is maintained. A degree of automaticity in using the
controller is an important aspect of how games are skillfully played, freeing up a player's
cognitive resources for other game-related tasks such as contending with on-screen

interface conventions and in-game pattern recognition. As Emily noted, "A lot of times when I'm playing sports I don't think, my body just does things because I'm so used to playing it. And with video games I find that the ones I play often, my fingers just move, I don't have to think 'Oh what do I have to do to do that?' You know what I mean? But if it's a new game, it takes so much more concentration and is less fun. The more you play a game, the more you know it, and it's something you just do." Accumulated experience and expertise with a console gaming controller is crucial to this doing; it removes
material preoccupation.

In this way the game controller can be seen as a gatekeeper between player and
game. The controller acts as conduit between will and action, hinders intent, or, for most, lies somewhere on the spectrum in between. The skills and expertise required to attain this level of connectivity with a game controller seems predicated both on past experience with similar devices, and, perhaps imposingly, on a minimum level of handeye coordination. Contemporary shifts away from the longstanding, historically

complexified gamepad can be framed as an attempt to include newer players in social

-113-

practices of play, largely negating accumulation of skill with various iterations of the

gamepad as a fundamental separator between 'expert' and 'part-time' players. Still,
material mastery of console video games nonetheless extends beyond the controller to
encompass a wide range of configurative tasks, from synching the hardware with

televisions and other devices to setting up controllers for each participant prior to actual
game play. Technology drives games; it drives their dominant modes of presentation and
representation, and most importantly, drives the interface and controller designs which

are intended to be used to navigate through these game worlds. In short, materiality matters. As seen from the preceding accounts of players experiencing the everyday challenges and nuances of video games, material and

technological conditions factor heavily into the way they engage with the medium. The reductive formalisms of narratology and ludology generally avoid contact with the
material component of video games, just as the notion of player skill is undervalued. Still, areas of games studies are opening up materialism as a valid and important topic of

exploration. Ian Bogost and Nick Montfort, for example, have begun work on exploring

the cultural and technological conditions of specific game consoles, ox platforms,
acknowledging that the games produced for those systems were very much enframed by

the material consoles on which they were intended to appear (see Bogost & Montfort,
2008, forthcoming).

-114-

Chapter 7: Conclusions
Here I have intersected games studies texts, popular discourse, and original player accounts in an attempt to highlight the role of player skill as an important aspect of

understanding video games more holistically; that is, in contrast to more polemical perspectives on what such games might mean. Influential ludological and narrativist texts assume or downplay the player as a site of accumulated mastery, as a crucial point of
enactment of video games. If nothing else, this thesis represents an initial attempt to focus

specifically on, or 'draw out', the player's role from within these frameworks for critical
analysis.

Video games, in all shapes and forms, require multivariate skills depending on their genre, on their platform, and on a player's environment. Cognitive abilities, social skills and pattern recognition represent only a few of these abilities. I have chosen here to

focus specifically on material and tactile ability, reflecting a particular interest in console gaming, and predicated on the argument that mastery of controller functions as a
precursor to other skill development. With the player (rightly) positioned in a place of import, the material component of the video game controller necessarily emerges as a key area of interest. For console systems in particular the controller represents a technological choke point, a gatekeeper between player and game, where initial mastery and familiarity

with this device precludes the development of additional game-required abilities. If a player cannot control the game, cannot play, then a vast majority of the game remains locked away. Even the most well-designed rule structures and compelling narratives are inaccessible to those unwilling or unable to acquire the necessary skill sets to experience them.

-115-

The console gamepad is positioned as a site of historically accumulated expertise,
characterized by a systematic complexification which confronts experienced players with
new tactile challenges to overcome. For the beginning player, however, the many buttons

and interfaces of the contemporary gamepad may initially represent a prohibitive,
confusing device. If mastery requires experience, a fundamental issue here is that of

discouragement: without gratification, new players are faced with a steep learning curve

and few immediate rewards. Material shifts in controller technology, such as Nintendo's
Wiimote, largely negate accumulated expertise with the gamepad and level the playing
field, at least temporarily, for players to enter console play alongside peers. This is

particularly relevant as the console often appears to take a socio-cultural role, where competitive and cooperative play amongst groups of friends and family members defines
many players' experiences with the medium.

An examination of genre reveals roughly the same state of affairs: as new

iterations of familiar game play are released to the public, assumptions of pre-existing mastery are built into design as new features and functionalities are added. Experienced players will welcome new challenges to apply familiar skill sets against, but others may find such suppositions problematic. As genres hybridize and require more nuanced, universal sets of skills of players, it will be interesting to see what industry tactics will
emerge to reconcile the 'hardcore' gamer with the casual player, the 133t with the nOObs.

Of course, the majority of players lie somewhere in the middle of this spectrum, and further discourse with such players will surely give cause to rearticulate player-skill as
more than a simplistic binary division.

-116-

punoj sq ireo uoijboijubp s^

sxsdouAs e joj
99S 'jJB SB S9UIE§ UO UOIJBUIJOJUI 9JOUI JOJ

*a"j; lqSxra suoaiuos sdeqjad ltiq '
o;

xjssjj

0}

ijun suisss ^ -Q\dumx3 joj 'ssui^S ssojob pszip.repire;s pn^ paonpojdai Avoq jo ginpirejsispun ub nap^ojq pynoAV siheS jo 9JU9§ iB|not^d ^ jo uoi^ui t 9JOXH v -Xpsop 9J0in syjp[s psApoisd jo jsqranu Xu^ ss^jpp^ aijSiui SAi
uxqixAV ^jjoav 9jn;nj 'Xj^sbixx jo sausuodxnoo J9jioj[|uoo pBdsixxt^S sq; uo Xpsop ;soxu p^snooj sxsaq; snp ^It

siuos

oa xnxq

o\

pus

sx

q oi jspjo ux

i3Av\d sxja jo ymd 9q; uo sTjppjo ps b '^xp^iu jo ssd^; isxjao Xubxh ut^q; os sioin '
sx luxod sqx *9J9lI uoxiBjapxsuoo jspun iou sx xunxp^ui ox;sxxjb ub psapux
09pXA 1OU JO

0

01 p9XI9J9J 4^pSJ9AUO0 'S^q lJ9qH J9§0^ OXJXJO 9XA0XXI
pqi o; guxxrajsj 'sjnoA^spua oxasxiJB se soum2 oapxA putij o;

81

psppsp XpusoQJ st^q 69|dxxiBX9 joj 'uoxssxinxuoo UB^dojng 9qx ix9;uoo iRinajno jlo2xts\ u ux
sx xiinxpsiu oq; A\oq uo SuxjBaq 9Ai^q Auui qoxqAV 'ssux^S inoqv ssjnoosxp
joj 9ixsx
sx

sxssxja sx

It is also important to note that I have kept video games in an entertainment domain rather than attempt to illustrate ways in which game-related skills spill out into real-world applicability. This is a hot topic amongst pedagogical researchers and many

media effect theorists, with the most extreme examples attempting to demonstrate that
games are "murder simulators" which train people to kill without reserve (see Grossman, 1999). While this is an undoubtedly interesting debate, it is far too great in scope to take on here. For now it is enough to say that skills developed in-game most certainly may

influence success in other areas (watch, for example, an accomplished real-time strategy
player use the mouse and keyboard for other computing tasks). In many ways a focused examination on skill within video games demonstrates

that the 'textual' boundaries of any given game are necessarily porous, that a player's
experiences transfer across in applicability to similar games, and that an inherently social discourse informs and enriches player activity. As contemporary games become more

nuanced and their challenges increasingly complex, dialogue amongst players facilitates knowledge about how to meet and overcome difficulties. Although the internet is a
traditional location for such communities, research participants were observed to be

helping each other in small social groups: with controllers and console configuration, and in imparting information about a game's specific structures. Players drew on their pre existing knowledge of how video games operate, oftentimes drawing comparisons across
genres, when confronting new challenges.

Much work has been done on sociability online, but surprisingly little attention has been paid to the console system within a small group environment. Many participants
suggested that interactivity with other, localized players was an important element of

-118-

their experience with such games, and that this social element was what separated the

console from PC and handheld gaming. Player skill was seen to mediate and define the
pleasures to be taken from such play, both socially and in-game. Many contemporary

games designed for group play facilitate and encourage a kind of social performativity,
where embodied play becomes a factor in how such games are experienced alongside the game's formal evaluation of player skill. Formulation of ability takes on additional

nuance here, beyond the cybernetic loop between player and game: the relationship
between player and player is also a large part of how video games are characterized and experienced by many. There may be spaces opening for players to participate in play successfully external to the game, as with the Rock Band participant who hits only 60%

of his or her notes but nonetheless heightens a group's experience and enjoyment through
sheer theatrical enthusiasm. Finally and most importantly, I gave intentional weight to female voices in this research project in opposition to a perceived male-centric cultural 'ownership' of video games elsewhere. Although by no means characteristic of girl gamers in general, many participants pointed to a distinct divide in their relationship with console video games; a 'gap' in their experience which often appeared in conjunction with rapid technological and genre complexification historically. They noted that their teenage years represented a departure from gaming and, now, in their 20s, games appear to be prohibitive. Skill factored heavily into their evaluation, as many had foregone conclusions that the males in

their lives, who had been 'training' alongside these advancements, would naturally be
better than them. These accounts were informed by a gendered perspective of technology,

where male 'ownership' of consoles and game spaces was framed as prohibitive. These

-119-

participants did, however, point out that with enough time and effort they were able to acquire the necessary abilities to compete effectively. Indeed, individual context and experience was seen to be a factor for many female participants which renegotiated or

outright contradicted feminist framings of their victimization or subjugation in a number
of ways.

A focus on player skill repositions many aspects of how video games are

understood, how they are seen to generate meaning in a socio-cultural context. A game
necessarily assumes a player; it therefore follows that a productive way to address the
game is to position the player at the centre. The video game is not simply a material

object, just as it is not simply a story or simply a set of rules. It is hard to believe that any

framework or understanding of games that negates or bypasses the player as a crucial
point of analysis could even come close to exploring the full range of experiences which
video games facilitate in contemporary everyday culture.

-120-

-Ill-

References
Aarseth, E. (1997). Cybertext: Perspectives onergodic literature. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.

Aarseth, E. (2001). Computer game studies, year one. In Game Studies: The International Journal of Compeer Game Research, 1 (1). Available online at http://www.gamestudies.org/0101/editorial.html
Aarseth, E. (2003). Playing research: Methodological approaches to game analysis. In Proceedings ofthe 5th digital arts & culture conference, Melbourne. Aarseth, E. (2004). Genre trouble: Narrativism and the art of simulation. In WardripFruin, N., & Harrigan, P. (eds.), First Person: New Media as Story, Performance, and Game (pp. 45-55). Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Ackermann, E. (2001). Piaget's constructivism, Papert's constructionism: What's the difference? In Future ofLearning Group publication. Available online at

http://learning.media.mit.edu/content/publications/EA.Piaget%20_%20Papert.pdf.
alwaysblack. (2006). Bow, nigger. In Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (eds.), The Game Design reader: A Rules ofPlay Anthology (pp. 602-609). Cambridge: The> MIT
Press.

Apperley, T. H. (2006). Genre and game studies: Toward a critical approach to video
game genres. In Simulation and Gaming, 37(1), pp. 6-23.

Arnold, E., & Faulkner, W. (1985). Smothered by invention: The masculinity of

Technology. In Arnold, E., & Faulkner, W. (eds.), Smothered by Invention: Technology in Women's Lives (pp. 18-50). London: Pluto PresS Limited.
Avedon, E., & Sutton-Smith, B. (1971). The study ofgames. New York: Wiley. Bannert, M., & Arbinger, P.R. (1996). Gender-related differences in exposure to and

use of computers: Results of a survey of secondary school students. In European Journal ofPsychology ofEducation, 11, pp. 269-282.
Barnett, M., Vitaglione, G., Harper, K., et al. (1997). Late adolescents' experiences with and attitudes towards videogames. In Journal ofApplied Social Psychology, 27,
pp. 1316-1334.

Barthes, R. (1989). The rustle oflanguage. Berkeley: California University Press. Behrenshausen, B. (2007). Toward a (kin)aesthetic of video gaming: The case of Dance Dance Revolution. Games and Culture, 4 (2), pp. 335-354.

-122-

Bogost, I. (2008). Persuasive games: Performative play. Gamasutra. Available online at
http://www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/3703/persuasive_games_

performative_play.php

Bogost, L, & Montfort, N. (2008). Video computer system: The Atari 2600platform.
Cambridge: The MIT Press (forthcoming).

Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction: A social critique ofthe judgment of taste. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

Brayton, J. (2006). History of feminist approaches to technology studies. In Trauth, E.
(ed.), Encyclopedia of Gender and Information Technology (pp. 759-764).
Hershey: Idea Group Publishing.

Brayton, J. (2008). What makes feminist research feminist? The structure offeminist
research within the social sciences. Available online at http://www.unb. ca/PAR-L/win/feminmethod.htm

Bryce, J., & Rutter, J. (2003). The gendering of computer gaming: Experience and
Space. In Fleming, S. & Jones, I. (eds.), Leisure Cultures: Investigations in Sport, Media and Technology (pp. 3-22). Leisure Studies Association.

Butler, J. (1990). Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity. New York:
Routladge.

Caillois, R. (2006). The definition of play: The classification of games. In Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (eds.), The Game Design Reader: A Rules ofPlay
Anthology (pp. 122-155). Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Consalvo, M. (2007). Cheating: Gaining advantage in videogames. Cambridge: The MIT
Press.

Cook, J., & Fonow, M. (1986). Knowledge and women's interests: Issues of
epistemology and methodology in feminist social research. In Sociological
Inquiry, 56 (4), pp. 2-29.

Cassell, J., & Jenkins, H. (1998). From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Gender and
computer games. London: The MIT Press.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology ofoptimal experience. New York: Harpers Perennial.

Degentesh, K. (2004). Playing material girl. In Compton, S. (ed.), Gamers: Writers, Artists & Programmers on the Pleasures ofPixels (pp. 44-56).
New York: Soft Skull Press.

-123 -

Dietz, T. L. (1998). An examination of violence and gender role portrayals in video games: Implications for gender socialization and aggressive behavior. In Sex
Roles, 38 (5-6), pp. 425-442.

Erickson, B. (2008). Is there a "critical period" for videogame skill acquisition? Gamecritics. com.Available online at

http://www.gamecritics.com/is-there-a-critical-period-for-videogame-skillacquisition

Eskelinen, M (2001a). The gaming situation. In Game Studies: The International Journal of Computer Game Research, 1 (1). Available online at http://gamestudies.org/0101/eskelinen/ r " Eskelinen, M. (2001b). (Introduction) to cybertext narratology. In Eskelinen, M., & Koskimaa, R. (eds.), Cybertext Yearbook 2000. University of Jyvaskyla.
Saarijaarvi, University of Jyvaskyla Press.

Faulkner, W. (2001). The technology question in feminism: A view from feminist technology studies. In Women's Studies International Forum. Edinburgh:
Elsevier.

Frasca, G. (1999). Ludology meets narratology: Similitudes and differences

between (video)games and narrative. Originally published*in Finnish as Ludologia kohtaa narratologian in Parnasso (3). English version available online at http://www.ludology.org
Frasca, G. (2003a). Simulation versus narrative: Introduction to ludology. In Wolf, M.,
& Perron, B. (eds.), Video/Game/Theory. New York: Routledge

Frasca, G. (2003b). Ludologists love stories, too: notes from a debate that never took

place. Available online at http://ludology.org/articles/Frasca_LevelUp2003.pdf
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Giddings, S., & Kennedy, H.W. (2006). Digital games as new media. In Bryce, J., &
Rutter, J. (eds.), Understanding Digital Games. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.

Greenfield, P. M. (1996). Video games as cultural artifacts. In Journal ofApplied Developmental Psychology, 75, pp. 3-12. Grossman, D. (1999). On killing: The psychological cost of learning to kill in war and
society. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.

-124-

'3oudddfuoj

uoxpBijsqB jo pA3j uxbjjqo v '(q/,003) 'f 'lnnf
'SS3JJ

iyi '(/spa) *g 'suppy

puB uado uo :i^o§ b Jtioipi^ '&LOOZ) 'f 'lnnr

SV

'(·spa) -j 'ubSujbh ^ S'N 'ut

o; uoxptipoj^ui '(izOOZ) T 'lnnf
Vs

't[0dV3S9}[
3VUVQ

udjnduLOjfo
UO 9;0U J9Uq V 6

:sdipms

pU12

T

3l{£ '(8003) 'S
uoiivonpgm i[0JV3S3}[ jvpogfo yooqpuvjjui '

jo Xpn;s oiqdmSouqp uy :Au\d @ s|Ji£) *(q8003) 'S '

'2<tniinj 3ulvq A3}ndiuoj jqfjvujnof .'souivpnjgui -sssudjns

spuaS Suxzuoaqx '(^8003) 'S 'IP^O 9P ^ CT '

y

'(/spa) *

'H '
XI1AI u2lS3(J 31UV£)

UI 'uouaxuousqd
::5tJ0A

b sb A*Bjd jo souboxjxuSxs puB

'(9003) 'f
uo su9tutuvjSou({

^ 'dd) spxijfo
uiojj

9XUB§ 09pXA UB0XJ9Uiy

puBsnoqx 'sixvudpuv faodi{£ :udjv9S9j isimiuaffo yooqpuvjj '(LOOZ) 'M 'S 6.»qx

ib

UX USXUOAV A\9J OS

"1 'S9UXBH

Juul, J. (2009). Fear of failing? The many meanings of difficulty in video
games. In Perron, B., & Wolf, M. (eds.), The Video Game Theory Reader 2 (forthcoming).

Kafai, Y. (1996). Electronic play worlds: Gender differences in children's construction of video games. In Kafai, Y., & Resnick, M. (eds.), Constructionism in Practice: Designing, Thinking, and Learning in a Digital World (pp. 25-38).
Mahwah: Ablex.

Kaiser Family Foundation (2005). Kids & media @ The new millennium. Program for the Study ofMedia and Health. Available online at

http://www.kff.org/entmedia/1535-index.cfm Kucklich, J. (2002). The study of computer games as a second-order cybernetic system. In F. Mayra, (ed), Computer Games and Digital Cultures (pp. 101-111). Tampere
University Press.

Koster, R. (2005). A Theory ofFun. Scottsdale: Paraglyph Press.

Lahti, M. (2003). As we become machines: Corporealized pleasures in video games. In Wolf, M., & Perron, B. (eds.), The Video Game Theory Reader (p$. 157-170).
New York: Routledge.

Lindley, C. (2003). Game taxonomies: A high level framework for game analysis and design. Gamasutra. Available online at

http://www.gamasutra.com/features/20031003/lindley_01.shtml
Malliet, S. (2007). Adapting the principles of ludology to the method of video game content analysis. In Game Studies: The International Journal of Computer Game Research, 7 (1). Available online at http://gamestudies.org/0701/articles/malliet
Mateas, M. (2004). A preliminary poetics for interactive drama and games. In WardripFruin, N., & Harrigan, P. (eds.), First Person: New Media as Story, Performance, and Game (pp. 19-33). Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Mochan. (2006). The evil Summoner FAQ v.1.0: How to be a cheap ass. In Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (eds.), The Game Design Reader: A Rules ofPlay Anthology, (pp. 268-295). Cambridge: The MIT Press. Moulthrop, S. (2004). From work to play: Molecular culture in the time of deadly games. In Wardrip-Fruin, N., & Harrigan, P. (eds.), First Person: New Media as Story, Performance, and Game (pp. 56-69). Cambridge: The MIT Press. Murray, J. (1997). Hamlet on the holodeck: The future ofnarrative in cyberspace. New
York: The Free Press.

-126-

Murray, J. (2004). From game-stor>[ to cyberdrama. In Wardrip-Fruin, N., & Harrigan, P.
(eds.), First Person: New Media as Story, Performance, and Game (pp. 2-11).
Cambridge: The MIT Press.

PapaBoo. (2008). how do iplay game? -Adventures ofa Non-Gamer. Available online
at http://www.howdoiplaygame.com


Ray, S. G. (2004). Gender inclusive game design: Expanding the market. Hingham:
Charles River Media, Inc.

Reinharz, S. (1992). Feminist methods in social research. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Rheingold, H. (1991). Virtual reality. New York: Touchstone. Salganik, M., & Heckathorn, D. (2004). Sampling and estimation in hidden populations
using respondent-driven sampling. In Sociological Methodology, 34, pp. 193-239.

Saxe, J. (1994). Violence in videogames: what are the pleasures? Presented at the International Conference on Violence in the Media. St. John's University,
October 3-4.

Schumacher, P., & Morahan, M. (2001). Gender, Internet and computer attitudes and
experiences. In Computers in Human Behaviour, 17, pp. 95-110.

Simon, B. (2007). Never playing alone: The social contextures of digital gaming. In
Loading..., 1 (1).

Suits, B. (2006). Construction of a definition. In Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E.

(eds.), The Game Design Reader: A Rules ofPlay Anthology (pp. 642-669).
Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Taylor, T. L. (2006). Play between worlds: Exploring online game culture. Cambridge:
The MIT Press.

Thorson, M. (2004). Back seat driver: Vice City. In Compton, S. (ed.), Gamers:

Writers, Artists & Programmers on itie Pleasures ofPixels (pp. 162-166). New
York: Soft Skull Press.

Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York:
Simon and Schuster.

Wajcman, J. (1991). Feminism confronts technology. Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State
University Press.

-127-

Walkerdine, V. (2007). Children, gender, video games: Towards a relational approach to multimedia. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Wolf, M. J. P. (2001). The medium of the video game. Austin: Texas University Press.
Yates, S., & Littleton, K. (1999). Understanding computer game cultures: A situated approach. In Information, Communication and Society, 2, pp. 566-583.

Zumthor, P. (1994). Body and performance. In Gumbrecht, H. & Pfeiffer, K. L. (eds.), (Whobrey, W. trans.), Materialities of Communication (pp. 217-226). Stanford:
Stanford University Press.

-128-

