Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Water resource management in the southern Ontario region : water market simulations under scarcity conditions
Shane Pepin
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Environmental Sciences Commons Recommended Citation
Pepin, Shane, "Water resource management in the southern Ontario region : water market simulations under scarcity conditions" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 548.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

HP
OSS

WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN THE SOUTHERN ONTARIO REGION
WATER MARKET SIMULATIONS UNDER SCARCITY CONDITIONS

by Shane Pepin

Bachelor of Commerce, McMaster University Hamilton, Ontario, 2001

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Applied Science in the Program of

Environmental Applied Science & Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008 ©Shane Pepin 2008

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY OF

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for
the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or
individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Abstract
Water Resource Management in the Southern Ontario Region, Water Market Simulations Under Scarcity Conditions
By: Shane Pepin

Master of Applied Science, 2008

Environmental Applied Science and Management Ryerson University

Water resource scarcity is a increasingly important issue in many parts of the world. Population pressures, climatic changes, and general resource mismanagement are

placing increasing strain on water supplies that provide for ecosystems and economies
alike.

This thesis addresses the issue of water resource management with an investigation of

free market principles to effectively manage end-use demand.

A water market is

designed for the Southern Ontario region, which consists of a large central population
with extensive water use related to industrial, residential and agricultural users alike. A comparison to a traditional centralized utility model is used to measure market dynamics
and overall efficacy.

The results indicate that a free market system produces economic advantages to a utility model while still demonstrating an ability to reduce demand. The model also suggests

that the inclusion of certain end-use functions, such as agriculture, must be examined
carefully for a free-market model implementation.

in

Acknowledgements
To Professor Paul Missios for his support and encouragement throughout this process. His advice has helped shape and improve this thesis to what it is today.
To my wife Jennifer and son Jackson, who are the reason that I pursue my dreams.

IV

Table Of Contents

List of Tables and(Figures
List of Appendices Introduction Literary Review Data Sources Methodology Results Conclusions

vi
vii 1 .5 25 51 67 86

Appendix A: Regional Water Usage N Appendix B: Weather Data and Related Calculations. Appendix C; Market Summary Calculations References v.

89 91 92 96

List of Tables and Figures

Figure 1: Lake Ontario Drainage Basin Table 1: Durham Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics

Table 2: Peel Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics
Table Table Table Table 3: 4: 5: 6:

26 29

30

Halton Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics Hamilton Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics Niagara Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics Crop Grouping Summary

.,

Table Table Table Table Table

7: Regional Temperature Statistics 8: Base Evapotranspiration Rates by Region 9: Crop Co-Efficient by Crop Group 10: Crop Group Evapotranspiration Rates 11: Crop Group Water Requirements

.

Table 12: Effective Rainfall Reference Table (in inches) Table 13: 30-Year Historical Rainfall Rates by Region Table 14: Crop Group Net Irrigation Requirements (NIR) ^ Table 15: Crop Group Gross Irrigation Requirements (GIR) ?. Table 16: Regional Utility Rates Table 17: Crop Efficiencies and Pricing Table 18: Water Consumption Elasticities Table 19: Crop Demand Curve Statistics Figure 2: Graphical Representation of the Aggregate Demand Curve Figure 3: Graphical representation of net purchasers benefit Figure 4: Graphical representation of net benefit for full allowance sellers. Figure 5: Graphical representation of benefit for partial allowance sellers Table 20: Market Results Summary Table 21: Value Retention Summary Table 22: Monetary Benefit of a Water Market vs No Market - No Scarcity Table 23: Overall Value of the Water Market-No Scarcity Table 24: Movement of water under a Water Market - No Scarcity Table 25: Monetary Benefit of a Water Market vs No Market - 20% Scarcity Table 26: Overall Value of the Water Market - 20% Scarcity Table 27: Movement of water under a Water Market - 20% Scarcity Table 28: Monetary Benefit of a Water Market vs No Market-40% Scarcity Table 29: Overall Value of the Water Market - 40% Scarcity Table 30: Movement of water under a Water Market-40% Scarcity Table 31: Low and Mid Value Industrial Allowance Transactions .: Table 32: Monetary Benefit of a Water Market vs No Market-60% Scarcity Table 33: Overall Value of the Water Market - 60% Scarcity Table 34: Movement of water under a Water Market - 60% Scarcity Table 35: Percentage of Prescribed Allowances Purchased (Sold) Figure 6: Value Retention by User Group Figure 7: Value Retention by Region Figure 8: Share of Benefits by User Group Figure 9: Share of Benefits by User Group (normalized) Figure 10: Share of Benefits by Region Figure 11: Movement of Water by User Group... ^ Figure 12: Movement of Water by Region ^

31 .32 .33 34 37 39 40 41 42 44 44 .45 47 48 50 52 57 56 62 63 .65 67 68 71 71 71 73 73 73 74 75 75 .75 77 77 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85

VI

List of Appendices

Appendix A: Regional Water Usage Appendix B: Weather Data and Related Calculations Appendix C: Market Summary Calculations

89 91 92

Vll

Introduction

Central to the livelihood ofany individual, community or economy is the access to
reliable sources of water. Whether used as an input for agriculture and industry

or for general purposes such as drinking, cleaning and transportation, the scarcity of water would quickly inhibit the smooth functioning of any human ecosystem, regardless of scale. In addition, water serves as a critical element in
all natural ecosystems, making its value truly universal. As such, it is no surprise that we value water resources as being so critical to our well-being, either directly
or tacitly. As with all resources, however, successful management with a view

towards long-term sustainability and stability is paramount.

Currently, there are a number of issues, local and global, that have the potential for creating water scarcity for a number of population and economic
centres around the world. Increased population and economic consumption of
water resources can put a strain on a water resource base that may be more or

less fixed. Multiple examples of increased scarcity currently exist all over the
world. In China, the Yellow River, which contains 2% of the available national water supply and serves 10% of the Chinese population, is experiencing chronic

shortages that are drastically affecting rural water supply1. In California, a
combination of reduced snowfall conditions in for the the mountains, Colorado depleted and aquifers, relentless unprecedented ^drought river,

population growth are causing urban and agricultural shortages that have put

scarcity front and centre in the political landscape2. Even in Canada, which is
considered to be one of the most water wealthy nations on Earth, has issues of
water scarcity. In Alberta and Saskatchewan, increased immigration and

economic prosperity are leading experts to predict chronic shortages that will

exceed the severe conditions not seen since the dustbowl era of the 1930's3.

1 "Chronic Water Shortages Hit Rural Chinese Hard," Yellow River: A Journey Through China, narr. Robert Gifford, 2 "California Grapples with Water Shortage," Nation, narr. Ina Jaffe, National Public Radio, 15 Oct. 2007. 3 Schindler, D.W., and Donahue, W.F. "An Impending Water Crisis in Canada's Western Prairie Provinces,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 25 Feb. 2006,1. <www.pnas.org_cgi_doi_10.1073_pnas.0601568103>. National Public Radio, 12 Dec. 2007.

In addition, there are potentially negative effects on water resources for
many areas due to climate change. The IPCC in its Fourth Assessment Report, Working Group II (AR4 - WGII) provides evidence that glacial melt and changes

in precipitation patterns will have effects on water access for many regions4. The
potential combination of increasing demand and shrinking supply of a regional water resource can create scarcity issues that, if left unmanaged, will produce
significant strain.

Avoiding, or at least mitigating, the negative impacts of water scarcity requires that the water resource is managed efficiently and effectively. Water
management, on a macro scale, involves affecting the allocation or resources

among users in such a way as to provide for the requirements of the system. In practice, a number of strategies can be used for large scale water resource management. These include direct regulation, water banks, price manipulation
and water markets. Of these strategies, water markets alone represent a true

free market approach to resource management. The question remains, however,
whether a free market approach to managing a resource as critical as water can

be successful. In order to answer this question, this thesis will investigate the feasability of a water market versus current practice in one of the most user diverse regions in Canada; Southern Ontario. The Southern Ontario region comprises the largest population centre in Canada as well as one of the largest industrial and

agricultural bases in the country. This makes it a truly heterogeneous market for
water.

Previous studies of water markets have focused on the value of water in terms of its in-site value and costs of extraction. Additionally, valuing water has
been proposed by Ewers (2004a) to be a function of its contribution to end use

production, investigating

as

it

relates to

agricultural a

water

use.

Building

on

the

work

water valuation was

review of water markets themselves,

4 Kundzewicz, Z.W., LJ. Mata, N.W. Arnell, P. Doll, P. Kabat, B. Jimenez, K.A. Miller, T. Oki, Z. Sen and I.A.
Shiklomanov, 2007: Freshwater resources and their management. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and

Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on

Climate Change, M.L Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 176-180.

specifically Yoskowitz (1997) examination of the Rio Grande spot market.
Recently, work has occurred in a Canadian context with the Mahan et al (2002) study of a potential water market in southern Alberta. Each of these studies
provide a valuable context for which this thesis seeks to expand current ideas
concerning water management.

Water management analysis (both review and simulation) has typically

been limited to single sectors or water sources. This allows specific aspects of
water management to be examined in isolation, whether it is groundwater price analysis as in Moncur and Pollock (1988), agriculture small market scenarios

with Ewers, or surface water market review with Yoskowitz. This thesis will eliminate those restrictions and investigate the potential for a water market where there are multiple user groups, regions, water sources, and pre-existing pricing
schemes.

In order to accurately simulate a water market in the Southern Ontario region, a thorough review of literature concerning water markets and water

valuation

is

required.

Next,

water consumption

and

pricing

data

for the

municipalities of Toronto, Peel, Durham, Halton, Hamilton, and Niagara are

collected

to

accurately

portray

residential

and

industrial

water

use.

For

agricultural use, direct consumption data are unavailable. Therefore, crop data, weather history and generally accepted crop-hydrological principles are

combined to estimate^ agricultural water requirements.

Price data are then

collected using published utility rates for residential and industrial use and derived for agricultural use using published crop sales data. Pricing and usage data are then combined to determine the demand curves for each user of water
in the study area.

In addition, the general rules of the market and the scarcity scenarios that will be applied to Southern Ontario water resources will be described. With market definition, scarcity scenarios and demand curves are all clearly identified, such that a simulation of both market and non-market models can occur, with a comparison of how each performs with respect to each other and each scarcity scenario. The results of the simulation are then analyzed at the user, municipality

and aggregate level for each scarcity scenario to determine the potential benefits
of a free market approach versus the current water management system.

Literary Review

Initial studies of water pricing models focused on groundwater only, such as Moncur and Pollock (1988). In their analysis, a pricing model derived from

marginal costs of extraction and the in-situ5 value was used in comparison to the
current practice of average cost pricing derived from conventional accounting principles. It was found that most water utilities appeared to be artificially

suppressing water prices below their calculated in situ and extraction cost

values6. Calculating the price of water based on marginal extraction costs and
the in-situ value would result in a sharp jump in price. This was due mainly to the

perceived future costs of extraction that would result from an ever-increasing
need to switch to more expensive sources of water due to scarcity, and the

decreasing efficiency of extraction from current resources as they became depleted. The authors conclude that these findings indicate that a policy of
meeting water demand simply by augmenting supply may be incorrect. Instead,

the large price increases attributable to what the authors call a scarcity rent resulting from expected future extraction costs create the need for tighter water
demand management policies. The primary tool for implementing a policy for demand management would be the augmentation of price.

Ewers (2004b), in the second of three studies, reinforces these findings
with an application of the^JHotelling Valuation Principle (HVP), originally

developed for the valuation of oil reserves, to value municipal groundwater reserves. The valuation is based on using the current above ground value of

water for a particular source to estimate the value of that source's reserves.

According to HVP, the reserve price7 of water should be equal to the above
ground price net of extraction costs. The in situ value versus the above ground value is then used to determine whether optimal extraction rates (through the definition of HVP) exist for sites identified in the essay. The targets of this

5 In situ refers to the amount of a given resource not yet extracted that is considered recoverable. In situ value 6 Moncur, James E.T., and Richard L. Pollock, "Scarcity Rents for Water: A Valuation and Pricing Model," Land
7 Also known as "shadow price", "user cost", and "scarcity rent"
Economics Feb. 1988: 64,1. 68-69.

refers to the value of resources not yet extracted.

analysis are municipal water utilities that have available data for determining above ground water valuation (through share price) and measurable extraction rates. The key question that this essay attempts to answer is whether HVP is an
accurate tool to determine the value of in situ values.

The available data set that is used to test HVP's validity for water resource
valuation consists of 19 publicly-traded water utilities. The stock valuation,

income statement expenses, and extraction history are the primary sources of
data used to test HVP. Stock valuation is used to estimate in situ values of
reserves, whilst the income statement and extraction history are used in

formulating both above ground water values and extraction costs. Frequently,

water utilities operate in a sole-source environment, effectively making them
monopolies in a given region. Both perfect competition and monopolistic

scenarios are tested, covering both extremes of the competitive spectrum. Miller & Upton (1985) use a common formulation of HVP for oil resources,

which is used by Ewers as the litmus test to determine if the same principles for
oil can apply to the valuation of water. The formula then is used to evaluate whether HVP hold up for water resources is as follows:

V/R=a + p(p-c) where, V is the discounted present value of profits R is the total of ground water reserves available

p is the market price for groundwater
c is the marginal cost of extraction (3 is the comparison of increase in prices versus increase in the interest rate over
time

a is the intercept

Essentially, the assumption that HVP mates is that the value of reserves

as a function of volume should be equivalent to the present value of extracted resources. In other words, the growth in price should be directly offset by the
interest rate, creating a p value of 1. If (3<1, resource prices are rising less than
the interest rate. This will undervalue the reserves as the firm owner will perceive

that a specific unit quantity of a resource currently extracted has a greater value

than that same quantity in the future, discounted to present value. Therefore, in the case of water, this thesis tests whether the HVP applies and that the (3 value

is in fact equal to 1. Data were taken from an online database of publicly traded
companies for 9 water utilities. There is currently no market available to

determine a price for water such as the one that exists for other commodities
such as oil. Therefore, Ewers proposes using a formulation of total revenues and

total acre-feet of water extracted to determine revenue per acre-foot, which is
then used as the spot price. The results indicate that HVP does not apply for the valuation of water reserves as p<1 in all cases, except when considering a short-run scenario

where the reserve has less than a 5 year expected lifetime. The conclusion that can be drawn from this analysis was that HVP is not applicable for water
resources. The author has reasoned that this may be a function of how water itself is valued, specifically that the future production of ground water is less than

the current value of production. This reinforces the findings Moncur and Pollock (1988) and suggests that they method in which water is valued is not in line with
current accepted economic principles of resource valuation.
Further analysis on pricing has also been done by Schuck (1999), which examines pricing models on what is termed a conjunctive use system. Schuck

refers to

a

conjunctive

use

system

as

one

in

which

surface water and

groundwater resources can be exploited interchangeably. This thesis deviates from much of the earlier (and current) work with regards to water valuation, as it considers both surface and groundwater. A conjunctive use system is defined as a dual use system where groundwater is pumped to replace surface water under drought conditions and surface water is redistributed to the aquifer under wet

conditions (groundwater recharge). Schuck develops a theoretical model to
optimize water system pricing for an agricultural community that relies on both

surface water and groundwater in a^upply-based model. Based in Kern County, California, the model has the objective to maximize the benefit of users and
water agency under relevant supply constraints, similar to many of the studies

examined. The benefits of the agency are defined as maintenance of financial

obligations, aquifer stability and meeting customer demand. The benefits of the users are defined as profits for commercial and agricultural customers and
consumer surplus for residential users.

The water agency's system in this case is subjected to wet season and

drought conditions, which greatly affect thd supply of surface water. The demand
for surface water is defined as grower use and aquifer recharge (in wet years
only), whereas the demand for groundwater is defined as direct grower extraction

plus water agency extraction (in drought years). The total system maintains
balance through groundwater pumping or recharge under the corresponding wet

or dry seasons. The costs associated with water delivery, pumping or recharge
costs, and scarcity account for the major inputs of the pricing optimization
exercise.

Schuck makes a number of assumptions in order to perform the pricing

optimization exercise. First, the optimization occurs over a multi-year period, in

order to account for alternating wet, dry and normal rainfall seasons. Also, it's
important to note that groundwater pumping and recharge are mutually exclusive

events in any given year. An important assumption, and one that deviates from
normal practice in most cases, is the agency's ability to completely regulate groundwater usage. Water legislation and water rights normally give the

landowner the right to use water drawn from on property wells at their sole discretion so long as it does not adversely affect other users of that system. The model also assumes perfect information regarding users of the water agency for
surface water and groundwater.

In performing an optimization for water prices in a conjunctive use system,

Schuck concluded that a water district must reflect the following in order for the
optimization to be accurate:

1) Substitutability

between

sources:

This

includes

the

technical

substitutability through delivery systems, and a comparable quality of
groundwater to surface water, such that both are considered

sufficiently homogenous.

2) Marginal cost of pumping/recharging

3) Scarcity value of the surfaqe^water:

Most pricing mechanisms in

practice today do not take into account the availability of surface water in a given year when determining price.

4) In situ value of groundwater: Related to the supply and quality of
groundwater available to users in any given period.

Optimizing

the

price

of

water

for

a

supply

based

system

shifts

consumption away from drought periods to high supply periods for low-value

uses of water (ie. Fallowing). Furthermore, it was found that linking the price of

surface water to groundwater based on the available supply of each allowed the
district to shift usage to groundwater use in times of scarcity. In extreme cases of scarcity, a subsidy for groundwater could result in order to encourage a heavy preference of users to avoid surface water consumption. Conversely, in high-

supply periods of surface water, aquifer recharge8 is performed, with recharge
costs affixed to the price of groundwater, thereby providing an incentive to users
to avoid groundwater extraction in favour of surface water consumption. This

lowers groundwater usage, allowing aquifer stability objectives to be met.
Although the mechanisms that Schuck used to develop his optimization

do not involve water markets in the sense they will be discussed in this thesis,

manipulation of consumer demand was Clearly demonstrated. It is a valuable
result to demonstrate that waterusage shows the properties of substitutability
and price elasticity, providing additional avenues for which a proposed water market can investigate in order to achieve its goals. The consistent theme with many of the studies concerning the valuation of water resources is that the current practice employed by many water utilities does not take supply side factors in to consideration. The resulting effect is an undervaluation of water price, specifically in the case of groundwater, or a rigid price that does not reflect the current availability of water to a given system.

8 Aquifer recharge refers to the practice of pumping surface water resources into the aquifer in order to increase
groundwater reserves.

Study of water markets must first begin with the criteria that constitute an

effective market mechanism. Howe, Schumeier and Shaw (1986) began much of
the work concerning the theoretical foundations of water markets. In their thesis, they established six primary criteria upon which an effective water market is
based.

First there must be flexibility in the existing water supplies. This allows

water to be shifted from one user or application to another. Not all water in the system needs to be flexible, but a tradable margin must exist in order for the
market to function. Second, security of tenure for established users should exist.

Guaranteed continuity of use will ensure that users of the water will invest and

maintain water-using systems and markets. Third, the opportunity cost of the
resource must be apparent to the user. Having strict limitations on the amount of
use, or a competitive market where multiple users attempt to acquire a shared

resource will make this cost explicit. Fourth, the predictability of the outcome of
the process is required. Many users fear water markets because they cannot

anticipate

how extensive the

reallocation

might be

in

practice.

Fifth,

the

perception of fairness in the process must exist for all participants. This includes

the equality of compensation for all users as well as those that are injured at
points of diversion or return flows. Sixth, a socially responsible water allocation

process must be able to reflect values that may not be considered by individual users. Socially responsible water allocation generally refers to factors considered
non-market values, resulting in allocations that would benefit the common good. Water quality, in-stream flow requirements for recreational and ecological

purposes may generate increased value in terms of the public good, but not to the individual user. In order to create these allocations, market restrictions,

incentives or other mechanisms designed to
behaviours may need to be imposed.

reinforce socially responsible

Simpson (1992) adds to the theoretical foundations of effective water markets with four additional criteria. First, well-defined rights for water must exist,

including a title on record. This eliminates possibility of dispute over ownership of
the right. Second, a system of water measurement must be fully established in

10

order to ensure that market participants are receiving correct entitlements for tradable water. Third, an administrative body must exist to oversee the market such that any transaction in water rights is sanctioned by the relevant

government jurisdiction. Fourth, physical delivery of the commodity to the buyer

must be easy. The best market allocation systems function where infrastructure
is in place to all for smooth delivery.

Going beyond the theory behind effective water markets, work has also
been conducted on analyzing existing and potential markets. Yoskowitz (1997)
analyzed the current spot water market that exists along the Rio Grande River in

Texas. Specifically, transactions occurring between participants were studied in

detail to determine what factors were statistically significant in determining price.
Yoskowitz begins by a general review of Texas surface water laws, which

make provisions for priority rights of all users in the system. Prior Appropriation
rights exist in Texas water laws that give priority rights to users who have a

historical claim to usage. Therefore, land owners with the earliest established claim to water rights, based upon date of title of land, get their full appropriation

of water. In times of scarcity, newer claimants to water rights may not receive all
or any of their allocation, as priority users receive their fully allocated amounts

first. The Texas spot water market was created, in part, to overcome the clear
economic inefficiencies that exist under the Prior Appropriation rights system. With an understanding of the regulatory and legal constraints governing
the current spot water market in Texas, Yoskowitz performs a statistical analysis

of the market's participants and the transactions that occur to determine what
factors, if any, are affecting spot market prices for water. In order to accomplish
this, multivariate regression is used on the transaction data available. By using
multivariate regression, the following key questions were addressed:

·

Examine/explain variations in pripe/acre-foot (AF) for given individual
variables

·

Test for a convergence in the price/AF of various water user groups. (Mining vs Irrigators, Municipalities)

11

·

Provide explanations for the existence of price differentials that currently

exist in the spot water market, even for transactions with similar variable
sets.

Data for the analysis were available from the Rio Grande Watermaster Office (RGW), which records all transactions that occur in the water market. For the
period of 1991 to 1996, 926 observations are available. Each observation

contains six data points, constituting the variables used in the multivariate
regression analysis. The variables used are as follows:

·

PRICE: The dependent variable used in the analysis

·

SEA: Dummy variable - Denotes time of year of transaction (Season). A
value of 1 denotes that the transaction occurred during the high demand
period April-September, The value 0 denotes the transaction occurred in
the low demand period October-March

·

USE: Three dummy variables, with a value of 1 denoting the usage profile of the buyer- Municipal (MUN) (0,1), Mining (MIN) (0,1), Irrigation (0,1)

·

LOCATION: Dummy variable - Denotes if the buyer is located North (1) or
South (0) of Eagle pass

·

ARMS: Qualitative variable detailing the closeness of association of the parties involved in the transaction. Arms length (0), not at arms length (1)

·
·

ACRE FEET (AF): Amount of water purchased in acre-feet (AF).
p: Solved to determine each variables contribution to price

Using the data available and all six variables, three models each using multivariate regression are performed. The first model, labeled the ordinary model, uses an ordinary least squares regression to estimate the price function for the spot water market. Two iterations of the regression are run under this
model. The first uses all available transaction data, while the second iteration
removes observations where no sale price was observed. No sale price was

observed in 88 instances, most likely the result of water transfers between close
12

associates (ie. relatives, neighbours, etc.). Note that all further variations on the

regression model are based upon the 2nd iteration. The basic model is formulated
as follows, with the USE variable set as Irrigation unless otherwise denoted by
the variables MIN=1 or MUN=1 in the model:

PRICE = p0 + PiARMS + p2LOC + p3MIN + p4MUN + P5AF + p6SEA

With the basic model, only 43% of the variation is explained through the

regression analysis. Therefore, a more sensitive model is developed to better
explain the variation in price due to the observed variables. This model, labeled

the transformed model, contains three more iterations of the basic regression
model. The third iteration of the regression model logarithmically transforms the

dependent variable PRICE to better illustrate the effect any change in the
independent variables have on the model. In addition, a fourth iteration is

developed that tests the elasticity of price with respect to volume (AF). This
iteration logarithmically transforms both PRICE and AF. Finally, a fifth iteration is developed that tests the relationship between ARMS and AF, as well as LOC and AF. The reason for this is that both ARMS and LOC are assumed to interact with

AF in a way that is non-additive to the price/AF of water. Therefore, the fifth
iteration of the model also includes the terms P7ARMS*AF and P8LOC*AF.

For each of the five iterations of the regression model, different variables were found to be statistically insignificant:

2nd iteration: AF, SEA insignificant 3rd iteration: AF, LOC insignificant 4th iteration: LOC insignificant
5th iteration: AF insignificant
In order to again more accurately determine the effects of the statistically

significant variables under each regression model, the insignificant variables are

13

removed from the equation. This model, labeled the Restricted model, focuses
only on statistically significant variables.

Using the Transformed and Restricted^models, Yoskowitz is able to explain 60% of the variable PRICE through the regression of the other five

variables. Of the independent variables LOC, SEA, USE, and ARMS were found to be statistically significant. Yoskowitz is able to demonstrate, that under market
conditions, the price of water is subject to non-regulatory factors. Further analysis regarding water markets involved impact based analysis,

specifically comparing alternate types of water institutions and their ability to

achieve desired conservation goals. O'Connor (1999) for example, performed a comparison of a water bank versus a water market in meeting the stated goal of
maintaining minimum in-stream flow along the Snake River Basin (Colorado).
The minimum in-stream flow requirement is for riparian uses, including

recreational and ecological concerns.

A water bank is a centralized institution controlled by the water authority that purchases water for storage purposes so that it can be used in later years

and/or released back into the system to maintain minimum in-stream flow requirements. The central administrative body sets prices, and trade of water
rights between users is not permitted. Conversely, the water market involves pricing set by supply and demand forces, with users trading water rights amongst
each other.

The primary user of water in this study is agricultural use, which has been modeled in detail using crop data, hydrological data, and geographical detailing (storage capacity of the system, flow rates, etc.). The focus of the comparison is

each system's ability to transfer water from the user base back to in stream flow.
The analysis is performed under short run conditions, using one growing season.

O'Connor divides the basin under study into distinct regions. Each region is assigned rights for flow water and storage. Since the water used in agriculture is not wholly consumptive, return flows available are detailed, including which

region's outflow is another region's inflow. Using these data, the usage of water
is optimized for each individual region.

14

Both models are run under dry, normal and wet season scenarios to

determine their effectiveness under all possible levels of scarcity. In general, it is

found that the water market scenario, which allows trade between individual
users in a given region, are able to meet the in-stream flow requirements of the

whole system more consistently. The in-stream flow requirements are met under

the water bank scenario

only when

the

bank

prices

are

relatively

high.

Furthermore, during wet years, the bank is overpaying users for their water rights, which is economically inefficient. Conversely, with the water market
system, low value producers sold their water rights to high value producers,

maximizing

the

economic

performance

of the

system

and

simultaneously

lowering overall usage to meet in-stream flow requirements. In addition to the conclusions noted above, O'Connor further examined
water markets by comparing a consumptive versus diversionary rights market to

determine whicl^i is more efficient in meeting the goals of maintained in-stream

flow requirements. Both diversionary and consumptive markets behave in similar
manners with the difference being that in a diversionary market the holder of the water right can transfer the entire right to another eligible user. Under a

consumptive rights market, a right holder can only transfer the portion of water

actually used by the holder. In other words, the right holder cannot market water

that returns to the system naturally through usage. This distinction becomes
important in cases where use of the water is not wholly consumptive, such as in
agriculture.

The assumptions and models follow the same definitions in the previous
study, although the focus with this model is on dry years only. Not surprisingly,

both diversionary and consumptive use models show improvement over the base
case scenario in which no market exists. Greater benefit is shown under a
consumptive use market, however, as it prevents users from trading more water

than is actually consumed, mitigating losses to the system due to users having

differing consumptive values. O'Connor also concludes that the major drawback
in a consumptive use market is unfortunately the high information requirements.

15

By comparing water banks to water markets and then the differing elements of a
water market itself, O'Connor demonstrates the increased efficiencies a water

market system can potentially have. The efficiencies may be ecological or
economic as demonstrated by O'Connor.

Additional analysis of the specific elements of water markets includes the

effect of tradable permits in a river-based surface water market, and their effect

on localized availability and quality to users along the system. Weber (1999)
examines the mechanisms needed to optimize the allocation of consumptive water rights along a river system. Since a tradable permit system can often allow

for downstream users to transfer rights to upstream users fey way of acquiesced early diversion, intermediate users may be affected. This third party effect could
result from intermediate users not being able to meet their water requirements or having a lowered quality of product, as flow rate fs reduced in their vicinity.
Weber demonstrates that purchasing water from an upstream seller, increases

both water flow and water quality at the buyer's point of diversion, something that
cannot be said for the purchase of downstream rights. This effectively divides the market into two segments, upstream and downstream for each location. Using

Nash equilibrium, Weber demonstrates that it is optimal to use location-specific
pricing for each user.

Though optimal, it is conceded that there are drawbacks to this solution.

Users must be able to recognize that there are asymmetric benefits from purchasing upstream versus downstream rights. This creates a high information
requirement, since the benefit associated with upstream versus downstream

diversion must be measured at each specific site. Each user is also required to
have perfect information, to avoid increased transaction costs. Weber suggests a

double auction format for the market to combat this. In the double auction initial allocations are grandfathered to each of the participants who then buy and sell
from each other in a central organized market. Each participant must outbid the others in order to retain its initial allocation. The largest obstacle in creating this market is the legal manner in which water is currently allocated to each user.

Prior appropriation rights law, which governs many areas that water markets

16

have

been

studied

in,

protects

from

third-party

injury.

Under the

market

proposed, injury would apply as users may have to alter their water portfolios

based uporrfhe actions of other users.
Further analysis on the benefits of water markets can be found with Mahan et al (2002), with an examination of a market's effect in a Canadian setting^ Using Southern Alberta as the setting, Mahan et al experimented with

the welfare effects of an intra and inter-regional water market, with the goal of
mitigating edonomic loss to the system under normal and scarcity conditions.

This thesis covers the Oldman and Bow River basins, which cover the area of Calgary and east. The Bow and Oldman rivers flow eastward towards
Saskatchewan and merge into the South Saskatchewan river, just west of the border. The base case used to determine the economic effects of the water

markets applied is the current reality, which is a complete absence of any water
market in the region. The analysis and effects occur over the short run period, covering one full growing season (May to September). The mechanics used in the model are based upon the current hydrological system in existence, so that

the market functions in a way that does not require additional diversions or infrastructure to be considered practical. Historical in-stream flows and

hydrological data are used to determine a normal hydrological season as well as scarcity scenarios. Minimum flow rate constraints are also used to mimic the

current

requirements

of specific

users

such

as

recreation

and

ecological

functions. Minimum outflow rates are also used to stay within the legislated

requirements of the provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta, which require a

minimum inflow from the South Saskatchewan River into Saskatchewan. As with
previous studies, markets are assumed to be perfectly competitive, with water

demand and supply considered deterministic. Using a short-run model as Mahan
et al do, this assumption is realistic.

Users of the system are grouped into 16 activity nodes.

Nodes are

grouped geographically, into groups that share a common diversionary source from the system. Users are also categorized into distinct groups including urban, industrial, hydropower and agricultural. Each user group has a calculated or

17

estimated consumptive rate for water. Consumptive rates are important as each

user returns a proportion of water used back into the system. For the purposes of
this study, hydropower usage is deemed consumptive since water is stored for
the growing season for power generation purposes. Estimations are based upon best available data. Trading between users and groups is defined under two

distinct models. Under an intra-regional market, trading is allowed within each
node, but not between nodes. Under an inter-regional market, this restriction is
removed.

Using historical hydrological data, Mahan et al perform three scenarios for the Southern Alberta market under normal, surplus and scarcity conditions. A
scarcity condition is defined as a 25% effective precipitation level for the growing season, whilst a surplus condition is defined as a 75% precipitation level. The base case is defined as a 50% effective participation level. Under each condition (normal and scarcity), the base case, an intra-regional market, and an inter
regional market are applied.

The results of this analysis showed a material economic improvement

under the market scenarios when compared to the base case. Comparing Scenario 3, the inter-regional market, to the base case, improvement was shown under all three water availability conditions. Under a scarcity condition, total
economic improvement from the inter-regional market over the base case was found to be 14.8%. Under normal and surplus conditions, economic improvement was calculated at 6.3% and 2.6% respectively. Differences between inter

regional and intra-regional markets were negligible, with inter-regional markets showing little or no economic improvement over intra-regional markets. Mahan et
al presume that the negligible improvement demonstrated in scenario 3 over scenario 2 is attributed to the high diversity of individual users under each activity

node. Essentially, there exist sufficient market participants in each individual node such that economic efficiency can be fully or near fully maximized by trade within a node, creating little incentive to trade outside any particular node. If the

nodes were more homogenous, Mahan et al predict that a more^Histinctive result
between scenario 2 and 3 may exist. Given the results shown over scenario 1 by

18

both market scenarios, Mahan et al demonstrate the potential positive economic effects that instituting a water market can have, especially under scarcity
conditions that can exist in Alberta.

Ewers (2004a), in the first of three studies, uses Water District 21 the San kyis Valley (South
examination

Central

Colorado) as the study area for a
be valued based upon

pragmatic

of how water can

the output goods

(agricultural products) that it contributes to. Specifically, the economic benefit of
optimal cropping patterns and the mitigation of economic impact from water

shortages are examined. Both of these concepts are directly related to the price of material inputs, (i.e. water) Unlike O'Connor, ecological impacts are not
considered in this scenario.

The first decision was the geographic location for the

analysis as

mentioned above. A smaller market with a homogenous firm base was used to

allow for easy transfer of water between firms. For the purposes of a water market designed to encompass a large geographic area with a variety of firms,

transfer of materials becomes an additional variable that can affect equilibrium
price, logistical possibilities and resource equality. For the purposes of this study though, using a small market with a homogenous firm base allows this factor to be ignored. Furthermore, a limited number of different crop types exist in this region (Potato, Barley, Alfalfa, and Hay). This allows the author to easily optimize total market values as there are a limited number of products available to produce, and hence substitute. In addition, each firm has a homogenous crop with no mixing of Output product. The separate irrigation ditches that comprise the agricultural infrastructure of the district represent the firms in this model.
There are 74 firms in th§ district.

A smaller market was also used because a geographic area with limited
water supply helps accentuate water's value as a material input. Water scarcity allows for a clear illustration of how water valuation can be calculated. By

keeping the supply of water at a finite, and in some cases insufficient level, firms
are required to make a decision about what goods to produce, whether to

produce at all, or whether to sell their water to the market. In situations of water

19

abundance, or effectively an infinite short-run supply, the price of water may be

artificially suppressed. It is also important to note that the author does not focus
on water conservation whatsoever and makes the assumption that the firms will
use all available water.

The region chosen also has little or no regulation regarding the valuation

mechanics and transport of water within the given market. This allows the model to ignore regulatory and transfer costs, making the valuation model less complex
and allowing the focus to remain on the valuation of water. Ewers also establishes other key parameters that simplify the water

market model to better test impacts such as limited water supply and crop substitution. A prior appropriation model for individual firms, a "first in time, first in
right" approach governs the method of water rights and access to material inputs.

The basic principle is that in times of scarcity, those with "last in right" or "junior"
water right holders lose their access to water first.

The supply of water is also governed by a short-run supply model time frame of one year. This allows rigidity of the model in terms of crop optimization
by fixing the supply of water. With each season, the supply of water to a region

can vary greatly depending on environmental factors. Eliminating this variability allows the optimization model to remain static, with known water supplies at the beginning of the year and crop choice to remain fixed for the duration of the
model.

Before determining a water market model for the agricultural sector in the
study area, a crop allocation model was designed and employed to ensure the

most efficient use of resources. To set a realistic crop allocation model in the
short-run, Ewers has established a number of constraints. Six constraints are employed in the model, four dealing with minimums/limits on product output
volumes and two outlining land and water constraints. c

Crop allocation constraints in the model dictate lower and upper bounds

for each crop in terms of production volume. These were designed by Ewers to account for real life circumstances where there are physical, contractual and tertiary market considerations affecting what is produced. Without these

20

limitations, the optimal market scenario would be to produce the most profitable
crop in 100% of the available land. The total land available for farming is also

limited to 75% of total available acreage. This is designed to reflect the reality of
agricultural practice that requires land to be left "fallow" to maximize long-term land use maximization. The key constraint affecting the model is the amount of water made available to the system. This was set at the 1998 water supply level. After determining overall parameters and model constraints for the crop allocation model, data were collected from local and state sources to determine optimal cropping patterns. Data collected were the following:

1) Water Appropriation Dates of all firms

2) Available water supply for 1998. 3) Net Irrigation Requirements (NIR) for each crop type in the model 4) Cost per acre for each crop type 5) Average production value for each crop type, including price, yield, acres harvested, etc.

Applying the data to the crop allocation model under the parameters and constraints noted above, an optimal cropping pattern can be determined for the

District. The results of this essentially dictate that products with the highest profit/acre foot are maximized, while products with the lowest profit/acre foot are minimized, subject to the model's constraints. For District 21, each firm is allocated a particular crop type to produce, making the model mathematically and
geographically demonstrable.

Having determined the^optimal cropping pattern and hence profit/acre foot for each firm within the district, along with the amount of water required to do so

(based on the NIR values), the profit per unit of water can be determined. This is
determined by calculating acres of a crop per firm over the amount of water
required to produce said product.

With the knowledge of optimal cropping patterns and hence profit/unit of water available. A water market can be modeled. To model this market, the

21

author creates a fictitious situation in which total water available does not meet

current market requirements for 100% production (80% of capacity in this case).
The parameters regarding water appropriation rights then apply, leaving those

with "junior" rights without the required material inputs to produce their product.

Knowing the profit/acre foot of each firm, the relative supply and demand curves
for all firms in the model can then be determined, with those lacking water

representing the demand curve. Using these data, a clearing price that will

determine the value at which those with water wilf sell their supply to those
needing it, in place of producing the product can be determined. With the water market modeled under a water resource constraint, a
number of results occur:

1) Firms with prior appropriation rights have the ability to sell water to those
lacking it. The decision to sell is based upon the clearing price per acre-

foot of water versus the profit/acre-foot of producing their designated crop.
Firms who produce crops with lower-than-clearing-price product will make
the decision to sell.

2) Firms with "junior" rights are required to either purchase water from sellers
or do nothing. The decision to buy is again based upon the clearing price per acre-foot of water versus the profit/acre-foot of producing their designated crop. In this situation, firms who produce crops with values
higher than the clearing price will choose to buy.

3) Under this scenario, there is inevitable loss to the district as production is lost from firms unable to produce product due to lack of water rights and

the ability to purchase at a cost-effective price; or firms that decide not tof
produce product and opt to sell their water in the market.

4) When compared to a "no water market" situation under a water constraint

scenario to the "water market" scenario, overall value increase is realized.
This is due to the optimization to produce higher value crops and let lower
value crops go fallow until such time as water becomes abundant.

22

Ewers concedes that there may be issues in the transportation of water to
one firm from another due to limits on the physical delivery of water. For example, a downstream water rights owner who delivers water to an upstream

firm. Essentially, this becomes an issue of market size parameters as further
disaggregating can alleviate these issues using a smaller geographic base for
the market.

In general, the previous work discussed has taken one particular aspect of
water management in isolation or with other variables largely fixed or ignored.

The value in this approach is that it allows the analysis to focus on one particular

feature of water management or pricing in order to gain a full understanding of
the element in question. For example, earlier works of Moncur and Pollock

focused

purely on

pricing,

largely ignoring

the

application

of price on

a

heterogeneous user group. This work was continued by Ewers with investigation of in situ reserve valuation, absent of above ground market dynamics. Research
concerning markets themselves has been shown to focus on specific elements of

a market such as system guidelines (Hdwe, Schumeier and Shaw, 1986), and
transaction analysis (Yoskowitz, 1997). Full market simulation has occurred as

demonstrated

by

Ewers;

however,

in

this

instance

the

user

group

was

homogeneous, consisting of agricultural users in a controlled setting. Recent work has expanded the complexity of water market analysis, with Mahan et al

(2002) using the Southern Alberta region as the case study for a water market
simulation. In this system however, the physical flow of water is linear, originating

from two surface water sources, the Bow and Oldman rivers.
This thesis will attempt to simulate a water market under extremely

heterogeneous conditions. This will

be done in terms of geographic area

(Southern Ontario), resource end use (Grain growers, fruit growers, vegetable
growers, 3 types of industrial usage, residential usage), and source (includes

surface water and groundwater). In addition, 4 separate scenarios containing
separate degrees of water scarcity, ranging from no scarcity to 60% scarcity, will test both the effectiveness and robustness of the water market model. Therefore, this thesis will serve as an extension of previous study of water management by

23

examining water markets at a macroeconomic scale in order to determine the
efficacy of a free market model in a typical urban/rural mixed environment.

The next section will focus on the different data requirements and

techniques used to collect, derive, and analyze water use in order to prepare for
a market simulation. Following this, the market parameters and methodology are

described. Finally, the market simulation will be run and results will be discussed
at the individual, group and aggregate level.

24

Data Sources

Data available for residential and commercial/industrial water use are separated from agricultural water use due to the different water delivery systems each group uses. For the study region, residential and commercial/industrial water is provided by a combination of traditional public surface water pumping
stations, public groundwater wells and private wells. The majority of water

(greater than 98%) comes from public surface water transfers via the municipal

utilities9. Nationally, 89% of water supply is from surface water transfers10.
The study region consists of the Golden Horseshoe area of Southern

Ontario, specifically containing the regions of Niagara, Hamilton-Wentworth, Halton, Peel, Toronto, and Durham. These regions were selected for two

reasons. First, they consist of a wide variety of water end-user types, including

dense

residential,

commercial,

industrial,

large

scale

agriculture

and

rural

communities. Additionally, the majority of each region is within the Lake Ontario

Drainage Basin, which is depicted in green in Figure 1. With the majority of surface and groundwater draining into the basin, it is assumed that all users of
water within the regions of the study area ultimately share a common resource,

allowing them to be placed within a single water market for the purposes of this
thesis.

9 Calculated from the 2004 update for the Muncipal Water Use Database available from Environment Canada.
<http://www.ec.gc.ca/water/en/manage/use/e_data.htm>

10 "2004 Municipal Water Use Report," Environment Canada.

<http://www.ec.gc.ca/water/en/info/pubs/sss/e_mun2001. pdf>

25

Figure 1: Lake Ontario Drainage Basin

Water consumption data are provided by Municipal Water Use Database: 2004, a national survey of water utilities beginning in 2001. The data are obtained via detailed survey sent to each municipal and regional water authority.

Responses were collected and deposited into an online database available by

direct download. Responses were updated as new data is available, with data are recent as 2004. The data set itself is divided into individual cities and/or
municipalities and includes average daily flow for all areas included in this study.

Also included in the survey are details concerning the usage profiles of the study
area in terms of user group. The usage profiles consist of three categories:

Residential, Commerical/lndustrial and System Loss. For the purposes of this
thesis, these categories have been renamed Residential, Industrial and System
Losses.

Consumption data are reported as Average Daily Flow (ADF), which is the
daily average for each reporting area as a function of total annual consumption.

Seasonal variations in residential and industrial use are ignored for the market
since no reliable assumptions concerning demand variation in the study area
have been found.

26

For the study area, surface water withdrawals are primarily made from

Lake Ontario. Other surface water withdrawals are made from local rivers along
the study area to a small degree. However, even in these exceptional cases, all

flows are ultimately inbound to Lake Ontario. For the purposes of this study, all

stfrface water withdrawals are assumed to be directly from the lake.
Residential use is defined by water withdrawals made by users deemed

"Residential"

through

zoning

information

and

regional

utility classification.

Essentially, users who are on a residential utility payment scheme and inhabit
land zoned "residential" are classified as such.

Industrial/Commercial users have been amalgamated due to lack of

diversification in the base data set. The same rules have been applied for the base data set to correctly identify this user group. In order to account for the
varying utility of water to different commercial and industrial users groups, total usage has been subdivided into three distinct groups. These groups are

identified as "high-value users (HVU)", "medium value users (MVU)", and "low

value users tLVU)". This division is an attempt to accurately quantify the criticality
of water inputs to the underlying revenue stream subsequently generated by the
end users. Using a qualitative example, HVUs would include industrial processes such as bottling, distillation and other water intensive processes where there is
no economically viable substitute available. In addition, HVUs require water as an intrinsic part of the manufacturing process such that reductions in availability

result in a direct reduction in production. Conversely, LVU can be identified as
commercial or industrial users that have little or no direct requirement for water in

the production of their good or service. Qualitative examples of LVUs are retail
operations, service-based industries, and industrial processes requiring little or no water as a direct or indirect input. MVUs are an attempt to capture processes

that fall in between the two extremes, where water is a secondary input, or
primary input with alternative inputs available.

For all regions in the analysis HVUs, MVUs, and LVUs are allocated equal
weighting, each receiving one-third of total water available. Information on the approximate share by region for each user group is unavailable at this time. It is

27

f

recommended for future study that greater resources be applied to reflect a more
accurate industrial representation of users for regional level analysis.

The third "user" defined in the municipal water database is labeled

"System

Loss" and

signifies extracted water lost in the

preparation

and

distribution to end-users. Sources of system lost include inefficiencies in the initial extraction process and leakage existing in the distribution network. While
system losses are a valuable metric in determining potential efficiency

improvements in the water distribution system, they are discounted for the

purposes

of the

market

design.

It

is

also

assumed

that

no

efficiency

improvements will occur during the market cycle in this analysis, eliminating a
potential non-market source of water and fixing capacity.

Annual reporting required by the government of Ontario for all regional and municipal water authorities was also used to cross-reference and validate

data collected in the online database. The annual reporting requirement focuses
mainly on water quality and public maintenance issues, but does contain gross

usage statistics for many of the surface water pumping stations and public groundwater wells included in this study. When discrepancies exist between the online database and annual reporting data, the online database is used given
that its focus is specifically on water use statistics rather than other non-use
related issues found in the annual compliance reporting.

Large sections of all but one region (Toronto) in the model contain

significant amounts of agricultural land. Irrigation techniques in the southern Ontario area primarily consist of two water delivery mechanisms. For agricultural land that is significantly close to surface water sources including Lake Ontario
and various river systems, a direct surface water irrigation approach is viable. This system consists of irrigation channels and reservoirs used by agriculture to supply fields directly via crop water delivery mechanisms. The alternative

irrigation method consists of groundwater supply delivered through^private well

systems. A private well is normally owned by a single farm or a collaboration of
geographically concentrated farms for common use. As with surface water
irrigation, final delivery of water is via a crop water delivery system.

28

Crop water delivery systems can vary by crop and location, but typically

include sprinkler and drip irrigation delivery methods. Though irrigation methods can vary from farm to farm, technological levels in the study area are considered advanced. Therefore, in line with more efficient irrigation systems, an irrigation efficiency ratio of 90% is used. This translates into 90% of irrigated water used
reaching the desired crops for beneficial use, with 10% considered "System

Loss"11.
Due to the nature of the water delivery systems of agriculture land use in

the area, direct metering of water use is an impractical notion. This results into a lack of direct water use measurement available for the study area. In order to derive agricultural water use to a level useful for the market model, however, a
region and crop level data set is required. To accomplish this, water use by

region and crop are calculated using a series of formulae and data based upon
weather, crop sales, crop acreage, biological crop data and solar irradiance. To derive agricultural water use, the Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food

and Rural Affairs (OMAFRA) provides crop data detailing total acreage and
production by crop. OMAFRA updates these data on an annual basis, with 2004

data available for this thesis. Data are available for all commercially grown crops
in the region with harvest dates occurring within the given calendar year. The

following table illustrates crop production by region for all crops in 2004.

Table 1: Durham Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics Crop Type Harvested Area (acres)
1,138

Marketed Production ('000 kgs)
12,130

Marketed Average Yield/acre Price ($/kg) ('000 kg/lb)
10.66 0.41

Market Value ($'000)
5,028.0

Apples.. Grapes

Peaches Strawberries Cabbage
196 200

400
2,966 382 257 408

2.04 14.83
14.69 14.29 0.37

2.43 0.21

970.0
621.0 58.0 62.0

Carrots
Onions White Beans

26
18 1,100

0.15 0.24
0.46

0.9

11 Brouwer, C, Heibloem, M., Prins, K. Irrigation Scheduling. 1989, Food & Agricultural Organization, 27 April
2007. <http://www.fao.org/docrep/T7202E/t7202e00.HTM>. Annex I.

29

Potato

200
69 70

1,361 2,131 80 112 2,123

6.80 30.89

0.22 0.14 4.96

295.0 296.0 398.0 74.0 285.0

Tomato Tobacco Green Beans
Peppers

1.15
7.50
4.72

15
450

0.65
0.13

Sweet Corn

Crop Type

Harvested
Area

(acres) Barley Canola
Fodder Corn
8,500

Average Marketed Marketed Yield (bu/ac) Productio Production Price ($/tonne) n ('000 bu) ('000 tonnes) 61
36 15 120 2.8 519 324
77

Market Value ($000) 1,153
1,402 1,636 13,257 20,095 830 773

11.3 7.3 69.9 123.9

102 192 23.4 107 112.2 100 138 232 156 139

9,100
5,200

Grain Corn Hay
Mixed Grain

40,500
70,900 6,700 4,400

4,878 197.4 456 362 1,476 43 1,584

179.1
8.3 5.6 40.2

68
82 34 39 69

Oats Soybeans
Spring Wheat
Winter Wheat

43,100
1,100 22,800

9,326
187 5,991

1.2 43.1

Table 2: Peel Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics
Crop Type
Harvested Area (acres)
242

Marketed Production ('000 kgs)
2,590

Marketed

Yield/acre ('000 kg/lb)
10.70

Average Price ($/kg)
0.41

Market Value ($000)
1,074.0

Apples
Grapes

Peaches Strawberries Cabbage Carrots Onions
White Beans
100 150 28 45 1,225 889 0.45 8.16 31.75 0.02 0.22 0.14 0.1 3 79

179

2.27

2.41

433.0-

Potato Tomato Tobacco Green Beans

263.0
121.0

Peppers Sweet Corn

109

522

4.79

0.14

72.0

30

Crop Type

Harvested Area (acres) 4,100
300

Yield Marketed Marketed Average (bu/ac) Productio Production Price

Market Value

n ('000 bu) ('000 tonnes)
62
45 22 255 14 5.6

($/tonne)
102

($'000)
571 58 1,189 1,990 10,996 90 69

Barley

Canola
Fodder Corn Grain Corn

0.3
50.8

192
23.4 107 112.2 100

2,600
6,200 41,000 800 ^

56
734 108

118
2.6

18.6
98 0.9 0.5 15.5 1.2 9.5

Hay
Mixed Grain Oats

59
61 37

48
30 571

500 15,300 1,100 5,200

138
232 156

Soybeans Spring Wheat Winter Wheat

3,596
187

39
67

43
350

139

1,321

Table 3: Halton Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics

Crop Type

Harvested Area

Marketed
Production

(acres) Apples
271

('000 kgs)
2,901

Marketed Average Yield/acre Price ($/kg) ('000 kg/lb)
10.71 0.42

Market Value

($·000)
1,215.0

Grapes Peaches
Strawberries
125 272 1,481 2.18 14.51 2.42 0.22 658.0

Cabbage Carrots Onions White Beans Potato
Tomato Tobacco

102

320.0

700 47

227

0.32 31.75 2.86 4.90

0.22 0.14 0.41 0.14

0.5

1,492 280
1,225

204.0 116.0 170.0

Green Beans
Peppers

98
250

Sweet Corn

Crop Type

Harvested Area (acres)
400

Yield Marketed Marketed Average (bu/ac) Productio Production Price n ('000 bu) ('000 ($/tonne)

Market Value ($'000)
51 19

tonnes)
Barley Canola

61s41 23 112

24 4 11.7

0.5
0.1 10.7 35.5

102 192 23.4 107 112.2

100
500

Fodder Corn

250
3,799 1,975

Grain Corn
Hay

12,500
8,600

1,398
19.4
31

2.3

17.6

Mixed Grain Oats

1,500 22,700
300 7,300

62 33 33 60

93 740 10 435

1.7
20.1 0.3 11.8

100

170
0

138
232 156 139

Soybeans
Spring Wheat

4,663
47 1,640

Winter Wheat

Table 4: Hamilton Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics

Crop Type

Harvested
Area

Marketed
Production

Marketed Yield/acre
10.70 3.71 3.82 2.22 14.97

Average

Market Value

(acres) Apples Grapes Peaches
Strawberries Cabbage

('000 kgs)
5,995 2,590 65

('000 kg/ib)

Price ($/kg)
0.42 0.89

($'000)
2,537.0
2,296.0

560
699 17 94
364

1.17
2.43

76.0
508.0 1,177.0

209
5,449

0.22

Carrots Onions White Beans

Potato
Tomato Tobacco
Green Beans
Peppers

1200 155 251 80 578

8,437 5,006

7.03 32.30 2.81
7.57

0.22 r

1,827.0

0.13
0.42 0.67 0.14

673.0
296.0 405.0 385.0

706
606
2,727

Sweet Corn

4.72

Crop Type

Harvested Area (acres)

Average Marketed Marketed Yield (bu/ac) Productio Production Price ($/tonne) n ('000 bu) ('000 tonnes)
46 32 5.3 0.7 102 192

Market Value ($'000)
71 0 112

Barley Canola Fodder Corn

700 300 17,100 19,500 600 1,900 27,500 7,300

18
115 2.8 72

4.8
49.8 49.5
0,8

23.4
107
112.2

Grain Corn
Hay
Mixed Grain

1,959
54.6

5,329
5,554 80 248 5,638 47 1,557

43
115 892 10 411

100

Oats Soybeans Winter Wheat

61
32

1.8
24.3 0.3

138
232 156 139

Spring Wheat 200

51
56

11.2

32

Table 5: Niagara Horticulture and Field Crop Statistics

Crop Type

Harvested Area (acres)

Marketed Production ('000 kgs)
8,313 51,043

Marketed Yield/acre

Average Price ($/kg)
0.42 0.90 1.13

Market Value ($·000) 3,482.0 45,800.0
23,938.0

('000 kg/lb)
10.80
3.71 4.29 2.22 14.83

Apples Grapes
Peaches

770 13,740 4,923

21,125
289

Strawberries Cabbage Carrots Onions White Beans Potato Tomato
Tobacco

130
72
-

2.43
0.21

701.0
226.0

1,068

112

3,577

31.93

0.13

481.0

Green Beans
Peppers
24 281

181 1,345

7.56

0.65 0.14

118.0 190.0

Sweet Corn .

4.79

Crop Type

Harvested Area (acres) 100

Yield Marketed Marketed Average (bu/ac) Productio Production Price n ('000 bu) ('000 ($/tonne) tonnes)
51 15 112 5 73.9 0.1 67

Market Value ($'000)
10

Barley

102
192 23.4 107

Canola Fodder Com Grain Corn Hay Mixed Grain
Oats Soybeans

0
1,568

4,800
15,900

1,776
87.4 33 30

45.1
79.3 0.6

4,826
8,897 60 69

41,700 600
500

2.1
55 60

112.2 100
138 232 156 139

0.5
62

60,000
100 11,800

38
50 47

2,277
5 553

14,384
16

Spring Wheat Winter Wheat

0.1 15

2,085

All of the crops grown in the study regions have been grouped into three
distinct categories. This has been done in order to simplify the market processes

and get a larger market size for agricultural water segment to better display the market model's function. Crops are grouped into categories sharing similar properties to create homogeneity as much as possible. Initially, field crops are separated from horticultural crops as shown in Tables 1-5, referred to as

33

"Grains". Horticultural crops are then subdivided into "Fruits" and "Vegetables" to provided further specification. The reclassification of each crop group and
characteristics that comprise each group are shown below.

Table 6: Crop Grouping Summary
Category

Crop Type

Crop Names
Apples

Average Value

Growing Cycle
-180 days

Fruits

Horticulture

Grapes Peaches Strawberries*
Cabbage

>$0.40 / kg

Carrots Green Beans
Horticulture

Vegetables

Onions Peppers
Potato

<$0.40 / kg

-120-150 days

Sweet Corn Tobacco** Tomato White Beans
Barley Canola Fodder Corn Grain Corn Grains Field Crop Hay Mixed Grain Oats Soybean
Wheat

-$0.10/ kg

-150 days

*Strawberries have a 90 day growth cycle

**Tobacco is valued at ~$5.00/kg, but does not occur in significant quantities in the study area

Crop

Types

follow

those

provided

by

OMAFRA

for

categorizing

agricultural products. Average price is also provided by OMAFRA farm statistics.

Growing cycles were obtained from the Farmer's Administration Organization
(FAO), which is an international body dealing with agricultural matters. For the

purposes of this analysis, crop type and price served as the primary drivers for
the categorizations used. Crop value are considered constant and do not factor
in any crop specific price fluctuations, such as what is currently occurring in corn

and field crops due to biofuel demand in North America12.
12 Wiggins, Jenny. "Rising Biofuel Demand Pushes Up Crop Prices", Financial Times 19 July
2006.
34

Given a complete set of agricultural production levels for the entire study
region, a comprehensive account of water use can be derived. Irrigation water

use for a given area is the sum of each individual crop group's water requirement
less the sum of water made available through natural processes such as rainfall.

Net Irrigatijdri requirements (NIR) for each crop can be summarized as follows:
(source, FAO)

(1)

NIRC = (Re -ETC), where;

NIRc = Net Irrigation Requirements, for crop (C),

Re = Effective Rainfall,
ETc = Evapotranspiration for crop (C)

Total or gross irrigation requirements (GIR) can be determined based upon net irrigation requirements and the efficiency of the irrigation techniques and technology being used. As mentioned earlier, it is assumed that high

efficiency irrigation methods are being used, resulting in 90% irrigation efficiency. The evapotranspiration rate (ET) is the combination of two bio-chemical
processes occurring for a given crop that determines the rate of water use and dissipation over time. Evaporation is the process of liquid water conversion to water vapour by means of interaction with sunlight occurring on the soil surface,
canopy or water body. This is important for determining irrigation requirements,

as a percentage of water received to the crop surface will be lost to evaporation

before it can be beneficially exploited by the crop. Factors affecting evaporation
rates are many, including wind speed, ground cover provided by plant species

(i.e.

crop

ground

cover),

temperature,

humidity,

and

sunlight

intensity

(irradiance)13.
The other process affecting evapotranspiration rate is the amount of
transpiration occurring. Transpiration accounts for the movement of water within

computing crop water requirements" FAO Irrigation and drainage paper 56.1998, Food & Agricultural Organization. 27April 2007. <http://www.fao.org/docrep/X0490E/X0490E00.htm>, Chapter 1.

13 Allen, Richard G., Pereira, Luis S., Raes, Dirk, Smith, Martin. "Crop Evapotranspiration - Guidelines for

35

a plant and the subsequent loss of water as vapour through stom^ta in its leaves.

As with evaporation, transpiration rates are affected by: wind speed, sunlight

intensity, temperature, humidity. Plant type, size and surface and subsurface soil

conditions also affect transpiration14.

Evapotranspiration is normally expressed as mm*day"1 and can be
considered the rate of loss of water over a given surface area. As one hectare of

land contains 10,000m2 and 1 mm is equal to 0.001 m, a loss of 1 mm of water

corresponds to a loss of 10 m3 of water per hectare. In other words, 1 mm day"1
is equivalent to 10 m3 ha"1 day"1. Evapotranspiration can also be expressed in
energy form as energy received per unit area. The energy refers to the energy or

heat required to vaporize free water. This energy, known as the latent heat of
vaporization (L), is a function of the water temperature. For example, at 20°C, L

is about 2.45 MJ kg"1. In other words, 2.45 MJ are needed to vaporize 1 kg or

0.001 m3 of water. Hence, an energy input of 2.45 MJ per m2 is able to vaporize
0.001 m or 1 mm of water, and therefore 1 mm of water is equivalent to 2.45 MJ

m"2. For this thesis, both of these equivalencies will fee used.
It is experimentally difficult to determine the amount water loss attributed to evaporation or transpiration separately, so for practical purposes, each
process is combined into the single mechanism of evapotranspiration to

determine a plant's water requirements.

There are a number of formulaic and empirical methods to determine

evapotranspiration rates for given crops in given soil condition, each with benefits and drawbacks. For this analysis, a formulaic approach is used that relies on

temperature, solar intensity and crop type to determine a base ET rate from
which individual crop ET rates can be derived. The base evapotranspiration rate can be expressed in the form of the Hargreaves ETo equation:

(2)

ETo = 0.0023 (Tmean + 17.8)(Tmax - Tm,n)0-5 Ra , where;

ibid

36

ETo

= the base evapotranspiration rate for standard grass crop expressed in

mm* day'1;
= Mean temperature expressed in °C
= Observed maximum daily temperature expressed in °C

Tmin

= Observed daily minimum temperature expressed in °C

Ra

= extraterrestrial radiation expressed in mm day"1
Temperature data are available from the Canadian national weather office

in the form of monthly daily, maximum and minimum temperature readings. Daily

temperatures for each month are averaged over a 30-year historical dataset to provide a monthly temperature average.

Table 7: Regional Temperature Statistics

Region: Durham

Latitude: 43° 52.200" N Longitude: 78° 49.800" W Elevation: 83.80 m
J
-1.4

Climate ID: 6155878

Temperature (°C)
Mean Max

F
-0.6

M 0.1
4.1

A

M

J

J

A

S

O

N 4.0

D

-5.3 ,,, -4.4

6.3
10.5

12.3 17.2 20.3 19.6 15.5 9.2

-2.0 1.5 -5.4

17.0 21.9 25.0 24.0 19.7 13.1 7.2

Min

-9.2

-8.2

-3.8

2.0

7.6

12.4 15.5 15.2 11.2 5.2

0.7

Region: Peel, Toronto Latitude: 43° 40.800" N Climate ID: 6158733 Longitude: 79° 37.800' W
Elevation: 173.40 m
J F M

Temperature (°C)
Mean Max
Min Region: Halton

A 6.3

M

J

J

A

S

O

N 3.2

D

-6.3
-2.1

-5.4
-1.1

-0.4
4.1

12.9 17.8 20.8 19.9 15.3 8.9

-2.9 0.9

11.5 1.0

18.8 23.7 26.8 25.6 21.0 13.9 7.0 6.9
11.9 14.8 14.0 9.6 3.9

-10.5

-9.7

-5.0

-0.7 -6.7

Latitude: 43° 28.800" N
Elevation: 86.90 m

Climate ID: 615N745 Longitude: 79° 37.800" W

Temperature (°C)
Mean

J

F

M

A 6.2 11.2 1.2

M

J

J

A

S

O

N
3.9 -0.1

D -1.8
2.3 -5.9

-4.9

-4.2

0.1

12.1 17.5 20.7 20.0 15.5 9.3 6.6 12.0 15.3 14.9 10.2 4.5

Max Min

-0.6
-9.2

0.2
-8.7

4.7
-4.4

17.6 23.0 26.2 25.1 20.8 14.0 8.0

37

Region: Hamilton Latitude: 43° 10.200' N Dlimate ID: 6153194 Longitude: 79° 55.800' W
Elevation: 237.70 m

Temperature (°C)
Mean -8.0 -5,2

M
-0.3

M

A

O

N

D

6.3

Max Min

-2.2

-1.2

4.0

11.2
1.2

12.9 18.0 20.8 19.8 15.5 9.1 3,3 18.5 23.7 26.3 25.1 20.7 13.8 7.0

-2.7
0.9
-6.2

-91

-9If

-4.5

7.3

12.4 15.1 14.5 10.2 4A

-0A

Region: Niagara

Latitude: 43° 7.800' N
Elevation: 182.90 m

limate ID: 6135638 Longitude: 79° 4.800' W

Temperature (°C)
Mean

M
-4.5 -1.0
-7.9

M

O

N

D

-4.1 -0.5

1.0 5.1
-3,2

7.3
12.2
2.4

Max Min

14.0 19.1 22.3 21.4 16.9 10.6 4.7 19.3 24.2 27.2 26.0 21.3 14.7 8.0
8.6 13.9 17.2 16.7 12.5 8.4
1.3

-1.4
1.9
-4.1

Extraterrestrial

radiation

(Ra)

is

normally available through

publicly

available information for many geographic locations. Alternatively, it can be derived using the following formula, provided by the Food and Agriculture
A "-

Organization of the United Nations (FAO):

(3)

Rs = 0.7 Ra - b, where;

Rs = Solar radiation, expressed in IMJ m"2 day "1;

Ra = Extraterrestrial radiation, expressed in IMJ m"2 day ~1;
b = Empirical constant of 4 IMJ m"2 day "1
Natural Resources Canada provides an average level of solar radiation of

14 IMJ m"2 day "1 for most of the southern portions of Canada where major
population centers are located. Given solar radiation and the empirical constant

b, which accounts for cloud cover, extraterrestrial radiation can be derived.

Solving for Ra, a value of 25.71 IMJ m"2 day "1 is obtained. This can be converted

to an evapotranspiration compatible metric, given that 1 MJ m"2 day ~1 is
equivalent to 0.408 mm day"1. Using this conversion rate, Ra is calculated at

10.49 mm day"1.
38

Given the relatively small geographic size of the study area, it is assumed
that a single value for solar radiation, and hence extraterrestrial radiation is sufficient. Furthermore, there is a relationship between temperature and radiation
levels that is not taken into account. A more accurate reflection of solar radiation

levels can be derived through direct measurement, however, this is outside the
scope of the analysis.

Using solar radiation and regional temperature measurements over the
past 30 years, the base evapotranspiration provided in equation 2 can be calculated for each region.

(2)

ET0 = 0.0023 (Tmean + 17.8)(Tmax- Tmin)ut5 Ra

Table 8: Base Evapotranspiration Rates by Region

ET0(mm*day1)
Region: Durham
Region: Peel, Toronto Region: Halton
Region: Hamilton

April
1.70

May
2.23

June
2.60

July
2.83 3.23

Aug.
2.68

Sept.
2.34

1.88

2.56 2.39
2.48

2.95
2.83 2.90

3.10

2.70 2.62 2.60

1.83
1.84

3.07
3.12

2.91
2.95 2.88

Region: Niagara

1.90

2.51

2.86

3.06

2.48

Using base evapotranspiration rates calculated in Table 8, crop specific ET rates

can be derived. To calculate crop specific evapotranspiration rates (ETC), the
following formula is used:

(4)

ETC = ET0 * Kc, where;

ETc = Evapotranspiration rate for each individual crop, expressed in mm day"1; ETo = Base Evapotranspiration rate, expressed in mm day"1;
Kc = Crop coefficient for each individual crop

As stated

previously,

crops were amalgamated

into 3 distinct crop

groupings, ^ach grouping contains crops sharing similar characteristics of
growing^ time, crop co-efficients, yield and plant characteristics. Crop specific
39

evapotranspiration rates are applied to the group as a whole for the purposes of
this analysis. ^

Crop groups have simply been labeled as fruits, vegetables, and grains.

For each group, an average crop co-efficient has been calculated for each stage of crop growth. Each crop group has also been assigned growth stage lengths
divided into initial, mid, and end stages. The exception to this is with grain crops,

as the majority, with the exception of winter wheat, does not have a discernable
initial stage requiring a unique crop coefficient. For each group, the crop co

efficient is calculated by applying the length of the growth stage, in days, to the
crop co-efficient for that stage. Each weighted stage-level co-efficient is then amalgamated into an average crop coefficient for the entire growing season. The
results are presented below.

Table 9: Crop Co-Efficient by Crop Group
Initial
Growing Period

Kc ini
0.65 0.65

Mid Growing Period (days)

Kc MID
1.00
1.10

End Growing Period (days)
50
30

f\CEND

Days)

Total Growing Period (days) 180
140 135

Average

Kc
0.91 0.98 0.83

Fruit Grain

30

100
80

0.90
1.00

Vegetable 30

105

0.95

35

0.40

Using equation (4), each crop group specific evapotranspiration rate (ETc) is calculated for all months and regions of the analysis. The results are presented
in Table 10. Using an average crop coefficient across time and crop type creates

two potential smoothing functions, eliminating water demand

peaks during

summer months, and moving all individual crop water requirements to a central average. Water demand peaks are somewhat reinforced through higher base evpaotranspiration rates in hotter months; however, the peaks are lower than

they would be otherwise. This is compensated by a higher than normal water requirement in the initial and end months for crops. Unfortunately, for the study
area, the early spring months have a relative abundance of naturally occurring water through increased rainfall and lower temperatures, masking the higher crop

40

requirements present via crop coefficient smoothing. This is primarily due to the

fact that the amount of water available for crops exceeds the crop requirements

despite the increased demand through Kc smoothing. This cannot be said for the
summer months when evapotranspiration rates become elevated, exceeding available water occurring naturally. Therefore, irrigation requirements for the system may be potentially understated as smoothing effects are generally recognized in time periods where there is downward pressure on actual water
requirements due to the use of an average crop coefficient.

Table 10: Crop Group Evapotranspiration Rates
Durham April

May 2.2 2.0
2.2

June 2.6 2.4 2.6 2.2

July 2.8
2.6

Aug. 2.7
2.4 2.6

ETo (mm * day1) 1.7 ETc (mm * day1)
Fruit
1.5

Sept.
2.3
2.1

Vegetable Grain
Toronto, Peel

1.7
1.4

2.8 2.3 July

2.3 1.9 Sept.

1.8 May

2.2 Aug.

HBNHi
ETC (mm* day1)
Fruit Vegetable
Grain
Halton

April

June

1.7
1.9 1.6

2.3
2.5 2.1

2.7
2.9 2.4

2.9
3.2 2.7

2.8
3.0 2.6

2.5
2.6 2.2

April

May

June

July

Aug.

Sept.

ETc (mm * day"1)
Fruit Vegetable Grain
Hamilton

W^«gltl»lilggglfil^BiiMH
1.7 2.2 2.6 2.8 2.7 2.4

1.8
1.5
April 1.8

2.4
2.0 May

2.8
2.3

3.0
2.5
July

2.9
2.4

2.6
2.2

June

Aug.
3.0 ,

Sept.

ETc (mm *day"n)
Fruit ^
1.7

1 t''2.#f:£.
2.3
2.4 2.1 2.7

2.8
3.1

2.7 2.9
2.4

2.4 2.6 2.2

Vegetable
Grain

1.8 1.5

2,9
2.4

2.6

41

Niagara

April

May

June

July

Augy

Sept.

eamsm
ETc (mm *
Fruit Vegetable Grain

day"1)

9m
1.7 1.9
1.6

iffifflmm§3.1
2.3 2.5 2.1

:
2.6 2.8 2.4

mm
2.3
2.4

2.6
2.8

2.8

3.0 2.5

2.4

2.1

With crop groupings and evapotranspiration rates now available, each
crop group's monthly water requirement can be calculated. Evapotranspiration

rates are a function of the water lost due to evaporation and transpiration

processes in a given day. Therefore, daily rates can be extrapolated to monthly
rates in a straightforward manner. Table 11 provides the monthly and season

total water requirements for each crop grouping on a per acre basis. Therefore,
the values can be interpreted as the depth of water (in mm) that is required to

blanket each acre of crop area in order to satisfy vyater demands for the specified
time period.

Table 11: Crop Group Water Requirements

Durham

April
46.48 49.96

May 63.09
67.80 57.14

June
71.37

July
80.28 86.28 72.72 July 91.41 98.24

Aug.
75.85

Sept.
64.23 69.03 58.18

Season
401.29
431.27

Fruits Vegetables Grains

76.70
64.64

81.51
68.70

42.10

363.48 Season 458.09 492.30

Peel, Toronto April

May
72.40 77.81

June
80.90 86.95 73.28 June 77.45 83.24 70.16

Aug.
87.78 94.33 79.51

Sept.
73.94

Fruits Vegetables Grains
Halton Fruits Vegetables

51.66
55.52 46.80 April 50.21 53.96

79.46
66.97

65.58 May
67.79 72.86 61.41

82.80 July 86.89
93.38 78.71 July 88.31

414.93
Season 436.61 469.22 395.47

Aug.

r Sept. 71.73
77.08 64.97

-: Mm
74.75

82.53

Grains
Hamilton

45.48
April 50.42 54.18 45.67

May
70.24 75.48 63.62

June
79.62 85.56 72.11

Aug.
83.69 89.94 75.80

Sept.
71.39
76.72

Season
443.66 476.79 401.85

Fruits Vegetables Grains

94.91
79.99

64.66

42

Niagara

* All units in millimeters (mm)

The necessary water required for each crop group is provided through a mix apfiaturally occurring sources via rain and human induced sources via
irrigation. To determine what the irrigation requirement is,
accounted for, as stated in equation (1).

rainfall must be

(1)

= (Re-ETc)

The Canadian Weather Office provides 30 year averaged precipitation

data as part of the same data set used in temperature calculations. These data
can be used to calculate regional precipitation levels for all regions in the study
area. Like irrigation, however, precipitation (rainfall) is not 100% efficient in delivery of water to the crop for use. A key factor in reduced water delivery to a

crop through rainfall is in the surface and sub-surface saturation of water levels such that excess water provided is not available for use by the plant. This occurs primarily through extreme precipitation events, where excess water delivered becomes runoff before being utilized by the crop. The amount of rainfall that can be used by the crop is labeled "effective rainfall" (Re). The most accurate way of calculating effective rainfall for a given farm or irrigation area is through direct measurement. In direct measurement, both spatial and volumetric intensity can be measured to determine effective rainfall over the measurement period. While
this method is highly accurate, it is most useful when used it is site specific,

involving management at the farm or community level.
For an analysis involving multiple regions and time periods, an

approximation is required. Using a fixed amount of time for an observation period

(ie. 1 month), the effective rainfall can be approximated given the volume of
rainfall over the observed period. The United States Bureau of Reclamation
43

r
(USBR) has provided a guideline to calculating effective rainfall under these

circumstances15. The underlying assumption is that over a fixed period of time, a
greater total volume of rainfall correlates positively with the probability of extreme
rainfall and hence, saturation events. The USBR table is provided below.

Table 12: Effective Rainfall Reference Table (in inches)
Rainfall (R)
R<1

Effective Rainfall (Re)
Re = 0.95R

1 <R<2 2<R<3
3<R<4 4 < R< 5

Re = 0.95 + 0.9(R-1)
Re = 1.85 + 0.82(R-2)

Re = 2.67 + 0.65(R-3)
Re = 3.32 + 0.45(R-4)

5<R<6
R>6

Re = 3.77 + 0.25(R-5) Re = 4.02 + 0.05(R-6)

Using the 30-year average rainfall rates for all regions of the study area in

Table 13, effective rainfall for each area can be calculated. Note that rainfall data
were accumulated from the same weather stations used for temperature data in
this analysis.

Table 13:30-Year Historical Rainfall Rates by Region
Effective Rainfall in millimeters (mm)

April
Durham 65.28 61.42 60.77

May
66.59

June
71.43 66.18

July
60.52 66.34

Aug.
72.43
70.03

Sept.
75.42 68.66

Peel, Toronto

64.78 62.98
67.33 68.01

Halton
Hamilton Niagara

63.80
72.82 75.16

65.11
74.51 67.16

69.25
70.68 71.33

69.31
71.65 80.17

68.99
67.24

Effective Rainfall in inches (in)

April
Durham 2.57

May
2.62 2.55

June
2.81 2.61

July
2.38
2.61 2.56

Aug.
2.85 2.76 2.73

Sept.
2.97 2.70 2.73

Peel, Toronto
Halton

2.42
2.39

2.48

2.51

15 Brower, Al. ET Toolbox EvaootransDiration Toolbox for the Middle Rio Grande. A Water Resources Decision
SuDDort Tool. 1 May 2008, US Beareau of Reclamation, 31. <http://www.usbr.gov/pmts/rivers/awards/ettoolbox.pdf;

44

Hamilton Niagara

2.72

2.65 2.68

2.87
2.96

2.93
2.64

2.78
2.81

2.82 3.16

2.65

With effective rainfall for each region available, net irrigation requirements

(NIR) for each crop group, time period, and region can be calculated. These
values, found in Table 14, represent the amount of irrigated water required by

each crop group before irrigation efficiency issues are considered. As with the

crop water requirements presented in Table 14, these values determine the
depth of water (in mm) that needs to blanket each acre of crop area in order to
meet water requirements not satisfied through natural processes. In instances

where the value is negative, rainfall provides more than enough water for the given months to meet water requirements. It is assumed that no significant water
storage capabilities are in use for agriculture for this thesis so that no excess water is carried forward for use in subsequent months. For months where excess rainwater exists, net irrigation requirements are assumed to be 0.

Table 14: Crop Group Net Irrigation Requirements (NIR)

Durham Fruits

April
-18.79 -15.32

May
-3.50

June
-0.06 5.27 -6.78

July
19.76

Aug.
3.41

Sept.
-11.19

Season
23.17

Vegetables
Grains
Peel, Toronto

1.21
-9.44 ,

25.76 12.20 July
25.07 31.90 16.46

9.08 -3.73

-6.40 -17.25

41.32

-23.17

12.20 Season
70.43

April -9.76
-5.90

May 7.61
13.02

June
14.73
20.77 7.10

Aug.
17.75 24.31 9.48

Sept.
5.27 10.80
-1.69

Fruits Vegetables Grains
Halton Fruits

100.79
33.83

-14.63

0.79

April -10.56
-6.81 -15.29

May
4.81 9.88 -1.57

June

July 21.78
28.27

Aug. 13.28 19.45
5.51

Sept.
2.41
7.77 -4.35

Season
55.94

13.65
19.44

Vegetables Grains
Hamilton Fruits

84.80 25.46

6.36

13.59 July
13.80

April
-18.57
-14.80> -23.32

May
2.91 8.16
-3.71

June
6.79
12.74 -0.71

Aug.
13.01

Sept.
-0.27

Season 36.51
65.61 10.60

Vegetables Grains

20.39
5.48

19.26
5.12

5.07 -6.99

45

Niagara =ruits Vegetables

April
-15.26

May
3.10
8.41 -3.60

June 3.18
9.04 -4.20

July
19.53

Aug.

Sept.
-12.07

Season 36.20 59.94 14.05

10.40
16.50

-11.38 -20.16

26.00 11.36

-6.98

3rains

2.69

-18.48

* All units in millimitres (mm)

To determine water requirements for each crop group and region at an

aggregate

level,

spatial

considerations

need

to

be

factored

in.

Evapotranspiration rates, and hence, net irrigation requirements are calculated in

the form of a rate, specifically mm day"1. To derive overall agricultural water use
within the system, these rates must be applied to the acreage available for each
crop. Using the crop statistics provided in Tables 1-5, aggregate net irrigation
requirements can be derived using the formula:

(5)

ANIRc = NIRcxVxac, where;

ANIRc = Aggregate Net Irrigation Requirement, for crop (C)
NIRc = Net Irrigation Requirement, for crop (C)
V = volumetric constant of 4046.94 L/acre

ac = Total acreage, for crop (C)

The volumetric constant (V), is derived from tr^e earlier stated notion that 1

mm day1 is equivalent to 10 m3 ha"1 day"1. Removing the time component from
each term due to the fact that values have been converted from a rate to a

monthly total, an equivalency of 1mm to 10 m3 ha"1 remains. Since 1 hectare

equals 10,000m2 , a 1mm volume covering that area equates to 10m3 of total
volume (10,000m2 x 0.001m). There are 1,000L per cubic metre, therefore each
1mm of NIR is equivalent to 10,000L of water. Converting units from hectares to

acres by dividing by 2.471, the resulting volume of 4,046.94 L/acre results.

Restated, every millimetre of irrigation required is equivalent to 4,046.94 litres of
water per acre of crop.

46

It is assumed that irrigation efficiency for all regions in the subject area is

90%. Therefore, aggregated net irrigation requirements must be divided by the
irrigation efficiency to determine aggregated gross irrigation requirements.

(6)

GIRc = ANIRc / IE, where;

GIRc = Gross Irrigation Requirement, for crop (C)

ANIRc = Aggregate Net Irrigation Reqikirement, for crop (C)
IE = Irrigation Efficiency, expressed as a percentage

Gross Irrigation Requirements (GIR) are presented in Table 15.

Table 15: Crop Group Gross Irrigation Requirements (GIR)

Durham Fruits Vegetables Grains
Peel, Toronto

April

May
1.21

June
5.27

July
19.76

Aug.
3.41

Sept.

Season
23.17

-

25.76
12.20

9.08

-

41.32 12.20

April

May
7.61 13.02 0.79

June 14.73
20.77

July
25.07

Aug.
17.75 24.31 9.48

Sept.
5.27

Season
70.43 100.79

Fruits
Vegetables
-

31.90
16.46

10.80

Grains
Halton

7.10

33.83 Sept.
2.41
111

April

May
4.81 9.88

June
13.65 19.44 6.36

July
21.78 28.27

Aug.
13.28 19.45 5.51

Season
55.94

Fruits Vegetables
-

84.80
25.46

Grains
Hamilton Fruits
April

13.59
July

May 2.91
8.16

June
6.79
12.74

Aug.
13.01

Sept.
5.07

Season
36.51 65.61 10.60

13.80
20.39 5.48

Vegetables
Grains Niagara Fruits Vegetables

-

19.26
5.12

April

May
3.10 8.41

June
3.18
9.04

July
19.53

Aug.
10.40 16.50 2.69

Sept.

Season
36.20
59.94

-

26.00
11.36

-

Grains
* All units in millions of litres (ML)

14.05

47

Using residential, commercial/industrial, agricultural and system loss data,
a comprehensive record of water consumption for the April to September time

period is generated for all regions within the study. A summary of water
consumption is provided in Appendix A.

Information concerning the price of water is similar to the consumption

data in that it is readily available for municipal use activities and must be derived
for agricultural activities.

For commercial / industrial and residential use, user costs can be directly

obtained from utility data available publicly for each region. The rates are applied

at a cost per m3 and in some cases contain block pricing with discounts for high
volume use. For this study, the first pricing tier is used, as per user volume is unknown. Prices are further divided into two parts, water use fees and sewer surcharges. Water use fees are designed to cover the costs of pumping and

delivery to the

user network, while sewer surcharges cover the cost of

transportation back to the network, filtration and cleaning, and eventual delivery
to the distribution system. For regions where the sewer surcharges are not

specifically identified, it is assumed that it is 50% of overall price.

Price

differentiation can also occur between residential and commercial / industrial
uses. Residential rates are not consistently lower or higher than commercial /
industrial for all regions, with a variability of no more than 15.5% in any instance.
All utility rates are presented in Table 16.

Table 16: Regional Utility Rates
Published Rate

" ...
in totals) Residential

)

--

Sewer Surchage (already incl.

Base Rate (Gross Rate less Surcharge)

($/m3)
Durham Halton
Hamilton

Residential

Commercial^

Commercial

Residential

Commercial

$
$

1.49 1.62

$
$

1.29

$ $

0.93
0.79 0.85 0.88 0.45 0.66

$
$

0.82
0.79 0.85

$ $
$ $ $

0.56 0.84

$

0.48 ^

1.63
1.70

%
$ $
$

. 0.89

$ $ $
$

1.70 1.46 0.95
1.42

$,«
$
$ $

$ $ $
$

$ $ $
$
,

0.85 0.58 0.50
0.76

0.85
0.58 0.50
0.80

Niagara

1.46
1.06
1.47

0.88
0.56

Peel
Toronto

0.67

$

$

Source: ht tp://wvvw.ec.gc.ca/water/en/manage/use/e mun.htm. *Accessed May 2 2007.

48

Agricultural water use is largely un-metered, consumption price for current use.

providing

no

published

Most farmers have access to irrigation

systems, private, or shared wells for agriculture practices. Though these systems

do have costs associated with their construction and use, there is no easily

discernable way to determine what these costs are at a regional level. Therefore,
in order to determine a price point for agricultural water use, a potential maximum

cost for each crop^group must be derived using water consumption rates and
sales statistics for all crops.

Using gross irrigation requirements and production yields for each crop grouping; a water efficiency rate can be derived. This rate, expressed in kg/L, denotes the mass of a crop grouping produced per litre of water input. The

efficiency is applied to the gross irrigation requirement to correctly identify the amount of irrigated water needed by the system and not the amount of irrigated
water needed by the crop itself. With water efficiencies expressed in kg/L and

crop sales prices known in $/kg, crop pricing expressed in $/L can be derived.
Assuming a generous net profit margin for crops of 20%, profit expressed in $/L

is available16. If it is assumed that agriculture can pay for water up to the point of
0% profit margin, then the users choke price for water if a price were attached for

growers would equal the profit per litre17. Efficiencies and crop pricing per litre
for each crop group and region are provided in Table 17.

16 Actual operating profit margins can vary between farm size, location and crop type. 17 Choke price refers to the maximum price the user is willing to pay for water while maintaining a unit revenue
greater than zero.

49

BYERSON UNIVERSITY UBRABt

PROPERTY OP

Table 17: Crop Efficiencies and Pricing0
Yield Efficiency (kg/litre) Crop Price Efficiency

Region/Crop

($/litre)

Crop Profit Efficiency ($/litre)

Crop Profit Efficiency

($/r,n3)

Durham Fruits
0.0921 0.0257

$

0.0441 0.0055 0.0047

$ $
$

0.0088

$ $
$

8.82 1.09 0.94

Vegetables
Grains
Halton

$
$

0.0011
0.0009

0.0421

Fruits
Vegetables

0.0349 0.0110
0.0159

$ $
$

0.0206 0.0019 0.0020
0.0247

$ $ $
$
$

0.0041

$ $
$ $ $ $

4.13 0.38
0.41

0.0004 0.0004

Grains
Hamilton Fruits Vegetables

0.0404 0.0296 0.0400

$ $
$ $

0.0049 0.0012 0.0010

4.94 1.23
1.04

0.0061
0.0052

Grains
Niagara Fruits Vegetables

$

0.0254 0.0468 0.0315

0.0233
0.0077 0.0037

$
$
$

0.0047

$
$ _$ $
$

4.65 1.54 0.75

$
$_

0.0015
0.0007

Grains Peel Fruits
Vegetables

0.0290 0.0153 0.0171

$ $
$

0.0158 0.0026
0.0017

$
$ $

0.0032
0.0005

3.16 0.52
0.34

Grains

0.0003

$

18 Differences in yield efficiencies between identical crop types are due to environmental factors specific to each
region, including rainfall and average temperature.

V.

50

Methodology

The objective of the model is to simulate, economically, the effects on each region and user group under different water scarcity scenarios. For each scenario, there are two simulations. The first simulation is the "business as usual" model, which contains no market for the trading of water rights. Under this model, each user is allocated a percentage of the available water under a scarcity

condition based upon their usage in the base case. The second simulation is the
"water market" model, which contains provisions for the purchase and/or sale of water rights to other users. What follows is a description of each scenario and how both models are intend to function.

There are four scenarios that describe potential situations of water scarcity for the study region. The first scenario is the "base scenario", which uses current
measured water use and applies each model to determine economic benefits

and usage patterns. The other three scenarios can be described as "scarcity
scenarios" with water availability of 80%, 60%, and 40% of current totals. These
percentages were chosen to reflect both varying degrees of scarcity for

comparison, and a realistic range of scarcity within the system. It is important to

note that each scarcity scenario reflects the available supply of water for the end user, with system losses and positive feedback loops associated with drought
conditions already discounted.

For each scenario, the business as usual case involves no trading or market mechanisms of any kind. This is contrasted against the market

mechanisms described earlier. For the business as usual scenario, it is assumed each user consumes a proportionate amount of available water resources equal to their share from the base case. As an example, if residential user "A" used
35% of available water in for their region in the base scenario, then they will
continue to use 35% of available water regardless of the total amount of water
resources present.

In order to run each scenario and determine the economic outcomes that result, a water demand curve must be derived for each user. Demand curves are

51

assumed to be linear and are based upon available consumption, pricing, and elasticity data. Consumption - price pairings are available for residential and

commercial/industrial users via utility meter rates and usage readings. In the
case of agriculture, however, price data were derived based upon crop sales
price and crop water requirements at current production rates.

To determine each user's demand curve, we begin with the equation for linear demand, with the traditionally dependent variable of quantity on the right
hand side of the equation:

(7)

P = a - bQ, where;

Q = Quantity
P = Price

a = Choke price (y-intercept)

b =Slope of inverse demand

For residential and commercial / industrial users, sufficient data are

available to determine demand curves directly. Elasticity (E) for water for both
residential and commercial users has been investigated in previous studies, most

notably McNeil and Tate (1991), and Tate, Renzetti & Shaw (1992). Mahan etal
(2002) also used elasticity's for both residential and commercral water use in their study of Alberta water markets. The following table summarizes previous

work on this subject. Elasticity values from McNeil and Tate (1991) were used for

this analysis based upon the existence of both residential and caofeiercial values
for elasticity and additionally the existence of a min, max and mean value for
industrial/commercial, which corresponds to the HVU, MVU, and LVU users
respectively.

Table 18: Water Consumption Elasticities
Min
Max
Mean

McNeil and Tate (1991)
Residential
-0.10
52

-1.00

-0.25

Industrial/Commercial
Tate, Renzetti, Shaw (1992)

-0,05
-0.354

-1.00
-1.202

-0.50

Industrial/Commercial
Mahan, Horbulyk, Rowse

Residential

-0.5 -0.5

Industrial/Commercial

Given that residential and commercial users have a known elasticity and a
price quantity pairing, both intercepts and slopes of inverse demand can be derived.

To determine the slope of inverse demand, the given elasticity for each user is used. Inverse slope of demand is a function of the change in price versus
the change in quantity, or:

(8)

b=AP/AQ

Elasticity can also be expressed in terms of price and quantity. Elasticity,
at any given point of the demand curve can be expressed as the percentage

change in quantity corresponding to a percentage change in price at the given point of that curve. Mathematically, it is expressed as:

(9) (10)
(11) (12) (13)

E = (AQ/Q) / (AP/P) E = (P/Q) * (AQ/AP)
E / (AQ/AP) = P/Q E(AP/AQ) = P/Q AP/AQ = (P/Q) (1/E)

* Note that E Is expressed as an absolute value in this equation.

Substituting equation (8) into equation (13);

(14)

b = (P/Q) (1/E)

53

From equation (14) all residential and commercial/industrial slopes of
inverse demand can be calculated given the current price-usage combinations
and assumed elasticities. The results are presented in Table 19.

To determine the choke price (x-intercept), a linear demand curve is assumed.

(7)

P = a-bQ

This equation can be restated as:

(15)

bQ

Substituting the values from known price quantity pairings and the inverse

slope of demand derived from equation (14), choke prices are calculated. The
results are presented in Table 19.

Rewriting equation (7) to the more traditional equation, with the quantity
(Q) on the left hand side of the equation;

(16)

Q = a/b-P(1/b)

Under equation (16), the y-intercept and slope of demand are derived. The

y-intercept is a function of the x-intercept and sloppyof inverse demand (a/b), while the slope of demand is expressed as the inverse of the inverse slope of
demand (1/b). Both the y-intercept and the slope of demand are expressed in
Table 19.

For agricultural users, different data are available compared to residential and commercial/industrial users, preventing a straightforward calculation of

demand curves. As with residential and commercial/industrial users, a linear
demand curve, solving for price is assumed;

54

(7)

P = a-bQ

Both the quantity demanded at zero price as well as the choke price is available

for agricultural users. Setting the price equal to zero in (7), the inverse slope of
demand is given by;

(17) (18)
(19)

0 = a-bQ bQ = a
b = a/Q

At zero price, both the quantity and the value of the x-intercept are known, allowing calculation of the inverse slope of demand. To determine slope of the
demand curve, the inverse of b is calculated. Demand curve data for agricultural
users are shown in Table 19.

With all demand functions derived, the aggregate demand functions can

be calculated. Due to the use of demand curves and the varying choke prices for
each user and region, the aggregate demand function becomes a series of

functions as users leave the market. At each known choke price, the user
associated at that price will no longer be willing to purchase any water resources,

effectively removing their demand from the market. The result is an aggregate demand curve with 39 separate linear curve segments reflecting the escalating
number of users leaving the market as price increases. Therefore, for each

segment of the curve, there exists a different x-intercept, y-intercept and slope. The resulting curve is depicted in Figure 2. For illustration, each line segment
represents the aggregate demand curve for n number of participants at a given price. Note that each segment is only a true reflection of the market when all participants within the segment have choke prices above market price. The thickness of each segment represents the diminishing number of users willing to

purchase water as the price rises beyond their respective choke point. As a
choke price is reached, a user is removed from the market and a new line segment with n=current number of participants reflects the current aggregate

55

demand. In the figure below, the overall demand curve is demonstrated as the
rightmost section of all line segments at any given price point.

Figure 2: Graphical Representation of the Aggregate Demand Curve

\

V*

»

n=39

.-

_

.Dn

Quantity (m3)

56

Table 19: Crop Demand Curve Statistics

Elasticity

Slope of Demand

Inverse

y-intercept

(Choke Price)

x-intercept (m3)

Slope of Demand

Durham
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial 0 25
0 05 2.79E-07

7 45
27 17

26,720,695
3,917,170 5,595,957

3 586 670 43 144 151 39

6.94E-06
6.94E-07 3.47E-07

0 50 100

3 88

1,441,513 91
2,883 027 82 15,416 31
349,284 50 12,400,327 70

2 59
8 82

7,461,276 135,990
382,092

Fruit J
Vegetables Grain
Halton

6.49E-05
2.86E-06
8.06E-08

109
0 94

11,641,920

Residential High Value Industrial

0 25

3.35E-07

811 35 18 5 03 3 35 413 0 38
0 41

24,205,524

2,985 203 72

0 05
0 50 100

1.18E-05 1.18E-06
5.89E-07 4.54E-05 8.90E-07 6.63E-08

2,986,716 4,266,737
5,688,982 90,797 426,786 6,169,907

84 910 18 84910179

Mid Value Industrial

Low Value industrial
Fruit > Vegetables Grain Hamilton

1 698,203 58
22 007 79

1,123 664 51

15 089 485 51

Residential^'
High Value Industrial

0 25
0 05 0 50
100

1.71E-07

8 51
35 74

49,797,091

5 851,597 03
242,896 48 2,428 964 81 4,857 929 61 44,439 60
631,097 94

4.12E-06
4.12E-07 2.06E-07

8,681,606
12,402,294 16,536,392 219,422

Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial Fruit Vegetables Grain Niagara Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial Fruit Vegetables Grain Peel Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial Fruit Vegetables Grain Toronto Residential

511 3 40
4 94

2.25E-05 1.58E-06
2.91 E-07

123

775,360
3,579,772

104

3 438 208 39

0 25 0 05

2.48E-07 8.45E-06
8.45E-07

7 28

29,336,799
3,619,863 5,171,232 6,894,976 3,178,692

4,029,780 03
118 389 02

30 58
4 37 2 91

0 50 100

1,183 89018

4.22E-07

2,367,780 36
683,437 91 85,582 75

1.46E-06
1.17E-05 8.71 E-08

4 65
154

131,808
8,562,586

0 75

11486 516 21

0 25
0 05

8.54E-08 2.30E-06
2.30E-07 1.15E-07 3.31 E-05

4 73 22 22
317

55,407,198 9,659,670 13,799,529
18,399,372 95,358

11,707,807 35
434,644 51

0 50
100

4,346,44513

212

8,692,890 25
30,169 60
335 744 66

316
0 52 0 34

2.98E-06
2.92E-08

175,388
11,728,629

34 277 037 48

0 25 0 05 0 50
100

4.62E-08 3.83E-07 1.15E-07 5.75E-08

710 11 26
4 41

153,740,061

21 644 384 26

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial

29,355,649 38,289,978
51,053,303

2,607,598 58
8,691,995 27

2 94

17,383 990 53

57

Using the aggregate demand and user demand functions, the market simulation can be performed for each scarcity scenario. The functions by setting a price-

quantity equilibrium sufficiently high to achieve two results. The first result is a
demand for water sufficiently low such that consumption is within ecologically or

technically constrained limitations. This includes issues of water availability,
water delivery or aquatic habitat considerations. In this model, the limitations are

artificially imposed; however, under other circumstances the limitations in supply could be driven through non-controllable factors such as drought or maximized
resource utilization.

The second result is to create a system that minimizes losses associated

with scarcity conditions.

Essentially, this is a resource allocation problem

whereby the most cost effective uses of water are maximized while lower yield
utilization is eliminated. The buffering effect exists where users who can no

longer afford to purchase water at the market price can instead sell their right to water to any other users at the market price to mitigate losses associated with foregoing production. At the same time, highly efficient uses of water can
continue at 100% capacity by purchasing water so long as marginal revenues
associated with incremental use exceed marginal costs.

To simulate these conditions and desired behaviours in an economic Simulation
requires certain assumptions and rules to determine how the system operates.

·

Market simulation is for one growing season only

·

Land-use changes will not occur during the season, users are relegated
to a "consume or sell decision" tree

·

Agricultural water use can be accurately metered to determine tradeable
quantities

·

Sales of water do not constitute a physical delivery of water resources. Rather, they constitute a payment "not to consume"

·

Therefore, all users within the marketplace share a water resource that is
physically connected for both groundwater and surface water

58

·
·

Trading information is perfect and shared between all users
Transaction and information costs are ignored

·

Scarcity levels can be accurately predicted in advance of the trading
season

· /Current water management and delivery infrastructure is able to handle
regional volume increases due to trading

·

Consumptive

use

rates

for

individual

users

are

considered

equal

throughout the region

·

Changes in water use, and hence effluent can be managed by the current
wastewater infrastructure

·

Complete sale outcomes (when a user sells 100% of their allocation) will
be ob$erved as a general sellout of the user group. It is assumed that
even in these circumstances, a small number of users would continue to
consume their allocation

·

Users within the market will act rationally

For each scenario, each user is allocated a fixed percentage of their normal usage based upon the overall system supply. This amount represents the number of "permits" that each user has available in the market. These permits
can then be redeemed by using available water supply or sold in the marketplace for the clearing price.

The clearing price can be determined using the individual and aggregate demand functions of the market participants. The first step is to determine the
proper aggregate demand function that applies. This is necessary as the

aggregate demand function is in fact a series of separate functions relating to

each user's choke price. To determine the appropriate aggregate demand function, each choke price is used as a minimum price point. For each minimum
price point, a "use" or "not-use" condition will exist for each user. Given that a

"not-use"

condition

indicates zero

demand for a

particular user,

the total

population in the model will transform into a series of positive or zero values for
quantity demanded. Adding all non-zero values for quantity demanded provides a

59

maximum demand for the entire market. The maximum demand is then matched
with available supply to determine a "best fit" for the appropriate aggregate

demand function. Stated another way, as individual users are unwilling to participate in the market as purchasers, their individual demand curves would be subtracted from the aggregate demand curve. When an aggregate demand curve

that contains the appropriate number of users to reflect the available supply is reached, the remaining users use this demand curve to determine market
equilibrium price and individual demand quantities.

Once the correct selection of users has been determined by matching the

demand to available supply, a new aggregate demand function is calculated. Using non-zero demand curves only provides a new aggregate demand function with the appropriate x-intercept and slope for the market. Given that supply is

fixed due to scarcity, price under the new aggregate demand can be derived. This price serves as the market-clearing price for which all water "permits" will be
purchased or sold.

For each individual demand curve, the market-clearing price is included to

determine the quantity demanded. Users with choke prices below the marketclearing price will demonstrate a negative value for quantity demanded,

indicating a value below the x-axis. These values are set/to zero in order to prevent "phantom supply" in the marketplace. Phantom supply can be defined as a participant's willingness to sell in excess of their available resources due to their position on the aggregate demand curve. Setting this user's quantity

demanded value to zero effectively means that they will sell 100% of their
available permits. Each user's individual demand is then compared against

available individual supply. What results is a list of both purchase and sale
listings for each user at the market-clearing price. There are four potential actions

that may occur. First, a user may purchase additional "permits" from the market
in order to meet their excess demand. Second, a user may sell a portion of their

permits in the case of excess supply above demand. Third, for users where the price is sufficiently high compared to their demand function, a complete sale of all
permits will occur, meaning that the user forgoes production. Finally, a user may

60

forgo both the purchase and sale of permits, instead using all available water
supplies in production without the purchase of additional permits.

There are two metrics that are used to determine the economic benefit associated with incorporating a market into the water management system. The

first method is to calculate economic gain versus the non-market system for each
scenario. This measures the mitigation associated with instituting a water market.

The economic benefit for each participant is individually calculated and then
aggregated to determine the total benefit to the system. Additionally, each user group is analyzed discretely so that the flow of benefits from one group to

another can be generalized. Benefits are calculated separately for buyers and sellers since each group is performing a different task within the marketplace.
For buyers, economic benefit (or mitigation of loss) can be described as

the difference between what they would have had to pay in a non-market
situation versus what they are paying under a water market, to meet their optimal

economic performance. Benefit is calculated as follows:

(20)

((PNM - Peq) x (QD - Qa) / 2), where;

Pnm = Price if no market exists
Peq = Equilibrium price under a water market

Qd = Quantity demanded by the participant
Qa = Quantity allocated to the participant

The above equation describes the benefit to a net purchaser of water allowances under a market condition. The benefit is described as the total economic gain of the water purchased at the equilibrium price. Allocated water is not factored into overall benefit versus a non-market situation, since in either
case the water is made available to the user. The non-market price reflects the price on the demand curve for the quantity that the individual user is demanding

if an aggregated market did not exist. The equilibrium price reflects the cost of
water allowances in the aggregate market.

61

Graphically, the net benefit for net purchasers in the market is shown
below.

Figure 3: Graphical representation of net purchasers benefit

Qa

For sellers, the economic benefits can be described as the incremental
revenue received above and beyond what would have been received if the water

had been used directly. Primarily, this constitutes low value uses for water where

the equilibrium price of the market exceeds the choke price for that user, though
partial sale of allowances can also occur. Benefits are calculated as follows:

(21)

(PEq) x (QA - Qd) - [((Pcp - Pnm) x (Qa - Qd)) / 2] - (QA - Qd) x
(Pnm), where;

Pnm = Price if no market exists

Peq = Equilibrium price under a water market
PCp = Choke price for the participant
62

A
Qo
Quantity (m3)

N M EQ\B

Price ($)

Qa = Quantity allocated to the participant Qd = Quantity demanded by the participant

This equation

provides a description of how a net seller views the

marketplace with respect to the value they can receive for using the water

themselves. The benefit to the user is in taking advantage of a high unit cost of
water based upon demand from other users and scarcity conditions present.

Essentially, the lower inelasticity user is leveraging the high inelasticity of
demand present with other users to maintain optimum economic benefit of

individual water supplies. It is important to note that a full sale of allowances does
not necessarily constitute the cessation of economic activity for any particular

user. This is especially true in instances of agricultural use where a natural
alternative through rainwater is available. It can be assumed, however, that a full

sale of allowances would result in at least a partially diminished production
capacity. This relationship is demonstrated graphically below:

Figure 4: Graphical representation of net benefit for full allowance sellers

Benefit = A-B-C

Qd

Qa
63

Quantity (m3)

For users that participate in the market with a partial sale of allowances, a third equation is required. In this instance, optimum benefit is achieved through a
mix of selling water allowances and using a portion of the allocation internally. This will occur in instances where the equilibrium price occurs somewhere
between the choke price and the price attached to the allocated quantity in a no-

market condition. The benefit in this case is calculated as follows:

(22)

(PEQ) x (Qa - Qd) - [((Peq - Pnm) x (Qa - Qd)) / 2] ~ (Qa - Qd) x
(Pnm)

Equation

(22)

accurately

describes

the

benefits

from

the

seller's

perspective. The seller will use the water allocations provided so long as they provide more economic benefit per unit than can be received through

participation in the water market. Once that threshold is crossed, the user will sell remaining credits at the equilibrium price, providing incremental revenue higher than what can be achieved by using the remaining allocation internally. This
transition is demonstrated graphically below:

64

Figure 5: Graphical representation of benefit forpartiai allowance sellers

CP

Benefit = A-B-C
EQ

NM

I aT
Qo
Quantity (m3)

The second approach to quantifying the benefits of the water market is to calculate economic loss versus the no scarcity scenario to determine the overall level of mitigation that occurs under each scarcity scenario. This helps to determine if there is an optimal point at which instituting a market will provide
maximum benefit.

This is a straightforward exercise where individual values under a water market for each scarcity scenario can be aggregated and matched against the
economic values under the base case. In addition, this analysis can be dis

aggregated into individual users or user groups to determine the economic
dynamics of the water market as the overall system moves to a more water
scarce environment.
approaches by region:

Specifically, the analysis will consist of the following

65

·

Individual user's economic benefit under each scarcity scenario against the base case (no market)

·

Allocation loss versus economic loss for individual users to determine an
"optimal scarcity" for maximized market performance

·

Allocation loss versus economic loss for user groups to determine an "optimal scarcity" for maximized market performance

·

Aggregate economic benefit under each scarcity scenario against the
base case (no market)

·

Aggregate economic performance by scarcity scenario to determine an

"optimal scarcity" for maximized market performance

These analyses will determine each participant's reaction to the market and the overall performance of the market as water availability is subject to
increasing levels of scarcity.

In addition, residential use will be monitored to determine the scarcity level

at which it is affected. Residential use, at least in part, is considered essential for
general quality of life, as its use is both economic and non-economic in nature
(ie. drinking, cleaning, etc.).

66

Results

Usirtg the pre-determined scarcity levels of 80%, 60% and 40%, a
comprehensive market simulation was conducted. Under each scenario, the change in water allocation, water demand, individual equilibrium price and market equilibrium price were calculated to determine overall performance. The
results are presented in Table 20.

Table 20: Market Results,Summary
Summary Table
No Scarcity 477,655,512
20% Scarcity
382,124,410

40% Scarcity

60% Scarcity

Water Available (m3)
No Market

286,593,307

191,062,205

Overall Value

$

2,063,705,600
n/a

Change in Value from Normal Conditions
Value Retention Ratio
J

$ $

1,926,699,789 (137,005,811)
1.17

$ $

1,711,867,460
(351,838,140) 1.38

$ $

1,397,977,841

(665,727,759)
1.69

n/a

Market Market Price

Overall Value

$ $
$

0.99
2,103,995,612

Change in Value from Normal Conditions
Benefit vs No-Market

n/a
40,290,012

Transaction Volume (m3)
# of Sellers

$ $ $ $

1.84

2,010,423,849
83,724,060 46,190,882
22

$ $
$

1,868,047,361

(93,571,763) $

$ $ (235,948,251) $ 156,179,901 $
2.76 59,921,488
25 1.48

4.01 1,638,968,758

(465,026,854)
240,990,917

44,333,298
16
n/a

62,668,182
27

Value Retention Ratio
Benefit Ratio

1.19

1.95

2.0%

4.3% 12.1%

9.1%
20.9%

17.2% 32.8%

Activity Ratio

9.3%

The results are presented for both no market and market situations for all scarcity scenarios. Overall value, the benefit of having a market over no market,

and value retention are shown. The value retention ratio refers to the value of
water relative to the total availability of water compared to the base case and is
expressed as:

Value Retention Ratio = (Vn/Vo)/(Wn/Wo), where;

Vn = Water Value under scarcity scenario n
Vo = Water Value under the base case
67

Wn = Water Allowance Volume under scarcity scenario n
Wo = Water Allowance Volume under the base case Expressed differently, the value retention ratio is the efficiency that the
market (or non-market) system has in retaining value. A value retention ratio

greater than 1 indicates that the system retains value under the scarcity condition at a rate greater than the lost amount. Alternatively, a value retention ratio less

than 1 indicates that the system is inefficient and is losing value at a rate greater than the loss of water volume (as a percentage). In all three scarcity scenarios, the value retention ratio remains strongly positive for both the market and non-market scenarios. This indicates that even

under non-market conditions, efficiencies can be gained as uneconomic users of
water within a user group curtail use. This has the effect of shifting overall use in each individual demand curve to higher value/unit users of water. In all three scenarios, the market condition also produces a value retention ratio greater than the non-market condition. This difference is small at first, but grows substantially under the 60% scarcity scenario, shown below.

Table 21: Value Retention Summary
20% Scarcity
Value Retention Ratio - No Market Value Retention Ratio - Market 1.17 40% Scarcity
1.38

60% Scarcity
1.69

Market Improvement over No Market

1.19 2.35%

1.48

1.95

7.03%

14.99%

The

primary

driver

for

the

increased

performance

of

the

market

concerning value retention is the ability for water use to shift both upward and
between individual demand curves depending on the optimal economic condition

available. For example, Peel region mid-value industrial use can shift to the most

optimal mid-industrial use within Peel region, thereby retaining a certain level of value retention efficiency. In a market example, however, Toronto high-value

industrial water use may prove to be more economic than the highest possible Peel mid-value industrial use, providing an incremental benefit that only a market
condition can accommodate. In this example, while using the available water

68

allocation for Peel mid-value water use is by no means uneconomic, it is simply
less economic than selling it to a higher value user, if that option is to exist.

The benefit ratio is a measure of the benefit of the market design over a
non-market design and is expressed as a percentage of overall market value. The ratio is determined as:

Benefit Ratio = (Market Value - No Market Value) / No Market Value

This ratio is closely related to the value retention ratio and specifically the

difference between non-market and market value retention differences. The main
purpose of the benefit ratio is to determine the degree of improvement under a
market system for each scarcity scenario. It has been assumed that there exists both perfect information and zero transaction costs for this model. Both these
assumptions serve to improve the calculated efficiency of the market as

transactions are completed at a level that receives the theoretical maximum

benefit (via a theoretically accurate equilibrium price) and at no cost to all parties.
The benefit ratio therefore may serve as an indication of the "degree of benefit" under a given scarcity and the resulting decision of whether the market provides

a benefit substantial enough to warrant implementation. The decision on what percentage of overall market value constitutes a fair measure of anticipated
transaction costs is not introduced at this point. For example, if we assume a general reduction m benefits to the market of 5% of total market value due to a

combination of market inefficiencies and transaction costs, a market application

would not be the optimal solution in both the control and 20% scarcity scenarios. The exact amount in benefit loss due to these two assumptions is unknown at
this point; however using 5% does not seem to constitute an unreasonable assumption for the purposes of this analysis. In a real world application of this model, such factors would need to be considered when determining the ideal point for the system to convert to a market based approach.

69

The activity ratio is described as the number allowances traded under any given market scenario taken as a percentage of overall available allowances.

Each unit of water allowance is equivalent to 1 m3 of water.
Activity Ratio = Total Traded Allowances / Total Allowances

The activity ratio provides insight into total market volume. Larger volumes
of water traded would indicate a perceived benefit in either acquiring or selling

water allowances. This in turn serves as an indication of the degree of
disequilibrium that is present in the system prior to trading" under each scarcity

scenario. Alternatively stated, the activity ratio provides a measure of the amount of activity required to put the water allowances into a state of economic^
equilibrium.

Not surprisingly, the activity ratio increases with scarcity. This is expected

due to the both the shrinking availability of water allowances (the denominator)
and the increasingly attractive equilibrium price for water allowances as scarcity

increases, prompting greater sales incentive to marginal or uneconomic users of
water given the market conditions present.

In addition to running three scarcity scenarios, the summary table above provides results for the market condition under a no scarcity, or "control" scenario. This is done in an effort to determine initial market equilibrium; a
scenario containing zero water scarcity (100% allocation) is run to determine any

movements in water between the users. In effect, any movements prior to the scarcity condition would indicate that prices are currently in disequilibrium. Users that would immediately sell their water under no scarcity condition can be said to

have a portion or all of their water as currently undervalued in association with its
end use when compared to what the overall market is offering. Conversely, users that are buying additional water resources under a market with no scarcity
condition perceive a higher value associated with their water end use in

comparison to the market price. Under a no scarcity scenario, it is expected that the water market including agricultural users could potentially lower overall water

70

unit prices to the system. This is primarily due to additional supply being made

available to all users from a previously excluded source. If the additional source, in this case agricultural users, attaches a value to water lower than current rates, there is the potential for additional water to be supplied to the market at a discount. The results of the creation of a full water market under no scarcity
condition are shown below in tables 22, 23, and 24.

Table 22: Monetary Benefit of a Water Market vs No Market - No Scarcity
Sceanrio: No Scarcity
Residential
Durham Halton Hamilton 1,500,786.61 $

Niagara
445,477.30 J5
13,087.47 !5

Peel 9,039.06 $ 1,142.45 $

Toronto
2,045,99245
303,66457

All Regions
|5
<5

$ $ $ $ $ $
$

455,906.24

$
$

603,570.87 5?

5,060,772.53
407,204.10

High Value Industrial
Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit

6,846.49 68,464.87 136,929.75 7,490.73

20,166.31
403,326.19

55
!&

62,296.80 $
622,968.03 $

$ $ $

201,663.10 55 10,693.50 S\
339,673.25 55
4,820,864.44 {&

130,874.69 $5
261,749.37 $5

11,424.53 $
22,849.07 $

1,012,21525
2,024,43049

\5
\5
5

2,047,610.46

1,245,936.06 $
21,593.02 $ 306,647.98 $

4,095,220.93
386,516.30
984J08.07

332,079.76 j5

14,659.29
127,086.57

Vegetables
Grain

169,715.95^ $
6,011,59973 $

41,584.32 35 5,249,479.78 55

I5 $

1,670,611.79 $

9,555,423.66

mHfcNHIimm
Scenario: No Scarcity
Residential
$ $

§l|fl,624.63

5,386,302.761

J\

27,307,979.41

$

40,290,011.80

Table 23.' Overall Value of the Water Mariref - No Scarcity
Durham
97,791,838.76 53,152,544.84 35 35

Halton
96,684,748.57 52,487,602.22 10,307,600.27 $ $ $

Hamilton
209,043,353.40
155,030,958.57 30,482,833.00
25,784,491.17

Niagara
35
H5 35
35

Peel
$ 125,872,030.69

Toronto

All Regions
1\ \5
\S
Jt

104,827,892.89

$ $ $ $

535,490,907 69 163,972,014 91
80,114,098 60
66,519,858 81

1,169,710,772.01
587,054,565.77

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit Vegetables Grain All Users

55,282,934.83 10,718,723.81
8,888,590.57

$ $
$

107,128,510.41 19,794,141.31
15,248,214.04

$
$ $ $
$

10,161,326:66
8,254,039.38 607,290.73 378,705.95
11,476,547 73

35
J5 35 35
S5

161,578,723.65
133,399,088.46

8,703,894.48 197,993.50 420,723.25
6,082,26444

$ $ $
$

563,293.02 782.947.98 3,534,193 79

35 S5 35

7,724,179.76
143.084.32 8,440,955 78 196,026,361.97

$
$ $

165,359.29
172.896.57 11,562,025 66

$
$

\

9,258,116.30

& t

1.898,358.07 41,095,987.41

$

$ 181,322,294.05

\>

174,884,826.73

$ 425,222,070.94 4f

$ 279,943,177.97

$

846,096,880.011 $ 2,103,995,611.68 j

Table 24: Movement of water under a Water Market - No Scarcity
Scenario: No Scarcity
Residential
Durham
1,808,416.67

Halton
1,898,305.57 58,520.51

Hamilton
4,190,942.26 173,963.64
1,739,636.41

Niagara
1,894,822.17 55,667.09
556,670.92

Peel
(460,059.89)
31,513.84
315,138.41

Toronto
9,411,083.55 1,258,439.76 4,194,799.19 8,389,598.38
-

All Regions
18,743,510.33

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit

44,428.16
444,281.60 888,563.20

1,622,533.00
7,835,731.61

585,205.08 1,170,410.17

3,479,272.82

1,113,341.84

630,276.82

15,671,463.23

(15,197.33)

(21,695.17)

(43,808.34)

(673,729.77)

(29,741.04)

(784,171.65)

Vegetables
Grain

(382,091.53)

(426,785.68)
(6,169,907.13)

(775,360.50)
(3,579,771.85)
5,184,874.43

(131,807.81)
(8,562,58615) (5,747,621.70)

(175,387.93)
(11,728,629.24)

-

(1,891,433.45) (41,682,813.99)

(11,641,91961)
(8,853,518.84)

-

All Users

(2,905,946.66)

(11,416,889.03)

23,253,920.881

(485,180.92)

Even under conditions absent of scarcity, there is a movement of water

from low value uses to higher value uses as the market corrects. Essentially, the
observable trend is a movement from agricultural use to non-agricultural use, in

particular fo low value industrial and residential uses. This demonstrates that
71

under current conditions the value of water as an input into agricultural processes is significantly lower than its value as a component of non-agricultural processes, based upon cost and revenue factors alone. The primary driver for this is the large amount of irrigated water required for food production coupled with the

comparatively low sale value of crops on a revenue per unit of water basis. A
number of factors could potentially explain this relationship, including:

1.

The current separation of agricultural and municipal water use that has
been waived for the purposes of this analysis. Most agricultural water use

is not covered under municipal water utility fee structures. This could
potentially create a de-coupling of any existing price trends between the
two uses. Integrating all uses under a single market would create an

opportunity for re-distribution of resources and without the proper controls,

cause a large shift in overall water use away from agricultural use until the
resulting price jumps were accounted for in crop prices.

2.

The

reduced

management controls and

decentralization

of a

large

proportion of agricultural water use. Many agricultural operations use

private wells, irrigation, or limited shared system access between other farms within close proximity. Therefore, cost pressures and controls on
pricing do not exist as in a municipal system. This is strongly related to the
factor described in the previous point.

3.

The post-consumption costs associated with water treatment. Agricultural
users do not have direct sewage treatment costs associated with water

use when not included in the municipal systems, creating a lower initial
cost point upon which water-related production revenues are based.

The first scarcity scenario is one in which 80% of normal water supply is available. Even under moderate scarcity, a large movement of water takes place,
as demonstrated in Table 25, and reinforced in Tables 26, and 27.

72

Table 25: Monetary Benefit of a Water Market vs No Market - 20% Scarcity
80% Water Availability
Residential
$

Durham
1,265,030.02

Halton

Hamilton
S5
S5

Niagara

Peel
5?

Toronto
$ $ $ 5,532,029.14 J5
14,227,439.92

$ $ $
$ $ $

1,731,134.45
1,811,923.05

4,365,364.27

$

1,221,728.33

112,153.72 2,585,755.60 282,425.16

High Value Industrial
Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial Fruit Vegetables Grain

$
$ $ $
$

1,543,668.01
671.16 120,659.52 46.75
362,454 92

5,399,672.15
355,041.74

$

1,750,416.56 22,806.28 10,665.56 284,165.83
96,80414

S5 S5 55 S5
S5

3,271,930.74

58

16,363,366.12

107,365.97
23,932.17 11,380.74 551,142.74 7,881,600.19

SR
25 S& S5 S5

$ $
$

198,369.00

55

966,679.29 1,731,230.05
333,906.29
1,910,286.77 48,191,151.32

97,435.42
16,228.42
685,394 74

1,422,859.53
22,084.56

$

55,677.85

I8
5
5 >

$ $

214,490 23
15,358,05183

$

11,910,256 36

$-1|3|J86jf

$

3,486,44324

9,554,799 70

S!

-%^2,94/,380jWM

5

83,724,059.761

Tab/e 26; <Overall Value of the Water Market - 20% Scarcity
80% Water Availability
Residential
$
$ $ Durham

Haiton
55
35 35 93,070,268.88 52,384,793.11 9,279,509.24 6,647,712.41 $

Hamilton
$ 201,958,249.46
154,736,859.92

Niagara
$5
35
99,948,641.94 $

Peel
114,227,932.79 106,602,243.55
17,417,833.44

Toronto

93,449,104.18
52,978,006.58 8,496,975.36

$
$ $

509,283,923.28

3>

1,111,938,120.53
582,656,231.66

High Value Industrial
Mid Value Industrial

55,139,589.60
9,285,271.55 6,435,680.37

$
$ $

160,814,738.89
69,589,845.20 48,034,347.11

3!
I! !J
i5

$

27,541,846.46

35

141,611,281.26
101,205,022.47

Low Value Industrial Fruit
Vegetables Grain

$

6,299,789.85

J5

$
$
$

19,902,518.09
536,260.42
1,142,642.74

35
35
35

13,884,974.65 114,277.38 258,467.83 17,284,389 75

$ $
$ $

$
$ $ $

575,854.75
563,085.32 17,156,606 44 179,519,422-47

35
35 j5 JI

191,188.74
628,950.74 9,092,54419 171,294,967.31

7,380,581.83
194,244.14

$
$

8,798,163.11
2,787,390.77 61,427,639.00

!\

$

5,275,48196

35

12,618,616 66

$

$ 411,093,859.04 S$

191,002,626.10

$ 269,790,119.39 $

787,722,854.48 f$ 2,010,423,848.79 j

-

JJ

Table 27: Movement of water under a Water Market - 20% Scarcity
80% Water Availability
Residential
Durham
3,012,389.67 667,116.02
Halton

Hamilton
7,147,636.34

Niagara
3,137,928.12

Peel
(1,620,539.48)
1,499,256.14

Toronto
15,474,971.04

3,214,899.37
554,708.41

30,367,285.06

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial
Fruit

1,619,605.73 1,313,304.15
972,969.05

643,785.83 232,379.55 (224,738.55) (623,233.02) (105,446.25) (6,850,068.92)

4,130,830.90
1,856,998.86

9,115,303.03 2,218,821.69

(43,988.21) (834,104.01) (1,200.53)
(305,673.22)

427,000.31

(1,566,872.97)

285,102.43
(22,381.46) (341,428.54)
(4,935,925.71)

(4,973,683.09)
(36,504.31) (140,310.34) (9,382,903.39) (16,221,557.46)

(1,391,332.62)
-

(6,165,786.80) (721,297.86) (1,513,146.76)
(33,346,251.19)

(37,978.53) (620,288.40)
(2,863,817.48) 7,531,430.85

Vegetables Grain

-

(9,313,535.69)

-

|

(6,818,995.97)

(818,025.19)

20,071,468.171

(45,072.83)1

With a reduced water supply of 20%, there is a more pronounced movement of water from low value uses to high value uses when compared to the zero scarcity scenario. In addition to the movement of agricultural water use
to non-agricultural water use, there is a net sale of water from low industrial uses

and large gains in residential and high value industrial use. The exception to this is Peel region, where all users, except high value industrial are net sellers.

Overall, three economic groups remain net purchasers of water allowances
under the market; residential, high value industrial, and mid value industrial. Also
note that although the number of sellers increased from 16 to 22 users (41% of

total to 56% of total), total sales of water allowances increased by only 1.86MM

allowances, or 4.1 %. This is due to the lower per user allowance levels under the

73

scarcity condition. What is observed is that the lack of allowances that grain,

agriculture, and to some extent fruit provide the market in the control scenario is
accommodated by increased sales of allowances from low value industrial users. Therefore, the allowances required by the highest value users in order to
maintain optimal economic output can no longer be satisfied through cheap water

from agriculture and must therefore jump to the next lowest value users. The change in perceived value of the sellers between low value agriculture and low
value industry is significant, and must be considered as one of the primary

drivers for the significant jump in equilibrium price from $0.99 to $1.84, an
increase of 86.8%.

Economic benefits of the market over a non-market solution have doubled from the control scenario to $83.7MM with a retained total value of approximately $2.01 billion for all water allowances. It is important to note that of a total benefit
of over $80MM, 57.5% is allocated to the sale of water allowances by grain

agriculture users and 2.2% to vegetable agriculture. This is lower than the control

scenario, where grain producers accounted for approximately 67% of the total
benefit.

The next scarcity scenario is one in which there is 40% scarcity, or 60% of
total water available compared to normal. The previous trends observed in the

20% scarcity scenario continue, with a few exceptions such a^ Halton region,
which converts from a net seller to a net buyer and mid-value industrial users,
who switch to net sellers of water allowances.

Table 28: Monetary Benefit of a Water Market vs No Market - 40% Scarcity
60% Water Availability Residential High Value Industrial
Durham Halton 5>
3>
3,180,028.49 6,442,065.60
28,306.37

Hamilton

Niagara

Peel

Toronto

$ $

2,238,375.93
5,695,284.40

$ $ $ $
$

8,144,253.26 19,162,596.28 114,323.96
339,731.22

$

2,132,670.62

$
$ $ $ $ $

512,505.93 9,954,367.54

$

9,496,935.31 9,000,056.07
56,151.62 4,271,590.64

i; \5
if \5
5 I5
(
\

25,704,769.54 56,592,018.50

$ $
$

6,337,648.61 10,946.61 610,982.80
274,566.82 132,759.67

$ $
$

Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial Fruit Vegetables Grain

$
$ $ $ $

131,776.78
1,246,751.30

$>
$5

1,576,986.37 5,286,199.39
33,602.11

1,918,491.72 11,899,236.67 339,812.33 2,361,102.08 57,364,470.34

143,981.31 13,472.90
637,852.47
9,145,897.82

4,590.31
456,455.50 14,666,022.95

$5
5* J5

13,580.20 882,410.49
4,355,793.36
33,012,688.78

$ $ $

$
$

251,623.95 17,714,457.61

11,482,298.59

$

J

$

|4,439,257/IB 15

19,591,604.97

$

$

20,981,873,72

$J 35M742,9t!

K

22,^24,^3.64 f$ 156,179,901.17

74

Table 29: Overall Value of the Water Market - 40% Scarcity
60% Water Availability
Residential High Value Industrial
$

Durham
85,905,459.77

Halton

Hamilton
55

Niagara
$
91,473,029.75
54,890,588.57
7,239,088.27

Peel
I
,5
,5

Toronto

$
$ $ $

86,791,655.94

189,650,910.90

96,168,379.57

$

463,760,493.77

55

1,013,749,929.69 575,016,006.82
110,061,059.45 89,320,647.08
7,824,752.98

$
$

52,674,820.98
7,083,298.41

52,206,206.26
7,493,640.67 5,003,794.19
170,804.90

J5
55 35
55

154,225,989.26 29,135,624.45
14,693,650.55

$ $
$

105,688,079.93 15,596,865.88
15,216,947.37

Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial
Fruit

$
$ $ $ $ $

155,330,321.84 43,512,541.78
42,504,592.70

J$ 51
55
!5
!5

$ $ $
$

6,170,745.79 541,218.95 632,00710
19,256,579 27

5,730,916.48 6,483,930.82
218,019 67

&
,5

Vegetables Grain

$
$ $

468,608.20
1,282,50249 5,921,20224

$
$ $

160,190.11
290,104 35

705,93447 10,205,473 82

55 55

5
,5

3,128,568.08
68,946,397.06

14,163,13843

19,400,003 29
252,520,570.50

$ 172,204,135,26' i

r395,378,48&.0&Hf- 180,£98,7|1.98 ,5

c$

705,107,950.09 f$ 1,868,047,361.15;

!5

Table 30: Movement of water under a Water Market - 40% Scarcity
60% Water Availability
Residential
Durham
4,007,072.93

Halton
4,357,300.29
1,045,941.63 219,248.67

Hamilton
9,762,877.47

Niagara
4,145,887.95 1,224,996.32

Peel
(3,464,194.18)
2,941,636.02

Toronto
20,275,863.34

39,084,807.80 16,396,103.80

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial
Fruit

1,281,392.34
(616,373.37) (2,238,382.80)
11,896.69

3,051,074.30
745,236.70

6,851,063.19 (987,997.62) (12,186,655.92)
-

(160,994.30) (1,700,983.88) (612,616.31)
(79,084.68) (5,137,551.69)

(3,702,508.54)

(4,503,388.46)
(24,161,938.19) (704,841.48) (1,134,860.07) (25,009,688.40)

(699,299.06) (24,351.95)
(256,071.41)

(1,816,805.09) (34,741.87)
(465,216.30)

(5,519,811.45)
(45,028.04)
(105,232.76)

Vegetables
Grain

(229,254.92)

-

(6,985,151.76) (4,768,800.89)

(3,701,944.28)
940,823.89

(2,147,863.11)
9,094,562.10

(7,037,177.55)
(16,932,316.50)

-

(2,320,346.59)

13,952,272.99 |

(33,804.99)

The water scarcity in this scenario is significant, causing a large reallocation of allowances to maximize optimal economic value for the entire system. Although the number of sellers in the marketplace increases by only 3,

from 22 to 25, the total number of allowances sold increases by 29.7%, from
46.1 MM to 59.9MM allowances. The primary increase comes from two sources, low-value industrial and mid-value industrial users, who are now selling

significantly larger portions of their water allowances, and in some cases
converting from a net buyer to a net seller of allowances. Movement within these
user groups is provided in Table 31 below.

Table 31: Low and Mid Value Industrial Allowance Transactions
Net Transaction Changes from 20%

Scarcity (ML)

% of Total Allowances Sold

Mid-Value Industrial Durham
Halton*

(5.95)
(0.57) (0.21) (0.57)

14.2%
27.5%
_

Hamilton*

_

Niagara
Peel

(0.39) (2.14) (2.84)

7.8%
67.1% 6.5%

Toronto

75

Low-Value Industrial
Durham Halton Hamilton Niagara

(18.0)
(1.40) (0.98) (2.79) (1.48) (0.55) (10.80)

76.0%
100.0% 41.0%
36.6% 82.2%

Peel
Toronto

100.0%
79.6%

*Users still purchased allowances, though less of them than in the 20% scarcity scenario

Only two mid value industrial users remain net purchasers of water and all
low value industrial users are now selling all or a portion of their water allowances. The introduction of mid value industrial sales of water allowances

combined with the increasingly large share of sales from low value industrial

water allowances continues to create upward pressure on the equilibrium price of
water. Under the 60% scarcity scenario, the equilibrium price has increased to

$2.76/m3, an increase of $0.91 over the 20% scarcity scenario. This represents
an increase of 49.7% over the 20% scarcity scenario and an increase of 180.6%
over the control scenario equilibrium price.

Benefits

of the

market scenario

over a

non-market

scenario

have

increased 86.5% to $156.2MM. The primary beneficiaries of this increased

benefit are high value industrial users and low value industrial users. High value
industrial users, through allowance purchases, are able to maintain water use at

88.2% of pre-scarcity levels, while low value industrial users are able to sell allowances at a price that allows for a substantial benefit over using the water directly. Overall, the market has a benefit ratio of 9.1%, which under the previous assumption of transaction and imperfect information costs at 5% of total water value, makes the market economically viable at the 40% scarcity level. The final scenario is one in which there is a 60% scarcity of water, signifying a severe shortage in water resources. Strain on the entire system is

substantial at this point, with many users forced into dramatically lowered use or
a complete sale of their water allowances.

76

Table 32: Monetary Benefit of a Water Market vs No Market - 60% Scarcity
40% Water Availability Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit
$
$

Durham 1,998,786.06
11,830,533.34

Halton $5
55

Hamilton

Niagara
$5

Peel

Toronto

3,374,084.81 13,398,214.63 44,918.03 1,132,415.85 36,255.35

$ $ $
$

9,233,981.02

1,780,845.19 13,173,065.28 385,571.56 1,916,074.06

$ $ $
$ $

3,673,529.58
20,649,150.07 4,631,824.97 7,747,353.75 56,516.31

$ $ $ $

7,272,741.22

\i

27,333,967.88

39,856,839.08 85,848.64 3,130,904.90

J5 55 55

14,472,716.56
2,642,688.74

ii
1>

113,380,518.96
8,754,656.42

$ $ $ $

963,804.48 2,508,587.06 , 12,677.48 479,162.64

3f 55 55 J5

13,959,515.80

!I
5 5

30,394,851.43 638,165.84 2,449,328.34

$ $ $ $

24,392.72
938,930.31
4,549,649.74

55
i5
55

508,323.98
146,474.02 11,692,772.02
29,603,126.11

Vegetables
Grain

632,738.51
9,089,904.07 27,708,531.25

$ $ $

252,022.86 17,529,767.80 54,540,165.34

$
$

15,177,334.70
32,970,885.77

S5
If

5

58,039,428.32

57,820,546.41

S>

$

38,347,662.32 |!t

240,990,917.20

Table 33: Overall Value of the Water Market - 60% Scarcity
40% Water Availability
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Durham Halton Hamilton 164,833,127.28
153,195,817.11 14,721,217.37

Niagara

Peel
55 35 35 35 3&
S5

Toronto

$ $ $
$ $ $

70,693,679.11 52,063,446.34

$ $ $ $
$

74,130,814.87,H?
51,846,085.35 5,000,021.35 4,562,872.00 145,795.00 684,610.51 9,897,200.07 55 55 S5 55 25 S&

$

74,381,933.37 54,388,477.26 5,605,896.09 5,530,144.89 5,239,267.98
211,434.02

74,156,804.90 103,844,666.34 14,757,293.50

$ $ $
$

371,962,367.20
144,270,979.07 14,443,979.13
40,947,517.26

S5
55 \5
55
!5
!5

830,158,726 73
559,609,471.46
60,512,755.32 85,045,258.78 6,563,349.33
3,034,064.34

$
$

5,984,347,88
5,984,347.88 654,241.32 612,916.24 18,674,901.42

Low Value Industrial
Fruit

13,263,083.25 371,080.72 1,243,762.31
5,742,342.22

$ $
$ $

14,757,293.50 152,964.31
281,341.26 18,813,993.08

$ $ $

Vegetables
Grain

$ $

$

13,735,316.66

S5

!5

66,863,753.44

54,f|f,88W| \t 146JJ6J^3|I9a|4^ ! ^i^r^!

^s ?<t R,^

>1 2l5564^356J|8 I1*

571,624,842.661!^

1,611,787,379.40

TaWe 34: Movement of water under a Water Market - 60% Scarcity
40% Water Availability
Residential
Durham
3,786,551.69
1,846,828.55

Halton
4,488,280.42 1,508,406.31

Hamilton
10,395,531.34 4,400,246.80

Niagara
3,788,512.74

Peel
(9,274,586.42)
4,236,753.42

Toronto
17,743,393.45
8,687,811.59 30,927,683.21

High Value Industrial
Mid Value Industrial

1,766,095.28 (955,483.53)

22,446,141.95
(13,827,533.19) (21,206,860.34) (932,269.31)

(1,492,255.20)
(1,492,255.20)
19,770.69

(276,188.26) (1,137,796.40) (33,778.93) (170,714.27) (2,467,962 85)

(645,791.50) (3,307,278.48)

(3,679,874.30)
(3,679,874.30)

(6,777,940.40)
(10,210,660.68)
-

Low Value Industrial
Fruit

(1,378,995.28) (833,556.09)
(52,723.12)

(46,561.85)
(310,144.20)
(1,431,908 74)

(38,143.14)
(70,155.17) (4,691,451 70)

Vegetables
Grain

(152,836.61)
(4,656,76784)

-

(756,573.38) (16,673,125.60)

(3,425,03446)

-

(2,140,963.93)

1,910,246.02

9,054,093.37

(1,091,184.47)

(17,197,331.61)

9,442,603.971

(22,536.66)|

At this point, virtually all users are selling to either residential users or high industrial users. The exception to this is Peel region residential users, who are sellers of allowances and Durham region fruit producers, who are small buyers of allowances. To illustrate the dichotomy of the market under this scenario, Table 35 quantifies the percentage of allowances purchased (or sold) by each user.

Users that have purchased over 100% of their pre-market allowance volume are highlighted in green. These users have more than doubled their water use
through the^market mechanism. Users who have sold greater than 50% of their
77

allowances are shown in yellow, while users who have sold all allowances are
shown in red.

Table 35: Percentage of Prescribed Allowances Purchased (Sold)
40% Water Availability Residential High Value Industrial Durham
44%

Halton
58%

Hamilton
65%

Niagara

Peel
40%
-52% -100% -100% -100% -100%

Toronto
36%

All Regions

^^^^^28%|

Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit


-100% 36% -100%
-inno/

Hinm
-24%
-20% -100% -93% -100%
.-.(,,

HHHHB
-53%

 -69% 
-66% m
-100%

85%

 
-100%]
12%

-66%

Vegetables Grain All Users

-100%
33%

-100% -6%

-100%
-51%

-12%

14%

At 60% scarcity, 3 entire user groups have sold all of their allowances,

with two other groups selling almost two thirds of their allowances. Regionally, with the exception of Toronto, every region has at least half of their user groups selling all allowances. Most importantly, we have Peel region residential users selling over half of their allowances. As mentioned earlier, for the purposes of this

analysis, a sale of more than 50% of a residential users allowance signifies a
potentially negative impact to basic living standards and as such indicates a situation where the concept of fairness would need to be addressed.
Examining the market from a benefit perspective indicates that a scarcity level of 60% provides substantial benefits over a non-market application.

Specifically, total benefits under the market compared to the no market condition are $241 MM, giving a benefit ratio of 17.2%. Of the total benefit received, 47% is allocated to high value industrial users, up from 36.2% in the previous scenario. Effectively, all water resources are being diverted to residential and high value

industrial use at this point, with compensation provided to the sellers at a rate of

$4.01/m3.
A more detailed look at the market constitutes an analysis of the regions themselves and the user groups across regions. Figures 5 and 6 demonstrate
the performance of these groupings with respect to value retention.

78

Figure 6: Value Retention by User Group
180.0%

160.0%

140.0%

0.0%

100%

80%

60%

40%

Water Availability

·Residential
-Fruit

High Value Industrial
-Vegetables

-*-Mid Value Industrial
Grain

X

Low Value Industrial

At the user group level, there is a distinct value increase for agricultural
users growing vegetables or grains. This gain in value is driven primarily from the

disproportionally low value assigned to water by these users in the initial condition. Aside from vegetables and grains, all users see value loss to a certain
extent. High-value industrial users retain up to 95.3% of their original water value

due to the high value placed upon water and the subsequent purchasing of allowances to keep use near maximum. Other users (residential, fruits, low-value

industrial and mid-value industrial) experience efficiencies in value retention, but to a lesser degree than vegetables, grains, or high-value industrial users.

79

Figure 7: Value Retention by Region
105.0% r

100.0%

65.0%

60.0%

100%

80%
Water Availability

60%

40%

Durham

Halton

-*- Hamilton

-^-Niagara

-*-Peel

-- Toronto

The loss in value by region is more uniform than by user group, with the one exception being a higher than average value loss by Toronto. This is driven

chiefly by the absence of agriculture in this region, which was previously shown
to actually gain value under scarcity when subject to market conditions. However, even in the case of Toronto, over 70% of the original value is maintained, even in

a scarcity scenario of 60% water loss (40% water availability). An examination of benefits at a user group level reveals the results presented below in Figure 7. Looking at the dispersion of benefits at the user group level, there is a clear transfer of benefit from agriculture to industrial uses as scarcity increases. In particular, grain production receives a large initial allocation of market benefits under the control scenario, whereas high value
industrial use gains a large share of benefits under the 60% scarcity scenario.

80

Figure 8: Share of Benefits by User Group
100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

100%

80%

60%

40%

Water Availability

Residential  High Value Industrial  Mid Value Industrial

Low Value Industrial  Fruit  Vegetables

Grain

For a true reflection of the share of the benefit received by each user with
respect to their share of initial water allocation, refer to Figure 8. With the

benefits represented in comparison to initial water allocations, the trend remains unchanged; however, the share of benefits is distributed differently among the
user groups. Grain users continue to receive a large share of benefits relative to

their allotment. In addition, both vegetable growers, and to a lesser extent fruit
growers, receive a proportionately larger share of benefits in the initial condition.

Off all users, mid-value industrial and residential users demonstrate the lowest
proportional share of benefits throughout each scenario, although these are

joined

by fruit growers as scarcity increases. The primary reason can be

attributed to the moderately elastic nature of demand for these users and the

higher opportunity costs for forgoing water consumption as scarcity increases. For residential users, this translates into only moderate purchases of water in the
scarcity scenarios compared to high value industrial. For mid-value industrial
81

users, the margin on water allowance sales is lower than for other users as scarcity increases, creating a lower overall benefit from a sales action, even
when it surpasses the consumption action under more scarce conditions.

Figure 9: Share of Benefits by User Group (normalized)
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

80%

60%

40%

Residential  High Value Industrial  Mid Value Industrial

Low Value Industrial  Fruit  Vegetables

Grain

The share of benefits is consistent across each region as each scarcity scenario is modeled and is shown in Figure 10. The initial share of benefits does show a discrepancy among the volume of water each region controls, where Toronto has a disproportionably low share of benefits in relation to their overall
market share of water allowances. This is shown in Figure 11.

82

Figure 10: Share of Benefits by Region

90%

60%

Water Availability
Durham Halton

a Hamilton

 Niagara

Peel

a Toronto

Figure 11: Share of Benefits by Region (normalized)

100%

40%

Toronto

 Peel

Niagara

 Durham

83

Reviewing the movement of water allowances themselves under each scarcity scenario reveals a number of interesting trends. Under the no scarcity condition there are four user groups that are net purchasers of water allowances, the largest being low-value industrial users, who purchase allowances equal to

30% of their initial allocation. As scarcity increases residential and high-value
industrial users trend towards greater purchases of allowances, while all other users sell increasingly larger proportions of their allotment, with vegetable

growers, grain growers, and low-value industrial selling 100% of their water

allowance under the 60% scarcity scenario. Regionally, Peel clearly sells the highest proportion of its allotment, selling

51% of allowances under the 60% scarcity scenario. This can be attributed to the

initial lower than average selling price ($1.00/m3) of water in comparison to other regions, which average $1.50/m3. Niagara and Durham are also net sellers of
allowances under each scarcity scenario; however,
trending toward net purchases as scarcity increases.

in both cases they are

Figure 11: Movement of Water by User Group
150%

100%

50%

-50%

-100%
-100% -100%-100%

-150%

Water Availability

 Residential

 High Value Industrial  Mid Value Industrial

Low Value Industrial  Fruit

 Vegetables

Grain

84

Figure 12: Movement of Water by Region

 Durham

 Halton

 Hamilton

 Niagara

 Peel

 Toronto

85

Conclusions

Overall,

the

implementation

of the

market

model

in

contrast to

a

conventional approach presents some opportunities for economic benefit, even in

instances where no water scarcity exists.

Both a traditional approach and a

market approach demonstrate positive value retention characteristics in that the value retention ratio remains greater than 1.0 at all times. This indicates that
there is some built-in robustness with the users themselves to reallocate water

more efficiently. However, as scarcity increases there is a divergence between

the value retention ratio of the traditional model versus that of a market model,
with a market model showing superior performance. This is in turn reflected by

the benefit ratio, which shows benefits increasing as a percentage of value
between the two models as scarcity increases. This is indicative of an improved
allocation efficiency that allowance trading provides, particularly as water

becomes scarce and higher value uses can become potentially constrained without the ability to purchase additional units. This effect can be indirectly
demonstrated by examining the activity ratio, which shows an increasing

percentage of allowances traded as scarcity increases, with more and more

users finding greater benefit in selling their allowances than using it themselves
as they may have done in less scarce conditions.

It is important to reiterate the role that agriculture has in providing benefit
to the market. In its current state, water valuation for agricultural uses is
considerably less than non-agricultural uses under the current model. However,
this is demonstrative of how market forces can best re-allocate resources at a

macro-scale, even when a large disparity in initial conditions may not exist. Indeed, under conditions of large scarcity, users that were initially purchasing significant quantities of allowances became sellers, indicating that allocation efficiencies are in fact working as intended under the market model.
In taking a system currently designed for all users and regions to operate

autonomously and forcing them into a single market, price disparities are bound
to exist. This discrepancy exists not only between heterogeneous user groups,

86

but also among groups across distinct regional boundaries. In the model as designed, the creation of a market, particularly under scarcity conditions, created
an equilibrium price that "priced out" many users within the market. This is a predictable result when instituting a market with a diverse base of participants

that have substantially different end use designs for the material input; in this
case water. This creates a trade-off between user equity and overall market

efficiency. As was shown in previous studies, this problem can be avoided
through exclusion of certain user groups within the marketplace. Primarily, this

has been achieved by creating agriculture only, or alternatively non-agriculture
type markets. For this thesis however, the primary design was overall market

efficiency and not user equity, making an inclusive design more appropriate. In
practice, the trade-off between user equity and market efficiency needs to be

closely examined for market implementation. Potential approaches could include excluding users considered "essential services" and/or creating allocation and
price rules that would influence certain users not to trade their allotments.

Functionally, this might resemble a mix of free market allocation and a modified
approach to the a priori rights allocations discussed in the literature. This is outside of the scope of this thesis, however, and would make interesting research for future study. Furthermore, any examination into alternate or hybrid approaches to address equity would be situational, depending on local/regional
economic, political and environmental factors.

In addition, for this thesis, trading and economic benefit was modeled for a single growing season only. Long-run scenarios, which take into account price
corrections in the output products of user groups and sustained scarcity issues,

would prove useful in determining the lasting effects of a water market on each
group with respect to their purchasing/selling behaviour.

Qualitatively speaking, the application of a market model to the Southern
Ontario region creates substantial changes to the water use equilibrium
condition. As stated, the primary driver is a move from low value agriculture to

industrial uses, with a secondary driver of low-value industrial to high-value
industrial uses. This relationship becomes increasingly more pronounced as

87

scarcity increases. This serves as an important exercise in how to best deal with
scarcity conditions, whether imposed through natural cycles of abundance versus drought or through artificial constraints imposed for a number of potential reasons including downstream flow rate requirements, political water sharing

agreements, ecological water table requirements, etc. Ideally, the institutiort of a market would accomplish use reduction goals on a large scale to meet natural and/or artificial constraints while mitigating loss and/or maximizing benefit.
creation of a market in Southern Ontario, demonstrates that

The

economic

efficiencies can be maintained to a reasonable level in an environment of
declining resources using proper reallocation of resources.

88

Appendix A: Regional Water Usage

Durham
Month Days

Millions of Litres (ML)
April
May

June

July

August

September

30
3,504.4 1,834.7
611.6
611.6

31
3,621.2 1,895.9
632.0 632.0
632.0

30
3,504.4

31 3,621.2 1,895.9
632.0 632.0 632.0

31
3,621.2 1,895.9
632.0 632.0 632.0

30
3,504.4 1,834.7
611.6 611.6 611.6 776.7

TOTAL
21,376.6

Residential

Industrial/Commercial

1,834.7
611.6
611.6

Hightjalue Users
Medium Value Users
Low Value Users

11,191.9
3,730.6

3,730.6
3,730.6 4,737.9

611.6

611.6

System Loss
Agriculture

776.7
-

802.6
-

776.7 50.9 (0.3)
50.9
-

802.6

802.6
99.9 17.5 82.4

12,009.2
118.5 248.8 11,641.9

12,160.0
136.0 382.1
N/A

Fruit Crops
Vegetable Crops
-

(21.0)
-

Grain Crops

-

-

(3,564.4)

11,641 9

TOTAL

5,339.1

5,517.1

5,390.0

17,526.3

5,616.9

5,339.1

44,728.5

Halton
Month Days

Millions of Litres (ML)

A 30
3,174.5 1,398.9
466.3

M

J

J

A

S 30
3,174.5

31
3,280.3

30
3,174.5
1,398.9 466.3 466.3 466.3

31
3,280.3 1,445.6
481.9 481.9
481.9

31
3,280.3 1,445.6
481.9 481.9 481.9 834.0

TOTAL
19,364.4
8,533.5 2,844.5

Residential Industrial/Commercial
High Value Users

1,445.6
481.9

1,398.9
466.3

Medium Value Users Low Value Users System Loss
Agriculture Fruit Crops

466.3 466.3 807.1
-

481.9 481.9 834.0

466.3 466.3

2,844.5 2,844.5
4,923.2

807.1 1,669.6
24.3
104.6

834.0 3,485.9
38.8

807.1 15.1
2.9

61.7
8.6

1,455.2 16.2
104.7 1,334.3 N/A

6,687.5
90.8 426.8 6 169 9

-

Vegetable Crops Grain Crops

-

53.2 (381.6)

152.2 3,294.9

12.2

1,540.7

TOTAL

4,573.4

4,787.6

6,243.0

8,211.8

6,181.0

4,588.5

34,585.4

Hamilton
Month Days

Millions of Litres (ML)

A

M
31
6,748.5
4,201.9 1,400.6
1,400.6

J

J

A 31
6,748.5
4,201.9 7,400.6 1,400.6 1,400.6

s
30
6,530.8
4,066.3 1,355.4
1,355.4

30
6,530.8 4,066.3
1,355.4 1,355.4 1,355.4

30
6,530.8 4,066.3
1,355.4 1,355.4

31
6,748.5

TOTAL
39,837.7 24,804.6 8,268.2
8,268.2 8,268.2

Residential

Industrial/Commercial
High Value Users Medium Value Users Low Value Users System Loss
Agriculture j Fruit Crops Vegetable Crops

4,201.9
1,400.6
1,400.6

1,400.6

1,355.4
1,725.1 192.4 41.8 150.5

1,400.6 1,782.6 2,175.5
85.0

1,355.4 1,725.1

1,725.1
-

1,782.6
114.3
17.9

1,782.6 2,032.5
74.6

10,523.2
4,574.6 219.4 775.4 3,579.8

18.9 (1.5)
18.9

-

-

96.4

241.0
1,849.5

227.6 1,730.3 N/A

Grain Crops

-

(1,251.9)

(239.4)

TOTAL

10,597.1

11,064.6

10,789.5

13,125.8

12,982.8

10,616.0

69,175.8

89

Niagara
Month Days

Millions of Litres (ML)

A
30

M
31

J 30 3,847.4 1,695.5 565.2
565.2 565.2

J
31 3,975.7
1,752.0
584.0

A
31

S
30
3,847.4

TOTAL
23,469.4

Residential
ndustrial/Commercial High Value Users

3,847.4
1,695.5
565.2 565.2

3,975.7
1,752.0
584.0 584.0 584.0

3,975.7
1,752.0
584.0

1,695.5
565.2 565.2 565.2

10,342.5
3,447.5 3,447.5 3,447.5

Medium Value Users
Low Value Users

584.0
584.0

584.0 584.0 1,010.8

565.2

System Loss
Agriculture

978.2
-

1,010.8
291.0 272.5 18.5 (2,194.9)

978.2
300.0 280.1
19.9

1,010.8 8,695.5
1,717.7 57.2 6,920.6

978.2
-

5,966.8

2,586.6
908.4

I

11,873.1
3,178.7 131.8
8,562.6

Fruit Crops
Vegetable Crops

-

-

36.3 °
1,642.0

-

Grain Crops

-

(2,557.9)

N/A

TOTAL

5,542.9

6,018.7

5,842.9

14,423.2

8,314.3

5,542.9 |

45,685.0

Peel
Month Days
Residential

Millions of Litres (ML)

A
30

M
31

J
30

J
31

A
31

S
30 7,266.5

TOTAL
44,325.8 27,599.1
9,199.7
9,199.7

7,266.5
4,524.4 1,508.1 1,508.1 1,508.1 1,919.5
-

7,508.7
4,675.3

7,266.5
4,524.4 1,508.1 1,508.1 1,508.1 1,919.5 2,519.8
213

7,508.7
4,675.3 1,558.4 1,558.4 1,558.4 ^

7,508.7
4,675.3 1,558.4

Industrial/Commercial High Value Users Medium Value Users Low Value Users

4,524.4
1,508.1
1,508.1

1,558.4 1,558.4 1,558.4 1,983.4 308.5
11.0

1,558.4
1,558.4

1,508.1

9,199.7
11,708.7 11,999.4 95.4 175.4

System Loss
Agriculture Fruit Crops

1,983.4
5,796.6
36.2

1,983.4
3,348.1
19.3

1,919.5 11.0
5.7 5.3

-

Vegetable Crops
Grain Crops

-

22.7
274.9

36.1 2,462.4

55.5
5,704.9

42.3

-

I- 3,286.5
15,532.1

N/A

11,728.6

TOTAL

11,791.0

12,492.5

14,310.7

17,980.6

11,802.0

83,908.8 |

Toronto
Month Days

Millions of Litres (ML) A
30 20,162.6

U
31 20,834.7 12,972.6 4,324.2
4,324.2

J
30
20,162.6

J

A
31

S
30 20,162.6

31

TOTAL
122,992.0 76,580.0 25,526.7
25,526.7

Residential Industrial/Commercial High Value Users Medium Value Users Low Value Users System Loss Agriculture

20,834.7 12,972.6
4,324.2 4,324.2 4,324.2

20,834.7
12,972.6 4,324.2 4,324.2 4,324.2 5,503.5
-

12,554.1
4,184.7
4,184.7

12,554.1
4,184.7 4,184.7 4,184.7 5,326.0
-

12,554.1
4,184.7 4,184.7 4,184.7

4,184.7 5,326.0
-

4,324.2 5,503.5
-

25,526.7

5,503.5
-

5,326.0
-

32,488.5
-

Fruit Crops
Vegetable Crops

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

j
-

Grain Crops

-

-

-

-

-

TOTAL

32,716.7

33,807.3

32,716.7

33,807.3

33,807.3

32,716.7

|

199,572.0

90

Appendix B: Weather Data and Related Calculations
Region: Durham
J F M
0

A 6
~11

M
-12 17 8
2.2

J

J

A 20 24 15 2.7 83 0

S 16

O

N
4 7 1 74 6
80

D

Rs = 0.7 Ra - b

Rs = Solar Radiation Ra = Extraterrestrial Radiation b = 4 MJ m-2 day-1

Mean Max Min ET Base (mm/day) Rain (mm) Show (cm)

-5
-1

-4
-1

17
22 12
2.6

20
25

9
13

-2 2
-5

4
-4

-9 32
39 71

-8

2 '

20

16
2,8

11
2.3

5 66 0
66

Rs estimated at 14 MJ m-2 day -1
Source: http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/

30 23 53

47 16
62

1.7 70 3 73
30

75 0 75
31

81 0 81
3O

67 0

88

47 32 79 31 Ra = 25.71 1 MJ m-2 day -1 is 0.408 mm day-1 Ra = 10.49 ET0 = 0.0023(Tmean mm day-1

0 88
30

Total (mm)
Days

67
31

63
31

31

31

31

30

Region: Peel, Toronto

17.8)(Tmax-Tmln)u°Ra
efers to Evapotranspiration

J Mean Max Min ET Base (mm/day) Rain (mm) Snow (cm) Total (mm)
Days

F -5
-1 -10

M 0
4

A
6

M
13

J 18

J
21

A
20

S
15

O
9

N 3 7
-1

D -3
1

Source: FAO

*E

-6
-2

**ETo is the base evapotranspiration for standard grass crop to which a crop factor is applied

12
1

19 7

24 12

-11 25 31 52 31

-5 37 19 57
31

27 15 3,2
74

26 14 3.1
80

21 10 2.7
78 0

14 4 63 1 64
31

Rainfall Conversions to Inches

-7 Region: Durham 35 29 61 31 Region: Peel, Toronto Region: Halton Region: Hamilton

A
2.88 2.69 2.66 3.07

M
2.94 2.85 2.77 2.98 3.17 2.92 2.81 3.30

J
2.65 2.93 2.87 3.41

A
3.28 3.13 3.09 3.17

S
3.46 3.05 3.09 3.23

1.9
22
22

2.6
72

3.0
74

62

62
8 69

6

0

0

0

0 80

43

68 30

73 31

74 30

74 31

31

78 30

30

Region: Niagara

2.97

3.01

3.44

2.97

3.21

3.75

Effective Rainfall Formulae Region: Halton
J F

aurce: US Bureau of Reclamation

R=Rainfall M
0

Re=Effective Rainfall 0.95R 0.95R + 0.9(R-1) 1.85 + 0.82(R-2) 2.67 + 0.65(R-3)

Mean Max Min ET Base (mm/day)

-5
-1

-4
0 -9 28

A 6

M

J

J
21 26

A
20 ,25

S 16
21

O
9

N 4
8 0 69 3

D -2
2 -6

R<1
1<R<2

12
18

1B
23

5 -4
47 15

11
1

14
5

2<R<3 3<R<4

-9

7 2.4

12

15

15 2.9 78
0

1.8
31
28

Rain (mm)
Snow (cm) Total (mm)

65
3

70
O

2.8 71
0

3.1

10 2.6 79
0

4<R<5
69
0

3.32 + 0.45(R-4)
3.77 + 0.25(R-5)
4.02 + 0.05(R-6)

73
0

47 18
65 31

5<R<6 R>6

17 44

59
31

62
31

68

70 31

Days
Region: Hamilton

30

71 30

73

78 31

79

69 31

72 30

31

30

Effective Rainfall in Inches

A
Region: Durham 2.57 2.42

M
2.62 2.55

J
2.81 2.61

J
2.38 2.61

A
2.85 2.76

S
2.97 2.70

J
Mean
Max

F -5
-1 -9

M 0 4
-5 49

A

M
13

J

J

A

S

O 9

N
3 7 0 68

D

Region: Peel, Toronto

-6 -2 -10
30 43

6

18
24 12
2.9

21 26

20 25

16 21
10
2.6

-3
1

Region: Halton Region: Hamilton Region: Niagara

2.39 2.72 2.65

2.48 2.65 2.68

2.51 2.87 2.96

2.56 2.93 2.64

2.73 2.78 2.81

2.73 2.82 3.16

11
1

Min ET Base (mm/day) Rain (mm) Snow (cm)

19 7
2,5

14 4 72 1 73 31

15
3.1

15
3.0

-6

1.8 26 35 55 26 75
31

70 9
78
30

75
1

84
0

87 0

81 0

82 0

44
37

Effective Rainfall in mm

11
79
30

A
Region: Durham Region: Peel, Toronto Region: Halton 65.28 61.42

M
66.59 64.78

J
71.43 66.18 63.80 72.82 75.16

J
60.52 66.34 65.11 74.51 67.16

A
72.43 70.03 70.68 71.33

S
75.42 68.66 71.65 80.17

Total (mm)
Days

66 31

76

84
30

87
31

81
31

82
30

77 31

31

60.77 62.98 68.01

69.25 69.31

Region: Niagara
J

Region: Hamilton 68.99 67.33 F

M
1

A

M 14 19 9 2.5 78
1

J

J

A

S

O

N
5 8 1 79 12 91
30

D
-1

Region: Niagara 67.24

Mean

-5
-1

-4
-1

7
12

19
24

22 27 17
3.1

21
26

17
21
13

11
15 6 84
1

Max
Min ET Base (mm/day)

5
-3 56 20 76

2

-8 27 42 70 31

-8 29
39

2

14 2.9

17 2.9 82
0

-5 51 40 91 31

1.9 68

2.5

Rain (mm) Snow (cm)
Total (mm)
Days

8S
0

75
0

95
0

7
76 30

67

31

77 31

88 30

75 31

82 31

95 30

84

31

*Data covers 30 years historical data, 1971-2000

Source: http://www.climate.weatheroffice.ec.gc.ca/climate_normals

91

Appendix C: Market Summary Calculations
No Scarcity (Control)
Applicable Choke Price ->

0.94

Q-intercept

Slope
3,586,670.43
144,151.39

Equilibrium Quantity
23,184,972.41 3,775,066.16

100%Q
21,376,555.74
3,730,638.00

Purchase/Sale
1,808,416.67
44,428.16
444,281.60 888,563.20 (15,197.33)

Actual Change
1,808,416.67
j 44,428.16 444,281.60 888,563.20

P{NW!)
1.49
1.29

Benefit {$}
455,906.24

Market Value
97,791,838.76

Non-Market Value 95,553,204.16

Durham
Residential

"23,353,386.18
3,781,834.86 4,242,606.55 4,754,575.10

26,720,694^8
3,917,169^90
5,595,957.00 7,461,276.00
135,990.48 382,091.53

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial Fruit Vegetables

53,152,544.84

53,101,901.29 9,654,891.14
7,241,168.36

1,441,513.91
2,883,027.82 15,416.31

4,174,919.60
4,619,201.20 120,793.15

3,730,638.00 3,730,638.00

1.29
1.29
0.00 0.00 0.00

/"" 68,464.87
136,929:75
7,490.73

10,161,326.66 8,254,039.38

121?517.03
54/169.38
0.00

,

135,990.48 382,091.53 11,641,919.61

(15,197.33)
(382,091.53)

607,290.73
378,705.95 11,476,547.73

599,800.00
208,990.00 5,464,948.00

349.284.50
0.00

37,768.56 0.00

(344,322.97)

169,715.95 6,011,599.73

Grain

0.00

(11,641,919.61)

(11,641,919.61)

Halton
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial Fruit
Vegetables

21,402,896.69
2,906,998.51
3,469,566.05 4,094,641.10

24,205,524.38
2,986,715.55
4,266,736.50 5,688,982.00 90,797.13 0.00 0.00

2,985,203.72
84,910.18

21,262,725.07

19,364,419.50
2,844,491.00 2,844,491.00 2,844,491.00 90,797.13 426,785.68 6,169,907.13

1,898,305.57 58,520.51
585,205.08 1,170,410.17 (21,695.17)
(426,785.68)

1,898,305.57

1.62

2,903,011.51
3,429,696.08 4,014,901.17

58,520.51
585,205.08

1.67
1.68 1.68

603,570.87 20,166.31
201,663.10
403,326.19
10,693.50

$ $
$
$
$

96,684,748.57 52,487,602.22 10,307,600.27 8,703,894.48
197,993.50

94,209,837.31 52,409,746.68 9,529,044.85 7,146,783.64 187,300.00

849,101.79
1,698,203.58

1,170,410.17 (21,695.17)
(426,785.68) (6,169,907.13)

70,135.34
0.00 0.00

22,007.79
0.00
0.00

69,101.95
0.00 0.00

0.00 0.00 0.00

339,673.25
4,820,864.44

$
$

420,723.25
6,082,264.44

81,050.00 1,261,400.00

Grain

(6,169,907.13)

Hamilton
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial Fruit
44,303,379.30

49,797,090.75 8,681,606.01

5,851,597.03 242,896.48 2,428,964.81
4,857,929.61 44,439.60

44,028,614.86

39,837,672.60

4,190,942.26

4,190,942.26 173,963.64

1.70 1.70

1,500,786.61

209,043,353.40

203,411,156.30

8,453,565.16

8,442,159.84 10,007,832.61
11,747,469.02 175,613.31

8,268,196.20 8,268,196.20
8,268,196.20 219,421.65

173,963.64 1,739,636.41
3,479,272.82

62,296.80
622,968.03 1,245,936.06 21,593.02 306,647.98 1,670,611.79

155,030,958.57
30,482,833.00

154,797,169.26 28,144,939.86
21,108,704.90 541,700.00 476,300.00 1,863,582.00

10,121,885.78
11,975,575.35 177,699.99

12,402,294.30
16,536,392.40 219,421.65 775,360.50

1,739,636.41
3,479,272.82

1.70
1.70 0.00 0.00

25,784,491.17
563,293.02 782,947.98

(43,808.34)
(622,133.28)

(43,808.34) (775,360.50) (3,579,771.85)

Vegetables Grain

182,860.71 351,845.42

631,097.94
3,438,208.39

153,227.21
190,402.75

775,360.50
3,579,771.85

3,579,771.85

(3,389,369.11)

0.00

3,534,193.79

Niagara
Residential High Value Industrial 25,553,481.26 3,508,714.30

29,336,798.63
3,619,862.61

4,029,780.03 118,389.02
1,183,890.18 2,367,780.36

25,364,261.07
3,503,155.29

23,469,438.90 3,447,488.20

1,894,822.17
55,667.09

1,894,822.17
55,667.09

1.46
1.46 1.46

445,477.30

104,827,892.89 55,282,934.83 10,718,723.81

102,514,509.12 55,214,971.01 10,039,085.64
7,529,314.23

13,087.47
130,874.69 261,749.37 332,079.76 41,584.32

Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial Fruit Vegetables

4,059,749.23
4,672,010.26

5,171,232.30
6,894,976.40

4,004,159.12 4,560,830.04
2,504,962.22 47,440.75 0.00

3,447,488.20 3,447,488.20
3,178,691.98

556,670.92
1,113,341.84

556,670.92

1,113,341.84
(673,729.77)

1.46
0.00 0.00 0.00

8,888,590.57

2,537,053.36
51,459.33 0.00

3,178,691.98
131,807.81 0.00

683,437.91
85,582.75 0.00

(673,729.77) (84,367.06)
(8,562,586.15)

7,724,179.76
143,084.32

$

7,392,100.00
101,500.00 3,191,476.00

131,807.81
8,562,586.15

(131,807.81)
(8,562,586.15)

Grain

5,249,479.78

$

8,440,955.78

Peel
Residential High Value Industrial
Mid Value Industrial 44,415,444.26

55,407,198.29
9,659,670.04 13,799,528.63
18,399,371.51

11,707,807.35
434,644.51 4,346,445.13

43,865,698.74 9,231,199.59
9,514,824.16 9,829,962.58

44,325,758.63 9,199,685.75
9,199,685.75

(460,059.89)

(460,059.89)
31,513.84

0.95 1.06
1.06

9,039.06

$

125,872,030.69

125,862,991.63

9,251,608.53

31,513.84
315,138.41 630,276.82 (29,741.04)
(175,387.93)

1,142.45
11,424.53

$
$

107,128,510.41
19,794,141.31

107,096,301.76 19,472,054.87 14,604,041.15
150,700.00

9,718,913.51
10,238,141.26

315,138.41 630,276.82 (29,741.04) (175,387.93)
(11,728,629.24)

Low Value Industrial
Fruit

8,692,890.25
30,169.60

9,199,685.75
95,357.84

1.06
0.00 0.00

67,033.42
0.00

95,357.84 0.00
0.00

65,616.79 0.00
0.00

22,849.07 14,659.29
127,086.57 9,555,423.66

$ $
$

15,248,214.04
165,359.29

Vegetables

0.00
0.00

175,387.93 11,728,629.24

172,896.57
11,562,025.66

45,810.00 2,006,602.00

Grain

0.00

(11,728,629.24)

0.00

$

Toronto
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial 133,419,454.73 26,907,532.46 30,129,587.55 34,732,523.41 153,740,061.38 29,355,649.46 38,289,977.55 51,053,303.40

21,644,384.26
2,607,598.58 8,691,995.27

132,403,132.65
26,785,091.46 29,721,450.89 33,916,250.08 477,655,512

122,992,049.10 25,526,651.70

9,411,083.55
1,258,439.76

9,411,083.55
1,258,439.76 4,194,799.19 8,389,598.38

1.42 1.47
1.47

2,045,992.45 303,664.57
1,012,215.25

$ $
$

535,490,907.69 163,972,014.91
80,114,098.60

524,167,514.85
162,427,786.54 74,966,670.71

25,526,651.70
25,526,651.70

4,194,799.19
8,389,598.38

17,383,990.53
115,563,411

1.47

2,024,430.49

$

66,519,858.81

$

56,225,003.03

Total Market Equilibrium Price

483,081,845 0.99

591,577,360

92

80% Water Availability
Applicable Choke Pries -->

1.54 21,196,787.50 3,695,159.29
3,375,850.86 3,021,063.73

Q-intercept

Slope

Equilibrium Quantity

80% Q 17,101,244.59 2,984,510.40
2,984,510.40 2,984,510.40

Purchase/Sale

Actual Change

P<NM)

Benefit ($)

Market Value

Durham
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial Fruit

26,720,694.68
3,917,169.90 5,595,95^.00 7,461,276.00

3,586,670.43 144,15139
1,441,513.91 2,883,027.82 15,416.31 0.00 0.00

20,113,634.26 3,651,626.42 2,940,522.19
2,150,406.39

3,012,389.67 667,116.02 (43,988.21)
(834,104.01)

_" 3,012,389.67 667,116.02

2.68

"1,265,030.02
1,543,668.01
671.16

/i^6.47*
1.81
1.55

(43,988:21)'

(834,104/01)
(1,200.53) (305,673.22)
(9,313,535.69)

120,659.52
46.75 362,454.92 11,910,256.36

112,247.49,
0.00 0.00

135,990.48
0.00 0.00

107,591.85
0.00 0.00

108,792.38 305,673.22
9,313,535.69

(1,200.53) (305,673.22) (9,313,535.69)

1.76 0.22
0.19

Vegetables Grain

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

93,449,104.18

52,978,006.58
8,496,975.36 6,299,789.85 575,854.75 563,085.32 17,156,606.44

Halton
Residential 19,607,948.83

24,205,524.38
2,986,715.55

2,985,203.72
84,910.18

18,706,434.97 2,830,301.21 2,702,593.11
2,560,695.23 50,256.24 0.00

15,491,535.60

3,214,899.37
554,708.41

3,214,899.37
554,708.41

2.92 8.37

1,731,134.45 1,811,923.05 107,365.97
23,932.17

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial

2,855,943.58
2,959,016.83 3,073,542.66

2,275,592.80
2,275,592.80 2,275,592.80

4,266,736.50 5,688,982.00
90,797.13 0.00 0.00

849,101.79 1,698,203.58
22,007.79

427,000.31
285,102.43

427,000.31
285,102.43 (22,381.46)

2.35 2.01
0.83 0.08 0.08

Fruit
Vegetables

56,902.46
0.00 0.00

72,637.70 341,428.54
4,935,925.71

(22,381.46)

11,380.74 551,142.74 7,881,600.19

0.00
0.00

(341,428.54) (4,935,925.71)

(341,428.54) (4,935,925.71)

Grain

0.00

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

93,070,268.88 52,384,793.11 9,279,509.24 6,647,712.41 191,188.74

628,950.74
9,092,544.19

Hamilton
Residential High Value Industrial
Mid Value Industrial

40,784,922.09 8,307,515.99 8,661,394.10 9,054,592.00 150,979.28
0.00

49,797,090.75 8,681,606.01 12,402,294.30 16,536,392.40
219,421.65

5,85i7597.03
242,896.48

39,017,774.42 8,234,162.69 7,927,861.11
7,587,526.01 137,558.79

31,870,138.08 6,614,556.96 6,6,14,556.96 6,614,556.96 175,537.32 620,288.40
2,863,817.48

7,147,636.34 1,619,605.73 1,313,304.15
972,969.05

7,147,636.34 1,619,605.73 1,313,304.15
972,969.05

3.06
8.51 2.38

4,365,364.27 5,399,672.15
355,041.74 97,435.42 16,228.42 685,394.74

2,428,964.81
4,857,929.61

Low Value Industrial
Fruit Vegetables

2.04
0.99 0.25

44,439.60
0.00

(37,978.53) (620.288.40) (2,863,817.48)

(37,978.53) (620,288.40) (2,863,817.48)

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

Grain

0.00

0.00

0.21

3,486,443.24

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

201,958,249.46 154,736,859.92
27,541,846.46 19,902,518.09

536,260.42
1,142,642.74 5,275,481.96

Niagara
Residential High Value Industrial
Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial 23,130,448.96 29,336,798.63 4,029,780.03 118,389.02 21,913,479.24

18,775,551.12 2,757,990.56
2,757,990.56 2,757,990.56

3,137,928.12 643,785.83
232,379.55 (224,738.55)

3,137,928.12 643,785.83
232,379.55

2.62 7.28

1,221,728.33

3,437,529.17
3,347,897.93

3,619,862.61
5,171,232.30 6,894,976.40

3,401,776.39
2,990,370.11 2,533,252.01 1,919,720.57 0.00 0.00

1,750,416.56
22,806.28

1,183,890.18
2,357,780.36 683,437.91 0.00 0.00

2.04 1.75
0.93 0.31

3,248,307.67 2,126,114.77
0.00 0.00

(224,738.55)

10,665.56 284,165.83 96,804.14 9,554,799.70

Fruit
Vegetables

3,178,691.98
0.00 0.00

2,542,953.58 105,446.25 6,850,068.92

(623,233.02)
(105,446.25)

(623,233.02) (105,446.25) (6,850,068.92)

Grain

(6,850,068.92)

0.15

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

99,948,641.94

55,139,589.60
9,285,271.55

6,435,680.37
7,380,581.83

194,244.14 12,618,616.66

Peel
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial Fruit
Vegetables

37,375,755.95 8,990,264.81

55,407,198.29 9,659,670.04
13,799,528.63 18,399.371.51
95,357.84 0.00 0.00

11,707,807.35
434,644.51

33,840,067.42 8,859,004.74 5,792,875.63 2,386,065.51
39,781.96 0.00

35,460,606.90 7,359,748.60
7,359,748.60 7,359,748.60 76,286.27 140,310.34 9,382,903.39

(1,620,539.48) 1,499,256.14 (1,566,872.97) (4,973,683.09) (36,504.31) (140,310.34) (9,382,903.39)

(1,620,539.48) 1,499,256.14

1.70
5.29

112,153.72
2,585,755.60 282,425.16

7,105,476.34 5,011,266.92
48,893.00
0.00 0.00

4,346,445.13
8,692,890.25
30,169.60

(1,566,872.97)
(4,973,683.09)
(36,504.31)

1.48 1.27
0.63 0.10 0.07

1,422,859.53
22,084.56 214,490.23 15,358.051.83

0.00
0.00

(140,310.34)
(9,382,903.39)

Grain

0.00

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

114,227,932.79 106,602,243.55

17,417,833.44 13,884,974.65
114,277.38 258,467.83
17,284,389.75

Toronto
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial 120,405,086.26 25,339,631.59
24,903,251.35 24,279,850.99

153,740,061.38
29,355,649.46

21,644,384.26

113,868,610.32
24,552,152.26 22,278,320.22 19,029,988.74

98,393,639.28 20,421,321.36 20,421,321.36

15,474,971.04
4,130,830.90

15,474,971.04 4,130,830.90

2.56
3.43 2.06 1.76

5,532,029.14
3,271,930.74 198,369.00

2,607,598.58
8,691,995.27

38,289,977.55
51,053,303.40

1,856,998.86

1,856,998.86
(1,391,332.62)

17,383,990.53 111,059,237

20,421,321.36

(1,391,332.62)

$ $ $ 55,677.85 $

509,283,923.28

160,814,738.89
69,589,845.20 48,034,347.11

415,663,642

586,708,329

382,124,410

Equilibrium Price

1.84

93

60% Water Availability
Applicable Choke Price ~>

2.59
17,438,391.61

Q-intercept

Slope 3,586,670.43 144,151.39;

Equilibrium Quantity 16,833,006.38

60% Q
12,825,933.44 2,238,382.80 2,238,382.80

Purchase/Sale
4,007,072.93

Actual Change
4,007,072.93

P(NWI) 3.87 11.65 2.33 1.81

Benefit ($}
2,238,375.93 5,695,284.40 131,776.78 1,246,751.30

Market Value

Non-Market Value

Durham
Residential 26,720,694.68 3,917,169.90 5,595,957.00 0.00 135,990.48 0.00 0.00

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
_ow Value Industrial rruit
Vegetables

3,544,106.10

3,519,775.14
1,622,009.43 0.00 93,490.98 0.00

1,281,392.34 (616,373.37)
(2,238,382.80) 11,896.69

1,281,392.34 (616,373.37)
(2,238,382.80)

^

1,865,319.00

0.00
0.00 0.00

^

- 1,44^513.91

0.00
0.00 0.00

2,238,382.80 81,594.29
229,254.92

96,093.06

15,416.31

Grairj

0.00

6,98b, 151.76

n (229,254.92) s

11,896:69
(229,254.92) (6,985,151.76)

3.53
0.44

4,590.31
456,455.50

(6:985,151.76)
4,357,300.29 1,045,941.63 219,248.67 (699,299.06)

^0.38

14,666:022.95

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

85,905,459.77
52,674,820.98

35
$
i 9"

72,620,435.16

43,44/,uiu.io
b.yoi.ozi.D^

7,083,298.41
6,170,745.79

$

4,923,yy4.4B

541,218.95 632,007.10 19,256,579.27

$ $ $

503,832.00 175,551.60 4,590,556.32

Halton
Residential

16,479,817.14
2,766,968.01 2,069,261.06 1,294,031.13 33,840.97 0.00 0.00

24,205,524.38 2,986,715.55 4,266,736.50 5,688,982.00 90,797.13 0.00
0.00

2,985,203.72 84,910.18

15,975,951.99 2,752,636.23 1,925,943.27 1,007,395.54 30,126.33

11,618,651.70 1,706,694.60 1,706,694.60 1,706,694.60 54,478.28

4,357,300.29
1,045,941.63

4.22 15.08 3.02 2.35 1.65 0.15 0.16

3,180,028.49 6,442,065.60

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit Vegetables

849,101.79
1,698,203.58 22,007.79 0.00 0.00

219,248.67
(699,299.06) (24,351.95)

28,306.37
143,981.31 13,472.90 637,852.47 9,145,897.82

(24,351.95)
(256,071.41) (3,701,944.28)

0.00 0.00

256,071.41
3,701,944.28

(256,071.41) (3,701,944.28)

Grain

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

86,791,655.94
52,206,206.26
7,493,640.67

35
3!
!i

71,599,476.36 42,880,701.83 6,860,912.29 4,859,812.87 157,332.00 68,082.00 1,059,576.00

5,003,794.19
170,804.90
705,934.47 10,205,473.82

35
3;
3; 3&

Hamilton
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit Vegetables 34,653,157.63 8,052,989.92 6,116,133.38 3,964,070.56 49,797,090.75
8,681,606.01

5,851,597.03 242,896.48 2,428,964.81 4,857,929.61 44,439.60 0.00 0.00

33,665,481.03 8,011,992.02 5,706,154.42 3,144,112.63 96,911.12 0.00 0.00

23,902,603.56

9,762,877.47
3,051,074.30

9,762,877.47
3,051,074.30

4.43
15.32 3.06 2.38

8,144,253.26 19,162,596.28 114,323.96 339,731.22 13,580.20 882,410.49 4,355,793.36

4,960,917.72 4,960,917.72
4,960,917.72

12,402,294.30 16,536,392.40 219,421.65 0.00 0.00

745,236.70
(1,816,805.09)

745,236.70 (1,816,805.09) (34,741.87) (465,216.30) (2,147,863.11)

104,411.97
0.00

131,652.99
465,216.30 2,147,863.11

(34,741.87) (465,216.30) (2,147,863.11)

1.98 0.49 0.42

Grain

0.00

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

189,650,910.90
154,225,989.26

J(
.6

154,592,478.78 126,652,229.39 20,264,356.70 14,353,919.33 455,028.00 400,092.00 1,565,408.88

29,135,624.45 14,693,650.55 468,608.20 1,282,502.49

»i »; .; ; £

5,921,202.24

Niagara
Residential 18,907,727.91 3,313,471.83 29,336,798.63 4,029,780.03 18,227,551.29 3,293,489.24 1,907,498.62

14,081,663.34
2,068,492.92 2,068,492.92 2,068,492.92 1,907,215.19 79,084.68 5,137,551.69

4,145,887.95 1,224,996.32 (160,994.30)

4,145,887.95
1,224,996.32

3.79
13.10

2,132,670.62 6,337,648.61 10,946.61 610,982.80 274,566.82 132,759.67 11,482,298.59

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit Vegetables

3,619,862.61
5,171,232.30 6,894,976.40

118,389.02
1,183,890.18 2,367,780.36 683,437.91 0.00 0.00

2,107,324.52 767,160.84
1,409,954.68
0.00 0.00

(160,994.30)
(1,700,983.88) (612,616.31)

2.62
2.04 1.86 0.62 0.30

367,509.04
1,294,598.88 0.00 0.00

(1,700,983.88) (612,616.31)
(79,084.68) (5,137,551.69)

3,178,691.98
0.00

(79,084.68) (5,137,551.69)

Grain

0.00

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

91,473,029.75
54,890,588.57 7,239,088.27 5,730,916.48
6,483,930.82

&

77,911,026.93

&
$ ! !
&

45,175,885.37
7,228,141.66 5,119,933.68 6,209,364.00
85,260.00

218,019.67
14,163,138.43

5

2,680,839.84

Peel
Residential
High Value Industrial 25,107,392.86 55,407,198.29 11,707,807.35 434,644.51 23,131,261.00 26,595,455.18 5,519,811.45 5,519,811.45 5,519,811.45 (3,464,194.18)

(3,464,194.18)
2,941,636.02

2.46 9.52
1.90 1.48 1.26 0.21

8,534,810.04 2,550,928.64
0.00

9,659,670.04 13,799,528.63
0.00 95,357.84 0.00 0.00

8,461,447.47
1,817,302.91 0.00 12,186.66 0.00 0.00

2,941,636.02 (3,702,508.54)
(5,519,811.45) (45,028.04) (105,232.76)

Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial Fruit Vegetables

4,346,445.13
0.00 30,169.60 0.00 0.00

(3,702,508.54) (5,519,811.45) (45,028.04)
(105,232.76) (7,037,177.55)

17,278.91
0.00 0.00

57,214.70
105,232.76 7,037,177.55

Grain

(7,037,177.55)

0.14

$ $ 1,576,986.37 $ 5,286,199.39 $ 33,602.11 $ 251,623.95 $ 17,714,457.61 $
512,505.93 9,954,367.54

96,168,379.57
105,688,079.93 15,596,865.88 15,216,947.37

$ £ > £

95,655,873.64 87,624,246.90 14,019,879.50 9,930,747.98

160,190.11 290,104.35
19,400,003.29

5 $ &

126,588.00 38,480.40 1,685,545.68

Toronto
Residential 97,724,394.92 22,607,184.33 15,795,093.80 6,063,535.90 303,384,851 153,740,061.38 29,355,649.46 38,289,977.55 51,053,303.40 560.847,681 21,644,384.26 2,607,598.58 8,691,995.27
17,383,990.53

94,071,092.80

73,795,229.46 15,315,991.02 15,315,991.02 15,315,991.02

20,275,863.34
6,851,063.19 (987,997.62)

20,275,863.34
6,851,063.19 (987,997.62) (12,186,655.92)

3.69 5.38 2.64 2.06

High Value Industrial
Mid Value Industrial

22,167,054.21
14,327,993.40 3,129,335.10

Low Value Industrial

(12,186,655.92)

$ $ 56,151.62 $ 4,271,590.64 $
9,496,935.31 9,000,056.07

463,760,493.77

$
5 5 i

398,367,311.29
127,443,340.21 43,456,390.16 38,233,002.06

155,330,321.84
43,512,541.78

42,504,592.70

Total Market

99,483,319

286,593,307

94

40% Water Availability
Applicable Choke Price ->

3.88

Q-intercept
26,720,694.68 3,917,169.90
0.00 0.00

Slope

Equilibrium Quantity 12,337,173.98 3,339,083.75
0.00

40% Q
8,550,622.30

Purchase/Sale

Actual Change 3,786,551.69

P(NM) 5.07 16.82
2.85 2.07

Benefit ($)
1,998,786.06 11,830,533.34 963,804.48 2,508,587.06 12,677.48 479,162.64 15,177,334.70

Market Value

Non-fVlarket Value

Durham
Residential High Value Industrial
Mid Value Industrial

12,797,240.08
3,357,574.20

3,586,670.43

3,786,551.69 1,846,828.55
(1,492,255.20) (1,492,255.20) 19,770.69 (152,836.61)

"

0.00
0.00

144,151.39
0.00

1,492,255.20
1,492,255.20
1,492 255.20 54,396.19 152,836.61

1,846,828.55
(1,492,255.20)
(1,492,255.20)

Low Value Industrial
Fruit i Vegetables

0.00 15V416.31
0.00 0.00

0.00

76,144.35 0.00

135,990.48
0.00

^

74,166.88
0.00 0.00

19,770.69 (152,836.61) (4,656,767.84)

5.29
0.66

Grain

0.00

4,656,767.84

(4,656,767.84)
(2,140,963.93)

0.56

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

70,693,679.11 52,063,446.34 5,984,347.88
5,984,347.88 654,241.32

612,916.24
18,674,901.42

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

53,509,794.33
32,826,629.89 5,020,543.39

3,475,760.81'
641,563.84
133,753.60

3,497,566.72

Halton
Residential 12,616,963.53 24,205,524.38 2,985.203.72 12,234,048.22 7,745,767.80

4,488,280.42
1,508,406.31

4,488,280.42 1,508,406.31 (276,188.26)

5.51

3,374,084.81 13,398,214.63 44,918.03

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial

2,657,094.23
970,523.35 0.00

' £986,715.55
4,266,736.50

84,910.18
849,101.79 0.00

2,646,202.71 861,608.14
0.00

1,137,796.40 1,137,796.40 1,137,796.40 36,318.85 170,714.27 2,467,962.85

21.78
3.69

(276,188.26) (1,137,796.40)
(33,778.93)

0.00 90,797.13
0.00

(1,137,796.40)
(33,778.93)

2.68
2.48 0.23

1,132,415.85
36,255.35 632,738.51
9,089,904.07

Fruit Vegetables

5,362.89
0.00

22,007.79
0.00 0.00

2,539.92 0.00
0.00

(170,714.27) / (2,467,962.85) i 1 Q*tn OAR no

(170,714.27)
(2,467,962.85)

Grain

0.00

0.00

0.25

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

74,130,814.87 51,846,085.35

5,000,021.35
4,562,872.00 145,795.00

684,610.51 9,897,200.07

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

52,757,508.89

32,398,752.49

4,955,103.32
3,430,456.15 109,539.65 51,872.00 807,296.00

Hamilton
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit

27,081,191.07 7,738,681.87 2,973,052.92
0.00 46,907.13 0.00 0.00

49,797,090.75 8,681,606.01

5,851,597.03 242,896.48 2,428,964.81
0.00

26,330,600.38

15,935,069.04 3,307,278.48

10,395,531.34
4,400,246.80

10,395,531.34
4,400,246.80

5.79

9,233,981.02
39,856,839.08

7,707,525.28 2,661,486.98
0.00

22.13
3.74 2.72 2.96
0.74

12,402,294.30
0.00

3,307,278.48
3,307,278.48 87,768.66

(645,791.50) (3,307,278.48)
(46,561.85)

(645,791.50) (3,307,278.48) (46,561.85) (310,144.20) (1,431,908.74)

85,848.64
3,130,904.90 24,392.72 938,930.31 4,549,649.74

219,421.65
0.00

44,439.60
0.00 0.00

41,206.82
0.00 0.00

Vegetables Grain

310,144.20 1,431,908.74

(310,144.20) (1,431,908.74)
9,054,093.37

0.00

0.62

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

164,833,127.28
153,195,817.11

14,721,217.37 13,263,083.25
371,080.72 1,243,762.31 5,742,342.22

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

113,910,247.53 95,692,795.54

14,635,368.73
10,132,178.35
346,688.00

304,832.00 1,192,692.48

Niagara
Residential High Value Industrial
13,693,192.55

29,336,798.63 3,619,862.61 5,171,232.30 0.00
3,178,691.98 0.00 0.00

4,029,780.03

13,176,288.30 3,145,090.56

9,387,775.56

3,788,512.74 1,766,095.28 (955,483.53)
(1,378,995.28) (833,556.09)

3,788,512.74 1,766,095.28 (955,483.53)

4.95 18.93
3.20 2.33

3,160,276.44 575,370.63
0.00

118,389.02
1,183,890.18 0.00 683,437.91
0.00

1,378,995.28

Mid Value Industrial
Low Value Industrial
Fruit

423,511.75
0.00

1,378,995.28
1,378,995.28

(1,378,995.28)
(833,556.09) (52,723.12) (3,425,034.46)

525,586.02
0.00 0.00

437,920.70
0.00 0.00

1,271,476.79 52,723.12 3,425,034.46

Vegetables Grain

2.79
0.92 0.45

(52,723.12) (3,425,034.46)
(1,091,184.47)

0.00

$ $ $ 1.916!074.06 $ 508,323.98 $ 146,474.02 $ 11,692,772.02 $
1,780,845.19 385,571.56 13,173,065.28

74,381,933.37 54,388,477.26
5,605,896.09 5,530,144.89 5,239,267.98

211,434.02
13,735,316.66

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

57,408,125.10 34,132,891.17 5,220,324.53 3,614,070.83 4,730,944.00 64,960.00 2,042,544.64

Peel
Residential High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial
Fruit Vegetables Grain

9,957,490.15 7,972,380.04
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

55,407,198.29
9,659,670.04
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

11,707,807.35 434,644.51
0.00 0.00 0.00

8,455,717.03 7,916,627.72 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
0.00

17,730,303.45
3,679,874.30 3,679,874.30 3,679,874.30 38,143.14 70,155.17
4,691,451.70

(9,274,586.42) 4,236,753.42 (3,679,874.30) (3,679,874.30) (38,143.14)

(9,274,586.42)
4,236,753.42

3.22 13.76 2.33 1.69 1.90

20,649,150.07

(3,679,874.30)
(3,679,874.30) (38,143.14) (70,155.17) (4,691,451.70)

0.00
0.00

(70,155.17)
(4,691,451.70)

0.31
0.21

0.00

$ $ $ 7,747,353.75 $ 56,516.31 $ 252.022.86 $ 17,529,767.80 $
3,673,529.58

74,156,804.90 103,844,666.34 14,757,293.50

4,631,824.97

14,757,293.50
152,964.31
281,341.26

18,813,993.08

Toronto
Residential

(17,197,331.61)

$ $ $ $ $ $ $

70,483,275.31
66,204,986.54

10,125,468.53
7,009,939.75 96,448.00
29,318.40 1,284,225.28

69,716,561.69

High Value Industrial Mid Value Industrial Low Value Industrial

19,232,951.77 4,547,651.92
0.00

153,740,061.38 29,355,649.46

21,644,384.26

66,940,213.09

49,196,819.64

17,743,393.45
8,687,811.59

17,743,393.45 8,687,811.59

4.83

2,607,598.58 8,691,995.27
0.00

18,898,472.27 3,432,720.28 0.00 191.062,205

10,210,660.68 10,210,660.68 10,210,660.68

7.34
3.23 2.35

38,289,977.55
0.00

(6,777,940.40) (10,210,660.68) 9,442,603.97

(6,777,940.40) (10,210,660.68)

$ $ 2,642,688.74 $ 13,959,515.80 $
14,472,716.56

7,272,741.22

371,962,367.20
144,270,979.07
41,625,357.51

40,947,517.26

$ $ $ $

293,533,808.32

94,957,782.90
38,982,668.77 26,988,001.46

Total Market
Equilibrium Price

199,702,197
4.01

461,183,184

67,357.287

95

References
"2004 Municipal Water Use Report," Environment Canada, 25 Feb. 2007, <http://\AAAAA/.ec.gc.ca/water/en/info/pubs/sss/e_mun2001.pdf>.

Allen, Richard G., Pereira, Luis S., Raes, Dirk, Smith, Martin. "Crop Evapotranspiration Guidelines for computing crop water requirements" FAQ Irrigation and drainage paper 56. 1998, Food & Agricultural Organization. 27 April 2007,

http://www.fao.org/docrep/X0490E/X0490E00.htm>.

[

Brouwer, C, Heibloem, M., Prins, K. Irrigation Scheduling. 1989, F-ppd & Agricultural Organization, 27 April 2007. <http://www.fao.org/docrep/T7202E/t7202e00.htm>.

"California Grapples with Water Shortage," Nation, narr. Ina Jaffe, National Public Radio, 15 Oct.
2007.

"Canadian Climate Normals or Averages 1971-2000," 30 April 2007, <http://climate.weatheroffice.ec.gc.ca/climate_normals/index_e.html>.

"Chronic Water Shortages Hit Rural Chinese Hard," Yellow River: A Journey Through China, narr. Robert Gifford, National Public Radio, 12 Dec. 2007. Ewers, Mary E. "Valuing our Water Resources and Modeling Water Markets," Unpublished
Dissertation, The University of New Mexico, December 2004.

Gan, Thian Yew. "Reducing Vulnerability of Water Resources of Canadian Prairies to Potential Droughts and Possible Climatic Warming," Water Resources Management 14, 9 Mar. 2000: 111135.

Jahagirdar, Abhijeet B. "Water Market Futures for Rio Grande water in El Paso County, Texas," Unpublished Dissertation, University of Texas at El Paso, April 2004. Kundzewicz, Z.W., L.J. Mata, N.W. Arnell, P. Doll, P. Kabat, B. Jimenez, K.A. Miller, T. Oki, Z. Sen and I.A. Shiklomanov, 2007: Freshwater resources and their management. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, M.L. Parry, O.F. , Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds., Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.

Mahan, Robert C, Horbulyk, Theodore M., Rowse, John G. "Market mechanisms and the efficient allocation of surface water resources in southern Alberta," Socio-Economic Planning Sciences,
36, 2002: 25-49.

McNeill R., Tate D. "Gudielines for municipal water pricing," Social Sciences Series No. 25, Inland Water Directorate, Water Planning and Management Branch, Environment Canada, 1991, Moncur, James E.T., Pollock, Richard L. "Scarcity Rents for Water: A Valuation and Pricing
Model," Land Economics, 64, Feb. 1988: 62-72. "Municipal Water Utility Rates," May 2, 2007, <www.ec.gc.ca/water/en/manage/use/e_mun.htm>.

O'Connor, John Patrick. "The Impact of Water Transfer Insitutions on Instream Flwo and Agricultural Production," Unpublished Dissertation, Washington State University, August 1999.

96

"Ontario Field Crop Statistics," 28 April 2007,

<http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/stats/crops/index.html>.
"Ontario Horticultural Statistics," 28 April 2007,

<http://www.omafra.gov.on.ca/english/stats/hort/index.html>. Reynaud, Arnaud. "An Econometric Estimation of Industrial Water Demand in France," Environmental Resource Economics. 25, 28 Sep. 2002: 213-232.

Schindler, D.W., and Donahue, W.F. "An Impending Water Crisis in Canada's Western Prairie
Provinces," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 25 Feb. 2006, 1.
<www.pnas.org_cgi_doi_10.1073_pnas.0601568103>.

Schuck, Eric Christian. "Water Management and Pricing in a Conjunctive Use System Using Supply-Based Pricing," Unpublished Dissertation, Washington State University, May 1999. Tan, C.S. "Estimating crop evapotranspiration for irrigation scheduling," Agriculture Canada ,
25(4), 1980:26-29.

Tate, D., Renzetti S., Shaw H. "Economic Instruments for Water Management: The case for industrial water pricing," Social Sciences Series No. 26, Ecosystem Sciences and Evaluation Directorate, Economics and Conservation Branch, Environment Canada, 1992.

Weber, Marian L. "Markets for Water Rights under Environmental Constraints," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 42, 19 Jan. 2001: 53-64.
Wiggins, Jenny. "Rising Biofuel Demand Pushes Up Crop Prices", Financial Times 19 July 2006.

Yoskowitz, David William. "Analyses of Water Markets and Allocation Mechanisms in Texas,"
Unpublished Dissertation, Texas Tech, August, 1997.

97

