Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Nourishing place? : immigrant children's "ethnic food" experiences
Kerith Paul
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Anthropology Commons Recommended Citation
Paul, Kerith, "Nourishing place? : immigrant children's "ethnic food" experiences" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 541.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

NOURISHING PLACE?: IMMIGRANT CHILDREN'S "ETHNIC FOOD'
EXPERIENCES by

Kerith Paul, BA, Trent University, 2006

A Major Research Paper

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts

in the Program of

Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009
© Kerith Paul 2009

RflEBSON UNIVIHSfTY LIBRARY

PROKRIYOF

Author's Declaration

NOURISHING PLACE?: IMMIGRANT CHILDREN'S "ETHNIC FOOD"
EXPERIENCES

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper.

KerithPaul Master of Arts, 2009

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or
individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Immigration and Settlement Studies
Ryerson University
ABSTRACT

This study explores the relationship between food and identity in a sample of ethnically diverse 1.5 and second generation Canadians residing in Toronto. The primary question of this research is what challenges do immigrant children face around "ethnic food" in the
home and school settings and how do they affect immigrant children's ethnic identity as adults. This paper is an extension of a study by Lessa and Rocha (2007) that examined how food mediates the processes of settlement and new identity formation in newly

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this Major Research Paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or
individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

immigrated women to Toronto. I applied the authors' thematic analysis to the data from
this study to compare the similarities and differences of experiences with "ethnic food" between immigrant women and immigrant children. Food studies provide a window into

the lives of immigrant children who experience othering processes in mainstream

Canadian society and occupy a difficult space in between the dominant and their parents' cultures.

KEYWORDS: "ethnic" food; immigrant children; identity; othering; intergenerational
relations

in

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction p.l

I would like to thank my supervisor Dr. Cecilia Rocha for her support and
encouragement. I would also like to thank my second reader, Dr. Iara Lessa for her
contributions to this study.

Review of the literature Exploring ethnic identity
Exploring second generation identity. Constructing identity through food
"Ethnic food", children, and the school setting

p.3
p.4 p.5
p. 10

Connecting children with food
Summary

.....

p. 13
p. 15

Methods. Theoretical Framework
Findings/Discussion

...p. 16 p. 18

Food as a tool to express narratives of displacements and dislocations
Diasporic healing Food in othering processes ,

.p.20
p.21 ..p.27

Integrating the loss of home into a transformed new life
New identities formation

p.32
p.41

Conclusion References

p.49 p.56

IV

Introduction

This paper is based on an exploratory research study that focused on immigrant
children's experiences, more specifically tensions and challenges with "ethnic food" in

the home and school settings. Food is of central importance for immigrants in the
diaspora (Hernandez-Ramdwar, 2006, Vallianatos & Raine, 2008). Food is an important marker and symbol of culture and/or ethnicity, and thus it plays a large role in the identity
of an individual (Isajiw, 1990). Looking at the complex symbolic meanings and associations of food "provides a window into understanding how individuals construct

subjectivity, and how various kinds of sociocultural boundaries (e.g. based on class,
caste, religion, etc) are demarcated" (Vallianatos and Raine, 2008, p356). In this sense, food not only connects immigrants in myriad ways, but it is also used to single out, or

"other", immigrants.
Children of immigrants, who were either born in Canada or not, occupy an interesting space in these issues. Childhood and adolescence can be a challenging time for children and their families. Physical, social, and psychological changes occur as people leave their childhood behind and begin the process of becoming adults. The processes of migration complicate an already challenging time in a young person's life. It may force them to renegotiate not only their individual identities, but also their cultural identities (Scott, 2003). One of the greatest settlement issues immigrant children face is the negotiation between two cultures, that of their parents and that of the mainstream (Janzen and Ochocka, 2003). Furthermore, many immigrant children are moving from countries where they are the majority to one where they are the minority. Therefore, their

settlement issues may be compounded by discrimination based on cultural differences

(Desai and Subramanian, 2003). The question that this study aims to address is how
"ethnic food" is involved in these processes of settlement, integration, and identity
formation in the lives of immigrant children.

differences of experiences with "ethnic food" between immigrant women and immigrant
children. The themes discussed are: food as a tool to express narratives of displacement and dislocations, diasporic healing, food in othering processes, integrating the loss of
home into a transformed new life, and new identities formation. The following literature review illuminates specific areas of identity as well as the ways in which food and identity are connected. It provides a context and serves as an

Through nine individual interviews with children of immigrants, aged eighteen to

thirty-five, from various ethnic backgrounds, I attempted to explore the tensions immigrant children may experience surrounding "ethnic food" at home and at school.
How were these experiences dealt with and how did these experiences influence, affect,
or help in their identity formation?

important starting point for an exploration of the ways in which "ethnic food" plays an
important role in the lives of immigrant children.
Literature review
Exploring ethnic identity

The term "ethnic food" is employed with the understanding that this is not a

homogeneous category. "Ethnic food" is used to differentiate from "non-ethnic food", that is, food that is consumed by the dominant culture in Canada. "Ethnic food" will be discussed as a marker of difference in this paper, and so it is important to articulate what
a marker of sameness would be. "Canadian" or "Western" foods, as defined by the

Ethnic identity has been conceptualized in many ways. It is a complex,

multidimensional construct that refers to an individual's identity or sense of self as a member of an ethnic group (Phinney, 2003). Broadly defined, an ethnic group is a
subgroup within a larger context that is bonded by a perception of common ancestry, a

participants in this study, include foods such as pasta, sandwiches, barbeque, "meat and
potatoes", pre-packaged foods, etc.

shared history and shared symbols (Cornell and Hartnann in Kibria, 2000). The pioneer sociologist Max Weber defined an ethnic group as a social group whose members
"entertain a subjective belief in their common descent" (Weber, 1968, p3 89).

I have always been interested in food and food issues. In my own life, I make

many connections through food.

Stemming from this, I wanted to find out how food

could be important to the lives of immigrants who undergo such extreme transformations

Phinney (2003) asserts that ethnic identity is not a fixed categorization but is instead a dynamic and fluid understanding of self and ethnic background. This is evident
by the fact that ethnic identity is modified and constructed and individuals become aware

and dislocations through the migration and settlement processes. It was in this search
that I read a research study conducted by Lessa and Rocha (2007) that examined how
food mediates the processes of settlement and new identity formation in newly immigrated women to Toronto. My research is an extension of their work. I applied the

of differences among ethnic groups and attempt to make sense of the meaning of their ethnicity within the larger context (Phinney, 2003). Similarly, Sollors argues that any "'ethnic' system" relies on an opposition to something "'non-ethnic'", and that it is this

authors' thematic analysis to the data from this study to compare the similarities and

antithesis that is more important than the interchangeable content (1989, xiv). Ethnic

however they are also overwhelmingly from racialized minority groups and may
experience racism on an everyday basis (Kobayashi, 2008). Some scholars argue that the second generation are caught between "two worlds" and so do not fully belong to either
culture (Anisef and Kilbride, 2003).

identity is not a tangible thing but a process - it is a constructed modern and modernizing
feature that we would now perhaps call an "invention" (Sollors, 1989, xiv).
As argued by Gans (1979), ethnicity has become an expression of symbolic ethnicity, or an expression of the way in which an individual wants to subjectively self-

Second-generation identity is varied and complex and may be very different from
the first generation. Evidence indicates that second generations develop subjective

define their identity and to share it with others. Similarly, Richard Alba observed that
"ethnic identity is...a choice by an individual, even if there are social influences on that choice.. .Thus, for the person who chooses to identify, an identity can be expressed by a

identities and patterns of behaviour that are not present in the first generation (Isajiw,
1990). Gallant (2008) found there is a large diversity of feelings of belonging and
identity: some may identify with their parents' culture of origin, others may not, while some allegiances may operate at many different levels. Although Lalonde and Giguere (2008) acknowledge the diversity among

curiosity about the immigrant experience... by a fondness for ethnic cuisine, or by myriad
other outlets" (Alba, 1990, p303).
Exploring second generation identity The term "second generation" is broadly applied to children of immigrants. Some

individuals within the second generation, these authors argue they very often share the
feature of being bicultural. Although these bicultural immigrants usually negotiate their lives between the two worlds with ease, there are situations where conflicts arise because of incompatibility of the two cultures' norms (Lalonde, and Giguere, 2008). Some second-generation immigrants try to establish a non-stigmatized identity in the "bicultural middle of a spectrum bounded by terms like "fresh off the boat" and "whitewashed", meaning too ethnic and too assimilated, respectively (Pyke and Dang, 2003).
Constructing identity through food

scholars use the term to mean children with either one or two foreign-born parents, others include children who immigrated at a young age, while others argue that the country of
origin is an important signifier (AH, 2008). However it is widely accepted that the

second generation is a demographic group that includes "both children born in Canada to
immigrant parents and those (often referred to as the 1.5 generation) who immigrated to
Canada as children" (Kobayashi, 2008).

A recurring theme in the literature on the second generation is that they see

themselves, and are seen by others, as a cultural bridge between two cultures or societies: their parents and the Canadian way of living (Kobayashi, 2008). This can be a positive
and/or negative experience in many ways for second-generation immigrant youth. They are agents of sociocultural change in that they have the ability to negotiate their identities,

Tensions surrounding ethnic foods in the home and school setting for immigrant

children are very often the result of coming into contact with the mainstream Canadian
culture, and its values and norms around food. Food is an important marker and symbol

of culture and/or ethnicity, and thus it plays a large role in the identity of an individual

(Isajiw, 1990, Vallianatos & Raine, 2008). The food choices that immigrant parents and
children make have a profound affect on their identity. Therefore, the most significant aspect of this literature review is my discussion of articles that study the intersections
between food, immigrants, and identity.

of teaching their children the social meanings of food. However, this is difficult in Canada since many immigrant children's friends and society at large do not share the same food meanings therefore most socialization occurs within ethnic/religious group boundaries, as such decreasing the potential difficulties associated with "cross-group food transactions" (p367). Women bear the burden of teaching values like dietary rules of consumption, and migration may further stress parent-child relations, "as children are exposed to a variety of foods through the media, school and peers, and want to fit in by consuming these foods" (p370).
Lessa and Rocha (2007) focus on how food mediates the settlement process and experiences, and what role food plays in the changing of women's roles, responsibilities, and identities. The authors argue that along with race, class, and gender, food also

Food is widely considered a marker of identity, and therefore identity change. In her work researching second-generation identities of the Caribbean diaspora in Toronto,

Hernandez-Ramdwar (2006) argues that people are "forever changing, shaping, shifting, amending, constructing, reconstructing and deconstructing our identities" (p4). She

argues that for the second-generation who may have never visited 'the homeland', food
can serve as a "root and/or route" of culture, as well as being a marker of difference

growing up (pl37). First-generation immigrants may base the identity of the secondgeneration on how much of their 'original' culture was retained. If second-generation
immigrants are not able to 'take the heat' of Caribbean food, or are not able to name

participates in discrimination and oppression, an example of how food is a part of the 'othering' process for immigrants. Lessa and Rocha further argue that in the context of the dominant group in Canada, home food can single out particularly men and children in the workplace and at school (2007). Another aspect of food as 'othering' is the way in which immigrants can encounter what Lessa and Rocha call "forbidden food habits", which function to segregate and regulate the lives of immigrant families (2007, p.2). In reference to a novel by Vassanji in which a Muslim immigrant feels forced to eat pork, Padolsky, who looks at how Canadian writers articulate how food becomes a way of
engaging the complex issues of group relations, gender, class, individual belonging, and

Caribbean foods such aspelau m&callaloo, they were seen as "'soft', 'white', and/or
'North American'" (pi 18). Second-generation or children of immigrants may feel
discrimination from within their own communities because they may not fit the
definitions of 'authentic' ethnic identities, defined by first-generation immigrants.

In their study looking at Arabic and South Asian immigrant women's identities

and how they are tied up with food, Vallianatos and Raine (2008) found that "family
meals may be an important place where shifting gender and ethnic identities are

negotiated between generations and genders" (p357). The authors mention Appadurai's (1981, p495) notion of "gastropolitics", which are the tensions between family members

race and ethnicity, argues that ethnicity can be challenged by food, and in some ways the ingestion of forbidden food represents a "clash of cultures" that immigrants experience in myriad ways (2005, p.22). Lessa and Rocha discuss the relationship between women and

over access and distribution of different types of food (p361). Women often have the role

the acculturation process, however they found that new immigrant women resisted
acculturation by creating a hybrid space, in which they utilized traditions of food from
both their home country and the receiving country. They argue that this happens because
women begin to "assume a different centrality in the life of the family, which finds expression in food practices" (2007, p.4). This shift in the role within the family can
have a profound affect on personal identity.

breaching and blurring boundaries as about their maintenance and cultural purity. That
is, rules surrounding food can be negotiated as is demonstrated by the way immigrants gain agency by selling their own invented ethnic cuisines to the dominant group.
In the poetic article describing a teacher's collaboration with an immigrant

student in her class, Gingras and Tiro (2008) argue that since power relations between
and among race, class, and gender are quick to surface as people engage in conversations regarding the connections between culture and food, self and 'Other', it is important to
acknowledge that subjectivity, food, and belonging are related and need to "talk back to

Changes surrounding food after immigration can affect perceptions of self,

relations with others, and physical and mental health, and these changes can affect
identity (Koc and Welsh, 2002). To create a feeling of welcoming and home to immigrants, it is important to not only provide equal access to good quality food, but to "culturally appropriate" food (2002, p.47). As a counter-argument to acculturation,

each other" in ways that resist subordination and silence (p378). The authors state that
one's subjectivity is mutually constituted with and by her/his eating and therefore, the "inner lives" of students and teachers are rich resources from which to understand cultural food narratives (p379). In discussing identity, the authors talk about how "manipulation of identity through embracing the food habits of 'other' can result in the

Toronto's cosmopolitan food introduces diversity, creates a sense of home for
immigrants, and challenges ethnocentrism (Koc and Welsh, 2002). Padolsky similarly
notes how immigrants are having a positive affect on the receiving society by the

appropriation not only of culture, but of power" (p386). The authors wonder how this plays out for immigrants new to Canada in how they make decisions to accept or reject
food and methods of food preparation as an attempt to preserve and/or perform ethnic and

diversification of national and local cuisines and foodways, and the creation of hybrid
restaurants and meals (2005).

Gunew's (2000) research looks at how intersecting with both food and cultural difference is the image of assimilation, and the relationship between food and subjectivity especially where the subject is positioned at a "tangent" to the dominant culture (p227). Gunew discusses how because of immigrants experience with mobility and loss of home ground, diaspora groups often attempt to retain "maintenance of social regulation" through food because of the fear of being overwhelmed and assimilated into the dominant
society (p228). However, the author also notes how diasporas are as much about

cultural subjectivity. The authors are good to remind us of Deutsch's (2004) argument
that the 'food voice' commonly "tells stories of migration, assimilation, resistance, changes over time, and personal and group identity" (p396). In her study that looks at acculturative stress experienced by South Asian women in Canada's Atlantic provinces, Samuel (2009) demonstrates resistance in the settlement experience: resistance of immigrant parents to assimilation, and resistance of immigrant children to their parents desire to retain cultural customs and values. The author states

how a Eurocentric pattern of education may create feelings of inferiority about other ethnic cultures and languages which may result in children perceiving their ethnicity as a symbol of backwardness while they come to define their parents, and everything they do,
such as food habits, as inferior.

immigrant families' perceptions on walking to school and school breakfast programs, Greves et al. (2007) discuss the need to address the community, institution, and
environmental barriers that make it difficult for different ethnic groups to fully participate. One of the barriers to full participation in the breakfast program is the lack of
"culturally-appropriate" foods which demonstrates the need for improved communication between the public education system and immigrant families to ensure that school meals meet children's religious, cultural, or other dietary restrictions (Greves et al., 2007, p7).
Zine (2007), whose work provides a critical examination of negative claims

Cultural beliefs may play an important role in the dietary practices of ethnic

minority populations. Satia-Abouta et al. (2002), for example, found that Chinese
immigrants in North America may experience pressures from both the culture of origin as well as mainstream culture about what foods are appropriate to eat. The authors refer to

this as a "cultural crossroad that may exhibit elements of bi-culturalism" in that Chinese
immigrants may eat Westernized foods outside the home but then feel the need to eat
Chinese foods in the home (p34).
"Ethnic food", children, and the school setting

associated with Islamic schools in Canada, discusses the "Eurocentric practices"
pervasive in the public education system (p76). Islamic students spoke of

disenfranchisement and a lack of belonging in public schools and that "trying to 'fit in' and accommodate to the social and cultural mores of the public school environment involved various aspects of cultural identification and practice, such as what kind of food it was 'safe' to bring to school that would not lead to ostracism from other students (Zine,
2007, p76). Zine states how Islamic students' experience of having to eat peanut butter instead of samosas is a powerful metaphor for the Eurocentrism within the culture of

Tensions surrounding "ethnic food" are also experienced in arenas outside the

home for immigrant children. The Canadian public education system, meant to be a safe
place for all children to learn, can be a place where multiculturalism and diversity are not

actively promoted. The public education system can in fact be a place where immigrant
children experience discrimination and/or racism due to their ethnic or cultural

public schools and any deviance from these norms results in the need to conceal any evidence of "ethnic-ness" (p76). Furthermore, encounters like these have a "profound effect on the identity and cultural self-esteem of ethnically minoritized students" (p76). In sharp contrast to Zine (2007), Grover (2007) argues that the denial of public education to minority groups (such as immigrants) "infringes upon children's
fundamental human right to free association" (p59). The author argues that Canadian courts have been inconsistent in protecting the right to a tolerant educational setting

background. Tensions surrounding "ethnic food" can occur through encounters with

peers at school, with the staff at school, as well as with policies and rules enforced by the
school. Apart from the research done by Greves et al. (2007), I have not encountered any
literature specifically looking at immigrant children's experience with "ethnic" and "non-

ethnic" food in the public education system, however some scholars touch on this topic through their research of diversity in schools. In their study looking at American

10

11

(which, the author believes, is the public education system) since the courts regard
children's rights as subsumed under parental liberty rights to place their child in a

immigrant parents are desperate for their children to 'fit in', and so this can become a

'story' for immigrant children to live by in their public school experiences. Zhao also
asserts that, as Canadian schools become more diverse, teachers may need to give up present understandings of teaching and "travel the worlds of many children" who have been shaped by lived stories and need to make meaning of new lives in new schools
(2007, p62).

different school setting (2007). Grover argues that being "completely segregated from

children belonging to the dominant group underscores the fragility of the minority child's
status, often on the margins of the larger society, and maintains a sense of victimization"

(p63). Although this may be true, Grover fails to recognize how the public education
system may not, in fact, be a "tolerant" environment for all students who belong to

By understanding the narrative of a young Chinese immigrant and his experience in a Canadian public school, Xu et al. (2007) argue that in order to avoid immigrants
placing their children in boarding schools, thus isolating them from their communities and homes, it is crucial that public schools bring the immigrants' home and community into close connection with the school. Furthermore, the authors discuss how immigrant

minority groups, as demonstrated by the examples in Zine's study. It is essential to
acknowledge how tolerance and other values promoted by Canada's multiculturalism

policy are often only tolerated instead of being actively promoted in the Canadian public
education system.

Several scholars use the research method of narrative inquiry to investigate

students' questions and difficulties surrounding identity, given that many are hyphenated
Canadians, are not easily resolved in Canada's public education system (Xu et al., 2007). As a marker of identity, food must pose a special challenge for immigrant students who

immigrant students' educational experience (Phillion, 2009; Zhao, 2007; Xu et al., 2007).
By applying a critical multicultural theoretical framework to the story of a mainland
Chinese student who immigrated to Hong Kong, Phillion (2009) was able to demonstrate

are unsure of their place in Canadian mainstream schooling and society.
Connecting children with food

how his experience of discrimination based on place of origin parallels that of ethnic

minorities experience in schools in North America. Phillion (2009) argues that it is
essential that teacher education programs and discourse acknowledge the importance to

Haden (2006), who writes about the increasing need to address food issues and
their connections to children, states that there is a need to understand food as an integral

understand privilege and socio-economic status and how it affects the lives of students, in
particular, immigrant students.

part of social and cultural life, as intimately a part of human and social communication,
and a shaping force of children's subjectivity and self-image. Moreover, the author

Incorporating the immigrant family into the research, Zhao (2007) argues that is
important to inquire into immigrant students' "intergenerational family stories" to see

argues that food helps children negotiate and in some ways challenge the cultural order of
things within which they must take their place (2006).

how they shape and/or ease tensions in the "school stories" of immigrant children. Some

12

13

In a study that focuses on how Nordic children describe and reflect on their

Summary of literature review Phinney (2003) asserts that ethnic identity is not a fixed categorization but is

everyday lives with food, Johansson et al. (2009) discuss how taste is constructed within
social and cultural settings and that "taste communities" may be formed and be strong in a school class setting (p35). These "taste communities" are a result of the relations of not
only children and parents, but also between children who compare and discuss their

instead a dynamic and fluid understanding of self and ethnic background. As argued by Gans (1979), ethnicity has become an expression of symbolic ethnicity, or an expression
of the way in which an individual wants to subjectively self-define their identity and to
share it with others.

lunches (p35). This demonstrates how children's food choices are highly influenced by
peer pressure, which results in tensions surrounding food and identity, health, and parent-

A recurring theme in the literature on the second generation is that they see themselves, and are seen by others, as a cultural bridge between two cultures or societies: their parents and the Canadian way of living (Kobayashi, 2008). This can be a positive

child relations. The authors also emphasize how food and eating are deeply embedded in
culture: "what we eat, the contexts in which we eat.. .what the social interactions around

the food is like, and the values and norms connected to food and eating - all this is rooted
in time, space, and social context in specific ways, which tend to differ between different
times and places" (Johansson et al., 2009, p47).

and/or negative experience in many ways for second-generation immigrant youth. They are agents of sociocultural change in that they have the ability to negotiate their identities,
however they are also overwhelmingly from racialized minority groups and may experience racism on an everyday basis (Kobayashi, 2008). Some scholars argue that the

Dyck (2006), whose work looks at place, health, and healing with South Asian
immigrants in British Columbia, Canada, found that "ethnic" and "Canadian" foods were

second generation are caught between "two worlds" and so do not fully belong to either
culture (Anisef and Kilbride, 2003). Food is an important marker and symbol of culture and/or ethnicity, and thus it

essential in the making of family and individual (including children) identity. Dyck

states that while children and husbands tastes are catered to, immigrant women and
mothers deliberately cultivate the inclusion of what they consider Canadian food, as some think this is necessary for immigrant children to feel like they belong. Furthermore,

plays a large role in the identity of an individual (Isajiw, 1990, Vallianatos & Raine, 2008). The food choices that immigrant parents and children make have a profound
affect on their identity.

Dyck found that immigrant children have a new role as "conveyors of 'new' food knowledge" who transmit information regarding dietary advice as well as requests for

Some immigrant children experience disenfranchisement and a lack of belonging

different foods.(p9). These examples demonstrate the influence children may have on the
food choices of their parents, and call to mind the need to question where those
influences are coming from and why they exist.

in public schools, and "trying to 'fit in' and accommodate to the social and cultural mores of the public school environment involved various aspects of cultural identification and

14

15

practice, such as what kind of food it was 'safe' to bring to school that would not lead to
ostracism from other students (Zine, 2007, p76).

To begin the recruitment process, emails were sent to each student in the immigration
and Settlement Studies Masters Program cohort at Ryerson University, the program in
which I am a student and for which I am conducting and writing this research project. I chose to recruit from my cohort not only because I knew many of them would fit my

Haden (2006), who writes about the increasing need to address food issues and

their connections to children, states that there is a need to understand food as an integral
part of social and cultural life, as intimately a part of human and social communication,
and a shaping force of children's subj ectivity and self-image.
Methods

participant criteria, but also because my recruitment methods included snowballing, and I
suspected they would be a good source of potential participants. This proved to be true, as many of the participants in my study were from outside the initial group. Recruitment presented an initial challenge, with few respondents. However, after a follow-up email
was sent, I received many responses and suggestions of participants. The interviews were one-on-one and took place in a reserved room at the Ryerson

This study was approached from a qualitative social research orientation, because

these qualitative methods allow for the breadth and depth necessary for an exploration of
how people assign meaning to certain constructs such as identity and "ethnic" identity.
Much of the published research on second generation and 1.5 generation youth involves

Library or in another location chosen by the participant. Light food was provided for
several reasons: as small compensation for taking the time to participate, to build rapport, and to relax the academic environment. One of the challenges during the interview process was trying to create a relaxed atmosphere so that the participants would feel more

large-scale quantitative analyses with large samples. Wilkinson (2008) states that, while
very useful in determining general trends, this type of research does not provide much

information on individual lived experiences. Capturing and understanding the stories of
immigrant children in their own words could be done best using a qualitative approach. It should be explicitly stated that the results of this research cannot be generalized. Rather, the aim is to allow for space for a small number of immigrant children's voices,
and to highlight and acknowledge the lived experiences of these children. Exploratory

comfortable and therefore more willing to talk about their experiences. The interviews
were audio-recorded, and lasted from a half hour to over one and half hours. In one case, I conducted a "follow up" interview, in order to gather more data. All participants gave informed consent to participate in the interviews, and had the option of ceasing
participation at any point. In total, I interviewed nine participants, all of them female. Countries of origin of

qualitative interviews were conducted. These were open-ended and utilized an interview
guide.

To be eligible to participate in this study, respondents had to be between 18 and
35 years old, had to be a child of (an) immigrant(s) (either the second or 1.5 generation),
and had to have gone through the Canadian public education system for at least 5 years.

either the participants or their parents include El Salvador (1), Romania (1), Taiwan (1),
China (2), Sri Lanka (1), South Korea (2) and Eritrea (1). One of the participants is a

second-generation immigrant (born in Canada) while the other eight are part of the 1.5

16

17

generation (arrived in Canada before the age of sixteen). To ensure confidentiality and
anonymity, all names have been changed and in some cases, ethnicity has been
concealed.

anti-racist framework was employed to understand and report on the issues surrounding
immigrant children, "ethnic food", and identity formation. This framework can be very
useful in "understanding how the interlocking social constructs of and categories of

All interviews were transcribed verbatim from the audio-recordings. To analyze

gender, class, ethnicity, and race affect people's lives in an overlapping and cumulative manner" (Desai and Subramanian, 2003). It can also be useful in understanding the
complexities of the lives of immigrant children living in a racialized society because it moves beyond a narrow preoccupation with individual discriminatory beliefs and actions to examine the ways racist ideas are entrenched and supported in institutions (Dei, 1996). Self-reflexivity is especially important in this anti-racist theoretical framework

the data, thematic analysis was employed. I employed a flexible framework directed by
the words of the participants. The data was arranged and cross-referenced according to the themes that emerged from the narratives (Mason, 2002). In addition, the study by

Lessa and Rocha (2007) was employed to help organize the data. These authors' study,
which looked at how "food mediates the processes of settlement and new identity
formation" in immigrant women in Toronto, was integral to how I approached my own

context because I come from a place of privilege. As a Canadian-born, white, universityeducated woman, it is important that I acknowledge how my own "whiteness" is

research question. I was interested in the connections between "ethnic food" and

identity, however, there was a gap in the literature. My study would attempt to address
this gap by exploring the children's experiences with "ethnic food", their thoughts on
these experiences, and how it mediates or affects identity formation. In a sense, my

constructed in relation to the participants in this study who fit the Census definition of "visible minority" groups. Sheth and Handa suggest to the white researcher and reader

that she needs to constantly position herself not within the text but in relation to the text:
"she must recognize her position of whiteness and how it falls outside the experience of the text but not outside the power dynamic of her relation to the history of racial

research is an extension of the study by Lessa and Rocha (2007). Therefore, the

identified themes from the data analysis were compared with the five main themes in that
study. However, while Lessa and Rocha focused on immigrant women, my study focuses
on 1.5 and second generation immigrant women reflecting on their experiences as

domination relevant to the experiences in the text" (1993, p49). I have experienced and felt the effects of racism only once in my life (some would even argue this is not possible
given that I am white). I have never experienced racism, discrimination, or exclusion

children. For the purpose of differentiating between the two study's participants, the
participants in this study will be referred to as "immigrant children".
Theoretical Framework

based on food. My initial interest in researching immigrants and "ethnic food" was
because of my own history of making connections through food. Also, my hopes were that food would act as a way to bridge my outsider status with the Canadian immigrant community, and that I would be able to explore how food and identity are connected.

The notion of food as a tool of exclusion was highlighted in several narratives and
so I was able to tailor the follow-up interviews to address this issue. Furthermore, an

18

19

Findings/Discussion

buildings. You are so limited to hotdogs..." (Margaux) These immigrant children have very real memories of the food from home and find
comfort in acknowledging the differences between their home food and the food that is
available in their new location.

Theme 1: Food as a tool to express narratives of displacements and dislocations

Some immigrant women feel the need to connect with other members in their diasporas to express feelings of loss, displacement, and dislocation. Food is a tool that

allows them to do this in that it facilitates the expression of feelings, the ability to discuss home foods in relation to Canada, and it provides imagery of their lost home (Lessa and
Rocha, 2007). Regardless of how old they were when they migrated, some immigrant
children may experience similar feelings of loss. Those that immigrated at a later age have much more tangible memories of, and sometimes longing for, "home". One

To some immigrant children, narratives of home foods help to create an almost

fictional home country. The following narrative demonstrates how home foods can be
used to recall a place (fictional or not) that is free of the challenges of building a new
home in Canada, and finding your place in it: "You try to replicate what you have at home but it wasn't the same.. .To have a lot

interviewee, who immigrated to Canada when she was twelve years old, describes how
her family would engage in narratives of longing:

of the fruit that we wanted and that we were nostalgic for. We missed it.. .all of us
missed it. [Canada is] more of a home than El Salvador believe it or not.. .El Salvador is my imagined home where your desires could be a reality." (Alex)
Although some immigrant children recall the foods from home, and relate those foods to their sense of dislocation, for the most part, immigrant children do not reflect on the trauma of displacement. Immigrant children use food to connect them to their place of origin, but it is rarely used to express suffering or to challenge uprooting from their

"Sometimes we have cravings for food that is only available in Korea. We would
talk about it like 'Oh I miss that dish I miss having that'...we would say when we go back to Korea 'I'm going to have that.. .it's one of my top priorities.' And the dishes have different tastes and feels to it. They use different ingredients I guess."
(Hae)

Similarly, this immigrant child, who migrated between Canada and Taiwan several
times, misses the access and atmosphere that home food represented:

home country. For the most part, immigrant children's struggles around "ethnic food"
are rooted in their new home, in Canada, as will become evident in the following

"I think it's different in Taiwan compared to here because in Toronto everything is
so clean. Food is always kept inside... Food is everywhere [in Taiwan]... it's

thematic discussions.
Theme 2: Diasporic healing The term diaspora encapsulates a group of people who have a common

probably really unsanitary but it's delicious.. .It's also very accessible to get food
inexpensively in Taiwan because it is everywhere. It's not very cheap to go out to

geographical origin, have trans-located through migratory patterns, and share a collective

eat in Toronto.. .Everything is so contained in North America.. .in boxes and

consciousness, identifiable markers (such as ethnicity), and common experiences in their

20

21

new locales (Tettey and Puplampu, 2005). Food practices are tied to space and time, and
for some women in the diaspora, food maintains or recreates home through myriad ways

Doring et al state that "in the complexity and plight of diasporic situations, cooking performs cultural memory: food and recipes are links to cultural 'roots' and are, at the same time, testifying on the contact zones and 'routes' which their producers and
consumers have gone through" (2003, p7). Cultural memory is performed in different ways. "Ethnic restaurants" play an important role in connecting immigrant children to food experiences that remind them of home.
"When I go out and buy Korean food at Bloor and Christie.. .like, Koreatown, it really brings back all those memories I used to have in Korea. On certain

(Lessa and Rocha, 2007). Food may bring a healing effect to the lives of immigrant women by "maintaining the presence of the old world in the present" (Lessa and Rocha,
2007, p3).

Connecting to the old world is also important for some immigrant children.
Hernandez-Ramdwar (2006) argues that for the second-generation who may have never

visited 'the homeland', food can serve as a "root and/or route" of culture, which can also be true for immigrant children who have memories of their country of origin. This immigrant child recounts how she and her sister wanted to learn how to make food that
has been made in her family for generations:

occasions I would like to go eat spicy chicken and then that memory comes back
and I will search for those restaurants and go and eat there, right? So I guess it
does bring a lot of memories from Korea..." (Hae)

"She [her sister] makes lots of... her big thing is she makes a lot of dumplings.
Which is what I wrote about in the anthology. Which was passed down from my grandmother and my mother. We used to bother her a lot.. .we wanted our mom to

Immigrant parents do not always instigate the need for a connection to countries

of origin by way of "ethnic foods". Some immigrant children noted how they were the ones to encourage their parents (more often mothers) to make the foods from home. "My mom didn't come from a social economic place where she was cooking all
the time.. .so when we came to Canada she felt the pressure from us because we

teach us how to make them and fold them. That was a big deal for us to learn how to make them right. It made us really happy. And she is very proud of herself to
be able to make them look so pretty and taste really good." (Margaux)

wanted the food from back home. She had to learn how to make things here... She
did learn to cook... .so here she would make the stuff that she knew how to make

The connection that she makes with the old world is both symbolic and literal.

Whenever she successfully recreates these foods in Canada, she phones her parents (who
moved back to Taiwan) to tell them. She talks of how her need for the recipes that come from her mother and grandmother are so desperately wanted that she will phone her

back home.. .So, the staple food. But makingpupusas or tamales was really difficult for her. Which is why whenever we get it we were like, 'oh yes!'" (Alex)
It is clear that immigrant children have a voice when it comes to the ways in which they want to remember and recreate their home. This quote also demonstrates that

family at three in the morning Taiwanese time, to understand exactly how something is
made, or what ingredients are used.

22

23

the downward social mobility that her mother encountered in Canada had a great effect on the culture and food habits of the family (to be discussed further).
Food may bring a healing effect to immigrant women by having the opportunity
to explain and educate others about culture and food habits (Lessa and Rocha, 2007). This is not the case for immigrant children when they are young. Instead, the experiences of racism and discrimination related to "ethnic food" that immigrant children face (primarily in school) leads them to hide the foods from home and eat the ubiquitous
sandwich. However, some participants discussed how now that they have grown up they
have become more confident in sharing their cultural foods.

people of color and immigrants. There is more give-and-take here than in
Peterborough. It was a lot of me giving and explaining." (Margaux) For some, it is important to have the connection, if not with their own diaspora or ethnic group, then with people of colour and immigrants who may have shared similar "ethnic food" experiences. Furthermore, the discomfort of educating members of other groups about food and other markers of difference calls to mind Razack's (1993)
argument that people of colour are always being asked to tell their stories for white people's benefit, which we cannot hear precisely because of the benefit we derive from hearing them. For some, diasporic healing can come only from within the diaspora, that

"It's an opportunity to expose part of who I am to them, but also allow them

is, the larger conceptual immigrant diaspora.
Food may bring healing to the lives of immigrant women by the promotion of

[members of other ethnic and non-ethnic communities] to expand their horizon as
to the different types of food that there are in the world and you don't have to
always eat macaroni and cheese." (Aatifa)

gatherings with members of the diaspora around food (Lessa and Rocha, 2007). For
some immigrant children, these gatherings help to connect them to a community, time, and place that they may have lost in some ways. "My mom's friends who were other Taiwanese or Cantonese women... we would have meals together and they would bring their foods from where they were from.

This experience of sharing is a stark contrast to the shame that many immigrant children associate with their "ethnic foods" when they are young. They feel confident . that not only are they educating others about different types of "ethnic foods", but it also asserts their identity and membership in a particular ethnic group'. However, not all immigrant children grow up to enjoy the experience of sharing elements of their culture
with those from mainstream Canadian society.

[They] were positive times.. .it was fun. They were good memories for me. It
made me a part of it... the Asian community." (Margaux)

This woman emphasized that these experiences helped her to feel strong in situations when she may be discriminated against. Therefore, these gatherings are healing in that they reinforce the pride that they may feel for their culture and ethnic identity. Immigrant children not only experienced gatherings with adult members of their ethnic group around food, but also other racialized and/or immigrant children. Two of

"I didn't have any friends of color in Peterborough. I was constantly having to
explain what I was making. People weren't repulsed.. .like, they never looked

disgusted but I always had to explain what I was making.. .I'm more comfortable
here in Toronto... there's more exchanging of stories and recipes with other

24

25

the immigrant children discussed how they sought out other children at school who ate
similar lunches.

"I hear people sometimes... 'ew curry' or 'ew Indian food'... and some of these
people are my best friends.. .and it's like.. .oh my god. I guess what they would call it is harmless prejudice. But it's not.. .especially when you're a child. To me
it's racism.. .a different form of it. Food is more important than people think."
(Alex)

"It helped me connect with another girl who became my best friend. She's

Japanese-Canadian and we used to share lunch because we had similar lunches.

Rice-based dishes. We would share lunch... and I think she also had that sense of
pride too." (Margaux)

The most common "ethnic food" experience the participants had as children was a
feeling of being 'othered', being discriminated against or excluded in the classroom. The Canadian public education system is meant to be a safe place where all children can learn and grow. Although many schools now recognize ethnic and cultural diversity in order to
prevent discrimination, "visible minority youth will continue to be at risk unless the system as a whole is actively working to accommodate their differences and needs" (Anisef and Bunch, 1994, p9-10). The participants' narratives demonstrate that racism is

The shared understanding about the "ethnic foods" that they ate provided them

not only with security in the face of segregation from non-racialized children, but also with a sense that there are others who want to express the pride that is felt about their

ethnic identity. Anisef and Kilbride argue that as a result of discrimination, "many learn
to cope by seeking peer groups from their own cultural background as a way to create a

sense of belonging and cultural identity" (Anisef and Kilbride, 2003, p253). Some

immigrant children also seek out gatherings with members of their diaspora when they have grown up. These experiences allow them to connect with their immediate family,
the ways in which they eat, and their larger ethnic community.

all too common in the education system and that cultural diversity may not be as
promoted as it should be. Since food is a marker of identity, then it is also a marker of sameness and difference. For most of the immigrant children, it was more important to "fit in" than it

"And my grandparents... .when they used to visit we would always go back to dim

sum. At dim sum we would see a lot of different families.. .so even now I will try
to go to dim sum on Saturdays and Sundays.. .It's one of those things that we do."
(Rose)

was to continue to take their "ethnic foods" to school. Whether they were witnesses or victims of discrimination because of the food they ate, it was known that their "ethnic
food" was an obvious marker of difference and cause for castigation. Two immigrant children never had the experience of taking their home foods to school because of that knowledge. One of those immigrant children, who arrived in Canada when she was twelve, did not take food to school until she knew what kind of food was the norm.

Diasporic healing has significance for some of the participants both as children

and as adults. Food may act as a conduit for experiences that serve to connect diasporic
members.
Theme 3: Food in "othering" processes

26

27

"I would kind of tell my mom 'this is what people eat'. So I would bring that
instead of Korean food in school which would stink up the place." (Hae)

alienated from the rest so they tried to do anything or everything so I can blend
in." (Hae)

However, most immigrant children have felt the effects of discrimination based
on their "ethnic foods" at school.

However, not all were able or chose to change the types of food they brought to

school and ate. Some simply chose to live with the feelings of exclusion. "Bringing in the lunchboxes that migrant parents made in elementary school was kind of embarrassing. Because mine would be different from other peoples'. I
would have a full meal whereas others would have a handy-dandy sandwich. And
it was kept in a thermos so it would have a smell. At some point I hated that feeling of being different.. .1 never expressed it with my family. I endured it."
(Meghan)

"Initially I would bring my food... normal soups and stuff that you warm up...

it's evidently different, right? It wasn't a big deal for people would always ask me

for that smells interesting or what is that... there was maybe a little bit weird for
them so I felt a bit weird about it (laughing). So I started bringing

sandwiches.. .which is something pretty universal so nobody looks at you funny

about that. So I started bringing sandwiches instead and buying things from the
cafeteria." (Dana)

Whether she chose to endure the othering as a result of eating "ethnic food", it is important to acknowledge the resiliency of immigrant children in these types of situations (Boyd, 2008). Beiser, Shik, and Curyk (1999) suggest that family stability may help

The need to take sandwiches to school is a powerful metaphor for the

Eurocentrism within the culture of public schools and straying away from these rules results in the need to conceal any evidence of "ethnic-ness" (Zine, 2007, p76). Most of
the immigrant children were able to switch to mainstream foods, or more "socially acceptable foods" as one participant called it, such as pizza and wraps. In those cases the
parents were happy to comply with their children's wishes because often, immigrant

foster personal resilience. It is important to consider where confidence in one's own ethnic or cultural identity comes from. Zhao (2007) argues that it is important to inquire into immigrant students' "intergenerational family stories" to see how they shape and/or

ease tensions in the "school stories" of immigrant children. This immigrant child
discussed how it was the "pride" that her parents instilled in her at a young age that
helped her deal with being discriminated against at school:

parents want their children to fit into Canadian mainstream society more than the children
(Zhao, 2007).

"So no they never forced me to take any kind of ethnic food to school. They put a
lot of effort so that it wasn't so different from others. Because when I first came to Canada I didn't speak much English, and that was a reason enough for us to be

"Chinese dumplings are filled with chives and they tend to get off a very strong
odor. So when I opened my lunchbox the whole room filled with chive smell and the other kids would say 'ew, that's so gross.'.. .1 just remember feeling bad because of how much work my mom put into it.. .1 saw her make them, it's really

28

29

labor-intensive. And then to see these white kids making fun of it, I was so

"... There was always that fear in the back of my mind that they would say
something [about what I was cooking]. They never did but there was always the
fear. That is probably because I was made fun of as a kid. And I really make that
known now. I warn people that they should never talk about my food. Don't ever
comment on it. I will f--you up. There's also a lot of self-deprecation and qualifying everything I eat. Like, oh sorry this stuff really smells.. .sorry, I'm so
sorry. ...set that up first so that nobody can say it for you. You say it first.. .which
really sucks. But I think that that is one coping mechanism.. .for you to voice it first before anyone else can." (Margaux)
Her experience as a child not only led her to feel fear about what people may say

offended and angry. I don't think I was really that embarrassed... maybe a little
embarrassed to have a smelly lunch... but mainly I was angry because I saw how
much work my mom put into it." (Margaux)

Experiences such as these come at a price for racialized or immigrant youth. These kinds of encounters can greatly affect cultural self-esteem and identity formation. In reflecting on their own experiences as Indian youth in Canadian schools, Sheth and Handa express a repercussion of racism and exclusion: "the emotional distancing, the

desire to become invisible, the self-silencing all become protective mechanisms of
survival for her in an all-white school.. ..self-hatred and shame of her India/n culture were

the outcomes of internalizing the dominant white Canadian discourse" (Sheth and Handa,
P76). Many of the immigrant children reflected on doing very similar things in order to

about her "ethnic food" today, but is has also led her to develop ways in which she can
avoid racist comments. These strategies, which include being apologetic for her "ethnic
food", are ones that she wishes she did not have to employ. Cultural or ethnic shame is also a repercussion that is created from experiences of discrimination. Samuel (2009) proposes that Eurocentric pattern of education may create feelings of inferiority about other ethnic cultures and languages which may result in
children perceiving their ethnicity as a symbol of backwardness while they come to

deal with the discrimination they faced from peers. When asked about how she felt about
her taking "non-ethnic" foods to school, this participant states:

"It was like a survivalist strategy. Kids want to be accepted... they don't want to

be picked on. You blend in. Or you want to stand out for good reasons, like
you're cool." (Alex)

In the face of these experiences of exclusion, immigrant children devised realistic
and necessary strategies in order to cope. As children, one of these strategies was to stop

define their parents, and everything they do, such as food habits, as inferior. Some
immigrant children discussed these feelings of shame as children.

eating "ethnic food" in order to conceal ethnicity. Some immigrant children discuss how

".. .1 remember my father making this chicken soup... and I remember that the * chicken's feet were still in there and I was just so disgusted... I just couldn't eat it, you know?...you slowly becoming aware.. .you just become aware somehow that you are an immigrant.. .there are differences..." (Robyn)

these experiences have affected them as adults, and how coping strategies are still employed. The following narrative illustrates the ways in which traumatic childhood
experiences may leave a real impression:

30

31

Immigrant children's feelings towards their families and their ethnicities may

practices demonstrated the disconnect that was felt between the participant and her
parents.

slowly change as their awareness of "otherness" becomes greater. Those who feel a
sense of belonging do not ask these questions of identity and self-doubt.

".. .Home was sort of unchanging. But I certainly wanted things, yeah. Oh I want
to try that or.. .or I would try to mix Canadian foods with [home] food. I would mix, like, [my "ethnic food"] with tomato sauce just to see and.. .because I think to be honest I really do think of my family as being so different.. .and so.. .that
was just the way that they were. And I would just go elsewhere or do my own thing, you know? And whenever we would go out, which was never, I would try
to suggest certain places but we would always end up going to most of the time a [country of origin] restaurant. And my parents would always bring their own food when they would come and visit me." (Robyn)

Theme 4: Integrating the loss of home into a transformed new life

Change and transformation are key themes in the lives of all immigrants.

Although identities are not static, immigrant children have a very different immigration

experience than their parents due to the fact that their identities are being developed and formed for the first time. Immigrant children are faced with significant pressures from their family and from mainstream Canadian society. These two forces have a tug-of war effect on immigrant children as expressed by one participant: "we definitely lived in two different words [from their mother].. .it was home and then school.. .there were different expectations from both" (Alex). Food helps to mediate those expectations and the resulting identity negotiation. The changes and transformations in food habits and

Immigrant women create a "borderland space" in the home by way of cooking
hybrid creations. This plays a role not only in the maintenance of their ethnic identity, but also in creating a connection with their new environment (Lessa and Rocha, 2007). Hybridization practices were common among the immigrant children's experiences in this study. The majority of them discussed how their mothers slowly incorporated new

practices that either the immigrant parents or children instigate help to create a sense of
adaptation and belonging. Most participants discussed change in their families' food habits as the "variety", "diversity", or "incorporation" of "Canadian", "non-ethnic", or
"Western" foods.

foods into their diet and "experimented" by mixing these new foods with their "ethnic food". Having a variety of foods facilitates immigrant children's dynamic identities that
are constantly being negotiated both within and outside the home. One participant discussed how she and her sisters began to demand the incorporation of new tastes after

For some immigrant children, there was a clear frustration at the lack of change or adaptation that they expected from their family. Some immigrant children found that the

family members who would not eat "non-ethnic foods", out at a restaurant for example, were hindering their desire to try new things. The second-generation participant, who
expressly stated that she was not an immigrant, discussed her frustration at her parents

her mother had been making only "ethnic food" for six years after arrival in Canada:
"She'll put spice on a chicken, you know, mixing it up. She does a lot of that. It's great because she's upholding both. Because Canada is our home now, and

who "whole-heartedly" identified with their country of origin. Their food habits and

32

33

you know our culture is.. .was Sri Lankan. To have both.. .it's great. Dual
identity is great." (Melinda)

foods, but the reality is that anything straying from the norm may place immigrant children in a vulnerable position. Furthermore, this encounter highlights the fact that
'othering' is a phenomenon that occurs within ethnic groups, as well as corning from mainstream Canadian society (this will be discussed further in terms of "authentic
identities").

Her assertion that the hybrid food they eat "upholds" her identity points to the
importance that food plays in the lives of immigrant children and how it helps to cement

the way they want to present themselves. Furthermore, this example demonstrates the
agency that immigrant children have in influencing their parents' decisions and in
transforming family food habits.

For many immigrant families that arrive in Canada, employment is one of the
greatest experiences of change in their lives. Whether it is a lack of credential recognition or Canadian experience, discrimination, or language barriers, many immigrants experience downward mobility in the Canadian labour market (Preston et al,
2003). Furthermore, this is compounded with the need to keep up with the Canadian

Lessa and Rocha (2007) argue that the ambiguity of the home space as a result of
hybrid food practices helps family members deal with discrimination and facilitates belonging. Although hybrid foods may do this within the home, they may not be "safe"
foods for immigrant children when interacting with others outside the home. Two

pace of life. This has a profound affect on the lives of immigrants and their families.
Lessa and Rocha (2007) discuss the effects in terms of changed food practices and
subsequent changed family dynamics. These effects were also articulated by immigrant children. Four participants discussed the struggles their parents endured as immigrants in the labour market and the impact it had on their family, including their family food
practices.

participants talked about their experiences of taking hybrid food to school and the
resulting ridicule they faced from peers.

"But I do remember one time I didn't have anything to eat.. .there was no rice or pasta, but we had bread. So we took that Eritrean beef stew and we put it into the

sandwich.. .into the bread. And that was my sandwich (laughing). I remember I went to school, and there was an Eritrean friend of mine there.. .and [she said]

One participant discusses how her mother's tiring schedule resulted in the children not being able to take "ethnic foods" to school.

'you don't eat that beef stew with bread, right?' My friend looked at me... she
was Eritrean...' What are you doing? Why are you having it with bread?'.. .1
think that impacted me a bit." (Aatifa)

"No, like, for lunch I don't think she ever made curries... because she worked a lot mostly... So she always prepared us like, sandwiches mostly... yeah, mostly sandwiches she made and she left it... it was for her convenience .. .because she works during the night so... it worked out for her. She would make it, leave it,

Encounters like these may have a "profound effect on the identity and cultural
self-esteem of ethnically minoritized students" (Zine, 2007, p76). Immigrant parents may

think that they are helping their child to 'fit in' by sending them to school with hybrid

we would take it.

She was always sleeping when we were leaving." (Melinda)

34

35

Another immigrant child reflects on how her friends from within the same ethnic
group, who were the majority at her school, sought her "ethnic food" because their
parents did not have the time to make it.

telling of the kinds of situations many immigrant families may be forced to endure as
newcomers to Canada:

"When I think about the food questions, there is context there because [my
parents] had to work a lot and very.. .their hours would change quite a bit. So my
memory of childhood when we lived in [Toronto suburb] was that they were not

"... We would exchange things at school. Because they wanted mine and I wanted
theirs. My Chinese friends wanted mine.. .Because their parents didn't have the
time to make them noodles or rice they would make them sandwiches... inevitably they hated it and they wanted with real food." (Meghan)
The experience of not seeing parents during meal times was also very common

home very often.

So we had to really take care of ourselves.. .we being me and
And then, you know, my parents...

my siblings. It really shaped our home life.

they were well aware of what their situation were their chances... where they
stood in their chances in Canada... it was very clear that the only work that they could do was manual labor... it was really physically difficult. And the
compensation was really... it wasn't enough... [When we moved to the country]
my parents had this.. .store which required immense amounts of time.. .their time continued to be devoted to their work which had a real impact on our family

due to the pressures of their under-employment situations.

"[Eating] just kind of united us after a day of separate lives [in Romania]. Which is different from how it is here... we don't get together as much. I think mostly
because when we first came here my parents worked a lot of precarious jobs.

They worked maybe three or four part-timers. And then we were in school...
everyone was just going different ways at different times of day and different
shifts so we mostly never came together [to eat] except on the weekend." (Dana)

life... it basically meant that we didn't have one... So I would cook my dinner.. .and in part I had to because everyone was busy working so I had to take
care of myself and my brother." (Robyn) There are many repercussions from these types of changed roles and responsibilities within immigrant families. Janzen and Ochocka discuss how immigrant youth struggle to deal with the pressures their parents face as newcomers, and saw the pressures on them as negatively affecting their ability to be parents (Janzen and Ochocka, 2003). Someparticipants discussed the resentment they felt towards their parents due to

These examples illustrate the kinds of systemic inequalities that immigrants face

in Canada, and how they can affect even the ways in which families eat. The inability to

eat "ethnic food" due to employment conditions upon arrival to Canada points to a kind
of forced assimilation. One participant reflected on how her family used a food bank for a period of time, and "made do" with whatever they could get. Furthermore, the changed food practices have other outcomes, such as changed roles for immigrant children within the family. The following narrative of the second-generation participant is extremely

the expectations that were placed on them. "Expectations" and "guilt" were common themes when talking about responsibilities within the family unit. Parental expectations

36

37

are something that all youth must deal with. However, for immigrant or racialized youth,
this takes on special significance. Immigrant children are under tremendous pressure to
succeed, to retain their culture, but to also "fit in", because their parents endure many

"At first she was given overnight shifts so that was really hard for her and my sister and I because we would never see her.. .1 think I made more of the effort to
try to learn how to bake a turkey or to learn how to make a roast.. .1 would feel
more pressure to introduce those types of foods than my mom did because.. .my

unwarranted burdens as marginalized people, "especially when seeking employment in a society that does not recognize their credentials or experience" (Desai and Subramanian,
2003, pl55).

experience growing up was very different from hers. [My mother] lived at the

standard of living that I have not known. So for me it was like... I was always
cooking when I was young.. .1 would learn how to make cabbage rolls and meatballs.. .1 would introduce that to my mom and my sister.. .so it's really
strange I don't know why I. did it. Maybe I felt the pressure to introduce it and
become more Canadian when I was younger." (Alex)

Another important aspect of changed roles within the family is the new power and

agency that immigrant children may find when, for example, taking on the role of
cooking. The second-generation participant discussed how she chose to "reject" her family's "ethnic food" and instead chose to make "non-ethnic foods" for herself and her sibling. It is important to recognize the variety of reasons that may have contributed to
this situation. The resentment could have been felt towards her parents because they

This immigrant child describes her responsibility as a cook in the family in three ways: she takes on the role that her mother finds difficult because of her different social
position in the home country, she takes on the role due to her mother's absence from the home due to precarious employment, and finally, she takes on the role to help to
negotiate her Canadian identity.

were caught in a system that forced them to find employment that required most of their
time. Furthermore, the pressures from mainstream Canadian society, including
experiences of discrimination in schools, need to be considered in contributing to

immigrant children's need to eat "non-ethnic foods". The second-generation participant expressed this by her assertion that "the level of acceptability of 'ethnic food' is still

Moving from immigrant children's experiences of cooking when they were
younger, present cooking practices for immigrant children vary. However, some

rooted in if the 'real' Canadians accept it." This is also asserted by Sheth and Handa who
argue that "white Canada" "systematically teaches non-white people to deny their
cultural heritage" (Sheth and Handa, 1993, p66).

common forces are at work. For six out of the nine participants who cook, it seems the
Canadian pace of life affects their ability to cook at home for themselves, let alone cook their "ethnic food". These participants discuss how their time commitments to education lead them to cook foods that are "fast" and "cheap". Similar to their parents struggle, immigrant children are faced with a society that is based on success, achievement, and production. The expectation, coming from themselves, their parents, and society, to get a

Another participant discusses the circumstances that surrounded her need/desire
to cook "non-ethnic food" as an immigrant child.

38

39

college or university degree has a profound affect on their food practices and
consumption patterns.

Theme 5: New identities formation

".. .we ate more outside than at home because we were working so much. And

Racism and discrimination occur both vertically and horizontally, that is, both
within and across cultural and ethnic groups. It is clear that racialized and immigrant
children face vertical racism in their day-to-day lives and that many are constantly

university is another thing -1 was never home because I was working here and
there. I was working three jobs and university and I was never home .. .even

weekends I was working so I was home at night and go sleep and get up in the
morning and it was either school or work." (Melinda)

attempting to display their identification with "Canadian-ness" to the dominant Canadian
culture. However, it is just as important to address the issue of horizontal racism, that is,
racism within cultural and ethnic groups. Looking at this issue from an anti-racist perspective, Sheth and Handa argue that "race" seeps into the system that reproduces
social relations and that racism becomes an integral part of all social living. Therefore, "in participating in the system by the mere fact of living in it, non-white people internalize and act upon categorization based on the colour of skin, thereby executing, and consequently reproducing the social relations of racism among themselves that are
primarily designed by the dominant whites to exclude all of them. They thus become
cultural and political workers supporting the daily reproduction of white racism" (Sheth

Education was also a factor in how three of the participants had a very limited knowledge of how to cook, let alone how to cook their "ethnic foods". For all of these
immigrant children, this was a source of worry for them and their parents.

"I eat but I don't cook.. .1 guess I've never been expected to. My mother has always been, like, 'just do your schooling and do your work, I'll take care of
everything, don't worry about anything.' So I never had to..." (Aatifa)
These immigrant children all ate both their "ethnic food" and "non-ethnic food". They also all asserted how it was important to them and their families to know how to

make their "ethnic food" not only because of their emotional attachment to those foods,
but also because it is either "a part of the culture" or a part of "who they are". One

and Handa, 1993, p79). The authors argue that it is crucial to recognize the role the

dominant culture plays in horizontal racism (within an ethnic group). The notion of the "authentic identity" is a theme that appeared in many immigrant

participant stated that she would need to take a "crash course" in how to make her "ethnic
food", while the other two stated, partly in jest, that they hope their mothers will continue
to make their "ethnic food" for them even after they have moved out of their parents'

children's narratives. They find themselves confronted with questions of "ethnic and cultural authenticity", and as not belonging enough to their ethnic group in the way they

homes. These experiences and sentiments of not being able to cook demonstrate the
difficulty for some immigrant children in retaining certain aspects of cultural and ethnic
identity in Canadian society.

conduct themselves, their lifestyles, and/or by the food that they eat (Tuan, 1999, pi05). Their interactions with members of their particular ethnic group reveal how much they differ from their parents, from others that grew up in their country of origin, or peers who

had a more traditional upbringing in Canada. Interactions involving "ethnic food" may
40
41

result in being looked upon, or feeling like "less than" versions of others in their ethnic
group. These feelings have a tremendous affect on one's sense of belonging.

different centrality in the family after migration, and that their skills in terms of food

practices may provide them with increased confidence. Some immigrant women may be
reluctant to share that role with their immigrant children, as they attempt to demonstrate

The following narrative demonstrates how parents can attempt to define the "authentic identity" by way of what kinds of food are consumed:
"And then there comes this moment... okay, I remember when I was young...

their own skills, and their identification with their culture, in making the foods from home. Another immigrant child discussed how she seldom cooks her "ethnic food"
because she is afraid that it will not taste the same as her mother's. "Authentic identities" are tied up with cultural retention. First-generation
immigrants may base the identity of immigrant children on how much of their "original" culture was retained (Hernandez-Ramdwar, 2006). "I don't speak a lot of Tamil, so I think food is the only thing I would say...
because there is a lot of gap in culture the way I think is way different than how the culture wants me to think. The way I behave is really odd for them. I get a

you know how ["ethnic food"] is the staple part of [ethnic group] food... and I
couldn't eat it as a child without burning my tongue and I would... and I remember my father saying to me... who knows if this is real but this is how I remember it... but I remember him saying that.. .yeah, basically the idea was that
you were not really [ethnic group] because you didn't eat it.. .um.. .and.. .you
know you feel, well I felt.. .1 felt inadequate in some way." (Robyn)

Her inability to consume a spicy "ethnic food" resulted in her feeling

"inauthentic" in the eyes of her parents. Similarly, some parents criticize their children's attempts at cooking their "ethnic foods". When asked if her sister, who learned how to

lot of criticism from my family. Even food wise I'm a little distant because [of my] allergy to spice..." (Melinda)

cook "non-ethnic foods" that are enjoyed by the family, could cook their "ethnic food",
this participant states:

In this case, food clearly served as a way for her to connect to her Sri-Lankan
identity, which was important considering her loss of language. However, this

"No, actually, she just can't.

She's tried but she just can't. She's terrible! But

connection was challenged due to her inability to eat spicy Sri-Lankan food. The notion of cultural or ethnic authenticity and its connection to food is explicitly questioned by an immigrant child. "I have a problem with authentic food.. .what is it that makes it authentic? Is it

she makes some kind of chicken or whatever it just doesn't taste right, you know,
this is not the way. My mom was like, 'this is not Sri Lankan food!'.. .My mom

kind of likes it because my sister can't take all the spotlight!" (Melinda)

Again, this calls to mind Zhao's (2007) assertion that we must look into the

the ingredients or the people making it? That bothers me.. .just because I am only
half Chinese does not mean that I can't make a mean chow mein. That bothers

intergenerational stories that may shape family members identities. In terms of identity
formation, Lessa and Rocha (2007) discuss how many immigrant women assume a

42

43

me. I can make a mean tabouli. But that doesn't have to have a bearing on what
my identity is." (Alex)

The notion of "authentic identities" is also espoused by those from the dominant,
or mainstream Canadian culture, A common complaint by many immigrants, and in particular immigrant children, is the constant need to answer the question 'where are you from?' asked by non-racialized people. When asked how she deals with this question,
this second generation participant states she will often reply with what she thinks the
person wants to hear.

She challenges the notion that she has to belong to a particular ethnic group to be able to make that group's "ethnic food". She rejects the concept of "authentic identity"
by way of rejecting the concept of "authentic ethnic food". Immigrant children's peers from within the same ethnic group may also espouse

the notion of the "authentic identity". This was seen above when an immigrant child was
a victim of ridicule from her friend who criticized the way she combined her "ethnic

"Some people have problems [when I say I'm from Canada] but.. .1 know what

they want and sometimes when I know that I'll give it to them because it's
easier..." (Robyn)

food" with "non-ethnic food". Minh-ha states that "inauthenticity is condemned as a loss
of origins and a whitening (or faking) of non-western values" (Trinh Minh-ha, 1989, 89).

For many members of the dominant culture in Canada, a racialized person who
claims to be or identify as a Canadian, is not an "authentic identity". The struggle to find the middle ground (between FOB and whitewashed) is demonstrated by this immigrant child whose way of conducting herself is different, or more'Western', than her cousin's: "For me, I have to introduce myself and say, 'nice to meet you'. For her she laughs at me when I do that. She says, 'why are you so whitewashed?'...And,

One participant discusses the role "ethnic food" plays in creating an "authentic identity"
for someone who she considers to have become too assimilated:

"I consider him very whitewashed... When I see him eating Korean dishes and he loves it so much I see that as him being Korean and it makes me feel like, that's
right, he is Korean even though he doesn't speak Korean or think about the

culture, but just because he's eating the food and he likes it...it makes me feel like
yes he's one of.. .Korean.. .Koreaness." (Hae)

I'm like, no, social mannerisms.. .this is what you do when you meet people [in

Some immigrant children try to establish a non-stigmatized identity in the

Canada].. .They intimidate you they say you don't know your own culture.. .1
have trouble identifying which is my actual culture because I know so much more about Canadian life then Sri Lankan life." (Melinda) Being stigmatized by terms such as "whitewashed" can have a profound affect on
the way someone feels about their membership in an ethnic group. It can create a sense

bicultural middle of a spectrum bounded by terms like "fresh off the boat (FOB)" and
"whitewashed", meaning too ethnic and too assimilated, respectively (Pyke and Dang,

2003). In the previous example, eating "ethnic food" helped to create a non-stigmatized
identity.

44

45

of being excluded from their ethnic group, which is extremely difficult for immigrant
children who try to find a balance between the "two worlds".

Her admiration for the way her sister was brought up compared to her own
upbringing sheds light on the importance for cultural maintenance and retention for some immigrant children. Her emphasis on making sure her own children are taught foods from "both" cultures reflects her need to resist the level of acculturation that she

This attempt to find balance was reflected in participants' narratives concerning

how they would educate their own children about food practices. In their discussion of

women's new identity formation, Lessa and Rocha argue that immigrant women resist
acculturation by "reinforcing the tastes of home and actively educating children and

experienced as an immigrant child.
One immigrant child hopes that "ethnic food" and her writings about "ethnic
food" and migration will help to teach her children about family experiences:

others through food related opportunities" (2007, p4). Similarly, the majority (six out of
nine) of the immigrant children expressed their desire to teach their children (should they have any) about their "ethnic foods" (in fact, two of the participants suggested it would
be their own mothers who would ensure that "ethnic food" knowledge would be passed down). However, the majority of the participants also emphasized that they would also educate them about "non-ethnic foods". These immigrant children have experienced the
difficulties of growing up and negotiating their identity in separate spaces and so they acknowledge the need to create a "hybrid space" for their children.

"I would want to cook them the food that my mother cooked.. .and I would cook
other things as well that my mother never taught me.. .1 would tell lots of the
stories around food. Hopefully make connections and fill in the gaps...family stories and history is lost so hopefully I would fill those gaps because of my writing. I think it is important to have that family knowledge and stories."
(Margaux)

These stories are an important aspect of who she is and she does not want this

"My kids are definitely going to be exposed to both.

I like the way my little It's the best of both

knowledge lost on her children. This calls to mind Bardenstein (2002) who argues that

sister is growing up because she's getting a bit of both.

the complexities around food give form to and recapture lost and fragmented stories for
people who have been displaced.

worlds I would say.. .She goes to Tamil schooling... so she learns language,

culture.. .but we never got that opportunity...So, I think the way my sister is
growing up is wonderful because although she was born in Canada, I think she's a
little bit more Sri Lankan than I am. Which is good [laughing] and you wouldn't

It is important to note that there is a wide range in terms of the importance that is

placed on passing on "ethnic food" knowledge to children. For some immigrant children,

not having "ethnic food" and not passing that on to their children would have an effect on
their own identity:

expect it.

I expect my kids to be exposed to both.

I want that.

I like the way

my sister is growing up.
already." (Melinda)

Because she understands what both cultures bring

46

47

"I definitely would want to pass that along. For me not to have Eritrean food
would just be bizarre... I think I would not feel Eritrean if I didn't have those meals. I think it would impact my identity". (Aatifa)

Some immigrant children acknowledge the very different circumstances and
experiences in their life from the lives of their parents, which leads them to think

differently about the importance of cultural maintenance, specifically through "ethnic
food".

For other immigrant children, the importance to educate children about "ethnic
food" is not as great:

"I guess it's really up to them, I guess if I were to have a family it would be here

"I like exploring different kinds of things. I'm not stuck with the Romanian
community or identity.. .1 don't really care much about that.. .but I know it's

in Canada instead of Korea right? So they would have a different experience
instead of being exposed to those types of food only, right? So I wouldn't really force it onto them..." (SM)
This acknowledgement of their children's different experiences to their own points to many of the participants' understanding and connection with identities being
fluid and being constructed according to individual experiences.

important to my family. I wouldn't put too much emphasis on [cooking for and
teaching children about Romanian food] but I would definitely introduce them to
it... because it's a part of me, right?" (Dana)

This immigrant child recognizes the role "ethnic food" plays in her family's life, however she is more ambiguous about its role in her own life and identity. This
ambiguity is found in some of the narratives of the three immigrant children who

Conclusion

expressed that they do not feel the need to pass on "ethnic food" knowledge to their
children.

In this paper, I examined the tensions 1.5 and second generation immigrants face
surrounding "ethnic food" in the home and school settings in an attempt to understand how food is implicated in immigration and settlement processes and identity formation. Although it is not possible to generalize the findings, the food narratives point to the various complex ways in which "ethnic food" may play a role in settlement,

"...It's not that important to me...1 have very mixed feelings about that - food...1

don't cook it.. .1 don't think I've lost anything, you know? I mean, maybe I will.. .maybe when I have kids I might have that... 'oh I really wish I knew how to make this'.. .1 don't feel strongly about that. I don't really know much about
[ethnic group] traditions. I don't buy this whole thing of this is who you are

belonging/othering, and identity formation in the lives of children of immigrants. When comparing the participants of this study's experiences surrounding "ethnic

because of your parents... for me my story has been that I was born and raised
here." (Robyn)

food with the experiences of immigrant women from Lessa and Rocha's (2007) study,
there are many similarities. These include the need to connect to their country of origin

through food, the sharing of "ethnic food" and food knowledge, the need to connect with
other members of the diaspora, adaptation through food, the creation of a hybrid space,

48

49

HWRSOHU

changed roles within the family, and new identity formation. However, it is clear that
they also experience many differences.

Many immigrant women experience diasporic healing in that "ethnic food" may
maintain or recreate home in the new location. Experiences with "ethnic food" may be
healing by maintaining the presence of the old world in the present, searching for home ingredients, justifying the need to speak to relatives about home foods, promoting gatherings with fellow members of the diaspora, and educating others about culture and
food practices (Lessa and Rocha, 2007). In many ways, diasporic healing help immigrant
children to cope with the challenges they face as young people trying to negotiate the
space in between their parents and the mainstream culture. For some immigrant children, "ethnic food" can serve as a way to connect them

The majority of these differences stem from the very different circumstances in which the two groups experience "ethnic food". For immigrant women, who most likely
had a formed identity upon migration, their need to adapt and change came less from a

place of discrimination. For immigrant children, the tensions surrounding "ethnic food"
that they experienced in the home and school settings primarily came from their

experiences of being (or having fear of being) othered, and the subsequent need to
negotiate their belonging in two worlds. The themes that were implemented to frame the

children of immigrants' food narratives, which came from the study by Lessa and Rocha
(2007) are: food as a tool to express narratives of displacement and dislocations, diasporic healing, food in othering processes, integrating the loss of home into a
transformed new life, and new identities formation.

with their country of origin, which in turn serves as a way for them to understand or connect with their parents' culture and identity. However, it is important to note how diasporic healing changes over time for immigrant children. As children, several participants expressed feelings of shame, the need to hide their membership in a particular diasporic group, and fear of sharing "ethnic food" knowledge with peers. Over

Lessa and Rocha (2007) discuss the ways in which food can be used as a tool to express narratives of displacements and dislocations for immigrant women. Food allows for the opportunity to express and recount the negative effects of loss, which comes from uprooting and relocating the home. Some immigrant children, who immigrated at an
older age, do use food to express similar feelings of loss. However, for the most part,

time, many immigrant childrens' growing confidence and pride in their ethnicity resulted
in pleasure in educating others (including those from mainstream society) about their "ethnic food". However, this is not true for all. Some immigrant childrens' experiences of discrimination had a profound affect in how they approach "ethnic food" and those

immigrant children have less of an attachment to their country of origin than do their
parents. Therefore, most immigrant children do not reflect on the trauma of

from without their ethnic group as adults. As adults, some immigrant children feel they
can experience diasporic healing only from within their own ethnic group. Also, most

displacement. Immigrant children use food to connect them to their place of origin, but it
is rarely used to express suffering or to challenge uprooting from their home country.

immigrant children sought out members of their diasporic or ethnic group as children and

as adults. As children, it allowed them to feel safer in the face of discrimination and racism at school, while as adults, it helps to reinforce the pride and enjoyment they find

50

51

in expressing their ethnic identity. Furthermore, it helps to maintain that part of their
identity, which may have been suppressed as children.

experiences for immigrant women are similar for immigrant children. However, due to

their very different position in the family and experience outside the home, immigrant
children experience some of those foodways very differently.
Immigrant children experience significant pressures and expectations from both inside and outside the home. Food helps to mediate those expectations and the resulting identity negotiation. The changes and transformations in food habits and practices that
either the immigrant parents or children instigate help to create a sense of adaptation and
belonging.

Lessa and Rocha (2007) discuss food in othering processes by the ways in which it participates in oppression and discrimination for both immigrant women and their

families. It is clear that immigrant children are targets of racism and discrimination, and
that these experiences have a profound affect on the ways in which they express their
ethnic identity, as children and as adults.

In the face of these experiences of exclusion, immigrant children devised realistic and necessary strategies in order to cope. These strategies include concealment of

For some immigrant children, transformation and change within the family are too slow to occur or they are not sufficient in terms of what immigrant children need to feel a sense of inclusion. Immigrant children who perceived or experienced a lack of change
resented the added difficulty of trying to fit into mainstream society. In some cases,

ethnicity by refusing to eat "ethnic food" and avoidance of anyone other than those who
were members of the same ethnic group. Even though most participants feel a certain

pride in their ethnicity, some of these strategies are still employed as adults. Experiences
of exclusion and racism can have the ability to create fear of being different that goes far beyond childhood. Cultural or ethnic shame is also a repercussion that is created from experiences of discrimination. The processes of othering may lead to some immigrant children never developing feelings of pride for their (or their parents') culture and result
in a complete lack of identification with that culture.

immigrant children would instigate change in the family themselves, or they would begin
to disassociate from their family to create their own "new life". Lack of change may

have a profound effect on how immigrant children choose to approach their ethnic
identity. Hybridization practices of "ethnic food", either employed by either immigrant

Lessa and Rocha (2007) discuss integrating the loss of home into a transformed

parents or children, were for the most part, seen as a positive change by immigrant children. Having a variety or a mix of "ethnic and non-ethnic" foods facilitates immigrant children's dynamic identities that are constantly being negotiated both within
and outside the home. However, some immigrant children had negative experiences with

new life in the sense that "great movements occur within the self, the home and the family through immigration" (p3). These movements include hybridization practices that help to move beyond feelings of loss and the capacity to act in ways that are empowering

(Lessa & Rocha, 2007). Transformation, movement, and change are also key themes in

hybrid foods. Although hybrid foods may help family members deal with discrimination within the home, they may not be "safe" foods for immigrant children when interacting

the lives of immigrant children. Some of the ways in which food contributes to these

52

53

with others outside the home. This is a clear example of how immigrant children

"Authentic identities" are not only espoused by members of a particular ethnic group, but
also by members of mainstream Canadian culture.

experience and interpret food practices differently from their parents, and that may in fact
lead to rejection of their parents' Gulture and/or ethnic identity.

The choices that parents make in terms of what aspects of their culture they will
pass on to their children points to how they identify with their culture and the importance that is placed on ethnic retention. Many immigrant children acknowledged the
importance of passing on "ethnic food" knowledge to their children. However, it is clear

A common "movement" for the families of immigrant children is the move down

the social and economic ladder. Changes in "ethnic food" practices were indicators of
experiences of unemployment, the need to workprecarious jobs, and the stress associated with being a newcomer to Canada. Changed roles within the family were often a result of the time and money pressures immigrant parents experience associated with
employment. As part of their new life as immigrant children, some participants took on

that 1,5 and second generation immigrants' experiences provide them with a unique
perspective on cultural retention. Many immigrant children acknowledge their own children's different experiences which demonstrates the participants' understanding and
connection with identities being fluid and being constructed according to individual experiences.

the role of cooking. For some, this was an opportunity to negotiate their need to express a more "Canadian" identity. As adults, immigrant children begin to experience the pressures of the fast-paced Canadian society that stresses the importance of production,
success, and material wealth. Many immigrant children either cannot (because they were

The findings from this study clearly demonstrate that in order to grasp the full
magnitude of the problems and challenges facing children of immigrants in Canada, and
of the challenges the mainstream society faces in addressing these issues, it is necessary
to recognize and probe these youth's experiences with complex problems in various

never taught) or do not have time, money, and/or energy to cook "ethnic foods". While
some immigrant children emphasize the importance of "ethnic food" in maintaining their

ethnic identity, many are simply unable to express their identity through "ethnic food".
Similar to the immigrant women in Lessa and Rocha's study (2007), new

ways. Looking at their experiences with "ethnic food" is one of these ways. The findings from this study, as well as further research on this topic, could help schools and immigrant service providers to develop initiatives that could help in the process of settlement for immigrant youth.

identities formation finds expression in food practices for immigrant children. Identity formation is of central importance and can be a major challenge for 1.5 and second generation immigrants. The notion of the "authentic identity" is a theme that appeared in many immigrant children's narratives. Interactions involving "ethnic food" may result in

being looked upon, or feeling like "less than" versions of others in their ethnic group.
References

54

55

Alba, R. D. (1990). Ethnic Identity: The Transformation of White America. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.

Ali, M. (2008). Second Generation Youth in Toronto: Are We All Multicultural?
Canadian Diversity 6(2), 87-89.

Gallant, N. (2008). Identity and Political Participation among Second Generation Young Adults. Canadian Diversity 6(2), 3-6.
Gans, H. (1979). Symbolic Ethnicity: The Future of Ethnic Groups and Cultures in America. Ethnic and Racial Studies 2, 1-20.
Greves, H. M., Lozano, P., Liu, L., Busby, K., Cole, J. & Johnston, B. (2007). "Immigrant families' perceptions on walking to school and school breakfast: a focus group study. International Journal ofBehavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 4(64),
1-9.

Anisef, P. & Bunch, M. (1994). Learning and sociological profiles of Canadian high school students, an overview of 15 to 18 year olds and the educational policy implications for dropouts, exceptional students, employed students and Native youth.
Lewiston, NY: The Edwin Mellen Press.

Anisef, P. & Kilbride K. M. (2003). Overview and Implications of the Research. In P. Anisef & K. M. Kilbride (Eds.), Managing two worlds: The Experiences & Concerns of Immigrant Youth in Ontario (pp. 235-272). Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press Inc.

Gingras, J. & Tiro, L. (2008). Mandarin Peelings and Lola's Tinola: Exploring Subjectivity and Belonging Through Cultural Food Narratives. Food, Culture, and
Society 11(3), 375-400.

Appadurai, A. (1981). Gastro-politics in Hindu South Asia. American Ethnologist 8, 494511.

Bardenstein, C. (2002). Transmissions Interrupted: Reconfiguring Food, Memory, and Gender in the Cookbook-Memoirs of Middle Eastern Exiles. Signs: Journal of Women in
Culture and Society 28(1), 353-385.

Grover, S. (2007). Children's right to be educated for tolerance: minority rights and inclusion. Education and the Law 19(1), 59-70. Gunew, S. (2000). Introduction: multicultural translations of food, bodies, language.
Journal ofIntercultural Studies 21(3), 227-237.

Beiser, M., Shik, A. & Curyk, M. (1999). New Canadian children and youth study: Literature review. Toronto: Joint Centre of Excellence for Research on Immigration and
Settlement, Toronto (CERIS). <http://ceris.metropolis.net>

Haden, R. (2006). "Pandora's Lunchbox": On Esthetic Education, Children, and Food. Food, Culture and Society 9(3), 265-274.
Hernandez-Ramdwar, C. (2006). "From T.T. to T.O.; Second Generation Identities in the
Caribbean Diaspora". University of Toronto PhD Thesis.

Boyd, D. (2008). Resilience in Newcomer Families. In M. VanderPlaat (Ed.) "Immigration andFamilies/L'immigration et les families", Canadian Issues, Spring, 8587.

Isajiw, W. W. (1990). Ethnic Identity Retention. In R. Breton, W. W. Isajiw, W. E.

Dei, G. J. S. (1996). Anti-racism education: Intersection of race, class, and gender.
Race, Gender and Class, 2(3), 11-30.

Kalbach & J. G. Reitz (Eds.), Ethnic Identity and Equality: Varieties of Experience in a Canadian City (34-91). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Janzen, R. & Ochocka, J. (2003). Immigrant Youth in Waterloo Region. In P. Anisef &

Desai, S. & Subramanian, S. (2003). Colour, Culture, and Dual Consciousness: Issues

Identified by South Asian Immigrant Youth in the Greater Toronto Area. In P. Anisef & K. M. Kilbride (Eds.), Managing two worlds: The Experiences & Concerns ofImmigrant
Youth in Ontario (pp. 118-161). Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press Inc.

K. M. Kilbride (Eds.), Managing two worlds: The Experiences & Concerns ofImmigrant Youth in Ontario (pp. 37-68). Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press
Johansson, B., Roos, G., Hansen, G. L., Mekela, J., Hillen, S., Jensen, T. M. &

Deutsch, J. (2004). "Eat Me Up": Spoken Voice and Food Voice in an Urban Firehouse.
Food, Culture and Society7, 108-110.

Juotilainen A. (2009). Nordic Children's Foodscapes: Images and Reflections. Food, Culture and Society 12(1), 25-51.
Kibria, N. (2000). Race, Ethnic Options, and Ethnic Binds: Identity Negotiations of Second-Generation Chinese and Korean Americans. Sociological Perspectives 43(1), 7795.

Doring T., Heide, M. & Muuhleisen, S. (2003). Eating culture: the poetics and politics
offood. Heidelberg: Winter.

Dyck, I. (2006). Travelling tales and migratory meanings: South Asian migrant women talk of place, health and healing. Social and Cultural Geography7(1), 1-19.

Kobayashi, A. (2008). Introduction: A Research and Policy Agenda for Second
Generation Canadians. Canadian Diversity 6(2), 3-6.

56

57

Koc, M. & Welsh, J. (2002). Food, Identity and Immigrant Experience. Canadian
Diversity 1(1), 46-48.

Satia-Abouta, J., Patterson, R. E., Kristal, A. R., The, C. & Tu, S. (2002). Psychosocial Predictors of Diet and Acculturation in Chinese American and Chinese Canadian
Women. Ethnicity and Health 7(1), 21-39.

Lalonde, R. N. & Giguere, B. (2008). When Might the Two Cultural Worlds of Second
Generation Biculturals Collide?. Canadian Diversity 6(2), 3-6.

Lessa, I. & Rocha, C. (2007). Women's Identities and Food: Practices of Settlement and Resistance in Immigrant Toronto. CERIS Final Report retrieved from
http://ceris.metropolis.net/frameset_e.html on February 4th, 2009.

Sheth, A. & Handa, A. (1993). A Jewel In The Frown: Striking Accord Between India/n Feminists. In H. Bannerji (Ed.) Returning the Gaze: Essays on Racism, Feminism and Politics (pp. 45-99). Toronto: Sister Vision Press.
Sollors, W. (1989). Introduction: The Invention of Ethnicity. In W. Sollors (Ed.) The
Invention ofEthnicity. New York: Oxford University Press: ix-xx.

Lessa, I. & Rocha, C. (2007). The Work ofBuilding Belonging: Food Narratives ofNew Immigrant Women in Toronto. Unpublished Manuscript.

Mason, J. (2002). Qualitative Researching (2nd Edition). London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Minh-ha, T. T. (1989). Woman, Native, Other. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Neuman, W. L. (2006). Basics ofSocial Research: Qualitative and Quantitative
Approaches. Boston: Allyn & Bacon / Pearson.

Tettey, W. J. & Puplampu, K. P. (2005). Continental Africans in Canada: Exploring a Neglected Dimension of the African-Canadian Experience. In W. J. Tettey & K. P. Puplampu (Eds.) The African Diaspora in Canada: Negotiating Identity and Belonging (pp. 3-23). Calgary: University of Calgary Press.
Tuan, M. (1999). Neither Real Americans nor Real Asians?: Multigeneration Asian Ethnics Navigating the Terrain of Authenticity. Qualitative Sociology 22(2), 105-125. Tyyska, V. (2001). Long and Winding Road: Adolescents and Youth in Canada Today.
Toronto: Canadian Scholars Press.

Padolsky, E. (2005). You Are Where You Eat: Ethnicity, Food and Cross-cultural
Spaces. Canadian Ethnic Studies, 37(2), 19-31.

Preston, V., Lo, L. & Wang, S. (2003). Immigrants' Economic Status in Toronto: Stories of Triumph and Dissapointment. In P. Anisef and M. Lanphier (Eds.) The World in a
City (pp 193-262). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Vallianatos, H. & Raine, K. (2008). Consuming Food and Constructing Identities among Arabic and South Asian Immigrant Women. Food, Culture and Society 11(3), 355-373.
Weber, M. 1968 [1922]. Economy and Society. New York: Bedminster Press.
Wilkinson, L. (2008). Visualizing Canada, Identity and Belonging among Second Generation Youth in Winnipeg. Canadian Diversity 6(2), 84-86.

Pyke, K. & Dang, T. (2003). "FOB" and "whitewashed": Identity and Internalized Racism Among Second Generation Asian Americans. Qualitative Sociology 26(2), 147171.

Phillion, J. (2009). Multicultural and cross-cultural narrative inquiry into understanding immigrant students' educational experience in Hong Kong. Compare: A Journal of
Comparative International Education 3 8(3), 281 -293.

Xu, S., Connelly, F. M., He, M. F. & Phillion, J. (2007). Immigrant student's experience of schooling: a narrative inquiry theoretical framework. Journal of Curriculum Studies
39(4), 399-422.

Phinney, J., (2003). Ethnic Identity and Acculturation. In K. Chun, P. Ball, & Marin, G. (Eds), Acculturation: Advances in theory, measurement, and applied research (pp. 6381) Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Yee, M. (1993). Finding The Way Home Through Issues of Gender, Race, and Class. In H. Bannerji (Ed.) Returning the Gaze: Essays on Racism, Feminism and Politics (pp. 344). Toronto: Sister Vision Press.

Razack, S. (1993). Storytelling for Social Change. In H. Bannerji (Ed.) Returning the Gaze: Essays on Racism, Feminism and Politics (pp. 45-99). Toronto: Sister Vision
Press.

Zhao, G. (2007). Intergenerational Stories: A Narrative Inquiry Into an Immigrant Child's Life in Canada. Curriculum and Teaching Dialogue 9(1,2), 47-64.

Zine, J. (2007). Safe havens or religious 'ghettos'?: Narratives of Islamic schooling in
Canada. Race, Ethnicity and Education 10(1), 71-92.

Samuel, E. (2009). Acculturative Stress: South Asian Immigrant Women's Experiences in Canada's Atlantic Provinces. Journal ofImmigrant and Refugee Studies 7(1), 16-34.

58

59

