Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Resettling minority groups : the case of the Somali Bantu
Khwaka Daria Kukubo
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Race and Ethnicity Commons Recommended Citation
Kukubo, Khwaka Daria, "Resettling minority groups : the case of the Somali Bantu" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 525.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

RESETTLING MINORITY GROUPS: THE CASE OF THE SOMALI BANTU

Al

by

Khwaka Daria Kukubo, B.Ed., Egerton University, Kenya, 1996

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts
in the Program of

Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario Canada 2009

© Khwaka Kukubo 2009

PROPERTY OF HYERSON UNSVERS5TY UBRARY

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.
I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by

other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

RESETTLING MINORITY GROUPS: THE CASE OF THE SOMALI BANTU

© Khwaka Kukubo 2009
Master of Arts Immigration and Settlement Studies Ryerson University

Abstract
This paper argues that possession of formal education is essential for successful settlement in a western country. Using the Somali Bantu resettlement experience as a case study, this paper highlights the extent to which a lack of basic information can hamper a smooth transition into a western community. It is co.ntended that a long history of social exclusion and intentional discrimination and abuse of the Somali Bantu resulted in their state of illiteracy and or lack of pre literacy skills, which made their resettlement experience that much more difficult than usual. I will seek to support my argument by use of narrations and case studies obtained from refugee supporting agencies and settlement providing organization reports and the media.

Key words: Somali Bantu; Importance of Education; Illiteracy; Exclusion; Resettlement;

iii

Acknowledgements
I would like to deeply thank Professor Anver Saloojee my MRP advisor for his
guidance and patience while I wrote this paper. I am grateful to Professor Grace-

Edward Galabuzi, my faculty advisor and second reader for my MRP and I am forever grateful to Professor Edwin Abuya for his advice and encouragement.

My deepest appreciation to Professor Femi Kolapo for listening to me and guiding me to my core resource person - Professor Omar Eno. Professor Eno, thank you for generously providing me with resources on the Somali Bantu. Asante!

To the settlement workers in Maine, Oregon and Utah for sharing with me valuable publications and videos; To my friend Sarah Shivo for your initial support; To Brampton library staff for your patience in showing me how to use the Brampton data
systems.

Last but not least, to my son Alex and my partner Aime, my Dad Arnold and Mum

Helen -for their continued support and patience, thank you for putting up with me
during this period.

IV

In memory of my Mum Helen Kukubo

Who filled our lives with joy and laughter
and loved us unconditionally
Mum, it was too soon!

Table of Contents
Abstract
Introduction Methodology
Global Refugee crisis

iii
1 4
6

Who are the Somali Bantu? Understanding the term "Somali Bantu" Collapse of a Nation State Life in Kenya Importance of Formal Education

11 15 16 18 20

Education experience of the Somali Bantu
Resettlement to the United States of America How they were selected The interview process Answering questions Orientation by International Organization for Migration (IOM)

26
31 34 36 40 44

Resettling in the United States
Opposition to resettling Challenges after arrival Conclusion

46
48 49 54

References Glossary of terms

60 66

List of appendices Session 2: Services and rights 59

VI

Introduction
This research paper will discuss the Somali Bantu journey to the United States of America. It will highlight by use of examples, the lived experiences of the Somali Bantu during their resettlement process. It will focus on their lack of formal education as one of the critical "integration" challenges they faced when settling in the United States of America. In more than one way, this paper will make a connection from the initial social exclusion they faced in Somalia that led to their pre-literate and illiterate status to the challenges faced by the Somali Bantu in their journey to the United States. For purposes of this paper, Walker and Walker ( as cited in Saloojee, 2003) define social exclusion as the "dynamic process of being shut out, fully or partially from any of the social, economic, political or cultural systems which determine the social integration of a person in a society". In this paper, the Somali Bantu will appear as a racialized minority group who have experienced intentional discrimination. Two hundred years of existence in Somalia (Besteman & Cassanelli, 1996) only served to "other" the Somali Bantu in Somalia. Their 'otherness" was made "official" when the United States of America decided to-extricate all ten thousand plus Somali Bantu from the midst of the Somali in the Kenyan Refugee camps, by resettling them to the United States of America. The lack of social integration of the Somali Bantu into the mainstream Somali society is a form of social exclusion that has promoted" inadequate social participation, lack of social integration and lack of power" (Room as cited in Saloojee, 2003) due to their continued isolation by the Somali. Marginalized groups such as the Somali Bantu group may not always recognize that they are victims of exclusion because over time and
1

within their "confined" locale, they come to accept their "separate status" as conventional.

In this case therefore, Saloojee (2003) points out that the "marginalized and victimized"
can use the concept of social exclusion to table their experiences on processes such as globalization and correlate it to the norm. Freiler's (as cited in Saloojee, 2003) explanation of the origin of exclusion being "deep, historical and continually reproduced in both old and new ways is contemporary society" gives a picture of the experiences of the Somali

Bantu from their entry into Somalia as slaves in the 19th century to their resettlement into
the United States two centuries later. The Somali Bantu's denied access to formal
education (Eno, 2008) fits into the concept of social .exclusion which takes account of
denied access to valued goods and services due to their 'race', gender, religion etc (Saloojee, 2003). The issue of racism in the case of the Somali Bantu brings up a

complicated issue due to differing discourses of what race or racism is. Using the taxonomic definition of race or racism does not fit into this discussion, therefore, for purposes of this paper and as shall briefly be discussed in the section, "Who are the Somali Bantu" we shall define race as "ethnicity" (http://thesaurus.reference.com) or clan. At best, the term "racialization" should be used when it comes to discussing the Somali Bantu in
Somalia. Denying the Somali Bantu education and other useful services such as access to

useful employment, medical services just to name a few, hampered their contribution to society, hindering them from being equal participation in society. Racial discrimination or racialization with an intention to undervalue the rights, recognition and participation in society is a form of exclusion (Saloojee, 2003).

The continued exclusion of the Somali Bantu from the common Somali society including participation in the social, economic and political arena led the Somali Bantu to be left out from everyday development. According to Mohamed Eno (2008), education has been a "crucially scarce commodity" for the Somali Bantu. Even where schools were available in the rural areas where Somali Bantus dwelled, stereotyping, names and epithets by some teachers damaged the motivation and self esteem of the Somali Bantu pupils leading to early drop out from school (Eno, 2008). This constitutes one of the critical forms of exclusion faced by the Somali Bantu and one that would have a deep impact on their ability to integrate into North American society. The collapse of the nation-state of Somalia, ironically, enabled a group of Somali Bantu exiled in Kenyan refugee camps to get a platform to address their predicament and to also inform the world of a community who had been isolated from the world for centuries. This paper will bring to light simple yet key accounts that will highlight how
.!',,-

illiteracy can be a barrier to immigrant settlement in a Western country. As will be discussed briefly in the paper, learning of the host language, culture and way of life is expected of new immigrants. (Bixler, 2004). Acquiring knowledge of these will require a basic level of literacy. In Canada for example, knowledge of one of the official languages - English or French - including an understanding of Canadian social and history, politics, physical and political geography are a requirement to becoming a Canadian citizen (http://www.cic.gc.ca). By use of narratives, the experiences of the Somali Bantu ~during various stages of their resettlement process, exposes the difficulties they encountered, thereby allowing the reader to come to grips

3

with what it means to be illiterate in a western world. The paper will enable us to
ponder important issues including whether resettlement of pre-literate and illiterate groups out of third world countries to western countries is the morals thing to do and secondly why a minority group of people such as the Somali Bantu dwelling in the midst of Somalia did not integrate into mainstream Somalia after two centuries (Mburu, 2004)?By documenting the Somali Bantu resettlement experience, this study will also contributes to on-going discussions about resettlement of marginalized
minority groups.

This paper will begin with an overview of the importance of education and the
Somali Bantu's experience with formal education. Notably, the Somali Bantu became

refugees after the breakdown on the Somali Government; this paper will also briefly look at the global refugee crisis that led to the discovery of the Somali Bantu and their
eventual resettlement to the United States of America.

Methodology
This project involves a multi-method case study of the challenges the Somali Bantu experienced while being resettled to the United States of America. These include textual analysis of articles, settlement providing organization reports,

mainstream media texts and internet websites of the Somali Bantu community in different US states. More than once I watched documentaries produced by settlement providing organizations that documented the Somali Bantu personal experiences in order to capture the subtle opinions that only the Bantu themselves can attest to. This methodology will perhaps elucidate actual occurrences in relation to what is already accounted for in texts and mainstream media. The mainstream media also has a vital

job in revealing what I can only assume to be first hand stances from the Somali Bantu, verifiers and the host community. Through examining media articles and clips, we can see how the media worked to prepare the host community for the Bantus arrival. By analyzing Refugee Resettlement Agencies and Service Providing

Organizations' reports on the settlement of the Bantu, the challenges and outcomes of the resettling of the Bantu will be uncovered. My methodology aids in demonstrating the inextricable relationship between successful resettlement and integration into a foreign community for immigrants and possession of a formal education. For example, it will explicate how a lack of formal education including a lack of exposure to simple modernity's made the journey of the Bantu uniquely complex.

5

Global Refugee crisis
Natural disasters and an almost unending human strife has led to growing

numbers of involuntary immigrants, refugees and internally displaced people around the globe. Under the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951, a refugee is a person who owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for
reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group, or political opinion, is outside the country of their nationality, and is unable to or, owing

to such fear, is unwilling to avail him/herself of the protection of that country (Ishay,
2007). This definition was later expanded to include persons fleeing from war and

violence in their home country (OHCHR, 1996). With our current world slowly
getting "converted" into a refugee world, this definition of a refugee is getting

irrelevant and outdated as we are seeing an influx in economic immigrants into the
current scene being unable to return home due to "un-livable conditions (BBC, 2009).

Internally displaced persons are "persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged to flee or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as a result of or in order to avoid the effects of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural or human-made disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally recognized state border" (Deng, 1998).
Every day, large numbers of people are being displaced (made refugees or

internally displaced persons (IDPS) due to invasion, oppression, persecution and natural disasters (Office of Refugee Resettlement Annual Report, 2004). Millions are

driven from their homes within their countries and sometimes across borders.

Colossal numbers of weapons of destruction have been used against populations in the

20l and 21st centuries displacing them from their homes, leading to a huge refugee
phenomenon unique to the history of refugees. The past ten years has seen a doubling in the number of displaced persons globally, and these numbers are expected to
increase (CIA, 2009).

Throughout history, immigrants have made up an important component of the United States population. The US population demographics continue to undergo a

change as a result of a rise in immigration levels. Successive waves of immigrants have increased the population of North America and changed its ethnic composition. These immigrants have provided labour, capital and creativity thereby contributing to the social and economic development. The number of immigrants entering the United States of America and their characteristics are partly determined by government
policies controlling admissions (McLaughlin & McLaughlin, 2003) and partly by the attractiveness of North America for immigration as well as the socio-economic and
political climate in the sending countries.

According to the United States Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration

(2007), between 1983 and 2004 the US received over 2 million refugees. The Cultural Orientation Resource Centre (2009) reports that the US will currently receive 80,000 refugees, of whom 12,000 are African refugees in 2009. Some of these refugees have been displaced several times whereas others have been confined to refugee camps for decades (ACF, 2009). According to statistics from the US Department of Homeland
Security (2006), approximately 11% of the population of the United States of America

is immigrants. About 7% of this population - approximately 2.3 million - is made up

of refugees or internally displaced persons who have been resettled into the United States (CAL, 2009). The Refugee Survey by the United States committee on Refugees (2004) stated that over 8 million refugees globally are living or have lived in protracted situations for more than 10 years. The internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugee situation in Africa is poignant. Many Africans have been killed, disabled and left homeless. 75% of the refugees in Africa are living in protracted situations (UNHCR, 2001). UNHCR defines a protracted refugee situation as 'one in which refugees find themselves in a long-lasting and intractable state of limbo. Their lives may not be at risk, but their basic rights and essential economic, social and

psychological needs remain unfulfilled after years in exile' (UNHCR, 2006). The UNHCR's principal objective is to protect the rights and well-being of refugees. They work towards finding a durable solution that will allow refugees live their lives in dignity and peace. They endeavor to accomplish this through three solutions namely voluntary repatriation; local integration; or resettlement to a third country in situations where it is
impossible for a person to go back home or remain in the host country. Voluntary

repatriation refers to when UNHCR works with the country of origin and host countries to
help refugees return home (UNHCR, 2002). This is usually the best durable solution because the old saying by Walter Kelly (1861) goes, "East or west home is best". However, if the country of origin is still facing unstable situations, this solution cannot
succeed.

The other type of durable solution which can only be achieved if the host country is able and willing (both socially and economically)- is the local integration of refugees. Local integration refers to the assimilation of refugees in the host community(UNHCR,

8

2002). Lastly, resettlement as a durable solution, is the last resort, when the first two durable solutions have failed. Resettlement refers to the "selection and transfer of refugees from a country in which they have sought refuge to a safe host country, which has agreed to admit them, where they are accorded permanent protection guarantees, including legal residence, allowing them to integrate in the national community" (lOM, 2002) With little or no hope of returning back to their homelands, and host countries unable to take up both the financial and social burden of absorbing the ever growing numbers of people in exile many of these refugees await to be relocated by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR, 2004). Every year between 2001 and 2008, the United States has allocated space and money for up to 70,000 refugees and internally displaced persons to be resettled in the United States. According to the Cultural Orientation Resource Center (2009), the United States currently has a refugee admission ceiling of 80,000 refugees. By the end of July 2009, 58,618 refugees had been admitted into the United States refugee (CORC, 2009). Some of these popUlations are "rare" (Tribe, 2002) and unique, such that there is little or no literature focused on them or their needs. In this case therefore, discerning the needs of these populations can be difficult and can create new challenges for both the hosts and the resettled persons (Miller and Rasco, 2004). Even more difficult is when the resettled group has no exposure whatsoever to daily life in a modern world, then cultural and language barriers in this case are more magnified (Wang & Freeland, 2004). When these refugees or IDPs take up residence in resettling countries, the reception is not always positive, mostly because of lack of information of the resettled refugees and also due to prejudice and discrimination.

9

Successful transition and hence settlement for new immigrants can be made easier if both the host community and the new immigrant understand each other's culture and
language.

Refugees of African descent often encounter more problems and difficulties than are typical for any new immigrant group as they are "triple minorities (Bryce-LaPorte, 1993, p. 34). The triple minorities' status refers to a situation where the new

immigrant groups not only speak a language different from the host community but
that they also are a different race from the majority host community (Bryce-La-Porte,

1993; Pierce & Elisme, 2000). With the increase of foreign populations in the US, it is
becoming increasingly important for settlement agencies to be more adequately prepared to meet the needs of newcomer populations. These settlement agencies need

to be equipped with more information on the immigration experience and the effect of
these experiences on the daily lives of refugees.

10

Who are the Somali Bantu?
Somalis have perceived and described themselves as a homogenous society that is closer to an Arab cultural context than an African one. Looking at a Somali Bantu and how physically different they are from the typical Somali, it is apparent that the Bantu was omitted from the description, as they do not fit this description (Declich, 1995). The Bantus are made up of many different peoples with diverse histories and differing levels of integration into Somali society. According to the CIA World Fact Book (2009), the estimated total population of the non Somali who include the Somali Bantu, Arabs, Indians, Italians to name a few is about 589.921 which is approximately 6% of the total population of Somalia. However, according to Lehman & Eno (2002), the entire Somali Bantu population in Southern Somalia is estimated at 600,000. The last official census in Somali was taken in 1975 by the Somali government (CIA, 2009). Because of the large numbers of nomads and forced migration due to civil war and famine, counting the population to estimate the number of people in a country like Somalia can be complicated. The SomaliBantu consists of three groups: i) runaway slaves ii) emancipated slaves and iii) indigenous population (Eno & Eno, 2008). The Somali Bantus have for as long as they can remember - been considered of a lower social status among the Somalis, possibly because of their so called Negroid look (Eno, 2008). Unfortunately, these three groups have been grouped as a single entity. The indigenous Somali's first Bantu people arrived as migratory agriculturalist thousands of years ago from South and Central Africa and settled in farmable rainfall and river regions. They are
11

believed to be the remnants of the Shungwaya Kingdom and residents of the Shebelle River while the first two groups were communities formed from runaway slaves and
emancipated slaves (Cerulli, 1957). It is believed that the indigenous Bantu group and

remnants of the Mjikenda people who migrated to Tana River in modern Kenya after

being driven from Ethiopia by Oromo fighters in the 15th and 16th centuries. They
reside mainly along the banks of the Shabelle River in Southern Somali (Eno, 2008). According to Cerulli (1957), the Mjikendas could be the natives and descendants of the ancient and controversial Kingdom of Shungwaya, located in Buur Gaabo. Shungwaya is known to be an ancient kingdom and headquarters of the then King
Mzee Sagawambe Mkamwa of the Bantu people in Southern Somalia (Shungwaya,

2009). Several theories explain how the second Bantu group came to Somalia. One theory is that the group, were initially brought to Somalia some 200 years ago, largely as slaves. They were originally from modern-day Tanzania, Malawi and Mozambique (Eno, 2008). Another theory based on Bantu oral traditions is that the Bantu left their country of origin -- in this case modern day Tanzania - due to several years of severe

and consecutive famine and droughts in the late 18th century - because of the prospect
to work on a fertile land in southern Somalia as labourers (Grotanelli, 1955). Another theory is that the Bantu might have deliberately sold their children and themselves off because of persistent droughts which affected Tanzania early in the nineteenth century. Whichever theory is upheld, the fact that they were eventually exploited and used as slave labourers in the commercially oriented plantations overseen by a combination of Arab / Swahili and Somali merchants is undisputed (Eno, 2008; Menkhaus, 1989). They grew grain and other food products to be exported to the

12

Omani empire in the eastern African coast and to the markets of southern Arabia and the Middle East (Luling, 1971). Many of them were also used as a means of transportation for the movement of merchandise such as ivory from the southern Somali interior to the coastal cities. The Somali often considered owning a Bantu a necessity for labour and for survival. They treated the Bantu people callously: " .... slaves were harshly treated often kept in manacles and fetters, overworked and underfed" (Hess, 1966). The inhumane treatment was noted by colonial officers, who reported, "Slaves and their wives, being labourers, were housed miserably in small, halfroofed huts with their usual food of parched Indian corn and fish from the river" (Lt. Christopher, 1844 as reported in World Civilizations: Volume I). Earlier in the 20 th century the Europeans abolished slavery in southern Somalia and introduced a coerced labour system, which indiscriminately conscripted the

emancipated Bantu ex-slaves, the runaways and the indigenous Bantu (Hess, 1966). The Italian colonizers choice to only enroll the Bantu into hard labour activities is suggestive of Freiler's) (as cited in Saloojee, 2003) description of exclusion as "continually reproduced in both old and new ways". In doing this, Italian authorities did not however make any effort at changing the status of the indigenous and "imported" Bantu populations as equal to that of the Somali nomads. Instead they upheld the nomadic claim of mythical nobility and contaminated the ethno-history of the distinct Bantu groups, by lumping them together and stratifying all of them as descendants from slaves (Eno, 2008). This misconception created class stratification based on nomadic "super ordinates" and Bantu "subordinates" effecting a deeply rooted
13

implementation of stiff marginalization by the former against the latter (Campbell,

2005). This was instrumental for the unilateral tribal manipulation of political power of
an ethnically diverse population that bedevilled Somalia since its independence (Lewis, 2002). The value label attached to this festering quandary has been key in the deliberate
exclusion of the Bantu people. To date, the Somali Bantu still do not have the same rights as other Somali

citizens. Being born in Somalia alone is not sufficient to qualify them for national prosperity and the full respect of "Somaliness, which came with independence (Eno &

Eno, 2009). Without access to "the national cake" that comes with being citizens in an
'independent country', the Somali Bantu have "incomplete citizenship, undervalued rights, undervalued recognition and undervalued participation (Saloojee, 2003) The Bantu need the magic code of a "major tribe" status with its affiliation to nomadic values, otherwise without these core parameters for gauging Somali nobility; the Bantu's
cannot fit into the framework of Somaliness (Eno, 2008).

Although a number of Bantus eventually integrated to some extent within the Somali society, a large number remained in destitution, held to menial labour and subjected to extensive discrimination. Those who integrated into the Somali society, assimilated into smaller Somali clans such as the Biamal, Garre, Jiido and Shiqaal. They even adapted the Maay Maay language, became accustomed to a new way of dressing like the local Somali mores and even though they maintained their ancestral culture and animist religious practices from their countries of origin they also took to
practicing Islam (Eno, 2008).

14

The Bantu live in the rural areas of the middle and lower Juba regions in southern Somalia. The Somali Bantu are mainly agrarians though a good number of

them are skilled technicians: masons, electricians, mechanics, carpenters and
plumbers - skills acquired usually by years of apprenticeship. The tendency for the
Bantu to move towards these skills and occupations, has been intensified partly due to

the Somali's unwillingness to do engage in blue-collar jobs which they consider
menial. Accordingly these and a variety of other occupations are not highly regarded

by the nomadic culture, which approves that only non-nomadic, "low" status people
should live by such "dirty" jobs (Eno, 2008). Two hundred years in Somalia and the Somali Bantu have not integrated in meaningful ways with the Somali people. Though they possess some cultural traits common to the Somalis, the Bantu have maintained
many distinct cultural traditions including music, dance and community lifestyles (IOM, 2002) due to their continuous exclusion from mainstream Somalia.

Understanding the term "Somali Bantu"
There are several theories that seek to explain how the term "Somali Bantu"

emerged. Previously, the Bantu were known as adoon, habash or the Italian word
ooji, all derogative and deprecating names to identify them as slaves or persons who

lack the ability to think beyond the moment (Chanoff, 2002). The Bantu had
collectively referred themselves as Mshunguli, a term taken from Mzigula, the

Zigua's tribe word for people. The name Mshunguli has also been used by the Somali to imply worker, foreigner or slave (Lehman & Eno, 2002). While describing the period after the 1990 civil war Chapin (2007) states that "the Somali Bantu ethnic
term and identity emerged through a synergistic process between the needs of

15

international aid organizations and the needs of the population of southern Somali
agriculturists." According to Jenkins (1996) once in the refugee camps, the Bantu groups assumed the term Somali Bantu as the new description to show a "common designation" for the amalgamated group. The Bantu felt strongly that embracing a unified front will help raise awareness to the suffering that they had and were undergoing and also present a unified voice to represent their common interests. Jenkins (1996) states that the "term designated a new unified grouping of small; formerly separate ethnicities of Bantu origin, speaking several languages".

Collapse of a Nation State
Colonization and decolonization has played a great role in the political and social instability of Somalia. The colonial occupation of Somalia affected the Somali Bantu more than it affected other Somali. According to Eno (2008), the colonialists not only appropriated Bantu land, they also forcefully exploited Bantu manpower. During this colonial time, in 1948, Ogaden was bequeathed to the Ethiopian. This

decision including the north /south economic divide caused by the British's lack of
investment in the north, making the north lag far behind the south economically, leading to bitterness from this state, would lead to civil war several decades later (Besteman, 1999). In 1977, Siad Barre attempted to obtain Ogaden back from the Ethiopians. In 1978, Siad Barre proved unable to return Ogaden to Somali rule thus leading to lower popularity and unrest in Somalia. In the 1980, Siad Barre unleashed terror on the opposing clans in order to secure his power by weakening opposition (Cassanelli,

1996). For the Somali Bantu, not being affiliated to one of the major Somali clans further
isolated them from a share of power.

16

In 1991, Somalia experienced a great revolution. A combination of clan-based

forces backed and armed by Ethiopia ousted President Siad Barre (BBC News, 2001).
Later in the same year, Ali Mahdi Muhammad was elected by the manifesto group as an interim state president until a conference between all stakeholders was held in

Djibouti to select a national leader. Unfortunately, military leaders and other leaders of various armed groups refused to recognize Ali Mahdi as President. This caused a
split between the different factions and the military forces, which led to efforts to
remove Siad Barre who still claimed to be the legitimate president of Somalia. This

led to an escalation in violence in the south especially in Lower Shabelle, Lower Juba and Middle Juba. This armed conflict devastated the south including the formerly
agricultural areas of Somalia, and led to the nation state of Somalia collapsing into a

series of warring fiefdoms sending thousands of Somali civilians fleeing for their lives. The Somali civil war involved at least a dozen clan and regional factions. The
war saw an estimated 300,000 Somalis die of starvation, close to a million were

forced to flee their homes, turning Somalia into a death trap for both civilians and international peacekeepers (Samatar, 1994; Clarke & Herbst, 1997). Warring clans
destroyed Somali Bantu communities, taking over farms in a fashion that would
preclude the return of the Bantu to Somalia (Besteman, 1999).

Many of these Somali civilians are refugees in Kenya. Initially about 120,000

Somali civilians crossed over into Kenya in 1991 mostly on foot through Liboi, a
small border town on the Kenya - Somali border before being hosted by the United

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Dadaab. Dadaab is a town in
North Eastern Kenya. It is about 100km from the Kenya - Somali border. Among the

17

over 120,000 Somali Refugees,

approximately 10,000 were Somali Bantu - a group

whose ancestors were sold or tricked into slavery from their ancestral homelands, and
who continued to be widely discriminated against and victimized in Somalia prior to

the war. The Somali Bantu were considered a forgotten and at risk refugee group
(http://www.Mapendo.org). It is this group of 10,000 Somali Bantus who were later
on resettled to the United States of America.

Life in Kenya
Dadaab is set in an arid landscape north east of Kenya. Dadaab is inhabited by ethnic Somalis who are Kenyan citizens. Between 1991 and 1992 three refugee camps were set up in the Dadaab town in the Garissa District of North Eastern Kenya, to host the large influx of Somalis fleeing violence in war torn Somalia. The three camps are namely Dagahaley, Ifo and Hagadera. By 1994, The United Nations High

Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) registered 128,144 refugees from Somalia. Among them, 10,143 were identified as "Bantu Somali" (Declich, 2000). Other

minority refugee groups in Dadaab included the Sudanese, Ethiopians, Eritreans and

Ugandans (UNHCR, 2002). Until 2005, the UNHCR implementing agencies included
Care International, Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) and Deutsche Gesellschaft fur
Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ).

The Dadaab area is highly insecure with shifta (bandits) roaming the flat plains. Armed escorts are used for all transports around the camp. The security situation has been characterized as "plagued by inter-clan clashed, cattle rustling and

banditry"

(UNHCR Global

Report

2000).

Since

Dadaab's

inception,

the

high

incidence of rape directed at women collecting firewood has been a devastating

18

problem. Women often have to walk up to three miles into the arid bush in search of
adequate firewood which puts them under high risk of attack. In the camps, the Bantu
remained a minority refugee group in Dadaab. The total number of the Bantu remained at just about 8% of the total population of the Dadaab refugee population

which by 1998 was about 130,000 (UNHCR, 2000). Their lack of affiliation to a
Somali clan made their stay in Dadaab very risky as they endured excessively high
amount of discrimination and bandit attacks (Lehman, 1993).

19

Importance of Formal Education
It is possible that education and schooling are in fact one of the means by which cultures are created and transmitted. Every day we observe the significance
formal schooling plays for the contemporary society. Formal education continues to contribute to human resource development, productivity and skill training, which are

all turning out to be keystones to the public and private sector's guiding principles
with the western world's aggressive and dynamic position in international commerce.

The world today which has been described in various ways including a knowledge
age, information society and credential society (Webster, 2002; Weert, 2004;

Neckerman, 2004) , continually depends heavily on formal education to sustain it.

Having more than a basic formal education is fundamental as more than ever before,
both individual and community success depends upon effectively applying learned knowledge to create ground-breaking resolutions to all manner of situations.

Schooling is progressively perceived as a strategic course of action for both the
individual and the nation.

The emergent significance of formal edification is ingrained behind two
cohesive ideas. First, according to Winkleby, Jatulis, Frank and Fortmann (1992), as

the idea that knowledge is indispensable to production gains acceptance; societies continue to appreciate the obligation to secure training and education. A budding
aggressiveness toward global trade has concentrated interest on human resource

development, productivity enhancement and skill training. Secondly, today's world

recognizes the need for citizenship training, as formal education plays a central part in raising awareness of ethical, political and moral issues. Schools help to mould the

20

lives of individuals thus shaping the society's structure. Formal education can help to reinforce the significance of important concepts of human rights, environmentalism and multiculturalism. Formal education can play an important role in providing equal opportunity in the society. Formal education has also been shown to be the best predictor of better health (Winkleby et aI, 1992). In countries where female secondary enrolment is low, it has been observed that women who have at least secondary level education, experience a reduced infant mortality and fertility rates. (Raney & Subbarao, 1993). A higher level of a mother's education translates into higher levels of contraceptive use among their children (Coelho, Teixeira., Cruz., Gonzaga., Arrais., Luchini., Vecchia., & Tognoni, 1994). Female education has been shown to increase women's participation in labour market along with their wages, improve the health and education of their families, decrease their number of pregnancies, decrease the likelihood of their contracting HIV virus, and promote better governance. In general, increased female education tends to improve a country's economic growth, along with additional benefits. (Herz & Sperling, 2004). Education for the Somali Bantu women will help to raise awareness to dangerous traditional practices affecting them and their babies including female genital mutilation, poor nutrition during and after pregnancies brought about by taboos, and outdated traditional practices. This in return will decrease child mortality and increase longevity among the Bantu. On June 9,1957, Nathan Pusey, the 24th President of Harvard University (1953

- 1971) stated:
"I believe the teacher's mission is to help every young person in his care to grow into the broadest, deepest, most vital person possible. And in fulfilling

21

himself, the student will, I am convinced, arrive at moments of heightened insight when he sees more clearly than ever before what the world is about and how he can fit into it creatively and significantly" (This Week Magazine, June 9, 1957). Pusey's description of education, speaks to the reality of its importance in fitting into today's modern world. Pusey stresses the important role that education implementers play in shaping the lives of people and emphasizes education as a fUl}damental basic human right. He points to the responsibilities each "player" has in keeping with the human rights tradition and upholding the education rights of children as fundamental human rights. Although this statement was made over half a century ago in North America, the importance of education has not been over looked by most nation states globally. Many nations perceive the right to education both as a right in itself and as a means of promoting peace and respect for human rights generally (UNESCO, 2000). Article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights - the right to education declares that everyone has the right to education and that education shall be free at least in the elementary and fundamental stages (Roosevelt, 2000). It is at the elementary and fundamental levels of school that one learns how to read and write. In the United States of America, schooling is so important that young people are legally required to attend formal school until the age of 16, and 18 in some states (http://www.ed.gov). The influence of formal education in today's modern world, goes far beyond this minimal legal requirement, it diffuses into the fabric of our daily lives. Tens of thousands of hours are spent pursuing schooling activities, however, even when the schooling ends, our lives have been shaped immensely by what we

22

learned at school at every level (Pinc4~,! 1987). North America is a schooled society. In the modern world and in North Am:erica especially, it is, important to acquire as much formal education as possible. Education has continuously been seen as important due to the transformation of the economy over the past centuries. North
,

America's economy has evolved from an agriculturally based resource economy to a manufacturing based economy and now to a knowledge-based economy. These shifts have resulted in the continual improvement of required literacy and numeracy skills. Technological developments and increasingly competitive international trade are creating a new economic order with the resultant impact on jobs and the levels of education and skills required to be employed in those jobs .. Knowledge work is now more pivotal at the same time as the de-industrialization of the United States is proceeding apace. Service and high technology jobs will continue to replace routine and low skill occupations. Knowledge is emerging as the key resource of the next century. (Beck 1995; Bell 1973; Stehr 1994). Globalization has led to more international migration and greater deregulization. Changing economic conditions throughout the second half of the 20 th century have made the society more unequal in terms of wealth, income and employment distribution. This means schooling is increasingly seen as a way to level the playing field and as a result, educational equity has become a central issue. KOlchiro Matsuura (2002), Director General of UNESCO stated, "I have personally committed myself to making it a priority, for education is a fundamental human right, set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Human Rights Covenants, which have force of international law. To pursue the aim of education for

23

all is therefore an obligation for States."(Education for All: the Unfulfilled Promise",
21st Century Talks session on education for all, 2002) The Right to Education is a fundamental human right. It occupies a central

place in Human Rights and is essential and indispensable for the exercise of all other human rights and for development. "As an empowerment right, education is the
primary vehicle by which economically and socially marginalized adults and children

can lift themselves out of poverty, and obtain the means to participate fully in their communities"(Matsuura, 2002). None of the civil, political, economic and social rights can be exercised by individuals unless they have received a certain minimum
education.

The right to education is protected in many international agreements, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Everyone has the right to education, training and information, and to other

fundamental human rights dependent upon realization of the human right to education. The human right of all persons to education is explicitly set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenants, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other widely adhered to international human rights treaties and Declarations - all 4 of them, powerful tools that must be put to use in realizing the human right to education for all (PDHRE, n.d.). The right to education entitles every woman, man, youth and child to: elementary l)The human right to free and compulsory of secondary and higher

education and to readily available forms

education. 2) The human right to freedom from discrimination in all areas and levels of education, and to equal access to continuing education and vocational training. 3)

24

The human right to information about health, nutrition, reproduction and family
planning (Joyce, 1978; Rehman, 2003; Dinstein and Tabory, 1990).

The human right to education is inextricably linked to other fundamental

human rights - rights that are universal, indivisible, interconnected and interdependent including 1) The human right to equality between men and women and to equal
partnership in the family and society. 2) The human right to work and receive wages

that contribute to an adequate standard of living. 3) The human right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion and belief. 4) The human right to an adequate standard

of living and 5) The human right to participate in shaping decisions and policies affecting ones community, at the local, national and international levels. The right to education is supported by seven important freedoms including the freedom to achieve
ones dreams, free will to thought and speech, the choice to have safe and respectable employment, freedom from poverty and from abuse, freedom from fear and the right
to be treated fairly (OCHA, 2006).

Education is important because once educated, people can improve their lives

by making well-informed decisions. In addition, everyone should be accorded the
opportunity to learn,: and to that effect, everyone should have a school nearby that

offers good quality education. However, it should be noted that in the event that there is no school nearby, education can occur anywhere. Regrettably in spite of all the commitments made by governments under international instruments for providing education for all, especially free and compulsory quality basic education, millions of children still remain deprived of educational opportunities, many of them on account

of poverty. Achieving the right to basic education for all is thus one of the biggest
25

moral challenges of our times. The case of the Somali Bantu is a sad reflection of how the Somali government failed to provide free elementary and foundation education to the Bantu populations in the rural settings including in urban settings on account of
their being different.

A lack of basic formal education today can be socially and economically detrimental to one's survival in these times. This can be especially difficult when a group of "coloured" refugees from a third world country are resettled to a western

country such as the United States. This is so because of the problems and difficulties that new African and Asian immigrant groups face due to the "triple minorities' status" (Bryce-La-Porte, 1993). The Somali Bantu are a good example of an

immigrant group that experienced and continue to experience the triple minorities'
status after resettling to the United States.

Education experience of the Somali Bantu
Since their arrival in Somalia, the Bantu have not experienced an easy life. Education was often out of reach for Bantu children, most worked on their parents' farms instead of attending school (UNHCR, 1999). By 1998, a formal education
similar to the Kenyan formal education had only begun to be available in the Dadaab

and Kakuma refugee camps (IOM, 2002). However, the Somali Bantus having not had any schooling available to them in Somalia did not find it that important to have schooling in the refugee camps. This was coupled with the discrimination and
oppression they continued to face in these camps from their Somali counterparts (Eno,

1997). On arrival to the United States, educators initially found Bantu parents reluctant or unable to participate in their children's education. However a few weeks

26

after their arrival into the United States, many Bantu parents wanted their children to access as much formal education as possible. They themselves also started to attend adult schools and English schools (Eno, 2008) The educational system for Bantu children in the inter-riverine areas had been cleverly· designed by Somali Bureaucrats, with the intention of maintaining illiteracy in the Bantu communities, thereby restricting their access in the institutional administration (Eno, 2008). Before Siad Barre, the Somali hegemony had set up the educational system in a way that did not favour the inter-riverine communities, since all the secondary schools as well as most intermediate schools, had been deliberately centralized in Mogadishu and other cities in southern Somalia (Eno et aI, 2008). So to get their children to schools, a Bantu farmer had to send their children in to the city to learn. This was unfair because all other non-Bantu areas had easy access to schools within walking distance. This is why 98% of the young Bantu men and women are either illiterate or with a minimum of primary level education. In 1969, Siad Barre's regime introduced a new system that would further hinder the educational advancement of Bantu and the inter-ravine people (Eno, 2008). In his book on the Somali Bantu, Eno (2008), describes how Siad Barre authorized the building of very few intermediate and secondary level schools in the inter-ravine areas ensuring that the Bantu remained unqualified to enroll in Somali universities and polytechnics. The following excepts illustrate the challenges and difficulties the Bantus faced while attempting to access education. The first example is the firsthand experience of Mohamed A. Eno, who later on went on to complete a Doctor of philosophy is Social studies education.

27

"When the school headmaster Abdalla Ali Murshid announced the highest scorer in the centralized leaving exam of Casa Popolare Elementary school was "Mohamed Abdulkadir Eno", a parent from the north could not take it. As I was passing near him to the podium to shake hands with the headmaster, I heard my left handed northerner classmate's father saying, "Ma kan adoonka ah baa caruurteena ka badiyey?" [How is it possible that this slave one has outscored our children?]" CEno, 2008) The above example conveys how academic participation
IS

seen as a sacrosanct

privilege not to be enjoyed by the Bantu. Obviously, the Somali were offended when a Bantu student excelled beyond their Somali counterparts. In another example, we see how the Bantus were methodically alienated from the schools. "An Italian teacher one day called for his student's parent. When the two met, the teacher advised, "Try to transfer your son to another school. In this school, he will not move to the upper grade no matter what." The student's father was perturbed as he was told, on confidential note, "The Somali teachers are hard on him without any valid reason. We can't help the situation but we have to be honest with you. The boy is brilliant and active but that is his disadvantage. I am sorry!" CEno, 2008). This excerpt demonstrates how unpleasant it was for the Bantu to study in a Somali dominated school. The Bantu student would face harassment, stereotyping and bullying from both the students and the teachers. Those who got accepted into these institutions had to bribe authorities with large sums of money equivalent to their life savings CEno, 1997). There were further restrictions to the Bantu getting enrolled into
28

special programs such as medicine, law and engineering. Bantus never benefited from academic scholarships; instead they were given scholarships to the military in the Soviet Union (Eno, 2008). A random survey conducted on 2116 Somali Bantu by Eno (2008) showed that 87% of the Somali Bantu were uneducated. Less than 2% had attained secondary level and above (p. 267). Of the 2116 Somali Bantu surveyed, 99% stated that they were treated unequally and unjustly by the Somali. According to Eno (2008), the Bantu have forever been alienated from the circle of Somali politics. The occupants of the central region have control of Somali's treasury. They have become the sole political power. The government pledged free financing within the tribal party to ensure re-election at Somali taxpayer's expense. There was little financial stability to support a Bantu party. Statistics from the United Nations show that the most populated regions in Somalia are the inter-ravine and coastal areas, yet these areas were allocated the least number of seats in parliament. This misrepresentation is unacceptable (Eno, 1997). The Bantu are being intentionally prevented from accessing the political arena, leaving them without a political voice. With little or no representation in parliament, advocating for better services such as schools in the inter-ravine areas where the Bantu's dwell (or tend to dwell) in Somalia is closer to nil (Eno, 2008). Representing Som~lia as a homogeneous society, whose people possess a pastoral culture only, overlooks not only the rich culture and traditions of the riverine and coastal regions, but lessens the strengths of the Somali mores. The promotion of Somali's homogeneity fides the reality of there being other ethnic groups other than the 'typical' Somali in Somalia. If there is no documentation to show for the other

29

ethnic groups in Somalia, then there can be no accusations of discrimination on the

basis of race, tribe or ethnicity. Earlier research on southern Somalia was done by
Italian scholars whose publications are not widely read in the English speaking world

(Eno, 2008). Only recently in the 1990s after the collapse of the nation state of
Somalia, did the world learn of the Somali Bantu.

30

Resettlement to the United States of America
Acquiring a United States green card requires that the-would-be immigrant meet certain criteria and have a reason for coming which is consistent with the spirit and the letter of the immigration and nationality act (McLaughlin et aI, 2003). Permanent residence in the United States is granted generally as a result of a family member filing a petition for family re-unification or a future employer filing a petition to have his foreign trained employee granted permanent residence in the United States. In addition, one can be selected in an annual immigration lottery drawing. Finally one can also gain United States permanent resident after having been granted asylum or refugee status. In order to qualify for refugee status, an applicant must meet certain criteria. According to section 101 (a)(42) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), to be a refugee, one must be of special humanitarian concern to the United States as well as not be firmly resettled in any foreign country. The same policy declares that spouses and minor children of "qualifying refugees may derive status and also enter the United States as refugees either accompanying or following to join the principal refugee" (Farnam, 2005). Eligibility for refugee status is determined on a case-by-case basis. Applicants with criminal records or serious health problems
may~be

determined inadmissible to the United States even if United

States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) has determined them to be a refugee (McLaughlin et aI, 2003).

31

In 1991, the Somalian civil war broke out in the wake of the collapse of Siad
Barre's regime. This was caused by and followed by clan competition for power which led to disastrous results for the civilian population and more so for the Bantu people in particular. Having no clan affiliations, the Bantu were much more

vulnerable because they had no protection, whatsoever (Eno, 1997). The Bantu had been the backbone of the agricultural production south of Somalia, but when the civil society broke down, the agricultural production networks also began to cease normal
operations. As the hunger among the Somali population increased due to the war, so

did the cost of food. Because of the exclusion from the traditional Somali clan
protection network, bandits and militias were able to attach the Bantu without redress. The bandits also robbed raped and murdered Bantu farmers (Eno et al, 2007). As the war progressed, control over lower Juba River valley shifted among various warlords with each inflicting havoc on the Bantu farming communities

(Declich, 1995). In 1992, the Bantu began to flee southern Somalia en bloc for Kenya. In Kenya, they were hosted by the UNHCR in refugee camps located approximately
40 miles from the Somali border in North Eastern Province of Kenya which is arid and often hostile (IOM, 2002). Several other thousands of Bantus also managed to flee directly by sea from Somalia to the Marafa refugee camp near Malindi and some to Mkuyu refugee camp near Handeni in northern Tanzania (UNHCR, 2002). Unlike their Somali counterparts who wanted to resettle to a developed nation, the Bantu refugees requested the United Nations High commission for Refugees to

specifically resettle them in their countries of (historic) origin - Tanzania, Malawi or
Mozambique (UNHCR, 2002). While in the refugee camps in Kenya, the Wazigua -

32

one of the Bantu tribal groups-held secret meetings to discuss the possibility of returning to Handeni district in Tanzania, their ancestral land. They set up a mission of able bodied young men who were sent to Tanzania as exploring emissaries. Some of the objectives of this mission included a negotiation with the Wazigua elders in Tanzania to bless the remigration and resettlement of their kinsmen from Somalia among them (Eno & Eno, 2007). After several trips back and forth between Wazigua elders in Tanzania and their counterparts in refugee camps in Kenya, the Tanzanian government intervened by sending a fact finding mission to the Kenyan camps in 1993. The Tanzanian delegation verified that the Wazigua refugees were indeed connected genealogically, culturally, linguistically and traditionally to the Wazigua people of Tanzania (UNHCR, 2002). In 1994, Tanzania declined to accept the Bantu because the country had its own troubles. It had recently been swamped with hundreds of thousands of other refugees fleeing the genocide in neighbouring Rwanda. To add to this calamity, the EI Nino weather phenomenon was battering the country's agriculture (Lehman, 1999). The decision to not take the Bantu during that time, underlined the vagaries of refugee life and dividing line which can separate a new beginning from condemnation to a lifetime of exile .. This kind of desperation can ibe seen in the words of one of the Bantu leaders, Abdullahi Ali Mohamed, "We felt so helpless when we heard the result. The Tanzanians looked like us. We felt like brothers. And then we were abandoned." (Refugees, 2002) Three years later, in 1997, the refugee agency tried again this time approaching the government of Mozambique. An official delegation spent three days in Dadaab
33

querying the Bantus on issues such as language, ethnic history and how the Bantus mark the occasion of a girl's maturation. Two years later, the Bantu's received Mozambique's answer. Mozambique withdrew its interest citing the acceptance of such a large number of refugees would give the wrong political signal, especially given the unresolved postwar circumstances of its own displaced population following a brutal civil was in the 1990s (lOM, 2002). The report added that a positive decision would set an unwelcome precedent that might encourage a flood of persons of Mozambican origin wishing to return from neighbouring countries. In Africa, this is not an idle concern. In the last two centuries millions of people have been uprooted by conflict and natural disaster. Some have been assimilated, but many remain marginalized minority groups and one day may also consider trying to return to their ancestral roots. That was little consolation for the dispirited Bantu as Abdullahi was to state, "We were rejected by the Tanzanians. Now by Mozambique. Now we feel totally adrift, homeless without any future" (Refugees, 2002) When the UNHCR approached the United States government, the Bantu leader said, "We didn't have much hope. Our brothers had rejected us. Why should the Americans want us? What are out ties with that country (UNHCR, 2002)

How they were selected
The United States through their US Refugee Resettlement Program (USRP) annually accepts agreed numbers of refugees for permanent resettlement, in addition to individuals or groups who may independently seek asylum. As discussed earlier in

34

this paper, between 2001 and 2009, the US set its refugee admission ceiling at 70,000 to 80,000 refugees per year. The main criteria for these resettlement countries are the extreme vulnerability of refugees and their inability to return safely and peacefully to their homes (UNHCR, 2002). In 2001, the US resettled about 3800 so called "Lost Boys" of the Sudan. This group of resettled lost boys is part of more than 27,000 boys who weredisplaced or orphaned during the 1983-2005 Second Sudanese Civil War that saw about 2 million people killed (Bixler, 2005). Resettling the Somali Bantu was not anything similar to the lost boys' resettlement; the Bantu resettlement was the largest African refugee group process. Resettling the Bantu was an uncertain and difficult activity. With human trafficking exploding into a global multimillion dollar business and the refugee resettlement program itself becoming a target where several scams were exposed in which officials were selling coveted places to the highest bidder. The US and UNHCR understood that another high visibility project would attract the attention of potential traffickers and untold numbers of unqualified refugees (UNHCR, 2002). To decide who was eligible for this new life on offer the UNHCR utilized its approach for the identification and processing of the Somali Bantu group for resettlement to the US. This approach is built around the 1) Conceptualization and 2) Evaluation and Analysis of certain types of information, followed by the preparation of a 3) Group Profile and Proposal Document, followed by the 4) Submission, or initial presentation of the proposed group to one or more resettlement countries and partners, and a 5) Group Processing Plan of Action, which details the roles and responsibilities of all partners in relation to case preparation and other procedures, as well as the fraud and

35

security safeguards and communication strategies developed to deter associated
refugee movements. 6) Verification is the final ascertainment of preliminarily

identified individuals who qualify for inclusion in the group, followed by 7) Group

Resettlement Processing, which will benefit from incorporating the gains made by
UNHCR in developing and implementing effective registration of refugee populations (UNHCR, 2004). This approach was useful because most refugees rarely carry

original passports of identification documents due to the fear of compromising their already precarious safety. This was especially helpful in the case of the Somali Bantu
as most of them had no official documents to begin with (IOM, 2002). In December 2001, UNHCR carried out a resettlement verification exercise in

Dadaab to identify all of the Somali Bantus who had indicated interest in going to
Mozambique (UNHCR, 2002).

The interview process
The resettlement of the Somali Bantu refugees to the United States was not

only a humanitarian act but also the creation of a modern Diaspora. They were the
largest African group ever granted a non-forced migration to resettle in the United States of America as a persecuted "minority" group (Eno et al, 2008). It was observed

during the verification exercise that while the men and even boys are quite vocal, the
women were for the most part reserved and quiet (IOM, 2002). They often deferred to

the males in the family. In some cases boys as young as 11 or 12 would answer
questions for and overrule their mothers. This seems to be a male dominated society

in which women will in the cases noted defer to men and even the boys (IOM, 2002).,

36

These observations took place within the context of verification interviews and may not be the most accurate depiction of gender dynamics. To carry out the resettlement interviews, the US government decided that security concerns involved in extricating this minority group from a vast and resentful refugee population in Dadaab dictated extraordinary measures (UNHCR, 2002). Instead of processing the Somali Bantus in Dadaab, where the Somalis might try to infiltrate eligible families, the decision was made to move them after the verification exercise, to the Kakuma refugee camp, a 900-mile, three-day road trip across banditridden north eastern Kenya (lOM, 2002). As if to confirm the wisdom of this decision, gunshots ripped through the night air during the first two evenings of resettlement interviews in Dadaab. A 50 person strong verification team moved into Dadaab. Extra Kenyan police were drafted in to keep order (UNHCR, 2002). The team's first task was to sift through thousands of tattered hand written control sheets. The original Mozambique lists now consolidated into a master list had to be upgraded, newly born children added, the names of the dead deleted (lOM, 2002). "Starting as early as Jam, an estimated 1000 persons began lining up for processing" (lOM, 2002). According to UNHCR's Andrew Hopkins who headed the project, at
lea~t

half the group waiting for transportation to the verification site were

clearly Somali refugees, not Bantu. Bantu's who had no inkling what the process was about and those Vvho did not understand why US and not Tanzania or Mozambique, sold their ration cards to whoever was willing to buy them. Somalis attached family members to large Bantu groups (Chanoff, 2002). The Bantus who are not accustomed to answering formal questions were unable to explain the extra addition to their
37

families, later denounced the scam to officials at the first opportune moment. Anthony
Hopkins reported,

"False claims were

sometimes

so rudimentary it was not uncommon to

encounter persons who could not even remember or pronounce the name of a person they were attempting to impersonate. Interviews often ended in tears.
These people were very poor liars" (UNHCR, 2002)

Kinship

and family

are paramount

for the

Somali

Bantu

(IOM,

2002).

However, family composition is unique in that a nuclear family consists of parents, children, grandparents, co wives, uncles, aunts and other relatives (Lehman and Eno,
2003). During the verification exercise several interesting cases occurred that showed

that the Bantu have a strong sense of family unity and were willing to forfeit slots or give up their possibility of US resettlement if this was in the family's best interest. The Somali Bantu also had no exposure to resettlement beyond the Tanzania and Mozambique effort. Field workers who had worked with refugees throughout Africa
were amazed at the naivete of the Bantus regarding resettlement (UNHCR, 2002). The following cases are examples of how callow on resettlement the Bantus were.

"A woman arrived for an interview with her 25 year old daughter. It was. explained that the daughter was not financially dependent and thus not eligible for US resettlement. Although she was informed that she could send for her

daughter, the mother refused to proceed with the verification, stating that she
would not go without her daughter"(IOM, 2002)

Not only does the above narrative show how important kinship is to the Bantu community, but it also refreshingly exposes how little the Bantu knew about the
38

resettlement process. The next incident illustrates the strong sense of family and sacrifice if it is in the family's best interest. "A Bantu man brought his younger adult brother to the interview. The younger brother had recently arrived from Somalia. When it was explained that the younger brother was not financially dependent on the older brother and thus not eligible for resettlement, the older brother asked whether his brother could go in his place" (lOM, 2002). From the above account, the naivety of the Somali Bantu is very obvious and consistent with a lack of exposure to current issues. Living in the Dadaab refugee camps where "Bufiis" a term in Somali that means resettlement to a western country (Horst, 2007) - is used on daily basis, one would expect that the Bantu would have an idea of what resettlement is and what it entails. During the verification exercise, the majority of the Bantu had no clue why they had been summoned to the verification exercise. Therefore they were not "prepared" for the interviews (UNHCR, 2002). The UNHCR staff often remarked at how the Bantu's honest responses and innocence regarding resettlement was refreshing. Verifiers were struck time and again by the straight forward way in which many individuals admitted that family members appearing on the verification lists either had died, travelled away from Dadaab or
~

even in a few cases, returned to Somalia to visit sick relatives. Many verifiers noted that this level of openness and honesty is rarely seen among resettlement populations (lOM, 2002).

39

Answering questions
The Somali Bantus in Dadaab are not accustomed to being interviewed and answering questions in a linear sequential way. Often seemingly simple questions

would be met with inadequate responses (IOM, 2002). Only after long conversation
with many follow up questions would the appropriate information be obtained. A closer look at some examples from the verification interviews held in Dadaab will

illustrate

the

difficulties

experienced by many

verifiers

when they

conducted

authentication interviews in obtaining basic information. These examples show how the lack of basic education, lack of exposure to current issues and problems with language proficiency (both their mother tongues and Af-Maay Maay) considerably complicated a simple verification exercise. The first example illustrates responses to basic questions that results from a lack of exposure to day to day time issues. This transpired between the interviewee
(A), a Bantu woman and a verifier (Q).

Q: How old are you? A: I am 30 years old

Q: Are you 30 years old now, or were you 30 years old in 1997?
A:1997?

Q: 1997 is during the Mozambique registration A: They told me I was 30 then Q: How old are you now? A: I do not know. You can give me an age (IOM, 2002).

40

The second example

IS

a scenano that had to do with the confusion that arose

surrounding questions of birthplace and age of children. A lack of exposure to formal education coupled with the lack of understanding of current times can be seen in this conversation between the verifier (Q) and interviewee (B) a Bantu mother.

Q:

W~ere

was this child born?

B: In Jimaame, Somalia

Q: How old is the child
B: 6 years old Q: And when did you come to Dadaab B: Daraad. (This terminology literally means before yesterday or is also used to indicate time in the close or distant past) Q: Daraad? B: Yes. At the time when everyone came here (this indicates 1992) Q: How can your child be born in Somalia when you say she is only 6 years old and yet you came to Dadaab 9 years ago? Your child must have been born here if she is only six! B: We are from Jimaame, Somalia (lOM, 2002) The verifier repeats B's response to when she came to Dadaab, whereby B responds with an explanation that lacks actual time but that indicates the moment when every Bantu was fleeing for safety into Kenya. Such conversations would proceed for another several minutes before an adequate resolution could be reached. Many Bantus do not place any importance on age or years. The Bantus often use weather markers or particular events as time of date signifiers. Floods, fires and disease outbreaks are
41

often recalled to try and convey a specific time or date in the past (Lehman and Eno,
2002).

The next example illustrates how a lack of understanding of time or place can impact or lengthen an interview. During the verification exercise, the verifiers needed

to be able to understand place and time markers from the point of view of the Bantus.
The verifier (Q) had the following discussion with interviewees (C) and (D) who are a married couple.

Q: Where did you enter Kenya?

C: Birta Dheer (Birta Dheer literally means "the tall metal". It refers to the tall metal telephone transmission structure in the border town of Liboi which was a UNHCR registration point for Somalis entering Kenya.
Q: How many children do you have? C: Seven children Q: When did you get married?

A:

Sacaad Hirgi (This literally means tying a watch to the wrist. The term is

used as a time indicator referring to the 1997 UNHCR revalidation exercise when wrist bands were issued to refugees)
Q: But some of your children are born before this time.

D: These children are from my other husband Q: Where is your other husband?
D: He died

:

Q; When did he die?
D: Mardow (literally means recently referring to any time from an hour to

42

several years)
Q: Mardow? Were you divorced before he died?

D: No. He died Tirokoob. (Tirokoob refers to any previous headcount. In this case it was the headcount before Sacaad Hirki) (lOM, 2002) In this conversation, the lack of understanding of the terminology by the verifier does not faze the interviewee. According to the interviewee, she or he has answered the question satisfactorily and assumes that the time markers used are "globally" understandable. In a situation like this, if the verifier had not been oriented to the way of conversing of the interviewee, the verifier will assume that the interviewee is stalling for time or being dishonest. The verification exercise that the aid workers conducted was slow and painstaking. Even though the Somali Bantu population had been estimated at between 10,000 to 12,000 (lOM, 2002), in the end nearly 14, 000 registered refugees claiming to be Somali Bantu were interviewed. Of that number, only 11, 585 people were approved for submission to the United States authorities (UNHCR, 2002). About 2000 had been excluded after their claims were examined and several hundreds were uncertain about their ultimate fate. It wasn't until seven months after the first interviews, in the gray dawn of June 2002, that the initial caravan of Somali Bantus pulled out of Dadaab and headed northeast toward Kakuma - four buses carrying 270 people flanked by carloads of armed security personnel and accompanied by a team of doctors, nurses,
and~other

staff (lOM, 2002). Young mothers who had gone through

diaper training for their children were still mesmerized at the diapers that their babies are to wear through the journey. None of these women had ever seen these strange
43

items. Officials accompanying this convoy were mystified to find the diapers totally unused at the end of the journey. Mothers still unfamiliar with the concept had
removed the diapers to preserve their cleanliness whenever an impending "crisis"
became obvious (UNHCR, 2002).

Heavily pregnant women including new mothers with their children were flown to Kakuma aboard an ancient propeller driven aircraft to avoid the long journey by road. None of these people had ever seen an aircraft up close or been a passenger

on one (UNHCR, 2002). Conversations such as these took place and hour later on this flight. This conversation transpired between two Bantu women (G) and (H). G: this vehicle is making a lot of noise but we have not started the flight.
H: We seem to still be on the ground

Q: We have taken off. We are in the air

G: you can walk around up here just like on the ground (IOM, 2002) None of these women could relate to what was passing below them through the aircraft windows, while they were flying over hills, rivers and lakes.

Orientation by International Organization for Migration (IOM)
Once in Kakuma, the Bantu were housed in tiny structures made of mud, brick
and tin roofs (UNHCR, 2002). The Bantu went through cultural orientation, to prepare them for life in the United States. The cultural orientation involved basic survival

skills on how to manage in the west (IOM, 2002). The cultural orientation for the
Somali Bantu was conducted by the International Organization for Migration (IOM).
Mohamed Abdikadir, IOM operations manager in Kakuma noted,

44

"These are people who have never seen an aeroplane upfront, so everything
needs to be explained, from a boarding procedure to how the social security
system works over there" (UNHCR, 2002)

Somali Bantu community orientation was prepared by the United States Committee

for Refugees and Immigrants Family and community outreach for Somali Bantu
refugees (O'Hara, Leon, Ahman and Ward, 2004). The objective of the community
orientation was to facilitate a smooth transition for the Somali bantu into the US
communities by providing at completion of orientation, an understanding of the 1)

clients' house and community in the United States, 2) the role of the resettlement
agency and other service providers, 3) the rights of refugees and individual responsibilities in the United States (O'Hara et al, 2004). The Somali Bantu community orientation materials included all regular teaching topics comprising two

model schedules, a classroom curriculum, descriptions of community trips, and attachments. The classroom curriculum addresses the orientation facilitator, and
contains step-by-step directions on how to conduct the orientation sessions. Some of

the topics covered during the orientation include services and rights, housing,
financial literacy, employment, education, health, nutrition, social adjustment, and the
legal system. (Please see appendix 1.1 for sample orientation sessions). Additional topics and lessons were included for the Somali Bantu group

including hands-on lessons on household appliances and a daily course on importance of dates and time (IOM, 2003). Emphasis on literacy and numeracy skills in each class was incorporated into the daily morning classes, specifically name writing and
numbers every morning during their orientation period.
45

Additional courses were

added such as a unit on food in order to expose the Bantus to forms of food beyond the beans, corn, lentils, oil and salt that they had lived on for ten years while in the
camps (Stephen and Chanoff, 2003).

The

cultural

orientation

trainers

reported

a

low

level

of retention

of

information by the Somali Bantu in the cultural orientation classes as compared to
other refugee groups (BRYCS, 2003). "For all people planning Bantu orientation classes...take to heart one important message: please start from the beginning in all you do. Do not

assume that the Bantus will know how to use a stove, turn on hot and cold
water taps, use telephones, turn on light switches...The Bantus are very

unexposed and this has been highlighted in every piece written about them"
(Stephen et al, 2003).

Stephen and Chanoff (2003) in their report to Bridging Refugee Youth and Children's Services (BRYCS) a national technical assistance project that collaborates with service providing organizations (SPOs) the United States to strengthen services to refugee youth, children and their families.

Resettling in the United States
How well immigrants integrate into society has far-reaching implications for a country's current and future vitality. Immigrant integration is a complex process that is tied to the ongoing debate about the role of immigrants in the US society. Integrating in to the society is considered the immigrant's responsibility except in the case of refugees where the government will play a part in the initial assistance to integrate (Biles, Burnstein and Frideres 2008).
46

JOU S3Op JUBlglUIUII 9qj JI 9SU9JUI 9J0UI qotlUI 9q TOO ^OOqS 3Jnjp3 -JOU SI

pUB

9jBi.ido.iddB si jBqM guiA\ou5[ ui Ajpoyjip guisnBO ginjjno a\9u gqj ojui
ui S9ijjnoijjip gqj jo jno sdopAgp spoqs amjpo -(9861 '
vi sv xpns jusixraojiAua {Birnpo UMoiqun puB jusjsjjip b unpiM aiBJsdo oj

u9t{M jpj sguip9j pus Xjsixub 9ijj oj SJ9J9J 5[ooqs 9Jn}p3 -^ooqs 9jnj[no raojj

osp Avai Xjuofera b inq 'Xppos M9U apqj ojui gj^jggiui oj ttu9p.mq,, gqj uo 95[b; jou sjTOjgirarai '(^003 '^IXTS) ^Jiunuiuioo sqj ui p9A|0Am XpAipB graoosq ptre

jd900B p

iq UB0U9XUV sq; uiB9i oj sjtiBjgiuraii joj sbm ;si| Jigqj uo

qgiq osjv "
'Ai3pos ubou9uiv

oj uo og puB jd900B oj sjUBjgiuirai padxs sjsoq
i a"jjtij o; jBqj p9A\oqs B0U9UIV jo
I

m S9tjiunuiuioo ;soq uo p9jonpuoo X9ajtis b uiojj sjpsg-jj -(£00Z tj

UOISU9UIip Aq J9JJip ABU! pUB SU0IlBJ9U3g {BJ9A9S IOJ JSBJ UBO UOIJBjg9JUI JO SS90Oid
sqi -ajjutioo jsoq gqj jo suoijnjiisui sqj ui sjuB^girauii jo uoijBdpipBd sq; saquosap

uoiiBjga;ui ibioos -(/,66I 'uubud[09h) dnoig oiuqi9 jo uosiad sqi jo guiguopq
jo suoijiuij9p puB sguipsj 9Aip9fqns gqj S9qnosgp

jsipq ui sgguBqo puB suuou 'S9n|BA jo uoijbzi|buj91ui gqj puB gjnjjno jsoq

jo 9gp9|A\ou>[ puB S9iji|iqB 9aijiuSoo 9qj guiuiB9{ jo ss9oojd gqj 'sjuBjgiuiuii jo sjsi
puB uoijBjugao sniBA jo ssgooad gqj S9quos9p uoijBiggjui iBanipo -uoiiBiggjui X;i;u9pi

pUB JBitliniO 'IBIOOS UOlJBjggjUI JO SU0ISU9UIip 39jqj 9JB 3J9qi -(9003 -JOJBX pUB AJU9H)

X;iju9pi iBJTii|no umo apqi guiureiaa graij 9uibs 9qj jb gjiqM Xppos jo ^iiunuiuioo jsoq
9qi jo ouqBj iBUOi;nji;sui puB 'jBanjpo 'jbioos 9qj jo jjBd b 9Uioo9q saguioo

have a formal education or exposure as will be seen in the case of the Bantu refugees
(Furnham et al, 1986).

Opposition to resettling
News that the Somali Bantu were a pre-literate group of people who were also semi-literate or illiterate raised a lot of concerns within the predetermined host communities in the United States. Very little was (is) known of the Somali Bantu as
there is a scarcity of literature on them or their plight. The final destination for most of the Somali Bantus was Kansas, Maine and Massachusetts. None of these states was

excited about receiving a whole group of "natives" considered to be " invading America's towns and cities and upsetting the social structure and ethnic makeup of America" (Allen, 2002). Allen (2002) writes that the Somali Bantu would depend
wholly on the government hand-outs and drain America's economy because they were illiterate and had no exposure to modern life. Resistance to the resettling of the Bantu

was not only at community level. In October 2001, Senator Sam Brownback who is
the senior United States Senator from the United States of Kansas was the Senate
immigration subcommittee chair announced,

"I oppose any resettlement of Somali Bantu refugees in the State of Kansas....

Our office has contacted the Department of State asking them to not resettle
any Somali Bantus in Kansas.... Simply put this should not occur" (Barnett,
2003).

When asked by a local newspaper about his support for Sudanese refugees resettled in
Kansas he said,

48

"They [Sudanese] are very pro-American. The Bantu on the other hand would
not work well in Kansas (Marquis, 2002).

Such harsh statements about the Somali Bantu resettlement were followed by mass
protests against the Somali Bantu resettlement in towns such as Holyoke,

Massachusetts and Cayce, South Carolina which were set to receive about 120 Somali Bantus each (MTN, 2004). Over 1000 fliers were distributed in Cayce claiming that

the refugees will put a strain on the school district and other social programs. Doors to
previously vacant apartments at the Pinewoods Apartments where the Somali Bantu
were to be housed were suddenly unavailable (WISTV, 2003). Plans to resettle the
Somali Bantu in Holyoke and Cayce were later scrapped.

Challenges after arrival In contemporary circumstances, literacy refers to reading and writing at a level

adequate enough to understand and communicate ideas in a literate society so as to take part in that society (UNESCO, 2004). Illiteracy therefore, is a social problem that
can only be solved by formal education. According to the Central Intelligence Agency's World fact book (2004), in 2003, the literacy rate in the United States was
99%, making the United States a literate society.

Since education was out of reach in the Bantu residential areas in Somalia,
most children worked on their parents' farms instead of attending school. Without

literacy skills, Somali Bantu adults were initially unable to participate in the modern
economy and integrate into mainstream America society unless they get a formal

education (Eno, 2008). Not only were the majority of the Somali Bantu illiterate, most

of them do not speak any English (IOM, 2002). To successfully integrate in to the US,
49

PROPERTY OF

UNIVERSFTY LIBRARY

one needs a basic understanding of English and possesses literacy skills that can

enable them to integrate and contribute to the society. A closer look at some narratives from actual incidences will illustrate the difficulties experienced by the Somali Bantus when they initially resettled to the United States. The first example
illustrates the negative of not having a formal education or exposure to modern basic

technology. AH is a Somali Bantu who was only recently resettled in the United
States:

AH and his family had been in their apartment only a day, and in the modern world not much longer, when he heard the fire alarm go off. Still he knew from the
orientation class at the refugee camp in Africa, what that sound meant: Fire! AH told his family - mother, wife and seven children - they had to get out. However

in panic, he could not unlock the door. He had never faced double locks before,
and now he flipped both furiously, first the top, then the bottom, until he could not

remember which was which. He had also been taught that a fire alarm brought fire engines. However, minutes passed and none arrived. Eventually, the family realized they were safe - and trapped in their apartment. They stayed there for five days until their case worker let herself in with a key, and explained to Abdiaziz
that what he thought was the fire alarm actually had been the lobby door buzzer"
(USA Today, 2006).

Traditional practices which have been phased out among many African populations,

remain common among the Somali Bantu (Stephen et al 2003). One of the ways of
treating ailments was administering medication or performing soft tissue manipulation
on the affected areas. An example is applying a heated blunt nail or other heated

50

metal objects to a baby's head to reduce the swelling of an infant's head in cases

where the head is unnaturally large (IOM, 2002). The next example will illustrate the
lack of understanding of how modern medicine works.

When 7 month old Hassan developed an ear infection, a doctor prescribed an
oral antibiotic. But his parents, unable to read their own language, let alone

English, poured the pink liquid into his ear. Mohammed Hassan and his wife

Timiro, both 33, often feel like fish out of water in Springfield, Massachusetts.
Mohamed quit his night shift job at a doughnut factory even though his eligibility for a welfare check will expire in a few months. He wrecked his van and hurt his back after skidding on an unfamiliar surface - ice - and smashing

into a highway barrier. Mohamed and his family temporarily lost their welfare
benefits, including food stamps because they could not read forms that state mailed them and threw them out. Despite weekly tutoring, Timiro says she
can't remember anything to say in English. Despite being in school for more

than a year, the three oldest sons come home with Spanish words instead of English. That is what their classmates speak, and their English classes are
taught in Spanish by teachers who do not know Somali. Now with the welfare cut-off, Mohamed says his back injury prevents him from looking for work or attending English classes. Still he says he likes life in America, except for one
thing - no camel milk (USA Today, 2006).

The problems with language proficiency, in this case lack of English, considerably
complicated matters. Compounding the lack of English proficiency is the lack of pre-

literacy skills. Preliteracy is also known as readiness skills which include oral
51

language and phonological and phonemic awareness, as well as knowledge of the alphabet and an understanding of common print concepts (Kress, 2004). The Somali
Bantu were also not accustomed to living with basic modern amenities such as

electricity or running tap water. They had never used electric stoves to cook. Use of
flush toilets or indoor bathrooms and plumbing was a new and strange phenomenon

(Stephen et al, 2003). A two week crash orientation by the IOM did little to prepare some of the Bantu families to use these conveniences. The next example is the
American experience of Lamungu and his wife Talaso. "It is the simple conveniences that intrigue them the most -- a kitchen
stove, a mop, a toilet they thought was too clean to use. Lamungu

mentions the shower, where water comes out like rain over your head.

Before, bathing entailed pouring a container of water over their heads. There were no towels. "You take a shower, you have to use a towel," he

explains. Lamungu's wife, Nurto Talaso, straightens up her kitchen,
marvelling at how a sponge and mop easily clean up the mess from the morning meal. "I've never experienced this kind of life," she said. But adjusting will take time. This day, they have forgotten to put the milk in the refrigerator and, despite Arizona's summer heat, they haven't turned on the air conditioning or fans. In their past life in Somalia or in the
refugee camps in Kenya, this was not an issue; there was no

refrigerator, no air conditioning, no fan (National Geographic, 2003).

The case of the Somali Bantu and their resettlement in the United States poses some very interesting questions about the roles and responsibilities of both migrants and of

52

the state. If a state makes a conscious decision to resettle a group of refugees, then the

issue of what constitutes fair terms of integration looms large. And this is particularly
the case where language barriers are present.

53

Conclusion
"Three years after leaving an African refugee camp for a new life in Utah,
Abdirahman Abdi opened a container of toilet cleanser, tasted it and told his family to use it as salt. The father of eight who cannot speak or read English --

originally thought the product was for the bathroom. But he changed his mind when he tried it and felt it didn't act like other cleansers. Hours later, AH Abdikadir and Abdikadir Hussein, Somali Bantu caseworkers, visited and prevented a culinary disaster" (Lyon, 2009). This is one of the experiences that this paper sought to highlight about the challenges
faced by the Somali Bantu due to their illiteracy and lack of "exposure". This paper pieces together the lived experiences of the Somali Bantu during their resettlement

process to the United States while drawing attention to the consequences of hundreds of years of social exclusion. Two centuries of exclusion resulted in the Somali Bantu today, being illiterate and lacking of preliteracy skills (Eno, 2004). It cannot be denied that the Bantu are hardworking (IOM, 2002; UNHCR, 2002), but in order to survive in today's world and especially in North America, a solid education is not an
option but a requirement. With the state of the economy being discussed in every form

of media it is apparent that being educated is essential and can help one to survive.
Having the technical knowhow to perform even the simplest of tasks is a requirement

in today's society. No education would result in low paying jobs with basic wages and inadequate benefits. Being under-educated makes it nearly impossible to survive in today's world with the rising costs of living (Goel, 2007). Education does not

54

automatically warrant higher earnings or a better life, however there is a strong
correlation between education and income as well as employment.

In no way does being educated, guarantee a person an easy life but it does

make the path much smoother. Basically, the educated mind is conditioned to perform better and continuously set and accomplish goals. In 1906, Theodore Roosevelt, the

26th President of the United States, while advocating for some of the policies he
favoured which included education stated, "A man who has never gone to school may
steal from a freight car; but if he has a university education he may steal the whole railroad" (Felzenberg, 2008; Harrison, 2002). Over a century has passed and one can
only agree with such proverbs.

The transition of the Somali Bantu into the United States would have been less complicated had they been more literate. It is hard to know who should take the responsibility for the Bantu's lack of exposure and education; It can be argued that

had they been more aggressive - more attentive to the changes around and about them, perhaps, they would have attained an education worthy for basic survival. On the other hand, if indeed their access to education was restricted, then the Bureau of
Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor (2004) and a human rights report by UNIFEM (2007) stating that serious human rights violations are a problem due to the unstable political situation in the Somalia since 1991 are incorrect. These reports base their

observations on Somalia's current, stateless condition, while neglecting - like earlier scholars and historians did - minority groups such as the Somali Bantu (Besteman,
1999).

55

This paper also succinctly describes the historical beginnings of the exclusion of the Bantu in Somalia. The Somali Bantu have lived in Somalia for over 2 centuries. For them not to integrate in a meaningful manner into the mainstream Somali society must have resulted from intentional exclusion. It was not a difficult task for the Somali to discriminate against the Somali Bantu given the Bantu's phenotypic features which are distinct from those of the Somali (Lehman et al, 2002). Some of these "Negroid" physical features that would distinguish them from the "mainstream"

Somali are the Bantu's kinky hair texture, dark skin and broad nose (Montagu, 1988).
It is not uncommon to find people with such features being subjected to a variety of discriminatory practices in foreign lands. They are often excluded from political,
economic, and educational advancement. There was no co-mingling or intermarriage

between the Somali and the Bantu (UNHCR, 2002) The Bantu, therefore, have had to settle for the lowest and most undignified occupations (Eno, 2008). When the Europeans came to Somalia, they conscripted the Bantus for forced labour on
plantations. Both the British and Italian colonial administration regarded the Bantus

as inferior to the Somalis. This treatment may have perpetrated the continued
exclusion of the Bantu.

"While upholding the perception of Somalis as distinct from and superior to the European construct of black Africans, both British and Italian colonial administrators placed the Juba valley population in the latter category.

Colonial discourse described the Juba valley as occupied by a distinct group of
inferior races, delineating a separate Gosha political district called Goshaland and proposing a "native reserve" for the Gosha (Besteman, 1999).

56

This paper not only theorizes education, it also introduces into the discussion the
refugee dilemma. Had the Somali nation - state not collapsed, the world would not
have know about the Somali Bantu.

Although the primary responsibility for refugees lies with the persecutors who cause their plight (Minority Group, 1980), it is not clear what factors encourage

nations to accept refugees or to assume any special responsibility. Offering asylum to refugees is intended to be both politically friendly and also as a humanitarian act
(UNAUSA, 2009). It is only hoped that the end result of offering asylum to refugees
benefits both the refugees and the host nations

By documenting the Somali Bantu resettlement experience, this study not only

contributes to on-going discussions about resettlement of minority groups, it also questions our motives and assumptions when relocating similar populations out of their "comfort" zones without adequate preparations. The Somali Bantu initially
requested to be resettled in Tanzania. However, this country did not have the

"financial capability to build a social support system and a proper survival mechanism for them such as farming equipment, schools, hospitals, markets" (Eno et al, 2007).
Wouldn't it have been easier to support Tanzania or any other African country willing
to receive the Somali Bantu financially to provide the necessary support system? In

addition, I question why a country like Canada, which has over 20 years experience in dealing with refugees with special needs under their Private Sponsorship Program (RSTP, 2008) did not get involved in the resettling of the Somali Bantu. Under this

Private Sponsorship program, sponsoring groups commit to providing basic financial
support and care for the sponsored refugee for up to 12 months or until the sponsored

57

refugee becomes self-sufficient, whichever comes first (CIC, 2003). The sponsoring groups commit themselves to providing government-assisted refugees with special needs orientation, significant settlement assistance and emotional support.

58

Appendix 1.1

SESSION 2: Services and Rights
OBJECTIVES 1. To give an overview of the services of the resettlement agency. 2. To give an overview of the services of other local and national agencies. 3. To build an understanding of the rights of refugees in the United States. 4. To develop an understanding of client responsibilities. WHAT YOU WILL NEED: Flip chart Markers Specific list of agency services (from welcome package) Specific list of other community services (from welcome package) Directory/contact list of local service providers (from welcome package) Copies of "The Rights of Refugees in the United States" (attachment 3) Copies of "A History of the United States and Immigration" (attachment 4) "Sample Client Resettlement Plan" (attachment 5) Paper

HOW TO DOlT
DISCUSSION · Discuss, using the following questions: What government services were available to you in Somalia? What services did you receive in the camp? What services do you expect to receive in the United States? What concerns do you have about providing for your family in the United States? What are your five-year goals? ROLE OF AGENCY · Using the list of agency services, explain in detail the role of the resettlement agency, and the services that the agency will provide to the clients. · Using the list of other community services, explain in detail the services that other community or national organizations will provide.

.7

S Committee for Refugees and Immigrants · Somali Bantu Community rientation

59

References
Adler, P. J., & Pouwels, R. L. (2007). World Civilizations: Volume I: To 1700. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing.

Barnett, D (2003).Out of Africa Somali Bantu and the Paradigm Shift in Refugee Resettlement.
Centre for Immigration Studies. Washington Besteman, C. (1999). Unravelling Somalia: Race, Violence, and the Legacy of Slavery

(Ethnography ofPolitical Violence). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Besteman, C, & Cassanelli, L.(1996). The Struggle for Land in Southern Somalia: The War

Behind the War. London: Haan Publishing.
Besteman, Catherine L. (1995). The Invention of Gosha: Slavery, Colonialism, and Stigma in Somali History, in A. J. Ahmed (ed.), The Invention of Somalia (pp. 43-62). Lawrenceville, NJ: Red Sea Press. Biles, John, Meyer Burnstein and James Frideres. 2008. Immigration and Integration in Canada in the Twenty-First Century. Montreal & Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press

Bixler, M. (2005). The Lost Boys of Sudan: An American Story of the Refugee Experience.
Athens, Ga: University of Georgia Press.

Bochner, S., & Furnham, A. (1986). Culture Shock. Psychological Reactions to Unfamiliar
Environments. London: Methuen.

British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), (2009). Aren 't they economic immigrants?. Retrieved August 19, 2009 from http://news.bbc.co.Uk/2/hi/uk news/politics/7892265.stm Bryce-La Porte, R. S. (1993). Voluntary immigration and continuing encounters between
blacks:

Campbell, E. (2005) Formalizing the Informal Economy: Somali Refugee and Migrant Trade
Networks in. Nairobi. Retrieved July 22, 2009 from top://www.rsq.oxfordjoumals.org

Cassanelli, L (1996) Explaining the Somali Crisis. In C.Besteman & L. Cassanelli (1996). The
Struggle for Land in Southern Somalia: The War Behind the War. London: Haan Publishing.

Cassanelli, L. V. (1995). Victims and Vulnerable Groups in Southern Somalia. Ottawa:
Research Directorate, Documentation, Information and Research Branch,

Immigration and Refugee Board. Cassanelli, L.V., & Besteman, C. L. (1996). The Struggle for Land in Southern Somalia: The War Behind the War. London: Haan Publishing. Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL). (2009a) The Somali Bantu: Their History and Culture Retrieved June 17, 2009 from http ://www.cal.org/resources/pubs/somalibantu.html Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL). (2009b) Refugee Integration. Retrieved June 17, 2009 from http://www.cal.org/topics/ri/
60

Central Intelligence Agency. (2009). The CIA World Factbook 2009 (CIA World Factbook).
New York: Skyhorse Publishing.

Cerulli, E.(1966). Somalia. In R, Oliver., J & Fage.,(Eds.). The Journal ofAfrican History Vol.
VII, 1966. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Chanoff,

http ://www.mapendo. org

S.

(n.d.).

Mapendo

International.

Retrieved

July

9,

2009,

from

Chapin, S (2007) Music of the Somali Bantu in Vermont:Music, Identity and Refugees. MA
Music (Ethnomusicology) Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Citizenship and Immigration Canada CIC (2003). Guide to the Private Sponsorship of
Refugees. Ottawa: CIC Publications

Clarke, W., & Herbst, J., (1997). Learningfrom Somalia: The Lessons ofArmed Humanitarian
Intervention. Oxford: Westview Press.

Coelho, H., Teixeira, A., Cruz, M., Gonzaga, S., Arrais, P., Luchini, L., Vecchia, C. L., & Tognoni, G. (1994). Misoprostol: the experience of women in Fortaleza, Brazil The
INFO Project, 49(2), 101-110.

Cultural Orientation Resource Centre (2009). US Refugee Program: Current Fiscal Year Admission Statistics. Retrieved August 3, 2009 from http://www.cal.org/co/refugee/statistics/index.html Declich, F. (1995). Identity, dance and Islam among people with Bantu origin, in AJ. Ahmed (ed.), The invention ofSomalia. Lawrenceville, NJ: Red Sea Press, 191-222.

Deng, F. (1998). The Forsaken People: Case Studies of the Internally Displaced. Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Education for All: the Unfulfilled Promise", 21st Century Talks session on education for all,

2002. Retrieved July 17, 2009 from http://valeglobal.vale.edu/displav.article7id-777'
(HB). London: Adonis & Abbey Publishers Ltd.

Eno, M. A. (2008). The Bantu - Jareer Somalis: Unearthing Apartheid in the Horn ofAfrica Eno, O (1997). The Untold Apartheid Imposed on the Somali / Jareer People in Somalia. In H. Adam. Mending Rips in the Sky: Options for Somali Communities in the 21st
Century. Laurenceville: Red Sea Press.

Eno, O (2009). African Urban Spaces in Historical Perspective (Rochester Studies in African
History and the Diaspora). Rochester: University of Rochester Press.

Eno, O. & Eno, M.(2007). The journey back to the ancestral homeland: The return of the Somali Bantu (Wazigwa) to modern Tanzania. In A. Kusow & S. Bjork. From
Mogadishu to Dixon. Michigan: The Red Sea Press, Inc

Eno, O. A., & Eno, M. A. (2008a). Surveying through the narratives of African Identity.In A. Jideofor (Ed.)(2009). Who is an African? Identity, Citizenship and the Making of the
Africa-Nation (pb). London: Adonis & Abbey Publishers Ltd.

Eno, O. A., & Eno, M. A. (2008b). The Making of a Modern Diaspora: The Resettlement
Process of the Somali Bantu Refugees in the United States. In T. Falola & N. Afolabi, (Eds.), African Minorities in the New World. New York, NY: Routledge
61

Grotanelli, V. (1955). Pescatori dell'Oceano indiano: saggio etnologico preliminare sui
Bagiuni, Bantu costieri dell'Oltregiuba. Cremona: Cremonese.

Heckman, J. J., & Krueger, A. B. (2005). Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies? (Alvin Hansen Symposium Series on Public Policy). London: The Mit
Press.

Henry, F., & Tator, C. (2006). Racial Profiling in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.

Herzt, B., & Sperling, G. (2004). What works in girls' education: evidence and policies from the developing world. New York: Council On Foreign Relations. Hess, Robert L. (1966). Italian Colonialism in Somalia. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Horst, Cindy,( 2007). A Monopoly on Assistance? International Aid to Refugee Camps and the
Role of the Diaspora', presented at AEGIS Conference, Leiden, 11 July. International Organization for Migration (various contributors) (2002a). Somali Bantu Report.
Cultural Orientation Project. Nairobi: Authors.

International Organization for Migration IOM (2002b). Somali Bantu Report, IOM, Nairobi. Ishay, M. (2007).
Routledge.

The Human Rights Reader: Major Political Essays,

Speeches,

and

Documents from Ancient Times to the Present,
Kress, G. (2004). Learning to Write. New York, NY: Routledge.

Second Edition. New York:

Lewis, I. M. (2002). A Modern History of the Somali: Nation and State in the Horn ofAfrica
(Eastern African Studies). Oxford: James Currey.

Lovgren, S. (2003). Refugees in the U.S.: One Family's Story. National Geographic, World Refugee Day.Retrieved August 22, 2009 from
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2003/06/0620 030620 banturelugees.html

Luling, Virginia (1971)The Social Structure of Southern Somali Tribes.Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of London.

Marquis, C. (2002). "Since Attacks, U.S. Admits Fewer Refugees.'Wew York Times, October
30,2002

Mburu, E. (2004). English language instruction in Kakuma Camp, Kenya. Refugee Reports, 25,
1-6.

McLaughlin, B., & McLaughlin, M. (2003). USA Immigration & Orientation: Getting in and

Getting Settled. Satellite Beach, FL : Wellesworth Pub; 6 Revised edition .
Menkhaus, K. (1996) From Feast to Famine: Land and the State in Somalia's Lower Jubba

Valley. In C.Besteman & L. Cassanelli (1996). The Struggle for Land in Southern
Somalia: The War Behind the War. London: Haan Publishing.

Menkhaus, Kenneth J. (1989). Rural Transformation and the Roots of Underdevelopment in
Somalia's Lower Jubba Valley. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
South Carolina.

62

Miller, K., & Rasco, L. (Eds.). (2004). The mental health of refugees: Ecological approaches to healing and adaptation. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers, Inc. MTN (2004). From Mogadishu to Minneapolis:Minnesota Somalis find a television home in the studios of MTNView on July 20, 2009 from http://www.mtn.org/Video/news/somalistory.html
O'Hara, R., Leon, R., Ahman, H. & Ward, L. (2004). Somali Bantu Community Orientation.
US committee for Refugees and Immigrants. Massachusetts.

OCHA

http://ochaonline.un.org/ToolsServices/tabid/1083/Default.aspx

(2006).

Tools

and

Services.

Retrieved

July

19,

2009

from

Office of Refugee Resettlement Annual Report, 2004

Office of Refugee Resettlement: Administration for Children and Families (ACF), (2009). State letter- Lost Boys: Arrival ofSudanese Youths During FY2001. Retrieved June
17, 2009 from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/on-/

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), (1996) Convention relating to the status of refugees. Retrieved August 12, 2009 from http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/refugees.htm Pierce, W. J., & Elisme, E. (2000). Suffering, surviving, succeeding: Understanding and
working with Haitian women Race, Gender, & Class, 7(4), 60-71.

Pincus, J. (1987). Development Policy in the Twenty First Century: Beyond the PostWashington Consensus (Routledge Studies in Development Economics, 17). New
York: Routledge.

Raney, L., & Subbarao, K. (1993). Social Gains from Female Education: A Cross-National Study (World Bank Discussion Paper). New York: World Bank Publications.

Refugee Sponsorship Training Program RSTP (2008). Joint Assistance Sponsorship. RSTP
Publications. Retrieved on August 23, 2009 from http://www.rstp.ca

Refugee Survey by the United States committee on Refugees (2004), Somali Bantu Community
Refugees, Washington, DC Laidlaw Foundation

Orientation Curriculum Index: Family and Community Outreach for Somali Bantu

Saloojee, A. (2003). Social inclusion, anti-racism and democratic citizenship. Toronto: Samatar, A. I. (1994). The Somali challenge: From catastrophe to renewal?. Boulder: L.
Rienner Publishers.

Shungwaya. (2009). In Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved August 18, 2009, from
Encyclopaedia Britannica Online:

http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/542332/Shungwava
The Global Report 2000 : The UNHCR Fundraising Report (2000).

The People's Movement for Human Rights Learning (PDHRE) (n.d.) Retrieved July 17, 2009
from http://www.pdhre.org/

The post-quincentenary challenge. Annals, AAPS 530 (November), 28-41.
63

The Week. (1957, January 9). The Importance of Formal Education. This Week Magazine Tribe, R. (2002). Mental health and refugees. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 8 (4), 240247.
UNESCO (2000). World Education Forum Executive Summary

UNHCR. (2006). The State of the World's Refugees: Human Displacement in the New Millennium. New York: Oxford University Press, USA. UNHCR. (2005). 2004 Year in Review. Refugees, Issue 137.

UNHCR. (2004). Dreams, Fears and Euphoria: The Long Road Home. Refugees, Issue 134, 4.
UNHCR. (2002). America here we come. Refugees, Issue 128,

UNHCR,

(2001).

Collection of International Instruments and Legal Texts Concerning

Refugees and Others of Concern to UNHCR. New York: United Nations
United Nations Education Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), (2002). Address by Mr Koi'chiro Matsuura United Nations July Education 17, Scientific 2009 and Cultural from

Organization, to the World forum of UNESCO chairs. Director General of the
DG/2002/11. Retrieved http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001281/128198e.pdf United States Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration (2007). Retrieved August 12, 2009 from http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis US Department of Education : http://www.ed.gov/index.jhtml USA Today (2006). After 3 years, Somali Bantu struggle to adjust to US. Retrieved August 12,
2009 from http ://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2006-03 -21 -somali-bantucover x.htm

Van Lehman, D (1999) Expanding Protection for Marginalized Refugee Minorities: Resettling Somali Mushungulis to Southeast Africa. Unpublished master's thesis, Cornell University.

Van Lehman, D (2001). Resettling Somali Bantus May Present Special Challenges. African
Refugee Network, 9( 10), 6.

Van Lehman, D. (1993). Resettlement of the Mushunguli: Somali Refugees of Southeast
African Origin. Paper summarized at the Fifth International Congress of Somali Studies, Holy Cross College, Worcester, MA.

Wang, L. & Freeland, D. (2004). Coping with immigration: New challenges for the mental health profession. In J.L Chin (Ed.), The Psychology of Prejudice and Discrimination. Westport, Conn: Praeger Perspectives.
Werner A (1952) A Swahili history of Pate, Journal of the Africa Society 14. Oxford : Oxford University Press Winkleby, M., Jatulis, D., Frank, E., & Fortmann, S. (1992). Socioeconomic status and health:

how education, income, and occupation contribute to risk factors for cardiovascular
disease.. American Journal ofPublic Health, 82(6), 816 - 820.

64

WISTV (2005). Cayce officials concerned about relocation of African refugees. Retrieved August 3, 2009 from http://www.wistv.corn/Global/story.asp?S=1337409

65

Glossary of terms
Bantu: Green Card

Somali Bantu

nickname (because of the color) of the United States Permanent
Resident Card, an identification document issued by the United

States of America affording non-citizens of that country some of the rights its citizens enjoy, sometimes with the prospect of
naturalization IOM: UNHCR:
SPO:

International Organization for Migration

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Settlement Providing Organizations

Scramble for Africa: Also known as the Race for Africa was the result of conflicting
European claims to African territory during the New Imperialism

period, between the 1880s and the First World War in 1914. UNIFEM: United Nations Development Fund for Women

Used by Somali Bantu Birta Dheer:

The tall metal. Refers to the tall metal telephone transmission structure in the Somali -Kenya border town of Liboi

Daraad:

The day before yesterday. Refers to any time in the near or distant past

Mardow: Sacaad Hirki:

Recently. Refers to any time from one hour to a few years ago Tying a watch to the wrist. Refers to a UNHCR revalidation exercise in 1997 when wristbands were given out

Tirokoob:

Counting. Refers to any previous UNHCR headcount

66


