COLLECTION ANTHROPOLOGIQUE DU MUSEUM DE PARIS: ETHNOGRAPHIC PORTRAITS BY JACQUES-PHILIPPE POTTEAU

By

Juli Sheptytsky-Zall BFA Photography, Toronto, 2007

A thesis project presented to Ryerson University & Art Gallery of Ontario

In partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts

in the Program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 © Juli Sheptytsky-Zall 2009

PROHWTYOF RYER88N UMYRSf

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals
for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals
for the purpose of scholarly research.

Abstract

Jacques-Philippe

Potteau,

a

lesser

known

photographer

and

naturalist

in

nineteenth-century France, produced a series of ethnographic portraits under the
title "Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris" for the Museum d'Histoire
naturelle in Paris, between 1860 and 1869. This paper investigates a representative

set of the series, found at the Art Gallery of Ontario, which has been used as a source
of information for looking at the photographer's mode and scope of production.

These ethnographic portraits, made according to conventions of commercial studio

portraiture in Second Empire France, were used for the study and classification of
man and displayed as specimens in the Anthropology Collection at the Museum. By
looking at the variation between the most formal and the most sterile compositions,

the various presentation methods and the labels as a new source of information, Potteau is identified as a photographer who produced work more independently
than previously thought.

in

Acknowledgements

1 was introduced to this body of photographs at the Art Gallery of Ontario, where I was completing the second year of my program of study. Maia-Mari Sutnik, the curator of the
photography department and Sophie Hackett, assistant curator, who were also two of the

faculty members of the program, presented the photographs as an example of the many treasures found in the AGO collection. They were very supportive in my process and
provided a number of leads on how to go about researching the set of photographs. Among

other faculty members who

contributed to this process were, David

Harris whose

enthusiasm for the material propelled my own interest and Marta Braun, who provided me with a healthy pile of reading material on the topic of photography and anthropology. My classmates, with whom I shared all my frustrations and small victories, have been a tremendous testament to the value that good colleagueship and even better friendship can
harness.

In Paris, the staff of the Bibliotheque national de France at Richelieu was very gracious in

letting me handle precious material and answered numerous questions about it to the best of their knowledge. Christine Barthe at the Musee du quai Branly, without knowing it,
helped me to find the 'hook' that I'd been searching for since undertaking the project. Her

indispensible knowledge led me through a web of unaccounted details, which I would not
have been able to decipher alone.

I must also mention the wonderful staff at Harvard University. Particia Kervick at the Peabody Museum Archives was unable to locate the photographs I was looking for in her own collection and put me in touch with David Odo. Professor Odo, who has a mental catalogue of all the material in the anthropology collection at Harvard, pointed me in the direction of the Tozzer Library. Just when I though the trail ran dry, Janet Steins, the associate librarian devoted her time and efforts to helping me find what no one seemed to know was there, an impressive set of the "Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris." Dana Fischer at the Library of the Museum of Comparative Zoology devoted an afternoon to helping me try to track down the provenance of the collection. The expertise and efficiency
of all the staff at Harvard has made a lasting impression.

Most of all, I am grateful to my advisors Thierry Gervais and Marta Braun, whose stern and
dedicated approach to this project helped to produce a paper that I am proud of. There were

many occasions throughout the process when I felt I reached a dead end. Thierry's
remarkable mind, which seemed never to stop questioning and drawing connections, was

an amusement and an inspiration. Marta's patience in refining the details helped me to see
the subject more clearly and better understand my working process.

Thanks You to all those who met me with open doors and open minds.

IV

Til min elskede S0de mand som tror at jeg er den klogeste
bj0rn i verden. Din st0tte holdt mig oppe og jeg haber jeg at kunne vaere der for dig I dine svaere tider.

Table of Contents

Introduction Literature Survey

1 7 14 14

Historical & Biographical Context 1 | Anthropology and the photographic industry 2 | The Photographers

16 19 24

Methodology - 'reading' anthropological photographs
Scope of the Series Description of Objects

30
31 36 40

1 | Presentations - a note on 19th century aesthetics
2 | Content - subject not object
Labels 1 | Labelled Objects - portrait or specimen 2 | Uncut Labels - the in between
Conclusion

41

45 49

Appendices I Database II Data Analysis
52 57

III List of Images in the AGO collection

58

Bibliography

64

VI

Introduction

The Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO) has an eclectic collection of photography that

amounts to over 60,000 objects. The material represents a range of processes and
applications spanning the history of the medium: from photojournalism archives to

vernacular three-dimensional objects and photographic artworks. Among this
collection is a set of 253 ethnographic portraits, from a larger photographic series

titled "Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris" (henceforth Collection
Anthropologique). The series created between 1855 and 18691 for the Museum

d'Histoire naturelle (Museum) in Paris included ethnographic portraits, photographs of skulls, photographic reproductions of plaster casts of human heads and drawings
made before the invention of photography, among other anthropological images.

Although the exact number of wet-collodion glass plate negatives that comprised the original series is unknown, there were likely well over 10002 plates. The original views in the series were made by a number of photographers including, Louis Rousseau, Pierre-Joseph Rossier, and Paul-Emile Miot, but the majority of
them is attributed to Jacques-Philippe Potteau. Some images in the series were
contributed by other individuals and made by unknown photographers. Potteau

made duplicate negatives from these images, which were then included in the series.
The AGO set of images is representative of the ethnographic portraits

included in the Collection Anthropologique, as it contains nearly half of the

1 These are the earliest and latest dates known, taken from the labels attached to the image mounts and sheets of
2 It is difficult to ascertain what constitutes a complete series, as no original inventory of the Collection Anthropologique exists. Jacques-Philippe Potteau, one of the major contributors to the Collection Anthropologique, made at least 1138 negatives for the Museum, most of which are known to be part of the series.
uncut labels.

approximately 6003 ethnographic portraits included in the series; 244 of the images are by Potteau, eight by Rossier and one by contributor M. L'abbe Larnandie. The set

consists chiefly of pairs of three-quarter-length, frontal and profile portraits of subjects of different ethnicities, printed on albumen, mounted on card stock and labelled on the verso; ten sheets of uncut printed labels also accompany this set. The Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris is a much larger body of work than is

presented in this paper. However, this investigation is concerned only with the
portraits, which represent the initial (beginning with label number 1 to

approximately 300] portion of the series.4 The ethnographic portraits that are part of the Collection Anthropologique

series made by Potteau are unique in comparison to other anthropological images in

this vein. There are a number of later photographic projects that emulate this model
for making ethnographic portraits (frontal and profile depictions of the sitter, basic

subject identification), for example the Collection Anthropologique du Prince Roland
Bonaparte made in the 1880's. However, unlike photographs made on expeditions

abroad, Potteau's photographs of official dignitaries and visitors to the Jardin des
Plantes in Paris5 were made in his studio in the proximity of the Museum d'Histoire
naturelle and exhibit the aesthetics of traditional portraiture.

3 580 of Potteau's 1138 negatives made forthe museum were "photographs ofthe human races," as quoted in

Christine Barthe, "Models & Norms: the relationship between ethnographic photographs and sculptures," in Facing the Other: Charles Cordier (1827-1905) Ethnographic Sculptor (New York: Harry N Abrams, 2004), 108.
This number does not include negatives by Rousseau that were included in the series.

4 The label number is also the subject number. Each subject photographed was assigned a number; therefore, if
there are two views ofthe subject, they have an identical label. s The Jardin des Plantes is a botanical garden, which is part ofthe Museum d'Histoire naturelle.

Fig. 1 & 2

Jacques-Philippe Potteau

Jacques-Philippe Potteau

63. Hluang Indimontry (46 ans) Officier en chef pour le recouvremens des impots provenans des differentes monopoles de la ville de Bangkok, au service de S. M. le 1er roi de Siam; charge des cadeaux royaux envoyes a SM. PEmpereur des Francais. Ne a Bangkok (Siam) d'un pere Chinois

253. Moustapha Ben Onarga (26 ans) Soldat de
1er classe au 2e Tirailleurs Algeriens, ne a

Tlemcen. Taille: 1m. 68cent. yeux the 1 bruns (Son pere et

- Cheveux noirs, sa mere Turcs)

[Moustapha Ben Onarga (26 years old) Soldier of class in the 2 Algerian Tirailleurs, born in
Tlemcen. Height: 1m, 68cm - Black hair, brown

en d'une mere Siamoise. [Hluang Indimontry (46
years old) Officer in chief for the collection of provincial taxes of the various monopolies of the

eyes. (His father and mother Turks)] 1865

city of Bangkok, in the service of H. M. the 1 King
of Siam; in charge of royal gifts sent to H.M the
French Emperor. Born in Bangkok (Siam) to a

Chinese father and Siamese mother.] 1862
15.3 cm x20.3 cm

12.6 cm x16.6 cm Albumen Print from Wet Collodion Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto

Albumen Print from Wet Collodion Negative
Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto

Many sets of images were printed from the negatives in the series. The sets produced before 1871 were most likely printed by Potteau and bear the Collection

Anthropologique title on a printed or handwritten label on the verso of the mount.6 Potteau cropped his albumen prints to rounded, oval and square with diagonally cut corners.7 Between 1871-72, the photographer donated his negatives to the

Museum.8 After this time, the institution made various sets of prints from Potteau's

negatives of ethnographic portraits that were labelled Collection Potteau.9 These later prints were made on albumen and sometimes on aristotype paper.10 They
were most commonly cropped to a rectangular shape and some are slightly larger

than Potteau's prints. The presentation methods for these prints also varied, for example both the frontal and profile images were mounted on one card. In
comparison to these later printings, the AGO set can be identified as an earlier one
printed by Potteau.

What began as my assessment of the AGO set, focusing on the identification of individual images and their organization, developed into an investigation

concerning the circumstances of their production and Potteau's involvement in it.

The composition and presentation of Potteau's portraits vary; on the one hand, there are photographs of Siamese delegates made in the tradition of studio

portraiture with curtains, decorations and props in the image and, on the other,
clinical views of Algerian military men, removed from any context, staring blankly at

6 I have seen or know of at least five sets of Collection Anthropologique probably printed by Potteau, including the AGO set. It is possible that Potteau had assistance in printing his images, which was common in photographic
practice at the time.

7 Christine Barthe, curator at the Musee du quai Branly, in personal communication with the author, June 16th,
2009.

8 Barthe, "Models & Norms," 108.

9 The Collection Potteau inventory was a catalogue of Potteau's negatives of ethnographic portraits compiled by the Museum after the donation. Throughout their history, many prints in Parisian institutional collections were relabelled. For instance, the labels handwritten in pencil on the verso of Potteau prints were sometimes erased
and replaced with labels handwritten in ink, identifying them as Collection Potteau. 10 The aristotype is a printing-out process using paper coated with silver chloride in gelatin or collodion.

the camera or in profile. Furthermore, each label includes varying amounts of quantifiable (hair and eye colour] and subjective ("very pure race") information,

depending on the subject and what the photographer considered important.11 This variance presents a number of questions about Potteau's approach to the subject
and his mode of production, implicating him in a different role than has previously
been understood.

It has been suggested that the photographer worked within the Museum12 and produced photographs specifically for its collection. However, in the mid
nineteenth century, only a few decades after the invention of photography,

museums did not employ photographers as dedicated staff. As Potteau's history of
employment within the Museum reveals, he worked in different departments, under various titles, none of which were "photographer." His skill as a photographer was applied in a studio located near the institution. The Collection Anthropologique

series is the largest body of work in Potteau's career. How does it define his mode and scope of production and what does it reveal about his employment within the
Museum? His approach mirrored the model of commercial photographic production

at the time and the series was targeted for use by the scientific community, newly founded societies of learned men with interests in ethnography, anthropology and geography. The existence of various sets, such as the one at the AGO, attests to their
dissemination and broadens our understanding of Potteau's production, showing

that he did much more than merely contribute photographs to the Museum's

11 It is also possible that the photographer was instructed as to what the type of information he was to record. 12 Barthe, "Models & Norms," 106-108; P-j. Jehel, "Photographie et anthropologie en France au XIXe siecle"
(Memoire de DEA, Universite Paris VIII, 1995), 35.

Anthropology Collection.13 This thesis analyzes the set of photographs in the AGO collection as well as the labels accompanying the set, which have not previously
been considered as a source of information about the photographer. It demonstrates

that Potteau's production was more independent of the institution than has hitherto
been understood.

13 The Anthropology Collection at the Museum d'Histoire naturelle included all objects in the custody of the Anthropology Laboratory, not to be confused with the Collection Anthropologique photographic series, which
was only a part of this collection.

Literature Survey

There

is

a

lack

of published

information

specifically

about the

'Collection

Anthropologique' series. However, that which does exist is helpful in placing the AGO

set of photographs into a context. The history of this set begins with the cultural context of its creation, discussed at length in Elizabeth Anne McCauley's Industrial Madness: Commercial Photography in Paris, 1848-1871. Her comprehensive account of the growth of commercial photography at this time is valuable in constructing a framework for understanding the creation and consumption of these images. The

establishment

of commercial

portraiture

in

Second

Empire

France

had

an

undeniable influence on Potteau's approach to making anthropological photographs, the protocol for which had not yet been fully determined, as one can see by
observing the gap between the two examples presented above (Fig. 1 & 2).

McCauley includes both Rousseau and Potteau in her history of commercial photographic production in Paris, placing them among other makers of commercial products14 specifically targeted for consumption by the scientific and academic
communities. She refers to Rousseau as a "naturalist" who made a reputation

photographing exotic "human and animal

specimens,"15

in

reference to the

photographs of 'Eskimos' that he took during Prince Jerome Napoleon Bonaparte's 1856 expedition to Iceland and Greenland.16 These are some of the first images to be
represented in the Collection Anthropologique series. She accounts for Potteau
14 Rousseau's work is included among 3.6% of prints of 'scientific studies' registered in the depot legal listings in

1853. By 1868, the 'scientific studies' category seems to be absorbed into miscellaneous images and the percentage of registrations declines to 1.4%. Elizabeth Anne McCauley, Industrial Madness: commercial photography in Paris, 1848-1871 (New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1994), 97.
15 McCauley, Industrial Madness, 307. 16 McCauley, Industrial Madness, 97.

having exhibited "three albums of human racial types"17 taken for the Museum

d'Histoire naturelle at the ninth exhibition of the Royal Photographic Society (RPS), in 1863.18&19 It is very likely that these images were the same ethnographic portraits that were part of the Collection Anthropologique series; however, there is little evidence of the albums themselves. Potteau is often overshadowed by Louis Rousseau, whose contribution to the series was significantly smaller, but who was a
much more prominent figure in photographic circles.
Using the camera as a tool for observation, scientific communities, societies

of learned men and institutions such as the Museum d'Histoire naturelle attempted to record 'invisible phenomena'20 to present and support their ideas about the
world. Marta Braun examines the value and validity of photographic observations

made in the name of science in her article "La photographie et les sciences de 1 'observation" [Photography and the science of observation.] Early applications of
photography to exploring micro and macrocosms were unsuccessful because it was
unable to accurately represent colour, three-dimensional form, scale, distance or

motion. In anthropology, unlike the case of astronomy, botany, medicine or kinetics,

17 McCauley, Industrial Madness 383, note 144.

18 McCauley, Industrial Madness 93, Potteau was awarded an honourable mention for his work, which was
displayed in the main hall of the London exhibition.

19 According to the "Photographic Exhibitions in Britain 1839 -1865" web-catalogue compiled by Roger Taylor, apart from these three albums, Potteau also exhibited three prints titled "Application of Photography to Anatomy and Natural Sciences, Types of Different Sections of the Human Race, and Objects of Natural History" for which he was also awarded an honorable mention, as well as two other similar photographs, twelve photographs titled "Types of the Human Race" and one photograph from a waxed-paper negative titled [Coral]. Taylor's catalogue does not mention any association to the Museum, however, it names the Societe frangaise de
photographie as the exhibitor of Potteau's photographs.
http://peib.dmu.ac.uk/itemphotographer.php?photogNo=1194&orderby=coverage&photogName=Potteau%2C

+Phillipe+Jacques+%281807-1876%29, [accessed, September 5th, 2009).

20 Marta Braun, "Aux Limites du Savoir: la photographie et les science de l'observation" in L'Art de la photographie des origines a nos jours, ed. Andre Gunthert and Michel Poivert (Paris: editions Citadelles-Mazenod,
2007), 174.

photographic observations continued to weigh heavily on 'faith' for their validity.21
Theories of racial hierarchy thrived on this same faith in observation as science struggled to produce evidence to support them.

In her book Raw Histories, Elizabeth Edwards22 investigates the materiality of anthropological photographs and how they managed to convey such an

authoritative message.23 The indexical value of a photograph attests to its power; as

Edwards puts it, "It was there."24 The photographs, in everything that cannot be
known about them, are as uncertain as the culture that created them: a culture not

fully resolved in its conceptual framework of looking at the 'other.' Edwards demonstrates how the 'rawness' of colonial photographs, on par with the rawness of the culture that created them, allows them to be viewed today in a post-colonial context. Her discussion helps to consider the trajectory of the numerous sets of the Collection Anthropologique series, their dissemination and consumption.25 In her article, "Models & Norms: the Relationship Between Ethnographic Photographs and Sculptures," published in Facing the Other: Charles Cordier Ethnographic Sculptor, Christine Barthe26 looks at the terms of production of photographs and sculpture in the mid-nineteenth century and their "museological fate."27 The discussion is built around the duality of these objects as both scientific

21 Braun, "Aux Limites du Savoir," 175.

22 Edwards is curator at the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford and the foremost scholarly source on anthropology
and photography.

23 Elizabeth Edwards, Raw Histories: Photographs, Anthropology and Museums (Oxford: Berg, 2006). 24 Elizabeth Edwards, ed. Anthropology and Photography 1860-1920 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1992), 7.

25 The AGO set is an interesting example because it is the only one I have come across that is part of an art
gallery collection.

26 Barthe is curator of photographs at the Musee du quaiBranlyin Paris and was previously head of the
photography collection at the Musee de l'Homme. 27 Barthe, "Models & Norms," 93.

specimens and art. Barthe investigates the growth of the Anthropology Collection at

the Museum d'Histoire naturelle through the acquisition and commissioning of various objects of study including sculptures, plaster casts and photographs. Barthe's account of Potteau's work for the Museum and his contribution of photographs to the Anthropology Collection provides insight as to the

circumstances and extent of the photographer's production. However, her sources
do not clarify his terms of employment with the institution and are in some respects

contradictory. Barthe quotes from writings by Armand de Quatrefage [1867), head

of the Human Anatomy and Natural History laboratory, where he addresses the
photographs of "M. Potteau, employed by the Museum ... [as] true scholarly

works."28 Further, she quotes the foreword to Quatrefage's Histoire generate des races humaines (1871), where he mentions Potteau as a "simple employee of the
Museum."29 But, if Potteau's terms of employment with the museum were so simple, why did Quatrefage have to purchase photographs from Potteau in 1863?30 In 1867,

Quatrefage once again requested funds to purchase Potteau's photographs of Bohemians.31 Finally, in 1871-72, Potteau gifted 1138 negative plates to the

museum,32

further calling into

question the terms of his employment and

production. Presumably, had Potteau's employment within the institution included

his photographic practice, the plates would have belonged to the museum as with
any other specimens prepared by an employee in the laboratory.

28 As quoted in Barthe, "Models & Norms," 106.
29 Ibid.

30 Barthe states that "18 prints of Parsis types" were purchased by Quatrefage, ibid.
31 Ibid.
32 Ibid.

10

Pierre-Jerome Jehel's thesis "Photographie et anthropologie en France au XIXe

siecle" [Photography and Anthropology in nineteenth-century France], looks at the historical and political development of anthropology in the early nineteenth century to later applications of photography in creating anthropological collections. He sees these bodies of work as representative of the culture that created them, rather than

the cultures they depict, and questions the representation of the 'other'33 and the
blurred lines between art and the scientific method. Jehel devotes a section to

analyzing the work of Potteau and

compares his

approach to

commercial

photographic production at the time. He focuses specifically on the group of
portraits of the members of the Siamese Embassy,34 photographed in 1861-62,

which he compares to portraits of the same group made by Nadar.35 He draws direct parallels between the established protocols used in studio portraiture and those adopted by Potteau in photographing the subject for the purpose of scientific observation. Jehel concludes, and I agree, that Potteau was tactful in photographing his subjects, giving due respect to his sitters, in contrast to Rousseau, whose portraits of 'Eskimos', are not only of lesser quality,36 but objectify the subject in a much more obvious way.37 Jehel also states that there is little, if any, biographical information available about Potteau.38 Further, he provides a number of nineteenth
century sources to confirm Boucourt and Rossier's contribution to the series.

33 Jehel, 6.

34 As seen in Figure 1.
35 Jehel, 40-41.

36 In La Revue Photographique, January 5,1857, Louis Figuier acknowledged the poor weather conditions and volatility of collodion as obstacles in producing plates of better quality, Jehel, 30.
37 Jehel, 35.
38 Jehel, 126.

11

Although dealing with the same material as this investigation, a set of photographs by Potteau from the Collection Anthropologique series, found at the

Bibliotheque nationale de France (BnF) and the Musee de l'Homme,39 Jehel's analysis is focused on a specific selection of images and does not address the labels
as a source of information about them or the photographers.

In approaching the problem of how to look at and interpret anthropological photographs, I consulted Anthropology & Photography, edited by Elizabeth Edwards. Her compilation of essays examines a variety of anthropological photographs, their

political and historical context, and the concept of looking at the 'other.' It offers a
theoretical framework for approaching this type of material. In her introduction, Edwards states that there is no truth to historical photographs nor is there a "key to a cultural decoding"40 of their creation. She encourages her audience to 'read' these
photographs as they have many interpretations and meanings. Joanna Scherer's essay "The Photographic Document: Photographs as

Primary Data in Anthropological Enquiry" in Anthropology & Photography offers a
useful methodology for examining anthropological photographs as documents,

which was partially applied to this investigation. Her method prescribes analysing

the original images and comparing them to others; contextualizing the material in
the history of photography and accounting for the limitations of the medium and

context; investigating the photographers' intent and assumed use; employing the

39 This collection is now at the Musee du quai Branly.
40 Edwards, Anthropology & Photography 5.

12

"study of ethnographic subjects" through cultural studies; and reviewing the "historical evidence," taking into account the treatment of the material by others.41

« Joanna C Scherer, "The Photographic Document: Photographs as Primary Data in Anthropological Enquiry," in Elizabeth Edwards ed., Anthropology & Photography 1860-1920 [New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992),
33.

13

Historical & Biographical Context

1 | Anthropology & the photographic industry

Photography and anthropology, both in their infancy in the mid nineteenth-century,

shared a reciprocal relationship as they developed. Anthropology, based on the biological sciences, helped to assert Western knowledge, and consequently the
white race, as superior.42 Through observation, documentation and classification,

anthropology sought to reveal 'scientific truth' about humankind. Photography
appeared to be the ideal tool for producing tangible evidence to support

anthropology's far-reaching theories, which ethnicities over others. With the creation

claimed the dominance of some of series such as the Collection

Anthropologique, anthropology classified human beings according to race and
established Europeans as the superior race at the top of the pile.43 The "Western

perception"44

of other cultures was

dependent on

both

the

"creation

and

consumption" of ethnographic photographs and led to the dissemination of

Darwin's theories, which in turn drew from these type of fabrications.45
In Second Empire France, the second decade of photography saw a boom in

its commercial exploitation and applications. This flourishing of the photographic industry was due to a growing culture of consumption, but also the wide-spread use
of the wet-collodion process, which bore reproducible fruit. The process was

42 Edwards, Anthropology & Photography, 5; Braun, "Aux Limites du Savoir," 176.

43 Potteau's negatives were re-catalogued geographically by the Museum d'Histoire naturelle in the 1870's; the
list began with Europe, France.

45 Braun "Aux Limites du Savoir," 176; Charles Darwin, "Chapter VII: On the Races of Man" in Descent ofMan and Selection Relating to Sex (New York, NY: AMS Press, 1972). Darwin consulted this series of'scientific specimens'
to build his arguments.

44 Edwards, Anthropology & Photography, 5.

14

cumbersome and its limitations were numerous, but photography was finally able to
duplicate the world indefinitely, with great clarity and precision. The inexpensive and accessible wet-plate turned everything observable by industrious eyes into

tangible, marketable objects.46 This marvel of vanity and curiosity led to the
increased desire of Western scholars, who supported theories of racial hierarchy, to

objectify others. The roots of this desire were long ago in place, exercised in conquest and colonization; but the camera became yet another tool of power
employed by Europeans.

The overwhelming number of studios and photographic ventures in Paris

eventually distilled into more specialized categories of industrial and scientific photography, among which anthropological photographs found a viable market.47 These types of images were widely disseminated, exhibited in museums and
industrial fairs and traded among learned men.

There was no concrete formula for making anthropological photographs.
Some basic protocols were employed including views from different perspectives

and descriptive labels; however, overall, ethnographic portraits mimicked the established traditions of portraiture. Unlike later anthropological photographs,

where the subject is posed (often nude) against an anthropometric scale, or those

produced as supplements to field work, the ethnographic portraits from the Collection Anthropologique series exhibit the aesthetics of traditional studio

portraiture of such notable contemporaries as Nadar48 and Disderi.

46 Compared to the daguerreotype, the wet-plate collodion process was cheaper and therefore more accessible,
contributing to the rapid growth of commercial photography in the mid-nineteenth century. 47 McCauley, "The Business of Photography," in Industrial Madness, 49-56. 48 Jehel, 40. The author compares Potteau's images to those of the same subjects taken by Nadar.

15

Etienne

Serres,

director of the

Human Anatomy and

Natural

History

laboratory at the Museum d'Histoire naturelle from 1839 until 1855,49 recognized
the potential application of the camera immediately. In 1841, Serres purchased an

appareil de Daguerre for 260 francs.50

Louis Rousseau (1811-1874), employed by

the Museum as a laboratory technician and assistant in the zoology department,

soon learned to operate the apparatus, which was seen not only as a viable way to

preserve the collections, but was also used to produce some of the first images of
humans at the Museum.51

2 | The Photographers

Rousseau was introduced to photography within the institution and took
lessons from Niepce de Saint Victor and Hippolyte Bayard.52 In 1854, he became one

of the founding members of the Societe Francaise de Photographie and was official photographer of the Museum d'Histoire naturelle until I860.53 He also partook in several important expeditions, including Prince Bonaparte's 1856 expedition to Iceland and Greenland, where he made photographs of natives, some of which are included in the Collection Anthropologique series. Rousseau gave up photography in 1862;54 however, his relationship to the Museum continued. In 1872, he was made
custodian of the Zoology department.55

« Barthe, "Models & Norms," 94.

50 Jehel, 31; Barthe, "Models & Norms," 94.
si Jehel, 30-31. sz Jehel, 32.

53 Ibid; McCauley, Industrial Madness. s* Jehel, 35.
ss Jehel, 28.

16

Rousseau

probably introduced

Potteau to

photography as

both

were

employed by the institution and making photographs on the cusp of the 1860's.56
The latter dedicated the next decade of his career to creating over 1000

photographic plates for the Museum, many of which are those represented in the Collection Anthropologique series. Although little is know about him, Potteau's

(1807-1876) presence can be traced within the Museum d'Histoire naturelle over nearly 30 years. The first account of his activity in the institution is in 1838, and records from the 1850's indicate his employment as assistant in the geology and mineralogy laboratories.57 He began to build on Rousseau's photographic work for
the institution after I860,58 creating ethnographic portraits as well as photographs of various museum specimens, and reproductions of art. The Collection

Anthropologique series offers insight into Potteau's mode and scope of production. The terms of his employment by the Museum d'Histoire naturelle are unclear.

Several sources indicate that he was employed by the Museum throughout the
1860's. However, Potteau also sold his prints and donated his negative plates to the

institution,59 indicating that his means of production was independent. The sheets of
labels investigated in this paper suggest that Potteau produced images for various institutions around Paris. He is also known to have presented his work to Societe Francaise de Photographie in 186260 and 186361 and exhibited work in England.62

s&jehel, 35. s? Barthe, "Models & Norms," 106.

58 According to Jehel, Potteau began making photographs for the museum in 1861, however, my research points

to earlier work. It is also possible that he made photographs prior to 1860, as there are 'unsigned' labels from 1857 and 1859, which according to the hypothesis presented in this paper implicate him as the maker.
59 Barthe, "Models & Norms," 108.
60 Jehel, 36.

61 Barthe, "Models & Norms," 106.

17

W0WTY0F

The views made by Swiss born photographer Pierre-Joseph Rossier (1829-

1898] included in the AGO set of images were not credited directly to him, but

rather French naturalist and artist Firmin Bocourt, who contributed these to the series. By 1861, Rossier, who had been working in Japan for the London photographic firm of Negretti and Zambra producing commercial travel images,63 ended up in Siam where he assisted Bocourt in taking ethnographic portraits that
were later assimilated into the Collection Anthropologique series. He eventually
returned to Switzerland where he owned and operated independent portrait

studios in Einsiedeln and Fribourg.64 There is no further evidence implicating his
association to the series or the Museum.

62 McCauley, Industrial Madness, 93; Taylor, "Photographic Exhibitions in Britain 1839-1865,"
http://peib.dmu.ac.uk/, (accessed September 5th, 2009). 63 Bennet, Terry, Bourgarel, Gerard and David Collin, Pierre Joseph Rossier, Photographe: une memoire retrouvee, (Fribourg, Switzerland: Pro Fribourg, 2006).
si Bennet et al., 25.

18

Methodology

In following Scherer's methodology, I consulted the image set at the AGO as the point of entry to the investigation of the series. By looking at the labels on the
photographs in the AGO set, I was able to analyze the organization and the scope of the series and identify Potteau as instrumental in its creation. Insofar as the AGO set

offered limited information as to the circumstances of the production of the series, it
was necessary to establish the historical context and further consider the limitations
of the medium in producing a scientific specimen.

In order to see how the AGO set was representative of the series, I decided that it would be helpful to survey another comprehensive set of the Collection

Anthropologique. Sets can be found at the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford,65 the Tozzer Library at Harvard, the BnF and the Musee du quai Branly (quai Branly) in
Paris. Many of the original negatives from the series and some collection
documentation are also at the quai Branly.66 The fact that various sets exist attests

to the claim that these images were produced on a large scale, more than necessary

to meet the demand of the Anthropology Collection at the Museum d'Histoire
naturelle.

I was able to spend a week in Paris and survey sets of the Collection

Anthropologique series in the holdings at the BnF. The library's catalogue listed Collection Anthropologique images only under Potteau's name. The BnF has a total of

65 Information about the Collection Anthropologique images can be accessed through the museum's online
database.

66 There is no original inventory of the Collection Anthropologique negatives; it is therefore unknown exactly
how many negatives the series consisted of.

19

338 images by Potteau,67 which they acquired from two separate donations. The first donation, in 1955, was from "French industrialist Georges Sirot,"68 and

identified with a "Sir" blind stamp on the image. These prints are labelled Collection Anthropologique and can be identified as a set printed by Potteau. The second donation was from the Musee de l'Homme69 and contains both prints by Potteau and
later prints labelled Collection Potteau; therefore, these are two separate sets.

Because there are three sets of prints, there are a number of duplicate images. These

duplicates are from different printings; they have different presentations and vary
in format. The library's online catalogue provides a brief record of each image,

listing information from 330 of the Collection Anthropologique image labels, sorted
geographically. The eight remaining images by Potteau do not have a record in the
online catalogue.

Among the few Potteau images at the BnF that did not belong to the Collection Anthropologique series were eight photographs of reliefs, which appear to be architectural ornaments of a religious nature. The albumen prints, presented in a very similar manner to those in the Collection Anthropologique, bear two significant

markings. The first is a small red stamp in the image that reads "Bibliotheque Imperiale," indicating that these images were produced between 1848 and 1871, when the French National Library was known as the Imperial Library. The second marking is a blind stamp, centred in the lower portion of the image mount; it reads

67 Bibliotheque nationale de France, BnF catalogue general, http://catalogue.bnf.fr/servlet/NoticeAutorite?host=catalogue, (accessed July 7, 2009). 68 Andrea R. Vaucher "A New Focus" France Magazine 66, (Summer 2003), http://www.francemagazine.org/artides/issue66/artide68.asp7issueJd=66&article_id=68, (accessed July 7,

69 According to a BnF librarian, the Musee de l'Homme made several donations to the library at different times.

2009).

20

"Potteau | Rue Guy de la Brosse," an address in the proximity of both the Jardin des
Plantes and the Museum d'Histoire naturelle. These markings affirm that Potteau was

in fact producing images independently of the Museum and that he operated a
studio.70

At the Musee du quai Branly, I had a brief look at the Potteau and Rousseau

holdings,

as

well

as

a

general

overview

of the

museum's

collection

of

anthropological photographs. The quai Branly inherited a large portion of its holdings from the Musee de l'Homme, which in turn inherited much of the Museum

d'Histoire naturelle Anthropology Collection. I discussed my research with the curator of photographs, Christine Barthe, who has in-depth knowledge of the collection having worked at the Musee de l'Homme for many years. I was able to
learn about the fate of the objects that had been passed down from institution to

institution and the many incarnations they experienced.71 Many of the prints, both early ones printed by Potteau and later ones printed at the institution, had been
removed from their original mount cards and re-mounted or the cards had been cut

down in size, eliminating original labels. All of the information gathered helped to
identify the AGO set as an early one printed by Potteau. I was also able to see a set of the Collection Anthropologique at the Tozzer

Library at Harvard University, which is the most comprehensive set printed by

701 have found no further evidence of Potteau operating a studio, however, a blind stamp with an address is very suggestive of one as most commercial photographers at this time identified their work in this way. 71 The quai Branly's online 'Catalogue de Viconotheque' lists 1620 photographic objects attributed to Potteau, which include 545 glass plate negatives, 620 albumen prints and 410 aristotypes (printing-out-paper process), and 45 views in other formats. Some of the print objects are composed of more than one print mounted onto a single card. Potteau is credited in any of the following three fields: photographer and/or previous collector

and/or creator of the duplicate negative, i.e. the list includes images taken by others from which Potteau made
duplicates, both negative and print. Although most of the negatives and prints listed are ethnographic portraits,
there are several images of skulls.

21

Potteau of all those surveyed. It contains 775 images in six bound volumes and was
acquired (probably in the late 1860's - early 1870's) for the Library of the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard College, founded by Louis Agassiz72 in 1861. In

1910, the albums were donated to the Peabody Museum Library (now the Tozzer Library) by Agassiz' son Alexander. The set was bound after acquisition; each

volume is accompanied by a hand written list of all the images contained in the
album and arranged according to a geographic system devised by the collector. The

original organization of the series is sequential according to the numbers on the labels; each label has a number and refers to a specific subject. Multiple views of the
same subject have the same label.

Volume number V is an exception to the lot.73 It is an album of frontal and profile views of plaster casts of human heads. This volume contains 262 images and
introduces the greater scope of the Collection Anthropologique series. The images

bear a label titled "Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris," with one distinction below the title, which does not appear on the portrait labels: "Bustes

moules sur nature - par M. Dumouthier, Expedition d'Urvile de 1837 a 1840." The
images are likely also by Potteau as he is known to have photographed busts from
the Dumouthier Collection.74

I used the AGO set of images as a base of comparison for looking at all the sets discussed above. Prior to seeking out sets in other collections, I constructed a
72 Louis Agassiz was a distinguished Swiss scientist who was likely the person responsible for the initial acquisition of the set now found at the Tozzer Library. It is also possible that his son Alexander Agassiz, also a scientists, who is known to have communicated with Armand de Quatrefage, was responsible for the acquisition. 73 The volume numbers were assigned by the Tozzer Library in order to identify the individual albums, which
are accessioned as a single lot.

74 Potteau's donation of plates to the Museum included 102 plates from the Dumouthier Collection and another 90 plates of busts according to Barthe, "Models & Norms," 108. However, this presents a discrepancy with the
number of views in the album, as 70 plates are unaccounted for.

22

database to organize the information garnered from the AGO set, which had not
been catalogued in the museum's database. The original acquisition was

accompanied by a basic Excel spreadsheet from the donor, which provided imprecise and sometimes erroneous data about the photographers and label information. I built the database in accordance with the standards for object

documentation outlined in the Getty Research Institute's

Categories

for the

Description of Works of Art75 with two objectives in mind: to accurately identify the correct maker of each image and to record complete label information. The process of gathering this information allowed me to become familiar with the range of
images and further to interrogate the set for statistics, about the presentation, image

content and label information, for example: What is the most common type of presentation? How many images contain props? Or, with what consistency is the
subject's age recorded on the label? (see Appendix II]

The labels were approached separately from the images because of the wealth of information that they provide about the photographer, the organization of the series and the process of producing a specimen marketable to the scientific

community. They can be seen as the unifying factor that defines the intention of the
series and in turn Potteau's approach. The investigation of the labels looked separately at the object-specific examples and the sheets of uncut labels, one
contributing to the creation of a specimen and the other to the systematic
classification of types.

75 The Getty: Research Institute Home: Conducting Research: Data Standards and Guidelines: Categories for the
Description of Works of Art http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/standards/cdwa/, (accessed
July 31st, 2009).

23

Scope of the Series

Potteau

produced

not

only

ethnographic

portraits,

but

also

photographic

reproductions of artworks, such as those in the BnF collection that bear his studio

stamp, and images of various specimens for institutional collections, as evidenced by the labels (discussed in detail under Labels: Uncut Sheets). He can be considered, at least in some part, an independent operator. His work was specific to the

scientific community and its institutions and produced on different terms than the
work of his contemporaries in the same industry. This investigation was not

sufficient to determine the how much photographic work he produced; however, we are able to discuss the Collection Anthropologique series as a starting point for
looking at his output.

The AGO set of images is limited because it is not a complete set; however, it

does provide several leads about the series and Potteau's photographic production.

When I first began investigating the set of images at the AGO, what exactly the
Collection Anthropologique series consisted of was unclear. However, it was

apparent that the series was larger than what the AGO had. I began by trying to

determine the scope of the series by looking at the AGO set.76 The set was offered as
a donation to the AGO in 2006. The donor, the Archive of Modern Conflict, based in London, UK, acquired it through auction.77 The original lot, offered by Bloomsbury

Auctions, Sale #488 on 21 May, 2004 in London, included 280 objects and listed

76 My research focused on the ethnographic portraits included in the series and I cannot say how many other photographs were included in the series. Reconstructing the series would be a considerable task as there is no
original documentation pertaining to the series.

77 Confirmed by Barbara Adams, Archive of Modern Conflict, e-mail communication with the author, July 15th,
2009.

24

both Rousseau and Potteau as the photographers responsible for the images.78 The
set of 10 sheets of uncut printed labels was also part of the lot. The donor kept 27

photographs from this lot as a "representative sample."79 The donation was presented to the AGO acquisition committee as containing images by Rousseau;80 henceforth, the AGO staff had assumed that the set included images by him. Since

being acquired in 2007, the set had not been catalogued in the museum's database
and no research had been done on the images. Through this investigation, I have confirmed that there are no images by Rousseau in this set. There is no evidence of an original inventory listing all of the negative plates

included in the series.81 The image labels were numbered consecutively with each number corresponding to one subject; multiple views of the same subject had the same label. According to the labels on the verso of the prints and on the sheets of
uncut labels included with the AGO donation, aside from Potteau's portraits,

ethnographic portraits taken by Louis Rousseau, Pierre Joseph Rossier under the
direction of Firmin Bocourt, Paul-Emile Miot, M. le Comte de Montblanc, M. L.

d'Eichtal, and M. Henri de Lacaze-Duthiers and contributed by M. L'abbe Larnandie were included in the series.82 The number of works from each of these

photographers and contributors is indeterminate. Eight of Rousseau's photographs

78 The original lot description indicates that the object label numbers ranged "between 13 and 299." Four of the images were listed as "signed" by Rousseau, which I believe is a reference to the credit on the label that appears
as "Par M. Rousseau." Bloomsbury Auctions London, http://www.bloomsburyauctions.eom/detail/488/39.0,
[accessed November 11, 2008).

79 Barbara Adams, e-mail communication with the author, July 15th, 2009. This representative sample contains the four Rousseau images identified in the auction listing. so Research report for the Canadian Cultural Property Expert Review Board, prepared by Sophie Hackett,
assistant curator of photography at the AGO.

81 The Collection Potteau inventory in the "Collection des Cliches" found at the quai Branly lists Potteau's negatives of ethnographic portraits and copy negatives made made by him from images by other photographers. 82 Among the other collections surveyed, the following contributors were also identified: M. du Chesne de Bellecourt (French Ambassador to Japan, 1866-67), M. le capitaine Aubaret (French Consul in Bangkok, 1865).

25

from Prince Bonaparte's 1865 expedition (labels # 5-12) were included in the original series; however, he is known to have brought back a total of 89 plates of
various views.83 The reasoning behind certain images being included and not others

is unclear. The same is true for images by other photographers and contributors; the
number of views by each individual originally included in the series is unclear.

According to the sheets of uncut labels, the series also included copy prints of daguerreotypes and drawings, such as the one of the infamous Hottentot 'Venus' (label #4) and a photograph of her skull (label #1603, discussed further under
Labels).84

The uncut labels included in the donation are a "separate set of printed captions" as referred to in the Bloomsbury lot description.85 It is unclear why these accompanied a set of photographs that had labels attached. The labels on the sheets were printed in consecutive order beginning with the first sheet, label 1, i.e. subject 1, a 'Hottentot' from South Africa, photographed by Rousseau in 1855. There are
two identical labels for this subject indicating that there should be two views two

views of the subject. There is only one label for subject 2, indicating that there is

only one plate of this subject and so on. However, these labels do not provide
consistent information about the number of negatives in the series. Among the AGO set of images, there are up to four views of one subject, specifically, number 145 Nguyen bun than, of the Cochin-Chinese Embassy in Paris, photographed in 1863

83 La Revue Photographique, January 5,1857, as cited in Jehel, 29. The 89 plates included landscapes, views of
Reykjavik, dwellings, ships, fishermen and portraits of men and women of different ages.

84 Unlike the portraits, where each subject is assigned one number and multiple views of that subject have the same label, the drawing and the skull, although they are from the same subject, are two separate objects and
therefore have different label numbers. 85 Bloomsbury Auctions London, http://www.bloomsburyauctions.eom/detail/488/39.0, (accessed November
11,2008).

26

(Fig. 3). There are two three-quarter-length portraits, frontal and profile and two

full-length portraits, one seated and one standing, in two different costumes. There
is at least one other view of the same subject in the quai Branly collection, bringing

the total to five views of one subject.86 There are only two labels for this subject
printed on the uncut sheets, suggesting that the sheets of labels do not account for
all the views.

Fig. 3

Jacques-Philippe Potteau Ambassade Cochinchinoise a Paris.

145. Nguyen bun than (30 ans) IMe a Hue (Annam) Capitaine de la Garde Imperial. Mandarin de 5e degre, 2e classe. [Cochin-chinese Embassy in Paris. 145. Nguyen buu than (30

years old) Norn in Hue (Annam) Captain of the Imperial Gard
Mandarin
1863.
12.4 cm x18.2 cm

5

degree,

2rd

class],

Albumen Negative

Print from Wet Collodion

Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto

I was able to consult one other source found at the quai Branly in trying to

determine the number of ethnographic portraits included in the series. The
Collection Potteau inventory in the "Catalogue des Cliches photographiques, conserves

86 The Collection Potteau inventory lists five plates of this subject.

27

au Laboratoire d'Anthropologie" lists 55587 negative plates of ethnographic portraits, donated to the museum by Potteau in 1871-72.88 This catalogue, put together between 1879-1890, was the first re-organization of the plates of ethnographic

portraits

in

the

Collection Anthropologique series.

It was

divided

into

five

inventories by photographer: 1, plates by Paul-Emile Miot; 2, "Collection des Cliches

donnes par M. L Rosseau"; 3, "Collection des Cliches donnes par M. d'Eichtal"; 4, "Collection Potteau"; and 5, plates by M. F. Deliste.89 The organizational principal of these inventories, the photographer, implicates Potteau as the creator of the series

and not a "simple employee of the museum," since all subsequent sets printed from the Collection Potteau negatives were directly credited to him, in the name of the
newly formed series.

The Collection Potteau inventory was organized geographically by the origin

of the subject. The information about the subject was probably taken from the
Collection Anthropologique labels. The negatives were assigned numbers from 1 to
555 and were divided geographically, beginning with entries from Europe: France,

Italy, Denmark and Sweden, Russia; Asia: Persia, Bohemia, India, Siam (including

Annam/Cochin-China, Myanmar/Burma,) China, Japan; Africa: Egypt & the Nile

Valley, Cap Vert [Senegal), Equatorial Guinea, Algeria; North America: Creole; South
America; and Oceania, an obviously biased system that placed Europeans, more specifically the French, at the top of the geographical hierarchy. This new system

87 Of the 1138 plates donated, 580 were portraits. Only 555 of these were listed in the inventory. The remaining

25 were unaccounted for in the inventory. Only 545 negatives of ethnographic portraits are listed in quai
Branly's online catalogue; 10 are unaccounted for. 88 Barthe, "Models & Norms," 108.

89 I did not have the opportunity to consult the other four inventories in this catalogue and therefore cannot
confirm if the plates listed there are part of the Collection Anthropologique series.

28

reorganized the negatives and omitted the original dates when they were created
(indicated on the Collection Anthropologique labels), placing these images into a

non-historical context. The inventory also recorded the locations of the negative plates by box number, and the projection numbers.90 After the inventory was

created, sets of prints were made by the Museum from Potteau's negatives and marked Collection Potteau91 with label information taken from the Collection
Potteau inventory.

The Collection Potteau inventory gives an idea of the number of the ethnographic portraits included in the Collection Anthropologique series as well as

its geographic breadth. It can be assumed that there were at least 555 plates of
ethnographic portraits made by Potteau, including copy negatives from prints by
various contributors. Rosseau's negative plates were not included in this inventory

as a separate inventory was dedicated to him.92 Potteau's negatives of busts, drawings and daguerreotypes, all part of his donation of negatives, were not listed in this inventory. The inventory further suggests that Potteau operated

autonomously, even if within the Museum. He donated his plates to the institution

and his donation was acknowledged; his plates, like those of others photographers who made donations to the Museum, were separated according to maker.

90 According to Barthe, the collections were highly circulated for years, "Models & Norms," 108. Further, according to the Collection Potteau inventory, the negatives were duplicated as projections. Although it is not indicated what type, these were likely lanternslides, a common format for projecting images in the nineteenth
century.

91 The majority of images at the BnF from the Musee de l'Homme donation have hand-written labels titled,
Collection Potteau and include information from this inventory.

92 There was also a separate inventory for Miot, however copy negatives of his images are included in the
Collection Potteau.

29

Description of Objects

In the nineteenth century, Potteau's ethnographic portraits were praised for being

fine examples of uniformity93 because he was able to produce a coherent series of
work through his practice. His protocol for constructing an image was partly

borrowed from Rousseau, who had made similar images and likely instructed
Potteau in photography, and partly influenced by the aesthetics of studio portraiture

at the time. Potteau included at least two views of the subject, a frontal and profile
portrait, adopted studio decorations such as drapes and elaborate furniture, instructed his sitter to pose in a specific way and look directly at the camera or to

the profile, and presented the images by cropping and mounting them according to

established photographic conventions. Although these images were treated as objects of scientific enquiry, Potteau consistently made portraits, with careful
attention to lighting, pose, printing and presentation, and remained respectful of his
subjects.

In 1863, when Potteau presented a sample of his work to the Societe frangaise de photographie, the Supervisor of Photography remarked, "His prints

would make very beautiful portraits even if they were not valuable scientific documents."94 In order to understand the dual function of these objects we need to

look at the models that Potteau applied in creating them. The presentation methods
he used reveal how a portrait was made to serve as a scientific document. By

93 Barthe, "Models & Norms," 108. 9+ As quoted in Barthe, "Models & Norms," 108.

30

examining the content of the images and how the views were constructed, we can discuss the photographers approach to the subject in making a portrait.

1 | Image Presentations - A note on nineteenth-century aesthetics The set of Collection Anthropologique at the AGO consists of 253 albumen prints

mounted on a medium-weight card stock, with printed labels attached in the top left corner on the verso. In some cases, these labels are handwritten in ink or pencil. The

prints are cropped to approximately 18 cm by 12 cm, although a few are much
smaller. The original wet collodion glass plate negatives are 27 cm by 21 cm. The
cards on which the images are mounted are 33.5 cm by 26.5 cm. The prints are

systematically centred on the cards with a slightly heavy bottom: a typical
presentation for artistic prints, adapted to photographic matting and mounting. This type of presentation is still common for framed photographs to allow space for the
photographer's signature or titles.

Potteau's approach to constructing these photographic objects can be analyzed by looking at the various presentation methods he used. The photographs
were printed from larger sized negatives and cropped in order to focus in on the

subject, but also to construct a portrait. In particular, Potteau applied three presentation methods when cropping and mounting the photographs on the mattboard; the prints were trimmed to oval, rounded or diagonally cut corners. These
methods of presentation were borrowed from the traditions of studio portraiture,

established a decade earlier and seen in commercial portraiture by Gustave Le

31

Gray.95 Le Gray's artistic presentation was trademarked and shamelessly copied by
the competition well into the twentieth century.96 The oval and rounded corners were standard shapes of frames; but the shape also influenced the composition of the portrait, focusing on the head and imposing a simple pose,97 which was suitable to Potteau's needs. These variations to the presentation method indicate that

Potteau's protocol for constructing these images was not systematic and that he
adopted established formats used in commercial portraiture.

Fig. 4

Jacques-Philippe Potteau

260. L'Emir Abd-el-Kader (57 ans) Ne a Maskara, (Province d'Oran) (Algerie)
Cheveux noirs, mais se rasam la tete

tout les deux jours; Yeux bruns, barbe noire avec quelques poils gris. Fils de
Moubi Eddin en de Zora, et petit-fils de Moustapha ben Mekta en de Noba.

[L'Emir Abd-el-Kader (57 years

old)

Born in Maskara (Province of Oran) (Algeria) Black hair, but he shaves his
head every two days; brown eyes,

black beard with a few grey hairs. Son of Moubi Eddin of Zora, and grandson

of Moustapha ben Mekta of Noba.]
1865
15.2 cm x20.5 cm

Albumen
Negative

Print

from

Wet

Collodion

Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto

95 Sylvie Aubenas, " Boulevard des Capucines: the glory of the Empire" in Gustave Le Gray 1820-1884, (Los
Angeles: J Paul Getty, 2002], 87-98.
% Ibid, 92.

«Ibid.

32

The oval is the least common presentation method for Potteau prints, as

represented by the AGO set and other sets surveyed; however, he seems to have
used it for the most prominent of his subjects. Four of the five oval shaped images in

the AGO set (including two duplicates), are of L'Emir Adb-el-Kader98 (Fig. 4), taken
in 1865. Le Gray photographed royalty, aristocracy and important personages

visiting Paris, and Potteau chose to distinguish the subject's high rank by applying the oval crop used by Le Gray. The other oval image is a profile portrait of a Chinese

woman photographed in 1867. The print is very small (9cm by 11.8cm) and it is possible that the negative was damaged and therefore this shape was the most suitable in presenting the image." The frontal portrait of her is full size (as typical of
the other images in the set) and has diagonally cut corners.

Of the three presentation methods used in cropping the prints, 13 of the AGO

images have rounded corners. Six of the photographs with rounded corners are of
delegates of the Japanese Embassy taken in 1864: three pairs of three-quarter-

length frontal and profile portraits, printed in a different way in comparison to the
rest of the set.100 These portraits have a vignette around the subject that obscures

the background, making it pure white and leaving a soft gradient around the

circumference (Fig. 5). This printing technique was not uncommon in commercial
portraiture and was used well into the end of the nineteenth century; for Potteau's

98 L'Emir Adb-el-Kader was an important Algerian Islamic scholar and political leader who led the resistance against French colonial invasion in the nineteenth century. The French defeated his armies and he was exiled in France in from 1847 to 1852, when he was pardoned by Napoleon III. 99 The same print can be found in the Tozzer Library set, presented in the same format. There is no indication

that Potteau used different cameras in producing these ethnographic portraits. Emulsion damage on the wetcollodion negative is the most probable cause for the image being cropped in this way; otherwise, it may have
been an aesthetic choice.

i"° The same prints can also be found in the Tozzer Library set and are both printed and presented in the same

manner as those in the AGO set.

33

purpose, this technique isolated the subject's head. Another six of the rounded photographs are full-length portraits: three of Japanese delegates and three of Cochin-Chinese delegates. The subjects are all wearing ceremonial costumes distinct from the typical dress (kimino or robes) worn in three-quarter-length portraits. The
remaining rounded print is also a full-length portrait of a Cochin-Chinese woman

taken by Rossier under the direction of Bocourt in Siam in 1862. Once again the artistic presentation can be compared to full-length portraits made in Le Gray's
studio, one that he applied to trimming not only portraits, but also landscapes.101

Fig. 5

Jacques-Philippe Potteau

184. Kawada Sakami-no-kami (30 ans) ne a Yedo 2e ambassadeur du Taiconne du Japon a Paris. [Kawada Sakami-no-kami (30years old) Born in Edo 2 ambassador of the
Shogunate of Japan in Paris.] 1864
14 cm x19 cm

Albumen
Negative

Print

from

Wet

Collodion

Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto

ioi See examples in Sylvie Aubenas, Gustave Le Gray 1820-1884, (Los Angeles: J Paul Getty, 2002).

34

The remaining 235 photographs in the AGO set have diagonally cut corners.

The diagonally cut corners are the most common method of presentation for

Potteau prints.102 The images printed after 1871 by the Museum,103 like many of
those seen at the BnF and the quai Branly, were cropped to a rectangular shape and are often slightly larger (where the hands of the sitter and studio elements are
visible in the frame), indicating that Potteau took much greater care in constructing

his prints and distinguishing Potteau prints from later printings of his work. The size of Potteau images and their respective presentation mounts is also
significant. The studios on the Grands Boulevards offered such large portraits to

clientele looking for a more artistic impression, to distinguish them from the
ubiquitous cartes-de-visite. The presentation conventions used for these images, as

well as their size, reflect their applications in the nineteenth century. Potteau's images did not have one single purpose: they were exhibited as specimens in the Anthropology galleries at the Museum d'Histoire Naturelle; exhibited in photography exhibitions such as RPS exhibition of 1863; used for study and classification of ethnic types; and sometimes offered to the subjects as compensation for

participating in the sitting.104 The uniformity of the presentation mounts also made
them ideal for binding into albums, as with the set at the Tozzer Library.

102 As evidenced by the collections surveyed and suggested by Christine Barthe at the quai Branly. 103 It is unclear who made duplicate prints for the Museum after Potteau donated his negative plates to the
institution.

io* Barthe, "Models & Norms," 106.

35

2 | Content - subject not object

Potteau's approach to making ethnographic portraits was different from that of his
contemporaries. He did not accompany any important expeditions, nor did he have

the opportunity to travel and photograph people abroad. He organized sittings with official groups who visited the Jardin des Plantes and invited foreigners touring the
city to pose in his studio in return for portraits.105 The subjects were largely

delegates of embassies and were thoroughly identified, not just according to their
physical traits, but also their profession and rank; however, some were musicians,

domestic servants and people of lower social ranks. Photographing official delegates

limited Potteau to making a specific type of portrait as the sitters' presence in his
studio was of their own free will.106 He could not ask these individuals to perform
outside of what they may have considered decent.

By further examining the images we can see how Potteau's protocol for constructing an ethnographic portrait was refined, but was never fully resolved. The

social status of his subjects varied as did his studio set up, presentation methods and printing techniques; furthermore, he was unable to consistently record the
same information about each subject. After the group of portraits of delegates from

the Embassy of Siam in 1861-62, the first official group photographed, Potteau's
studio set-up was simplified; the drapery disappeared, the decorations and props were used only sporadically and the subjects no longer posed with studio props,
placed in their hand by the photographer.

105 Ibid.

i°6Jehel,35.

36

These images were cropped from what was recorded on the negative plate,

which leads us to consider what type of information was included in the print and
what was left out, outside of the crop lines. The majority of these images, 225, are three-quarter-length portraits, another convention of the traditional studio portrait, not only in photography, but also in painting. However, for ethnographic study, the

convention was applied in order to focus on the face and head, hence also the frontal and profile views, used to give a better sense of the structure of the head, from which observations could be made about cranial capacity or even 'inherent character traits.'107 In a number of the photographs, the hands are also visible: in a few cases, awkwardly posed in order to show distinguishing features, like long

fingernails; in others, subjects are holding a prop that focuses attention on the hand,
such as a pen or a cigarette. Jehel's study of this material, which looks

predominantly at the delegation from the Siamese Embassy,108 concludes that the
hands are overwhelmingly visible.109 This is true for this group of sitters; however,

it is not the case with the rest of the examples in the AGO set. The hands are of course visible on the negative, but they have been trimmed off in many of the

prints.110 Further on the topic of subject pose, in the frontal portraits Potteau's
models are predominantly looking directly at the lens, compared to traditional portraiture, where the subjects are instructed to look just beyond the camera.111

if' Martin S. Staum, Labeling People: French Scholars on Society, Race and Empire, 1815-1848. Montreal: McGillQueen's University Press, 2003), 176.

los According to information gathered from the labels, there were 16 subjects from this delegation.

no The original negatives are 27 cm x 21 cm; the images are only approximately 18 cm x 12 cm, therefore a portion of the image has been cut off. I have seen a number of prints that were not cropped as tightly and the
hands are visible.

109 Jehel, 40.

in In a sample of 100 cartes-des-visite from the same period, only 12 subjects are looking directly at the camera,

most of them children.

37

The studio setup in the group of portraits of the Siamese sitters is elaborate and includes drapes in the background, a table with props such as books and an embellished high-back chair. Another recurring element visible in the full-length

portraits is a decorative tile-patterned carpet, which is used on the floor of the
studio, covering what appears to be an elevated podium. These elements are useful in identifying photographs made in Potteau's studio (Fig. 6). However, the full studio

setup, typical of a commercial portrait studio at the time, is visible only in images of the Siamese delegation and partly (without the drapes) for seated full-length portraits of the Cochin-Chinese group, photographed in 1863.U2 Potteau had carefully considered how to best make an ethnographic portrait versus a traditional one; he had also considered that he had to treat his subjects, many of them honourable dignitaries, with the level of respect that their presence in his studio
commanded.113

After 1863, it appears that Potteau adopted a more sterile studio set up with a consistently white or plain background and removed the furniture with the

exception of several different embellished chairs, which are sometimes visible in the image. The subjects continued to pose with props, but only those that were part of their attire, such as swords, and not ones deliberately placed in their hand by the photographer. Potteau was trying to implement a more objective view of his
subjects; this is also evident in the evolution of the label information that he
collected (discussed below).
112 It is possible that these elements remain present on the negative and have been cropped out of the image;
however, as I was unable to access the negatives, and cannot confirm this. 113 There are a number of images taken by Potteau in 1860 and included in the Collection Anthropologique series,

where African subjects are posed shirtless against a plain background, a much more objectifying view compared
to the photograph of members of official groups.

38

Fig. 6

Jacques-Philippe Potteau 67. Munhannaroug (31 ans) Secretaire

d'ambassade

ne

a

Bangkok

(Siam)

[Munhannaroug (31 years old) Secretary of the embassy, born in
Bangkok (Siam)], 1861. 13 cm x 18 cm

Albumen
Negative

Print

from

Wet

Collodion

Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto

This practical examination of Potteau's work allows us to consider the nuances of
his practice. Potteau's modus operandi allowed him to make marketable commercial

products and his relationship to the Museum secured his venture financially.
Armand de Quatrefage was supportive of Potteau's production and used his photographs as specimens to build the Anthropology Collection at the Museum. This connection to the institution also gave Potteau an authority among other groups

who purchased and used his images. He distributed his work among societies with
anthropological and ethnographic interests as well as artistic ones, such as the SFP.

39

Labels

Charles Darwin speaks about the Collection Anthropologique in his Descent of Man

and Selection in Relation to Sex, first published in 1871. His observation of these

images leads him to state, in concurrence with other theorists, that in photographs
people of different races seem to have traits similar to Europeans and may in some

cases "pass" for some. He continues to state that "if seen alive" the distinction would
be much more evident due to the colour of skin and hair as well as expression,

alluding to the limitations of the camera in being able to produce 'scientific'
documents.114

While photographs in this series vary both in presentation and content, the

unifying factor among them is the label attached to the verso of their mounts. The
images themselves were insufficient to serve as documents for scientific inquiry, which draws inferences from quantifiable information; therefore, quantifiable data

about the subject was collected to supplement the images. The images were also
limited by the medium; albumen prints in all of their shades of beige and brown

were still monochromatic. They could not entirely inform the viewer and therefore
the photographer needed to record information to compensate for that which was unknown. This process of documentation made the Collection Anthropologique a

coherent whole, chronologically organized according to a protocol established by
the photographer. There are several indications that Potteau was responsible for the
labelling and organization of this series.

Darwin, 195.

40

1 I Labelling Objects: portrait or specimen

There are two different sizes of labels on the verso of the AGO photographs; the standard is 3cm by 8cm and the large version is 6.5cm by 8cm. The larger labels are rare but provide more biographical and sometimes anecdotal information about the
subject than the smaller labels. Each label bears the title Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris and is written in French. They follow a sequential numbering

system and each number in the system is assigned to one of the subjects portrayed,

as explained above. Thereafter, the information recorded varies. In most cases, the
subject's name is recorded. If the name is not known, the subject's position or rank

is recorded. In the most obscure cases, often with the images contributed by others,
only a basic subject description is provided, e.g. 276. Young Girl, Japanese or 83. Young Siamese, (Fig. 7) that always includes the subject's ethnicity.

Fig. 7

iflH ati&xopotoqiqui. h\
53
Jacques-Philippe Potteau
1S3Z

de
dll

cWnc cfio

iTOtumi

(

'9 <*****)

Small label mounted on
verso of image mount

Art Gallery of Ontario,
Toronto

Next, the subject's age is recorded in brackets e.g. (xx years), sometimes this

figure is represented with more precision, e.g. 209. Mi-yake Hidzou (16 Yz ans); this latter format is generally used for younger subjects. In a few cases, usually for

41

European subjects, the birthdates are recorded. In some cases, the age has been
filled in after the label was printed, in pencil; it is difficult to determine who may have filled it in and whether it is valid. Twenty of the labels do not indicate the subjects' ages at all; most often these are on images that have been assimilated into

the series.115 A few examples have labels that have been crossed out in pencil, implying that the wrong label was likely attached. The information that follows is not entirely systematic and includes one or more of the following details: place of birth (city, province, country or continent], parentage and parents' ethnic origins or place of birth, profession or rank

(especially for military subjects), affiliation (embassy or delegation], place that the
photograph was taken, by whom, who is responsible for bringing it from abroad (in the case of contributed images, where the photographer is not identified] and the
year that it was taken or assimilated into the collection. Some remarks that occur

sporadically, such as the subject's association with any notable figure, typically
European, any traits considered noteworthy, e.g. 128. an unusually white African, or comments about the subject's dress, e.g. 151. grand costume.

The

conventions

of studio

portraiture

were

insufficient

for

making

standardized, objective documents; hence, Potteau collected information about the subjects, which he included on the label. After 1864, there is some indication that
there was a need for more precise information, as the height, hair and eye colour,

began to be recorded systematically with one exception. The label attached to the
portrait of L'Emir Abd el-Kader, discussed above, provides detailed information
115 The images assimilated into the series are those contributed by other individuals from which Potteau made
copy negatives. The label information on these images was likely provided by the contributor.

42

about the colour of the subject's eyes, hair and beard, but not his height. It can be assumed that Potteau was unable to obtain this information when photographing this high-ranking subject because he would have had to ask to measure the subject, which the subject would have likely considered inappropriate. The choice of subjects, dignitaries, official delegates and groups, presented a challenge in

obtaining data (as in the example above) suitable for scientific enquiry; Potteau

nevertheless recorded that which he was able to obtain on the label.

The first indication that Potteau was responsible for writing the labels is one
label in the AGO set, which is written in the first person: "214. Hayasi kankai (21 ans) ne a Yedo, Etudiant en medecine a La Haye
(Hollande) Ce Japonais que j'ai photographie par un tres mauvais temps a

la peau aussi blanche qu'un Europeen tres blanc Phot, en 1864." [214. Hayasi kankai (21 years old) born in Edo, student of medicine in The

Hague (Holland). This Japanese (male) whom I photographed in very bad
weather conditions has skin as white as the whitest European.

Phot[graphed] in 1864.]

The for this same label in the Collection Potteau inventory appears as:

Hayasi kankai 21.. ans.. ne a Yedo, Etudiant en medecine a La Haye

(Hollande) Ce Japonais photographie par un tres mauvais temps, a la
peau aussi blanche qu'un Europeen tres blanc. Face [Hayasi kankai.. 21 years old., born in Edo, student of medicine in The Hague (Holland). This Japanese (male) photographed in very bad weather conditions has skin as
white as the whitest European. Frontal]

The original subject number, the year the photograph was taken and the first person

reference by the photographer, have all been omitted. But the Museum considered Potteau's commentary important and kept records of his observations in the

43

Collection Potteau inventory. It is known that Potteau chose his subjects and organized sittings,116 and, as suggested here, it can be inferred that he gathered information about them (the example of Kader indicates his limitations in doing so);

therefore, it is probable that he also wrote the original labels, which were then
printed and attached to duplicate images.117

Finally, the images [according to their respective labels) were not ordered chronologically by their date of creation, indicating that the organizational system was established after some part of the images had been made, potentially as late as
1864. If Potteau was in fact responsible for the entire production and organization

of these photographic objects and the Museum purchased his prints, he can be
classified as photographer-anthropologist, a role that Jehel has defined for

photographers making anthropological images at this time.118 Potteau made these photographs independently, which can be seen as reflections his interest in the field.

His observations and records were all important to the value of these photographs
as scientific specimens; the Museum retained the recorded information in their catalogue [Collection Potteau inventory) and the images were widely used in
ethnographic studies.119

I" Some of the labels on the verso of the Collection Anthropologique prints made by Potteau were hand written. The handwriting has not been identified. The Collection Potteau images did not have printed labels; these were
all handwritten presumable by a Museum employee, as the handwriting is consistent.
us Jehel, 5.

I" Jehel, 36.

iw The Museum d'Histoire naturelle reproduced Potteau's negatives in print and projection formats, probably lantern slides. The reproductions were widely circulated according the "Cahier des sorties," which recorded
outgoing collection material at the institution. Barthe, "Models & Norms," 108.

44

2 | Uncut Labels: the in between

The AGO set of the Collection Anthropologique series was accompanied by a set of

ten sheets of uncut labels related to the material. The sheets begin with label one, subject number one and continue sequentially until number 178 at the top of page 8 (Fig. 8). Sheet eight is a random selection of labels for photographs of various kinds of objects, with different label titles including: Societe Anthropologique de Paris,

Collection d'anatomie comparee, Collection du Museum d'Histoire naturelle, Collection du Museum de Paris, Collection de I'Ecole de Pharmacie. From this sheet of uncut

labels, it can be inferred that if Potteau wrote the labels for the other institutional
collections, he also made photographs for them.

The majority of the images, both those in the AGO set and those identified by the uncut labels, were not credited to a photographer; however, Christine Barthe has identified them as Potteau's.120 They have been previously identified and
catalogued in the Collection Potteau and can be cross-referenced with this inventory

of negatives. Those that were made by Rousseau were labelled as such, "Phot, par M.

Rousseau." Those made by or contributed by others were also labelled as such. This

suggests that since Potteau wrote the labels, he did not need to acknowledge the
photographer on his own work, but only credited the work of others. Apart from the labels for various institutions, sheet eight exhibits two other

anomalies: first, there are three labels that bring into question the relationship between Rossier and Bocourt, and second, there are two labels that describe
photographs of human skulls. The photographs in the Collection Anthropologique

1 Barthe, "Models & Norms"; Survey of sets at the BnF and quai Branly.

series taken by Rossier are labelled as 'under the direction of M. F. Bocourt' and do not credit Rossier as the photographer. However, on this sheet, there are three

labels without the Collection Anthropologique title (indicating that these are not part

of the series) for photographs given by Bocourt (as indicated on the label), which
directly credit Rossier as the photographer. Why was Rossier's name not included

on the Collection Anthropologique photographs? Firmin Bocourt, an artist and naturalist in his own right, was chosen to go to Siam to receive a gift of animals from

the Siamese King.121 He was also mandated by the Museum to collect zoological and
botanical specimens.122 The images that are credited to Rossier are of monuments in

Bangkok, which were likely photographed on his own initiative and gifted to or purchased by Bocourt, whereas those photographed specifically to meet the
mandate of the Museum, possibly for inclusion in the series, were orchestrated by Bocourt and he is therefore given credit for their creation, despite the fact that they were taken by Rossier. Jehel states that these are similar to Potteau's images,123 but
I would argue that some of them are different. The photographs of the Siamese King are in line with Potteau's perspective and composition; however, those of the young

women, half nude and posed suggestively on an exotic animal skins, verge on the
exotic and reflect Bocourt's own artistic intentions.

The second deviation from the systematic chronology of the other sheets of
labels that list ethnographic portraits are two labels with the Collection

Anthropologique title, label numbers 347 and 1603 (the highest number in the series

121 Henri Milne Edwards "Rapport de M Bocourt a Siam," Comptes rendus hedbomadaires de l'Academie des

Sciences, Paris, Mallet Bachelier, 1863, t.57, p.313 as quoted in Jehel, 38.
122 Jehel, 38.
123 Ibid.

46

I have seen], which identify images of skulls. The objects identified by these labels are different from the portraits, but not unlike other objects included early in the
series, i.e label #4 is for a drawing of the Hottentot 'Venus' by Wally made in

1815.124 Label #1603, is the same subject's skull. Potteau's donation included 256
negative plates of skulls125 and it is likely that these constituted part of the Collection

Anthropologique series. The labels do not record the date that the photographs were taken, but the late label numbers indicate that the photographs were produced later.
These two labels were also the first indication that a variety of objects were

eventually photographed for the Collection Anthropologique series, possibly with the intention of preserving them, as was initially advocated with the introduction of the
practice of photography in the Museum.

The labels are very important to the series, not only because they identify the subject of each photograph, but also because they contribute to the creation of a
scientific document. The text legitimized the image in the scientific domain, serving

as secondary and quantifiable evidence or so was the intention. It is fitting that

Potteau should write the labels if he was taking the photographs. Without the
supplementary information, the portraits would have little 'scientific' value because
they would present too many unknown variables.

124 Jehel suggests that the Hottentot Venus, Saartjie Baartman, came to symbolize the "primitive humanity," as quoted in Jehel, 27. Her notoriety and presence of her remains at the Museum made her an important subject for
inclusion in the series.

125 Barthe, "Models & Norms," 108.

47

Fig. 8

ill

c

,l,t

eu.

#(<

«i*

tniilll

u

~,n. i«. j

1*1

, .-...kottlr

(TAt C^t,«t,.,... X '«.<·· ! P'(»3T'«

-I' »t.X»4> --*»'·' I1"5"
«-f,r ,,, i«-3

H.U o©-t-> a-.fuJi ;^--*I it}---,.,,... .

diffixiiw ii»iA«P''t>'Hut)u jh«««"i>'^k"
(Own .wiJiAan*. *·*·
-

- 3*tu..t*r A** ·« >W* f*»^ tfc **»«--«*. *^-

t»

W

^

it f '<&>
. fi

Ui

flffnli.il *« fA>fi I

--.-.«

f.-.-ft.'

Uncut sheet of labels #8

Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto

v

48

Conclusion

The photographs, their labels and the sheets of uncut labels belonging to the AGO all provide information about the Collection Anthropologique series as a whole. The

images tell us about Potteau's approach to the subject and his method of producing
a versatile and usable product: a scientific specimen, an exhibition print and a

portrait. The labels

offer information about the photographer, the type of

information he considered important for producing a scientific specimen and how

the series was organized. The uncut labels provide insight into the overall scope of
the series and its organization.

By analyzing the set of images and their corresponding labels in the AGO

collection, this thesis proposes that Potteau worked more independently, producing

and labelling the ethnographic portraits than has previously been understood.
Potteau had a keen interest in anthropology; his commentary on the labels was not

only a practical record of what he observed, but also a reflection of what he
considered important for the study of ethnic groups. His close relationship with the

Museum d'Histoire naturelle afforded him a reputation within the scientific
community that constituted his client base and helped support his photographic
production.

Potteau's achievement in his field was substantial and warrants further

research into his photographic activity. His series of images, made entirely in the studio and without ever leaving Paris is unique in contrast to the intrusiveness of contemporaneous anthropological photographs made abroad. His approach to the

49

subject was sensitive and it is therefore no surprise to see some of his subjects smiling coyly, like children in a yearbook picture. Today, these images are no longer
seen as scientific specimens. They do not harness any scientific truth about human

beings, as we have long ago rejected this type of subjective viewing of different ethnicities. Many anthropological photographs, including those at the AGO, have

been reinterpreted as artworks, representative of the photographer's aesthetics far more than the subject's physiognomy; others are used for historical reference and others still serve as examples of early visual anthropology.
Photography was not an ideal tool for building the anthropological typologies

that the Museum sought to create because it did not reveal anything beyond the surface of the subject. Nevertheless by 1930, the Musee de l'Homme had inherited nearly 200,000 photographs in this vein from the Museum d'Histoire naturelle.126
There was a disjunction between the purpose and approach to making

anthropological photographs. On the one hand, ethnographic portraits were a

means of representing individual 'live subjects' in the museum; but the way that
they were photographed, removed from their context and placed in a studio setting, made the subject representative of an entire culture.

There are still many unanswered questions about Potteau's terms of employment at the museum and whose interests and intentions were being played out in the construction of this series. The support of Armand de Quatrefage and his

126 Jehel, 4.

50

pursuits as head of the Human Anatomy and Natural History laboratory was

instrumental in Potteau's continual production of material.127
The AGO set has been thoroughly investigated and documented, making the

material accessible to the institution staff and hopefully gallery patrons in the future. The proper identification of each individual image has added not only to its

value as an art object in a public institution, but also to the general knowledge about
the series and the photographers.

127 Quatrefage uses Potteau's images in his Histoire generale des races humaines: introduction a I'etude des races

humaines (Paris 1887-89), Barthe, "Models & Norms," 106.

51

APPENDIX I

Database

In order to organize the information available from the image set and labels at the AGO, I constructed a database in FileMaker Pro. The primary purpose of the

database was to accurately and completely document the set in the AGO collection,
for ease of access and use by the museum [AGO]. The secondary purpose was to

extract statistical data and analyze the image content and label information in order
to make inferences for the purposes of this study.

The database was divided into three tables: object, image and label. The

object

table,

used

primarily

for

identification

of images,

contains

general

information fields about the object, including: 'object id number', 'photographer', 'date', 'title', 'image size', 'medium' and 'process'. The 'photographer', 'medium' and 'process' fields include a list of controlled values, meaning that the user can only choose from the values provided and cannot input information outside of these preset values. For example, the 'photographer' field consists of three choices: 'Jacques Philippe Potteau', 'Pierre-Joseph Rossier' and 'other'. The control lists
ensures that data is consistent and helps prevent errors in spelling, etc. The image table contains information about the print itself as well as image

content. I used this information to study image presentation and content. Each field

has a number of controlled values. The type of presentation is expressed in the 'shape' field, which is limited to: 'oval', 'rounded', 'cut' or 'rectangular' corners and other. The subject's 'pose' is expressed as: 'frontal', 'profile', 'full-length seated', 'fulllength standing'. The image 'background' is divided into: 'studio', which includes any

52

type of background decoration; 'plain', which is generally a neutral or grey background without studio props; 'outdoors', which I chose versus 'in the field' or 'natural environment' as I have not seen any such images in the series, and finally, 'other'. I used a separate field to note any specific props used by the photographer

or the subject. This field is not controlled and can accept unrestricted user input, e.g. fan, pen/ink or (headrest?), which gives clues about the sitter or the photographer's

process. I set up a field of three radio buttons titled 'hands', in order to determine whether the hands of the sitter were 'visible,' 'partially visible' or 'cropped' out of the image, and another set of radio buttons to account for 'image relationships': 'one of one', 'one of two', 'two of two', and 'other'. The image table includes one other free field titled 'markings', which denotes any markings or inscriptions, such as stamps or writing exclusive of the label. It is not particularly applicable to the set
found at the AGO as none of the mounts have markings save the label; however,

most of the photographic objects from the Collection Anthropologique found at the
BnF and the quai Branly are marked in some way.

The final table specifies the information found on the label and was used to record subject groups and relationships, geographical scope and specifics about
recorded information, such as hair and eye colour. The fields in this table include:

'subject number', 'name', 'age', 'origin', 'group', 'description' and the 'label authority'. The 'subject number' refers to the number assigned to the subject according to the
original label. The 'subject origin' field allows for statistical analysis of the

ethnicities included in the series. The 'subject group' field is a controlled field that
further groups the subjects together based on their relationship to other subjects.

53

This is generally most applicable to delegations and embassy representatives that Potteau photographed. The control list includes: 'Algerian Military', 'Embassy of

Cochin-China', 'Chinese Embassy', 'Japanese Embassy', 'Siamese Embassy' and 'Under M. F Bocourt' (the images attributed to Pierre-Joseph Rossier] and 'other',

which

accounts

for
or

any

copy

images
Subject

included

in

the

collection,
other

by other
specific

photographers

contributors.

description

includes

information recorded about the subject such as, height, hair and eye colour. The 'label authority' denotes the source of the label, whether a printed label titled "Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris" is attached to the verso or a hand-written one. Finally, a thumbnail image of the object is attached to each record
for reference.

The user can search each input field and generate form, list and table views

of the photographic objects. The database can also be used to reorder the images in

date

sequence.

This

is

important

because

the

series

was

not

ordered

chronologically, which suggests that it was complied at a later point and not in 1855,
the date of the earliest negative by Rousseau included in the Collection

Anthropologique. It seems that these early negatives were absorbed into an organizational system and titled "Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris" as late as 1864, after which time the numbering system on the labels corresponds
with the chronology of the negatives.

54

In order to search for anomalies among the prints in the AGO set, I conducted

a search by year. When I got to 1867, I discovered that one of the images, (Fig. 9)
""
Browse

CAMP.dup

Collection Anthropologique du Museum de Paris
i ..

Layout:

Form Vie i»j
.f. !_,

?

JSZJD
Record 228

228

Photographer

Other

Total 253

Date
Title

1867
PrmceofSiam

Unsorted

Size (cm)
Medium IMAGE: Shape Subject Pose

14x19.2
Photograph
Process Atxjrnen Print

Cutcomers Ful-Seated

Hands

· V
P/V

N/V

Background
Markings/Stamps

Studo/props

Props

· 1/1
1/2

2/2
Other

raart Pctire

I I

Export Pcture I

LABEL:

ColPatttiu*

Subject Number
SubjectName
Subject Age

278
Le prince royal de Siarn
Fti Label (In French)
278. Le prince royal de siarn. HAritier du Trone
d;ap.*S une Rhotoflrafihie rappoftoe de siarn par

Sub)ectOngin
Subject Group
Sub Description

Siam
Other

M.LapbeLafnarKjseen1867.

Label Authority

Other pend
Notes

Object Location Date Entered

AGO 27/06/2009

Who took mis pnoto?

100 ^ «|E

Browse

Fig. 9

Image of database created for this investigation.

label #278 Le prince royal de Siam [The Royal Prince of Siam], had been wrongly attributed to Potteau, according to the spreadsheet provided by the donor. The label indicates that the photograph had been brought back from Siam by L'abbe

55

Larnandie in 1867. As with other photographs contributed by others, Potteau made
a copy negative of the image to include in the series;128 however, he was most
certainly not responsible for the original view. Due to the nature of the information

recorded on the label, it is difficult to ascertain who took the image or when. The
date indicates when the image was 'brought back' from Siam. It is not impossible

that the image was taken by Rossier, as the composition and approach is very similar to his 1862 photographs of the King of Siam; but, there are no obvious
similarities between the studio decoration.

The database was further used to analyze the image presentation and content as discussed in Description of Objects, label information as discussed in

Labels and provide statistics about the scope of the collection. Further statistical
figures collected from the database are expressed below in Appendix III.

128 Christine Barthe, in conversation with the author, June 16th, 2009.

56

APPENDIX II

Figures presented here relate to the 253 photographic objects in the AGO set (duplicates are counted once) + data from the uncut labels (#1-231, duplicates are
included):
Number of plates by photographer:
Lacaze-Duthiers, Henri de ejects
-

Uncut Labels 6
4 7

Miot, Paul-Emile M. L. d'Eichtal M. le Comte de Montblanc

-

-

-

5

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe*
Rossier, Pierre-Joseph (Bocourt) Rousseau, Louis
Other

244 7

192**
12 18

1

Number of plates by Potteau, per year:* 1857 1859
1860 1861 1862 1863 1864
0 0
1 1

0
24 2 104

11 21

23

76
50
-

62 10

1865 1866 1867 1868 1869

16 6
0 20

-

-

-

* Includes all labels without attribution to others. Labels for images taken in 1857 and 1859 have
also been attributed to Potteau in the Collection Potteau inventory.

** Label set is not complete: earliest unattributed entry is 1857, last entry is in 1864.

57

APPENDIX III

The following is a list of images of the Collection Anthropologique set in the

collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario, used in this study as a representative sample
of the
series.

ID
#
11

Date

Photographer

Label
if
#

Subject Name
Mohamed Ben Maktar Mohamed Ben Maktar Hluang Indimontry Hluang Indimontry Kloom Mahasiddihwaharm Kloom Mahasiddihwaharm Nai'lbim

Subject Group Algerian Military
Algerian Military

1

1863 1863 1862 1862 1861 1861 1861 1861 1861
1861

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

57 57 63
63
64

2

3
4

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy
Siamese Embassy

5
6 7 8

64
66

Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy
Siamese Embassy

66

Nailbim
Munhannaroug Munhannaroug Naidan
Naidan

9 10 11 12

67 67 68
68

Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy
Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy

1861 1861 1861 1861 1861 1861 1861 1861 1861 1861
1861 1861 1861 1861

13
14

69
69
71

Chune Chune
Naipia

15 16
17 18

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

71 72

Naipia Naifak
Naifak Munnarapakadi

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

72
73 73
74

19 20
21

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Munnarapakadi
Munchindarak Munchindarak Khounraxassoinbar Khounraxassoinbar Naider Naisoung Bharul Bharul

Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy
Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy

22 23
24

74 75 75

25

1861 1861 1861 1861
1862 1862 1862 1862

76 77
78

26
27

Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy Siamese Embassy
Under M. F. Bocourt Under M. F. Bocourt

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Rossier, Pierre Joseph Rossier, Pierre Joseph Rossier, Pierre Joseph Rossier, Pierre Joseph Rossier, Pierre Joseph Rossier, Pierre Joseph Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

28 29
30 31 32 33
34

78 80
81 82 83

King of Siam King and Queen of Siam Young Siamese Girl
Young Siamese in Costume
Pegouan Type

Under M. F. Bocourt Under M. F. Bocourt Under M. F. Bocourt
Under M. F. Bocourt

1862 1862 1863 1863 1863 1863

87 88 117 117

Laotian Type

35 36
37 38

Djellali Ben Selimen Djellali Ben Selimen Mohamed ben Miloud Mohamed ben Miloud

Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military

118
118

58

39

1863 1863
1863

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

119

Mohamed ben Karrouche Mohamed ben Karrouche Mohamed ben Attab Mohamed ben Attab

Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military
Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military

40
41 42

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

119 120 120
121 121 122

1863
1863 1863 1863

43
44

Ohmed ben Olderramon
Ohmed ben Olderramon

45 46 47 48
49

Ziani ben Eloutani
Ziani ben Eloutani
Messaoud ben amar

Algerian Military Algerian Military
Algerian Military

1863
1863 1863

122 124
124

Messaoud ben amar
Ahmed ben Kilgassem

Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military
Algerian Military

1863
1863 1863

125 125

50 51
52

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Ahmed ben Kilgassem
Brabin ben Salah

126
126
128

1863
1863
1863

Brabin ben Salah Mohamed au said
Zerouke

Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military
Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military

53
54

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

128 129 129 130 130 131
131

Mohamed au said Zerouke Ben zian ben sliman Ben zian ben sliman Mohamed ben ahmed
Mohamed ben ahmed

55 56
57 58

1863 1863 1863

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

1863
1863 1863 1863 1863
1863

59 60 61
62

Mohamed ben dris Mohamed ben dris
Abdel kader ben Mohamed Abdel kader ben Mohamed Ali ben Asmar
Ali ben Asmar

132
132

63
64

136 136
137 137

1863 1863 1863
1863 1863

Algerian Military
Algerian Military

65
66 67 68 69 70 71
72

Ben aouda Ben dedouche Ben aouda Ben dedouche Haddour Ben Abdaloz

Algerian Military Algerian Military
Algerian Military

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

139 139
141

Haddour Ben Abdaloz Mohamed ben Brahim Phan Thong Ging
Phan-plu-Thu

1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863

Algerian Military Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina
Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina

142 143 143

Phan-plu-Thu Phan-plu-Thu
Ngug-kai-dan Nguyen buu than Nguyen buu than Nguyen buu than Nguyen buu than Phan buu do Phan buu do Tian van cu Luong van the

73 74

143
144 145

75 76
77 78 79

145 145 145 146

Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina

80
81 82

146
147 148 148

83
84

Luong van the
Ta hue Ke

149

59

85

1863 1863

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

149 150
150

Ta hue Ke
Hante Han te Han te

Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina
Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina

86
87 88

1863 1863
1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

150 151
152

89
90 91
92 93 94

Ho van buan Ba-thuang Ba-thuang Guyen Sen diam Sen diam Sen diam Michel Vannier

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina
Embassy of Cochinchina

152 153 154 154

Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina
Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina

95 96
97 98

154

155
155 156

1863
1863
1863

Michel Vannier
Marie Vannier Marie Vannier

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

99
100

156
156
157 157

1863 1863 1863

Marie Vannier
Tan Tan

101
102 103 104 105

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

1863
1863 1863 1863
1863

158 159 160 160 160
161

Hiep
Hieu Clere phong Clere phong Clere phong

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Embassy of Cochinchina
Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina

106
107 108

1863
1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863
1863

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Pedro dieu Pedro dieu
Dan yaii Dan yaii Ho Ho

109
110
111

161
162 162

112 113
114

163 163
164 164 165 165

D'a D'a Nguyen buu cap Nguyen buu cap Nguyen buu cap Nguyen buu cap Cang Cang
Tran-van Luong

115 116
117 118

1863 1863 1863 1863
1863 1863 1863

166 166 167
167 168

119
120 121 122 123
124

Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina
Embassy of Cochinchina

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina
Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina

1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863 1863

168 169 169
170 170 171 171 172 173 173
174 174 177

Tran-van Luong Simon cua Simon cua

125
126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134

Paulus tru'ong Chanh
Paulus tru'ong Chanh Petrus sang
Petrus sang

Ho van nbuan

Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina Embassy of Cochinchina
Under M. F. Bocourt

1863 1863
1863 1863 1863 1863 1862
1864

Kieu Kieii
Cui gian Ihenh Cui gian Ihenh Hiep

135 136
137

177 181

Hiep

Rossier, Pierre Joseph
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Cochinchinoise
Ike-da Tsikou-go-no-

138

182

Japanese Embassy

60

kami
139 140
141 142

1864

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

182
183 183

Ike-da Tsikou-go-nokami
Kawadzou Idzou no kami Kawadzou Idzou no kami

Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy

1864
1864
1864

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy

184 184 185

Kawada Sakami-nokami Kawada Sakami-nokami Ta-nabe Ta-itsi

143
144

1864 1864
1864 1864

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe

Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy

145 146 147 148

185
186 186 187 187 187 188 188

Ta-nabe Ta-itsi
Ta-naka ren-ta-ro Ta-naka ren-ta-ro Nisi-kitsi-zyou-ro Nisi-kitsi-zyou-ro Nisi-kitsi-zyou-ro Sai-to-dzi-ro-ta-ro Sai-to-dzi-ro-ta-ro

Potteau, Jacques Philippe
Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe

Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy

1864
1864 1864

149 150 151
152

Potteau, Jacques Philippe
Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe

1864
1864 1864 1864

Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy

Potteau, Jacques Philippe
Potteau, Jacques Philippe

153
154

189
189
190

Sou-to Taki-itsi-ro
Sou-to Taki-itsi-ro
Syo-da saban-ro

Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy

1864
1864 1864 1864 1864

Potteau, Jacques Philippe
Potteau, Jacques Philippe

155

156
157

Potteau, Jacques Philippe
Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques ·Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe
Potteau, Jacques Philippe

190 191 192
193

Syo-da saban-ro Fori-ye rokou-go-ro Ya-tsou-kou si-ro
Masou-da taka-no souke

158 159 160 161 162 163
164

1864
1864

193 194
194

Masou-da taka-no souke Souzi-ouza-ai-zo
Souzi-ouza-ai-zo

1864 1864 1864
1864 1864 1864 1864 1864 1864 1864 1864

195
195

Matsi-nami kou-no
Matsi-nami kou-no

165 166
167

196 196 197
198 198
199

Ya-no riro be-ye Ya-no riro be-ye Yama-outsi
Seki-sin-patsi Seki-sin-patsi
Masou-da sousoumon

168

Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques -Philippe
Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques Philippe Potteau, Jacques -Philippe

169
170 171
172

199

Masou-da sousoumon

1864
1864 1864 1864 1864 1864 1864 1864

200 200
201

Fara-da go-itsi Fara-da go-itsi
Ko-Tozoumi yasou-yemon

173
174

175

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau Jacques Philippe Potteau Jacques Philippe Potteau Jacques ·Philippe Potteau Jacques -Philippe Potteau Jacques -Philippe Potteau Jacques -Philippe Potteau Jacques -Philippe Potteau Jacques -Philippe Potteau Jacques -Philippe

201
202 202 203 203

Ko-Tozoumi yasou-yemon

Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy

176
177 178 179

Oho-seki fan-no zouke Oho-seki fan-no zouke Kane-gami sa-souke Kane-gami sa-souke

180 181
182

1864
1864 1864 1864 1864

204 204 205

Iva-matsou Ta-ro Iva-matsou Ta-ro Bes-syo sad-zi-ro

183
184

205 206

Bes-syo sad-zi-ro Takahosi Tome-sabu-ro

61

185 186

1864 1864
1864

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

207 207 208 208 209

Saga-nami fisasi

Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy

Saga-nami fisasi Tama ki san-ya Tama ki san-ya Mi-yake Hidzou Mi-yake Hidzou Ok kotsou watari Ok kotsou watari
Mori-da ya-souke Mori-da ya-souke

187 188
189

1864
1864 1864 1864

190
191 192 193

209 210 210
211
211

Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy
Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy

1864 1864
1864 1864

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

194 195 196
197

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

212 212 213 213 214

Oura-Moto to-ki-ro

Japanese Embassy Japanese Embassy
Other

1864 1864 1864 1864 1865 1865 1865

Oura-Moto to-ki-ro
Ou-tki-da Tsu-ne sabu-ro Ou-tki-da Tsu-ne sabu-ro Hayasi kankai
Ahmed-B en-Yelloub

198
199

Other
Other

200 201
202 203 204

251
251

Algerian Military Algerian Military
Algerian Military

Ahmed Ben Yelloub Yelloub Ben Tobij Moustapha Ben Onarga Moustapha Ben Onarga Mohammed Ben OH
Mohammed Ben Onarga

252
253

1865
1865 1865 1865

Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military Other
Other

253 257 257 260 260
260 260

205 206
207 208

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

1865 1865
1865 1865 1866 1866 1866 1866 1866 1866 1866 1866 1866 1866 1866 1866 1866
1866 1866

L'Emir Abd-el-Kader
L'Emir Abd-el-Kader L'Emir Abd-el-Kader L'Emir Abd-el-Kader

209 210
211
212

Other Other

265 265 266 266 267
267 268

Rakai Ben Bazin Rakai Ben Bazin Echabla Ben Ebbala Echabla Ben Ebbala
Abdjeia bente Balguacinne Abdeja bente Balguacinne

Algerian Military Algerian Military
Other Other Other Other Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy

213
214

215

216
217

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Li Yunne Ichiaoh Li Yunne Ichiaoh
Ichang-yung-hion Ichang-yung-hion
Iae-Ichaoh-hiang

218 219 220 221
222

268 269 269
270
271

Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy
Chinese Embassy

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Other

Lion Kunne Fung Bouguerrah ben mohamed Bouguerrah ben mohamed Mezian Ben Satis Mezian Ben Sails

223 224 225

273 273 274 274

Algerian Military Algerian Military Algerian Military
Algerian Military Other
Other Other

226
227 228

1866 1869 1867 1867 1867
1867

276
278 280

Jeune japonaise
Le prince royal de Siam Corv-aKan-ve Corv-aKan-ve Tcheon-ya-Mai Leao-ya-Tchoe Leao-ya-Tchoe
Corv-aKan

229 230 231
232 233 234

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

280 281
282 282

Other Other Other Other Other

1867 1867 1867

283

62

235

1869

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

286
287 288 288 290

S. Exc. Sounneta Jen Tzo-chu-fan Lien-Lao-ge Lien-Lao-ge Tchang-Lao-ge
Ta-Moo-an

Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy
Chinese Embassy

236
237 238
239 240
241

1869
1869 1869 1869 1869 1869 1869 1869 1869 1869

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

291
292 292 293

Wang-wen-Knay Wang-wen-Knay Wnang-chao-yan
Wnang-chao-yan

Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy

242 243 244

293
294

Chinese Embassy
Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy
Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy

245 246
247

Kone-lien-fon
Chang-hoa-fang

1869
1869

295
295

Chang-hoa-fang
Hung-Pun-Joo Hung-Pun-Joo

248
249 250

1869
1869 1869

296 296
297

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe
Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy Chinese Embassy

Lio-chun-chi Chang-fao-fan
Chang-fao-fan Chang-kiva-an

251
252 253

1869 1869
1869

298 298
299

Potteau, Jacques-Philippe Potteau, Jacques-Philippe

63

Bibliography

Aubenas, Sylvie. "Boulevard des Capucines: the Glory of the Empire." In Gustave he Gray 18201884, edited by Gordon Baldwin. Los Angeles, CA: J Paul Getty Museum, 2002. Banta, Melissa. A Timely Encounter: Nineteenth Century Photographs ofJapan. Cambridge, MA:
Peabody Museum Press, 1988.

Banta, Melissa. From Site to Sight: Anthropology, Photography, and the Power of Imagery.
Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum Press, 1986.

Barthe, Christine. "Des photographies dites «ethnographiques»" In D'un regard l'autre:

Photographies XIXe siecle, 159-171. Paris: Musee du quai Branly and Aries: Actes Sud,
2006.

Barthe, Christine. "Models & Norms: the Relationship between Ethnographic Photographs and Sculptures." In Facing the Other: Charles Cordier (1827-1905) Ethnographic Sculptor, 93111. New York, NY: Harry N Abrams, 2004.

Bennet, Terry, Bourgarel, Gerard and David Collin. Pierre Joseph Rossier, Photographe: une memoire retrouvee. Fribourg, Switzerland: Pro Fribourg, 2006. Braun, Marta. "Aux Limites du Savoir: la photographie et les sciences de l'observation" in L'Art
de la photographie des origines a nos jours, edited by Andre Gunthert and Michel Poivert,
140-177. Paris: editions Citadelles-Mazenod, 2007.

Braun, Marta. "China, 1854" In Musee du quai Branly: the Collection: Artfrom Africa, Asia,
Oceania, and the Americas, edited by Yves Le Fur, 392. Paris: Flammarion, 2009.

Darwin, Charles. "Chapter VII: On the Races of Man." In Descent of Man and Selection Relating to
Sex. New York, NY: AMS Press, 1972.

Edwards, Elizabeth, ed. Anthropology and Photography 1860-1920. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1992.

Edwards, Elizabeth. Raw Histories: Photographs, Anthropology and Museums. Oxford: Berg, 2006. Edwards, Elizabeth. "Ordering Others: Photography, Anthropologies and Taxonomies." In In

Visible Light: Photography and Classification in Art, Science and The Everyday, edited by
Chrissie lies and Russell Roberts, 54-68. Oxford: Museum of Modern Art, 1997.

Edwards, Elizabeth. "Photographic 'Types': The Pursuit of Method," Visual Anthropology 3, nos.
2-3 (1990): 235-58.

Frizot, Michel. "Body of Evidence: The Enthnophotography of Difference." In A New History of Photography, edited by Michel Frizot, 259-271. Cologne: Konemann, 1998.
Grinshaw, Anna. The Ethnographer's Eye: Ways ofSeeing in Anthropology. Cambridge and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

64

Jehel, Pierre-Jerome. Photographie et anthropologie en France au XIXe siecle. Memoire de DEA
sous la direction d'Andre Rouille et Sylvain Maresca, Universite Paris VIII, 1995. McCauley, Elizabeth Anne. Industrial Madness: Commercial Photography in Paris, 1848-1871.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994. McCauley, Elizabeth Anne. Likenesses: Portrait Photography in Europe, 1850-1870. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1980.

Pinney, Christopher. "The Parallel Histories of Anthropology & Photography." In Anthropology & Photography 1860-1920, edited by Elizabeth Edwards. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 1992.

Pinney, Christopher and Nicolas Peterson, editors. Photography's Other Histories. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 2003.

Scherer, Joanna C. "The Photographic Document: photographs as primary data in
Anthropological enquiry. In Elizabeth Edwards ed. Anthropology & Photography 18601920. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992.

Staum, Martin S. Labeling People: French Scholars on Race, Society and Empire, 1815-1848.
Montreal, QC: McGill-Queens University Press, 2003.

Internet Sources
Bibliotheque nationale de France, Catalogues etbibliotheque numerique, BnF catalogue general.
http://catalogue.bnf.fr. Bloomsbury Auctions London, Sales Archive, http://www.bloomsburyauctions.com.

Getty Research Institute, The, Conducting Research, Data Standards and Guidelines, "Categories
for the Description of Works of Art,"
http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/standards/cdwa/.

Harvard College Library, Tozzer Library, http://hcl.harvard.edu/libraries/tozzer/.

Musee du Quai Branly, The Iconotheque Catalogue, http://www.quaibranly.fr/en/. Peabody Museum of Archaeology & Ethnology at Harvard University.
http://www.peabody.harvard.edu/.

Pitt Rivers Museum of Anthropology and World Archaeology, University of Oxford, Object &
Photograph Collections Catalogue, http://www.prm.ox.ac.uk/.

Taylor, Roger. "Photographic Exhibitions in Britain 1839 -1865" http://peib.dmu.ac.uk/.
Vaucher, Andrea R. "A New Focus" France Magazine 66, (Summer 2003), http://www.francemagazine.org/articles/issue66/article68.asp?issue_id=66&article_id=6
8.

65

