Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Geological data handling using Oracle 3D : a study on data services and management
Nedim Oren
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Civil Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Oren, Nedim, "Geological data handling using Oracle 3D : a study on data services and management" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 539.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

GEOLOGICAL DATA HANDLING USING ORACLE 3D: A STUDY ON DATA
SERVICES AND MANAGEMENT

by

Nedim Oren

BSc, Geomatics Engineering, Istanbul Technical University, TURKEY, 1993

A thesis presented to Ryerson University
in partial fulfillment of the

requirements for the degree of
Master of Applied Science

in the Program of
Civil Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 © Nedim Oren, 2009

RYERtttN UNWBSITY LffiftAHV

PROPWTYOF

Declaration

GEOLOGICAL DATA HANDLING USING ORACLE 3D: A STUDY ON DATA
SERVICES AND MANAGEMENT

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend
this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Nedim Oren, MASc, Civil Engineering, 2009
Department of Civil Engineering

Ryerson University

Abstract
I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of
scholarly research.

Efficient management of 3D geological and subsurface models require a robust 3D data modeling environment which can provide the necessary functions and flexibility to enable accessing 3D models in a collaborative work environment through the Internet. This allows geoscientists and geo-engineers to work collaboratively for better, informed decisions. Today, there is no data standard that satisfies the entire 3D geological modelling requirement in a
collaborative work environment.

This thesis presents the result of a research project that focuses on identifying modelling and

analytical requirements of geological models and the usability of existing technologies for both database management and applications that allow sharing 3D models in a collaborative
modelling environment. Specifically, it examines current 3D data models and how they can fit

into the requirements of the 3D geological modeling. Based on identified system requirements, an integrated solution prototype has been implemented that allows large-scale 3D data
management and provides real-time Internet access to the underlying 3D models.

m

Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to express my great appreciation and thanks to my supervisor, Dr.
Declaration

Table of Contents
ii

Songnian Li for his valuable advice and ideas as well as the guidance he has provided during the time of my thesis study. I also appreciate that he provided me with the great opportunity to continue my study in the field of Geographic Information Systems (GIS). I greatly appreciate his
help in obtaining financial support for my studies.
able to complete this work.

Abstract

iii

Acknowledgements

iv

Table of Contents

v

Without his support, I would not have been

List of Tables

vii

List of Figures
I also wish to thank Dr. Mike Chapman and other faculty and staff members in the Department

viii
x
1 2 4 5 7 8 8

List of Acronyms and Abbreviations
Chapter 1. Introduction

of Civil Engineering at Ryerson University for their help and support. Thanks also to Desmond
Rogan who patiently helped me with software installation and configuration. 1.1 Problems The School of Graduate Studies at Ryerson University is acknowledged for granting me Ryerson Graduate Awards and the opportunity to conduct my research from 2007 to 2009. I would also 1.2 Research Objectives 1.3 Research Methodology 1.4 Thesis Organization Chapter 2. 3D Data Modeling 2.1 The Concept of 3D Modeling

like to thank Ms. Marry Neelands for her administrative support during my study.

Thanks also go to Eric (Zheng) Chang for providing the Collaboration Web Client (GeoLink) prototype and for his help. The advice and help provided by Baris Kazar of Oracle and Ken Bragg and other staff at Safe Software was priceless. Thanks also go to my friend Sandeep
Prakash who offered his expertise and knowledge in geology and modeling.

2.2 Review of 3D Data Models 2.2.1 Topological Models 2.2.2 Geometric Model
2.3 Geometric vs. Topological Data Models Chapter 3. Geological 3D Modeling Requirements 3.1 Sources of Geological Data 3.2 Characteristics of Geological Data and 3D Models 3.3 3D Geological Modeling Workflow 3.4 System and Data Modeling Requirements

10 12 16
16 18 18 22 22 26

IV

Chapter 4. Oracle 3D Data Management and FME Server

27

List of Tables
Table 2.1 Inventory of topological structures (source: [Oosterom et al., 2002]) Table 3.1 Sources of geological data (source: [Wu et al. 2005]) 15 21

4.1 Oracle 1 lg and 3D Data Management

27

4.1.1 3D Data Retrieval, Query and Analysis
4.2 FME Server: Key Capabilities and Services 4.2.1 Key Capabilities

30
31 31

Table 3.2 Phases of geological modeling
Table 4.1 Oracle SDOGEOMETRY 3D Geometries (source: [Kothuri et al., 2007]) Table 4.2 3D Geometry processing functions (source: [Kothuri et al., 2007])

25
29 31

4.2.2 FME Server Architecture 4.2.3 FME Server Services

33 37

Chapter 5. Framework Design and Prototype Implementation 5.1 Framework Design

39 39

Table 5.1 Summary of VRML viewer test results

62

5.1.1 Existing 3D Data Systems and Design Approaches 5.1.2 Problem Areas of 3D System Development 5.1.3 Options for Storing and Managing Geological Data and Models 5.1.4 Oracle 3D for Subsurface and Geological Modeling 5.1.5 FME Server for Streaming 3D Geological Models

39 42 43 46 49

5.1.6 Framework for Geological Data Modeling and Management
5.2 Prototype Implementation 5.2.1 Test Dataset, Data Conversion and Uploading Process

50
52 54

5.2.2 Creating the Data Streaming Services
5.2.3 Testing Streamed 3D Data 5.2.4 Summary

56
61 67

Chapter 6. Conclusions and Recommendations References
Appendix A - Player support for X3D components by www.web3d.org

69 73
78

VI

vn

List of Figures
Figure 1.1 GEOIDE - GeoTopo 3D project structure [Blessent, 2006] 3

Figure 5.12 Accessing Workspace Services Request Information

60

Figure 5.13 BS Contra VRML viewer (FME streamed LENS 3 data layer) Figure 5.14 BS Contra VRML viewer (FME streamed LENS 3 data layer) Figure 5.15 BS Contra VRML viewer (FME streamed LENS 4 data layer) Figure 5.16 BS Contra VRML viewer (FME streamed LENS 4 data layer) Figure 5.17 Xj3D Browser (FME streamed LENS 3 data layer) Figure 5.18 Xj3D Browser (FME streamed LENS 4 data layer) Figure 5.19 GeoLink Browser (FME streamed LENS 3 data layer) Figure 5.20 GeoLink Browser (FME streamed LENS 4 data layer)

62 63 63 64 64 65 66 67

Figure 1.2 Research Methodology
Figure 2.1 Constructive solid geometry representations

6
10

Figure 2.2 Boundary representation

11

Figure 2.3 Comparison between geometrical and topological models (source: [Chena at al.,

2008])
Figure 4.1 Operational concept (source: [Safe Software, 2008a]) Figure 4.2 Role of FME Server components (source: [Safe Software, 2008c])

17
33 34

Figure 4.3 FME Server, Service and Web Browser relationships (source: [Safe Software, 2008a])
36

Figure 5.1.a Typical 3D modeling workflow in Oracle (modified after [Kothuri et al., 2007]) .. 48
Figure 5.1.b Typical 3D modeling workflow 49

Figure 5.2 Relationship of geological data, FME Server Services and Web client applications . 50
Figure 5.3 Framework of geological data modeling and management Figure 5.4 Prototype System Configuration 52 53

Figure 5.5 Test data visualized with MIRARCO's ParaViewGeo application
Figure 5.6 Flowchart showing the data conversion process

54
55

Figure 5.7 FME workspace transfers of ESRI Shape files to Oracle 3D Figure 5.8 The workspace created to export Oracle 3D data into VRML format
Figure 5.9 Publish to FME Server screen

56 57
58

Figure 5.10 Web interface for accessing available services and services parameters
Figure 5.11 Web interface for accessing published Data Streaming services

59
59

vm

IX

SIMAL

Spatial

Information

Management

and

Applications

Laboratory

at

Ryerson

List of Acronyms and Abbreviations
API AEC BIM
CAD

University
SQL Structured Query Language

Application Programming Interface
Architecture/Engineering/Construction

SQL/MM
TIN
URL VTK VRML

SQL Multimedia and Application Packages
Triangulated Irregular Network
Uniform Resource Locator Visualization Toolkit Virtual Reality Modeling Language

Building Information Models Computer Aided Design
Database Management System

DBMS DEM ETL ESRI
FME

Digital Elevation Model

Extract, Transform and Load
Environmental Systems Research Institute Feature Manipulation Engine
Geographic Information Systems Geography Markup Language

WFS WMS
PC

Web Feature Service Web Map Service
Point Cloud

GIS GML
GOCAD HTML XML KML

PNG

Portable Network Graphics

Geological Object Computer Aided Design
Hypertext Markup Language

Extensible Markup Language
Keyhole Markup Language

KMZ
LIDAR

Compressed Version of the KML
Light Detection and Ranging Level of Detail Non-uniform rational B-spline

LOD NURBS OGC

Open Geospatial Consortium Object-oriented DBMS
Relational Database Management System

OODBMS
RDBMS

XI

Chapter 1. Introduction
With advanced data acquisition and computing technologies, a large amount of geospatial data

has become readily available from many different sources. Different user requirements may be set by the different domain-specific application areas. GIS technology evolved rapidly from
mainframe computing environments, to the desktop environment and finally Internet-based

application architecture, which is currently used in many applications.

Today, because of the

recent improvements in the Internet technology and other enabling technologies, location-based solutions are incorporated in many daily tasks. A wide range of computing devices, such as personal computers, mobile computing devices and cell phones, can use these solutions.

Many well-established GIS tools can handle the common functionalities of GIS. Worboys and
Duckham (2004) identify these common functions as capture, structuring, manipulation, analysis and presentation of the spatial data. Some advanced geoprocessing tools can also accomplish

complicated analysis in 2D environment.

However, in more complex situations such as

geological modeling for the purpose of mineral exploration or groundwater modeling, 2D models may not characterize the phenomenon under consideration. In complex situations 3D models facilitates understanding of the reality through a 3D abstraction of complex geological and
subsurface objects.

Despite the established use of GIS tools and functions for 2D space, challenges remain when modelling real-world objects in 3D space. These challenges exist within most of the common

functionalities of 3D modeling, such as capturing the geological data, structuring it in a model

allowing manipulation, and analysing and presenting data. Several commercial and open source

1

applications are available for the visualization of 3D models. Beside visualization of 3D models,

collaboratively and share the same view of the 3D model. The Internet can provide the communication base for such collaboration and knowledge sharing.

users also want to easily manipulate 3D data, perform GIS analysis in 3D space, and interpret the
results for better management of subsurface resources. The next section describes the main

One of the sub projects under the GEOIDE GeoTopo 3D project is to develop methods and tools

problems of modelling subsurface objects in GIS environment.
for collaborative geomodeling and real-time sharing in a collaborative environment among a

1.1 Problems
GIS applications have long been a part of many resource management solutions, in both the private and public sectors. Most resource management activities benefit from analysis that would
be impossible, or too expensive, without a GIS model built into a computing environment. In the last decade, specialized tools have been developed to perform specific 2D GIS tasks that help resource managers resolve domain-specific problems. However, certain more complex

group of geographically distant geoscientists and geo-engineers. Such methods and tools can

directly link geoscientists, exploration and data centers to allow faster analysis and decisions in
situations where collaboration is a critical part of the process. Figure 1.1 shows the overall

structure of the GEOIDE GeoTopo 3D project in relation to the other sub projects.

Geomodels
· Develop Workflows

3D GIS
· Data structures

· DBMS/standardisation

management activities in geological, hydrological, mineral exploration and petroleum domains cannot be efficiently performed without a proper 3D model of the complex subsurface
phenomenon.

f

3D model ^\
collaborative communication

Loverthe internety

Today, well-established Computer Aided Design (CAD) and GIS systems can be used for visualization of complex 3D objects and visual inspection of the rendered 3D model, as well as the relations among included objects. Abdul-Rahman and Pilouk (2008) state that "a digital model must be capable of relating spatial and non-spatial aspect of reality and creating such a
model as an artificial construction of reality in a computing environment requires a tool set to
Figure 1.1 GEOIDE - GeoTopo 3D project structure [Blessent, 2006]

1
Numerical
modeling

1

exploiting the technologies both of computer graphics and database management". Usually a
group of collaborating geologists and scientists, located in dispersed geographic areas, generate

To realize such a system, a robust, efficient 3D data model is required to model 3D geological
data which can, ideally, be stored in a Database Management System (DBMS). It is also

geological models. To be able to make informed decisions, geologists and scientists need to work

important to develop methods and tools that allow different systems, either stand-alone or

collaborative applications, to access 3D models, regardless of the data format of the underlying
system.

3.

Prototyping of an integrated solution using Oracle 3D and other enabling tools to allow sharing of the 3D models in a collaborative environment over the Internet.

These three aspects are important in this development:

1.3 Research Methodology

1.

Collaborative 3D system providing software support of model sharing;

The research began with a literature review that included relevant research papers and studies in 3D GIS, 3D data models, and geological and subsurface modeling concepts. The purpose of this

2.

DBMS allowing easy management of the large 3D models;

phase was to build an understanding of the terminology and knowledge required to carry out this
research, to summarize existing and proposed solutions for modelling 3D geological objects, and

3.

Tools and functions allowing manipulation of 3D models in either stand-alone or
collaborative environments.

to provide a better understanding of geological modeling requirements.

The second phase of this research focused on identification of technologies and applications that

1.2 Research Objectives

may, potentially, satisfy the geological modeling requirements identified in the first phase of
research.

This research focuses on identification of modelling and analytical requirements for subsurface models, and the usability of existing technologies for both database management and

The third phase identified the modeling environment and middleware applications that can

applications that allow sharing of 3D models in a collaborative environment over the Internet.
potentially be used in the prototype system design. Taken into consideration are: the potential for The main objectives of the study include: managing the complete 3D geological data modeling workflow, handling large volume 3D geological data, and capability of streaming 3D data to the web client applications (including

1. Examination of current 3D data models and how they fit into the requirements of 3D
subsurface and geological modeling, especially with the recent release of Oracle 3D;

GeoLink collaborative GIS client).

The fourth phase installed and configured components of the prototype. Upon completion of the

2. Design of a framework for an integrated solution that can provide real-time 3D data
management and access capacity over the Internet;

system implementation, a test dataset was processed and loaded into the Oracle database. The Feature Manipulation Engine (FME) Server services were created to stream the 3D geological

models to the Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML) clients, including the GeoLink
Prototype.

1.4 Thesis Organization
The first chapter describes the problem of 3D modelling, collaboration, real-time 3D model sharing, research objectives and thesis research methodology.

The prototype system was tested in the fifth phase. The main functionalities expected from the
system were tested with several VRML web client applications. Figure 1.2 shows the overall
procedure followed in this research.

The second chapter discusses concepts of 3D data modelling, a review of existing 3D systems,
current implementations, and new developments and trends in 3D modelling.

Literature review

T

Project
Started

Chapter

3

focuses

on

subsurface

and

geological

3D

modelling

processes.

It

discusses

characteristics, modelling workflow and 3D geological data modeling requirements.

Oracle's 3D data management capacity and the detail of 3D data types, 3D spatial operations,
».

Analyze the Geological 3D Modelling requirements

*--

existing framework for 3D data modelling that may fit into the modelling of the 3D geological
objects are discussed in the fourth chapter.

T



Technology review and evaluation

k--

The fifth chapter looks at the framework design and prototype system implemented for managing
f

and sharing of 3D geological models using Oracle and FME solutions.

Framework Design,

Prototype Implementation and Testing
^ J

The sixth chapter includes concluding remarks and recommendations for further study.

f

Results and Discussions

M

h.

Project

Finished

Figure 1.2 Research Methodology

Chapter 2. 3D Data Modeling

the visualization, visually-oriented 3D systems most likely prefer using the geometric models. In contrast, topological models allow running some of the spatial queries to the Structured Query

2.1 The Concept of 3D Modeling
Language (SQL) database without any computation, and provide faster results for these queries.

The common definition of GIS underlines GIS' basic functionality, regardless of architecture or underlying data models. These are the common tasks of GIS functionality: capture, structuring,
manipulation, data analysis, and data presentation. Because object relationships in 2D space are

For this reason, systems that deal with the spatial relationships of the model prefer using topological models as the underlying data structure. In certain other models, such as CityGML,

storing both geometric and topological model is a suggested solution, but synchronization of
both models remains a major problem.

relatively simple compared with 3D space, most well-established and commonly-used 2D GIS
tools can handle the functionality expected from a 2D GIS system. In contrast, these same tools

are far from providing basic GIS functionality for objects modeled in 3D space. This is due to the complexity of real-world objects in 3D space. For example, existing 3D systems cannot perform
commonly used spatial operators, such as intersection or overlay analysis.

It is inevitable that 3D GIS will be realized with integration of geomodeling tools and data management systems [Apel, 2006]. This type of integration can be achieved by splitting the
intensive workload of the 3D system between DBMS and geomodeling tools. It is possible to

implement some of the 3D GIS functions at the DBMS level to avoid costly data transfer

Organization of 3D data and governing rules of modelled objects and their relationships are very important for the realization of a 3D system. A well-designed data model can provide a robust base for realizing complex spatial functions and operations. In the literature, both topological and geometric models have been reported as 3D data modeling options. Geometric data models store the geometry and require that all topological relationships are derived by computation from that geometric model. On the contrary, topological models implicitly store the relationships and geometry needed to be derived from the topological relationships for rendering and other metric
operations.

processes between the database and the front-end-applications. Execution of some common

computationally expensive functions in the DBMS will greatly help realize web-enabled 3D GIS

solutions.

In the literature, several research efforts have aimed to prove the possibility of

implementing some spatial operators in DBMS, but so far none of the proposed solutions has been commonly accepted or implemented [Zlatanova et al., 2004].

Implementation of some GIS functions and operators at the database is related strictly to the
underlying data model and data organization. Therefore, a standard and interoperable data model is needed to implement suggested functionality and operators. In the next section, the data

In practice, both implementations have strong and weak areas. For example, deriving geometric model of 3D objects from the topological relationships is highly time consuming and needs extensive computations. However, because the rendering engines need the geometric model for

models and options for organizing 3D data will be discussed.

8

2.2 Review of 3D Data Models

Boundary Representation: In this option, objects are defined by their bounding surfaces where object's boundary is defined by contiguous simple or complex surface

The historical experience gained from CAD systems provides the basis for 3D modeling in

objects. This model can be described as accumulation of related surfaces to enclose general. In the literature, several distinct groups of 3D modeling techniques have been reported the volume of the object. Because all surfaces are explicit in this representation,
for volume modeling. Based on distinct definitions, Latuada (2006) groups modeling techniques textures can be draped directly onto them and 3D polygons can be efficiently
into the following major categories.

rendered

using

hardware

acceleration.

The

topological

relationships

and

the

-

Sweep Representation: objects are represented by sweeping a definition area or
volume along a defined trajectory.

restrictions on the types of primitives can be applied based on the methodology and

intended use of the model. Figure 2.2 shows boundaries that represent basic building structures where all surfaces are enclosing a 3D volume based on the restrictions and

-

Primitive

Instancing:

a

technique

that

uses

a

set

of predefined

shapes

or

rules set for the model.

mathematical primitives positioned in space without intersecting.

Constructive Solid Geometry: a combination of primitive shapes using set theory operators such as union, intersection and difference. Volumetric and parametric primitives compose object geometry. Constructive solid geometry is widely used in many applications and most CAD software provides extensive support for this
representation and best suits the Architectural Design process. Figure 2.1 shows the

Figure 2.2 Boundary representation

Spatial Occupancy Enumeration: This technique represents objects by uniting a set of cells. Each cell is a primitive, simple, regular or irregular shape. The adjacent cells are connected, but do not intersect.

basic volumetric and parametric primitives that are used to model 3D objects in
constructive solid geometry models.

Cell Decomposition: The voxel approach is an example of the cell decomposition method. This volume modeling technique is broader in its scope, and applies to any shape and size of cell.

Although all these methods are used in different application areas, in theory a hybrid approach Figure 2.1 Constructive solid geometry representations combining boundary representations and constructive solid geometry appears to be suitable in
11

10

many domain-specific modeling areas of 3D GIS [Abdul-Rahman and Pilouk, 2008]. Boundary representation is commonly used for large volume 3D data collections and object reconstruction
techniques employing Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR), photogrammetry, and remote sensing technologies. Currently, most 3D systems rely on Boundary Representation and do not

[Zlatanova et al.,

2002].

Some of these reported models are also examined in various

experimental studies [Zlatanova, 2000; Heuel and Kolbe, 2001; Store and Zlatanova, 2003; Zlatanova et al., 2004; Zlatanova, 2005; Oosterom et al., 2002].

The following parameters characterize different topological structures, and can be used as

support Constructive Solid Geometry. Organizing 3D data as boundary representation appears to
comparison criteria for different models [Oosterom et al., 2002]:

be the most flexible option for implementing a true 3D GIS in most GIS domain areas and so
geological modeling. -

Dimension of embedded space (2D, 2.5D, 3D, 4D-Time added);
Topological primitives used (node, edge, face, volume);

Topological and geometric models are two common methods for modeling and storing geographic data and which can both be used for modeling 3D objects. The following sections will discuss both topological models and geometrical models in detail.

-

Orientation of elements considered (directed or not);

-

Explicit topological relationships stored (part-of, in, on.); Topological rules governing the model (crossing edge allowed, dangling elements allowed or same topological primitive on both side of boundary allowed).

2.2.1 Topological Models

Objects can be modeled by using their topological properties, an approach that's best suited to complex spatial analysis. Most 2D GIS systems are realized on underlying topological models. Because 3D space introduces new issues, such as primitives, rules, and constraints representing objects and their relationships, existing well-defined 2D topological models may not be suitable
for 3D modeling [Zlatanova et al., 2004].

Table 2.1 provides a short inventory of the most common topological structures reported in the literature [Oosterom et al., 2002]. As some 3D modelling domains may have specific

requirements, no single topological model is satisfactory. Outstanding issues of 3D GIS include space partitioning, supported objects and primitives, and constructive rules in representing the objects and the relationships among them.

The implicit or explicit description of many spatial relationships/operations such as inclusion,

adjacency, equity, direction, intersection, and connectivity are expected within topological models. These relationships/operations must also be kept up-to-date in a sustainable form when

Where, and how, the model is to be physically stored is an important aspect that will effect the
whole system design and needs to be carefully considered. The recent objective of

the model is modified.

The literature has reported several 3D abstractions for topological

Architecture/Engineering/Construction (AEC) is to bridge the gap between CAD and GIS.

models, which have strong and weak points for representing spatial objects within the 3D space

DBMS can provide a common ground, which different domain-specific applications can use to
13

12

store and manage 3D models [Zlatanova, 2005]. This common ground can also provide a solid

Table 2.1 Inventory of topological structures (source: [Oosterom et al., 2002])

base for the development of interoperable 3D modeling standards. GIS systems use specialized
DBMS systems to mange the underlying data. By using DBMS for data management, both GIS and CAD can integrate these systems with accepted data standards. Because of the size of 3D data involved in modeling geological objects, and the complexity of relationships in 3D space,
DBMS is most likely the best option for storing 3D topological models for the geological
Wingdomain. 2D

Primitives
Used

Topological Explicit Relationship
Tables

#of
Rules

Tables
Planar

TIN

2D

node, edge

node, edge

no

2

Partition Planar

node, face

edge, face

no

edge

2

Partition Planar

If chosen, a topological model either can be mapped directly into relational tables or modeled as an object-relational DBMS. As a third option, the same model can be implanted as an objectoriented DBMS (OODBMS). This latter option is suitable for most 3D GIS domain applications,
but requires extensive low-level programming in implementation.

Whell
2D

node, face

edge, face

no

(Chain)

2

Partition

node-on-face, node-in3D
3D

node, arc, edge, face

arc, edge, face

volume, arc-part of-line arc-on-face, arc-envolume 8

Space

FDS

Partition

node, arc, arc, triangle,
TEN 3D

tri-part of-surf, arc-part-

Space

triangle, tetrahedrons tetrahedron

of line

5

Partition

Cell3D

0-cell, l-cell cells 2-cell, 3-cell face, line,
no

Space 1

tuple

Partition

node-in-volume, face-in-

Space 6 Partition

sss

3D

node, face

surface, volume
volume

14

15

2.2.2 Geometric Model

topological data model. Figure 2.3 shows a possible comparison between geometric and
topological data models.

A 3D model can also be represented in DBMS using a geometric data type. The geometric data

type and functions to operate on the model can be either created by the user, or provided by the
DBMS as a native data type. User-defined geometric data types and functions are commonly written in C, C++ or Java in order to maintain an acceptable performance level [Chena at al., 2008]. Generally, DBMS vendor-provided geometric types are also written in one of these
lower-level programming languages, but because of the lower-level integration, geometric types
can potentially perform better.

On the other hand, once the topological model is constructed, performance of spatial relationship operations on that model is faster than performance of the same types of operations on geometric models. Moreover, topological models are likely more suitable for integrated 3D modeling
approaches, and may not be suitable for modeling different geological entities as different data
layers, similar to the 2D GIS layers.

Among other main DBMS vendors, Oracle provides a native 3D data model and several 3D data types. In general, a data type is defined as a class object with functions and properties. It may also allow spatial operations to be performed on them with SQL queries. With its well-defined
properties, and compatibility with the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC)'s simple feature

Computational-geometry

operations

---j

Computational-geometry

i



operations

Topological operations

Topological operations

specification, Oracle llg's new data type can provide a solid platform for the geological 3D
modelling process.

Metric operations

M



Metric operations

Geometric Model

Topological Model

2.3 Geometric vs. Topological Data Models
To some degree, spatial operations and functions can be performed on both geometric and topological 3D data models. A comparison between these two types of data models is possible,
based on the allowable 3D spatial operations. Chena at al. (2008) classifies the computationalgeometry and metric operations that are only possible within the geometrical 3D model because

Figure 2.3 Comparison between geometrical and topological models (source: [Chena at al.,
2008])

of the need the mathematical computations for these types of functions. It is nearly impossible to implement these 3D computational-geometry and metric operations on any known 3D

16

17

compositions, indicators of stratigraphic faces and age like fossils, fabric, and structural

Chapter 3. Geological 3D Modeling Requirements
The geological modeling process uses mathematical methods to represent and integrate topology, geometry, and physical properties of geological objects [Pouliot et al., 2003]. Modeling
subsurface geology is a most complex and time consuming process compared to any other domain-specific 3D modeling process. This difficulty is due to the inherited difficulties of collecting subsurface observations, and the intensive manual interaction with the observation data required to create 3D approximations of geological objects. Apel (2006) states that the abstracted characteristics of geological models are the derived interpolation, and the

descriptions.

Measurements, drawings, images and information related sampling locations are

also commonly collected data components of geology. Furthermore, another important source of geological data is age data and other quantitative data obtained by laboratory examination of the collected samples such as geochemical, petrochemical, and petrophysical data [Marcus, 2004].

The data for representing geology comes from different sources including boreholes, crosssections, classic geology maps, and surface characterization data such as Digital Elevation
Models (DEM). Wu et al. (2005) characterises geological data into three distinct, generic groups

interpretation, of the observed data. In process, prior knowledge and the geophysics model can
be considered as additional constraints.

based on their significance in the modelling process. Table 3.1 presents these main sources of the
geological data.

Data collection methods such as LIDAR can only be used for capturing and constructing a 3D object located on the surface of the Earth. These methods allow a large volume of 3D object capture and model construction for some 3D modeling domains, such as buildings and city objects. Object boundaries of synthetic objects are usually well defined and can be captured by automatic and semi-automatic processing of the collected raw data. On the other hand,

Direct Data: This is the original sampling data obtained by direct observations and surveys. This group of data is highly accurate and can directly be used in the modelling
process. Sampling data are usually organized and managed within a DBMS.

Indirect Data: This group of data is also obtained from direct observations and has different precision with different resolution of graphs. It can be used as constraints in interpretation of direct data. This group of data is mostly collected from observations on the Earth's surface, such as boundaries, faults, folds and DEM derived from geological maps, topographic maps and structural geology maps, 2D and 3D seismic-reflection data. Exploring data can be categorized into this group. This type of data, usually collected by digitising hardcopy maps, is commonly stored in file formats.

subsurface data collection is mostly based on well logs that are very expensive and time consuming to collect and to process in order to create the 3D approximations of geological
objects.

3.1 Sources of Geological Data
In geology, observed data are usually defined as a finite set of points in 3D space. These observations are usually stored in field books and include qualitative descriptions of petrographic

18

19

Assistant Data: Assistant data is used in the process of 3D modelling and includes primitives that represent geological structure in models, texture maps, satellite or aerial

Table 3.1 Sources of geological data (source: [Wu et al. 2005])

Origin/ Collection imagery, and scanned maps.
Category

Data method

Common Storage

Qualitative descriptions of the
petro-graphic compositions; indicators of stratigraphic facets Direct Data and age like fossils; fabric and
structural descriptions; measurements; drawings; images; sampling locations Age data, quantitative

Original sampling
data obtained by

Usually organized and
managed within a DBMS.

direct observations and surveys

By direct observations and
laboratory

These types of data usually need to be

geochemical and petrochemical
and petrophysical data, Indirect/derived Data boundaries, faults, folds and DEM derived from geological

digitized from the
hardcopy maps and commonly stored in file formats.

examination of the collected data

maps, topographic and structural
geology maps, 2D/3D seismicreflection data, exploring data Primitives that will represent Not specific

Vector or image file formats

geological structure in the Assistant Data
model, texture maps, satellite or aerial imagery, scanned maps.

20

21

3.2 Characteristics of Geological Data and 3D Models
Geological data is collected for modeling geological characteristics of the subsurface. Its main

modeling process is time consuming and requires intensive human interaction. Construction of geological 3D models is complex because of the requirement to interpret low-density observation data and natural boundaries of geological objects, which are subjective to the interpreter. The

characteristics can be summarized as follows:

resulting model is an approximation, only as good as the data and the interpretation skill used in
Geological data accumulates over a long period of time where technology and methodologies for collecting the data change. Because of change in collection methods
and technology, not all existing data may be suitable for modeling. Depending on the

its creation [Perrin at al, 2005; Pouliot et al., 2003].

Pouliot et al. (2003) divides the methodology of constructing 3D geological models into three
generic phases:

level of interest, only some recent and older available data is adequately accessible or
accurate to be included in the geological modelling process Kaufmann and Martin, 2008]. [Wu et al., 2005;

Data gathering, setup and cleaning of objects in a 2D universe: This phase involves
Data collection methods such as drilling and geophysics surveys are costly compared to technologies such as LIDAR and photogrammetry which allow the collection of large amounts of surface data for the characterization of surface of the Earth. 3D objects located on the

gathering the available data and converting it into usable forms. This phase includes format conversion, coordination of system transformation, and identification of the scale,
quality, and precision of each distinct dataset. This step is not complicated and can be performed by certain software tools. However, the process may take a long time to

-

Processing geological data for 3D modeling requires extensive human interaction to interpret and extend it in order to construct abstractions of subsurface objects in 3D space. Because interpretation is extensively used in 3D modelling of the subsurface, the original input data needs to be available along with the resulting model for future complete and may involve manipulation of two-dimensional spatial object primitives

(0D, ID, 2D) for representing geological features such as drills, faults, rock type contacts, elevation points, and contour lines.

consideration and re-processing the model if new data becomes available. Projection of planar objects in the 3D universe: This phase involves

-

Geological models generated from data available at the time of building represent the best approximation of the geology given the data available at that time. The dynamic character of geological models needs to be considered in the system design process.

interpolation/extrapolation of the gathered and cleaned data in order to construct the vertical and parallel sections that will be later be used to form the 3D volumetric objects in the third phase of the modelling process. The performing geologist's knowledge of structural geometry, and geological history of the study area, is very important in this phase. This phase is highly time consuming, complex, and requires manual interaction with a proper geomodeling tool.

3.3 3D Geological Modeling Workflow
Because of the difficulties inherent in complex subsurface geometries, poor data density,

irregular data distribution, and heterogeneous sources of geological data, the 3D geological

22

23

Construction of continuous volumetric objects: In this final phase of the 3D geological
modeling process, approximations of the geological 3D objects (volumetric) are formed
by connecting vertical and parallel sections that were built in the previous phase. These

Table 3.2 Phases of geological modeling
T RF

^Phases of
Geological Modeling

1
Action

c

Performed
H

Tools

Dependenciesjj^^^^^H

approximations, done with the aid of a modeling tool, are highly dependent on decisions
and interpretations of the processing geologist.

£ u 2 S

Phase 1:
Data setup

format conversion; coordinate transformation; scale, quality
and precision identification
computer

Table 3.2 summarises the three generic phases of the 3D geological modeling process.

and cleaning of objects

Y

M

L

software
packages

none

Phase 2:
prior knowledge and Projection of planar objects in the 3D universe vertical section construction; parallel crosssections Y
H

done
conceptualization of the

manually;
study area; available H
computer

information; spatial
software

orientation and geometry

construction

packages

of geological objects;

Phase 3: Construction of continuous volumetric

connect each
cross-section;

done prior of the study area;
manually;

compatibility of the build continuous 3D geological units Y
M

H

computer

sections; conformity with

software
the structural models packages

objects

Y: Yes; N: No; L: Low; M: Medium; H: High
24

25

PROWWY

3.4 System and Data Modeling Requirements

Chapter 4. Oracle 3D Data Management and FME Server
In general, any 3D GIS system should provide functions such as the construction of a 3D data

For the last couple of the years Oracle has provided extensive data management, retrieval, and
model from disparate input data, permit maintenance of existing models, facilitate effective 3D analysis solutions in the 2D GIS domain. visualization, surface illumination, and texture mapping, and provide spatial analysis, for With its llg release, Oracle moved into the 3D

domain by implementing 3D data types, and providing some basic operators and functions at the
example to enable the calculation of volume, surface area, center of mass, optimal path, and database level. This development will change 3D GIS system considerations, and will contribute spatial and non-spatial search capacity [Abdul-Rahman and Pilouk, 2008].

towards the realization of a fully functional 3D GIS. If the functions provided are further
The following functionalities are identified as the basic requirements for geological models
[Marcus, 2004; Apel, 2006; Kothuri et al., 2007; Kaufmann and Martin, 2008].

developed, the Oracle Database will be able to handle the entire geological modeling process.

Although it is impossible to create a system capable of providing all identified functionalities,
Integration of various sources of 2D-3D spatial and descriptive data. Representation of topological relationships, geometry and material properties of geological structures. Capacity to build sophisticated structural models with distinct heterogeneous input
data.

nonetheless a functional 3D GIS system specialized in geology can be achieved through integration of DBMS and geomodeling tools which allow the user to interact with the underlying DBMS, create 3D geological objects, as well as perform analysis on the resulting 3D geological
models.

As a second enabling technology, the FME Server centralizes spatial data transformation and
Capacity to update 3D geological models by re-interpolation, when new input data is distribution tasks. The FME Server facilitates the translation, transformation, and integration
introduced.

capabilities of spatial data flows [FME, 2008]. The following section will discuss Oracle's data
Visualization of 3D models.

management capacity, the FME Server architecture, as well as key capabilities supported by this
Capacity to model functionalities including advanced geostatistic methods. Extensive investigations of the model by the means of topological and metric queries. technology.

-

Integration of concepts such as fault intersection rules which can support the modeling
process.

4.1 Oracle llg and 3D Data Management

-

Interoperability.

Oracle, as a major DBMS vendor, provides 2D spatial data management capacity by supporting

spatial data types of GIS and CAD applications. With the new 3D spatial data types offered by

26

27

Oracle llg, a fully functional 3D data modeling system is ever more feasible. Table 4.1
summarises the spatial data geometries available in Oracle's SDO_GEOMETRY data type.

Table 4.1 Oracle SDO_GEOMETRY 3D Geometries (source: [Kothuri et al., 2007]) Spatial Geometry Type
UNKNOWN_GEOMETRY

Explanations

Oracle Spatial ignores this geometry.

A 3D model can be implemented as an object-relational model in a DBMS. This implementation
POINT

Geometry contains one point.
Geometry contains one line string that can contain straight or

can be realized by extending the existing data types of the underlying DBMS [Zlatanova, 2000; Zlatanova et al., 2004; Stoter and Zlatanova, 2003; Zlatanova, 2005; Pu and Zlatanova, 2006;
Zlatanova and Stoter, 2006]. A native 3D data type, supported by a mainstream database, can
LINE or CURVE

circular arc segments, or both. Geometry contains one polygon with or without holes, Foot 1 or
provide many benefits to implementing 3D GIS systems and data modelling activities. As
POLYGON or SURFACE

one surface consisting of one or more polygons. In a threedimensional polygon, all points must be on the same plane.

summarized by Kothuri et al., (2007), this newly released capacity:Eliminates the need for dual architectures, because data can be stored in the same way in a unified data storage;

Geometry is a heterogeneous collection of elements. COLLECTION is
COLLECTION

-

Allows usage of SQL for accessing a relational database.

a superset that includes all other types.
MULTIPOINT

-

Defines a spatial data tape, which is equivalent to the spatial types in the OGC and
SQL Multimedia and Application Packages (SQL/MM standards).

Geometry has one or more points, (superset of POINT.)
Geometry has one or more line strings. (MULTILINE and

-

Standardizes access to spatial data by implementing well-known formats for spatial data specification, such as SQL/MM and Geography Markup Language (GML).

MULTILINE or
MULTICURVE

MULTICURVE are synonymous in this context, and each is a superset
of both LINE and CURVE.)

-

Provides scalability, integrity, security, recoverability.
Supports advanced user management features for handling spatial data.
MULTIPOLYGON or
MULTISURFACE

Geometry can have multiple, disjoint polygons (more than one exterior boundary) or surfaces (MULTIPOLYGON is a superset of POLYGON, and MULTISURFACE is a superset of SURFACE).
Geometry consists of multiple surfaces and is completely enclosed
SOLID

in a three-dimensional space. It can be a cuboid or a. frustum.

Geometry can have multiple, disjoint solids (more than one exterior
MULTISOLID

boundary). (MULTISOLID is a superset of SOLID.)

28

29

4.1.1 3D Data Retrieval, Query and Analysis
In the first release of Oracle 1 lg, certain relationship functions such as Distance, Closest Point
and AnyInteract were supported for 3D data types. The distance function is used for computing the distance between two three-dimensional geometries. The ClosestPoints function returns the closest pair of points on two geometries that were passed into the function. Anylnteract is the only relationship function that is supported in the current release of Oracle; it determines whether two three-dimensional geometries intersect [Kothuri et al., 2007].

Table 4.2 3D Geometry processing functions (source: [Kothuri et al., 2007])

Method
Anylnteract

Determines whether two three-dimensional geometries interact in any way Returns a three-dimensional geometry extruded from a two dimensional

Extrusion polygon Computes the closest points of approach between two three-dimensional

ClosestPoints geometries
Returns the three-dimensional bounding box of a three dimensional

The first release of the Oracle 1 lg also has some geometric analysis functions - length, area and volume. The length function computes the length of a three-dimensional shape; the area function computes the area of a surface or the sides of a solid, and the volume function computes the
volume of a three-dimensional solid [Kothuri et al., 2007].

getMBH
geometry

Validate
Area Length

Verifies the validity of a three-dimensional geometry Computes the area of a surface or of the sides of a solid
Computes the length of a three-dimensional shape

Even though the functions provided by Oracle 11 g are fewer that those needed for implementing an ideal geological 3D system, they can nonetheless be used as a basis for development of
advanced functions.

Volume Distance

Computes the volume of a three-dimensional solid
Computes the distance between two three-dimensional geometries

The J3D_Geometry class, a subclass of JGeometry,

allows manipulation through several

4.2 FME Server: Key Capabilities and Services 4.2.1 Key Capabilities
FME Sever allows data to be remodelled on-the-fly and eliminates the need for human interaction. After setup, the data is first dynamically transformed based on user requests, and then presented to users via a web interface. This on-the-fly data transformation capacity of the

methods of 3D objects such as surfaces and solids. Table 4.2 summarises 3D processing
functions provided by Oracle 1 lg [Kothuri et al., 2007].

FME Server supports a wide range of domain-specific data models, such as GIS, CAD, Building

Information Models (BIM) and 3D. It allows on-the-fly access to custom views of the underlying
31

30

2D, as well as 3D, data. FME Server services can be accessed either through an online spatial

-- Share common spatial Extract, Transform and Load (ETL) tasks.

data downloading service, or through a web streaming service.

With downloading services,

Figure 4.1 shows the operational concept of the FME Server.

clients use a web browser to download the requested spatial data in the format and projection of their choice. Clients can use this option as an offline data resource of up-to-date data to which
Source Datasets

the FME server is connecting. More importantly, FME Server can dynamically transform spatial
data into web-friendly formats such as Keyhole Markup Language (KML), GeoRSS, and GeoJSON, VRML. This capability of FME Server allows streaming 3D datasets directly into
Destitution Datasets

web applications. ESRI ArcGIS® Server, GoogleTM Earth, GoogleTM Maps, Microsoft® Virtual EarthTM, OpenLayers, JavaX3D Clients, and VRML viewers are some of the client applications
that can use data streamed by FME Server.

Any User of Dab

If
USER

FME SERVED CLIENT

Virtual Earth Google Earth Universal Viewer Applications
etc.

GIS. IT, Web, or Database Specialist

ADMINISTRATOR



FME Server fully supports OGC data standards with the option for data owner to keep propriety data models and while automatically transforming the data into a different 3D data format. FME Server provides Java and C++ Application Programming Interface (API)'s which allow

Figure 4.1 Operational concept (source: [Safe Software, 2008a])

4.2.2 FME Server Architecture
FME Server architecture harmonizes multiple components such as Transformation Manager,

components to be integrated into any current web environment, including 3rd party web mapping

applications, such as: ESRI ArcGIS® Server, ESRI ArcIMS®, Intergraph GeoMedia® WebMap, FME Engines, Repository Manager, FME Server Services, FME Server Console, and FME Maplnfo MapXtreme®, and Autodesk MapGuide®. Server Services. Each component performs a dedicated task to accomplish spatial data

The following outlines the key capabilities and functions of the FME Server [FME, 2008];

transformation and distribution tasks. Depending upon the task, object-oriented architecture

allows maximum scalability of an application to deliver the intended service.
-- Enable on-the-fly data transformation via the web;

Figure 4.2

illustrates FME Server architecture and the role of each component. These will be further
discussed below.

--

Create spatial data download services;

--

Deliver spatial data as a web streaming service;

32

33

workspace specified by the client. Increasing the number of FME Engines increases the spatial
ETL processing resources available to satisfy incoming client requests. FME Engines perform

every spatial ETL request that is sent to the FME Server.

Repository Manager
The Repository Manager maintains and stores all information necessary to operate the FME

Server.

This information, stored for each repository,

includes details of all registered

workspaces, services, and other system resources needed by the other components. The
Repository Manager enables users and client applications to have access to shared workspaces defined and maintained under them.

FME Server Console
Figure 4.2 Role of FME Server components (source: [Safe Software, 2008c]) The FME Server Console is a common-line interface that provides access to FME Server operations, for example sending transformation requests to the FME Server, and viewing

Transformation Manager

available services and workspaces registered with the FME Server. It can be used effectively for
The Transformation Manager acts as a central mechanism that distributes the workload assigned to the FME Server at a given time. Every web, or non-web, client request eventually passes through the Transformation Manager. An incoming request goes to the first available FME Engine capable of performing the requested task. After the task completed, the Transformation Manager ensures that the FME Server client receives a response from the FME Engine. managing workspaces within the FME Server repository, and for running workspaces on the
FME Server.

FME Server Services
FME Server Services are components that add extra capabilities to workspace translation by allowing a workspace translation request and response to be generated in a specialized way. In

FME Engines
FME Server architecture, the services provided by the FME Server carry out common tasks. Based on system requirements and configuration, an FME Server deployment contains one or

more FME Engines. FME Engines perform the requested transformation task by running the

34

35

For example, a Web Map Service (WMS) Uniform Resource Locator (URL) Query is a specialized request that can be generated by the client and sent to an FME Server Service to be processed. In response, an image based on the request will be generated and sent via HTTP to

4.2.3 FME Server Services Data Downloading
A data downloading service request can be either a URL, or a Form request with no restrictions.
For example: http://<HostName>/fmedatadownload/<Repository>/<workspace>.fmw?<pa-

the client by the service. In the FME Server, the context of the specialized request (WMS URL query) is converted to a workspace translation request; the result of the translation is transformed into a specialized response (streamed image) that is sent to the requesting client. With the FME
Server, the client is generally a web browser which passes requests to the FME Server (the FME

rameters> is a valid FME Data Download request that can be generated on any client

application. When this request is passed to the FME server, a web page with a link to a zip file
containing the results of the workspace translation of the request will be generated. The FME Data Download Service works with any workspace that writes feature types without published parameters (options to run the workspace). However, in certain cases publishing some

Server API) using a service; however, in certain cases the FME server client is a desktop application or a thick web client. Figure 4.3 illustrates the relationship of the Web Browser, FME
Service and FME Server.

parameters from the workspace in order to control the translation from the URL or form request is a useful option. For example, commonly published-parameters when using this service are feature types to read, output coordinate system, and format.

Several services provided by the FME Server can be used for general tasks. For specific tasks, the extendible service capability of FME allows the addition of new customized services to
perform specific tasks.

Data Streaming
A Data Streaming service request can be a URL or form request with no restriction. For example
http://<HostName>/jmedatastreaming/<Repository>/<workspace>.fmw?<pa-rameters> is a

valid request which a client can send to the FME server.
Web FME

The FME Server will process the

FME Server

Browser

1

Service

request and generate a dataset that is based on the parameters passed with the request. After the
translation is complete, the resulting dataset (if it is one file only) is streamed with appropriate content-type (mime-type) over HTTP back to the client (e.g., GeoLink, web browsers, Google Earth) file. The FME Data Streaming service can generate streams in several formats including

Figure 4.3 FME Server, Service and Web Browser relationships (source: [Safe Software, 2008a])

Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), Portable Network Graphics (PNG), KML, VRML among
others.

36

37

KML Network Link
KML Network Request is also a URL or form request without restrictions. The following
represents a valid KML Network Link Request: http://<Host>/fmekmllink/<Repository>/

Chapter 5. Framework Design and Prototype Implementation
5.1 Framework Design
An integrated 3D system framework was designed to allow managing a 3D geological data modeling workflow, handling a large volume 3D geological data, and streaming the underlying data to the GeoLink collaborative GIS prototype over the Internet. Because of data format and functional constrains of the GeoLink prototype not all identified geological modeling system requirements were considered in the framework design. The details of the framework design are
explained in the following sections.

<workspace>.fmw?<parame-ters>. Based on the request and the parameters a response is
generated and returned to the client; the response is in a compressed version of the KML (KMZ) file and contains a KML Network Link with a URL pointing to the Data Streaming service, as well references to the requested work-space. The FME Server performs no transition for the
KMZ files, but rather streams the generated context on-the-fly.

Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) WebFeature Service (WFS) The FME Server WFS service accepts standard WFS URL request defined on OGC standards.
As a Base URL Example: http://<Host>/fmeogc/<Repository>/<workspaceName>.fmw is a valid FME Server WFS service request, while http://<Host>/fmeogc/<Repository>/

5.1.1 Existing 3D Data Systems and Design Approaches
All 3D GIS functionalities are performed within a GIS System in order to capture, model, store, retrieve, share, manipulate, analyze and present 3D models. Spatial functionalities are performed on spatial objects and can be implemented either in a DBMS or in front-end application. Implementation of these spatial operators and functions on a front-end application is common for
2D GIS systems, some of which arehighly-specialized GIS systems which can perform

<workspaceName>.fmw?SER-VICE=WFS&REQUEST =GetCapabilities&VERSION= 1.1.0 is a valid GetCapabilities URL example for this type of request. The results of a valid WFS request is a WFS formatted GML file that contains the requested spatial dataset returned as a response
stream.

complicated spatial operations [Zlatanova and Stoter, 2006].

Traditionally, many 3D systems utilize file-based options to store and manage 3D models. In this

OGC WMS (Web Map Service)
The FME Server WFS service accepts standard Web Map Service (WMS) URL requests defined

structure all data is retrieved and constructed to reflect the logical model components at run time. This file-based storage option does not allow access to a specific section of the stored model without retrieving the entire model. Due to the immense size of geological raw data and

on the OGC standard. An example of a valid Base URL can be similar to: http://<HostName> /fmeogc/<Repository>/<workspaceName>.fmw while a valid GetCapabilities URL Example can behttp://<Host>/fmeogc/<Repository>/<workspaceName>.fmw?SER-VICE=WMS&REQUEST
=GetCapabilities&VERSION=l. 1.1 38

constructed models, a better data storage option is needed for an operable 3D geological
modeling system.

39

Some major DBMS such as Oracle, SQL, DB2, and PostgreSQL offer spatial data types to

for storing 3D models in this type of implementation. With the significant increase in data for 3D
modelling, some CAD and geomodeling tools have started to take advantage of DBMS large

support spatial objects in 2D space. With the spatial data type offered by major DBMS vendors
certain spatial operations, traditionally performed in a costly manner by the front-endapplication, can be implemented more cost effectively. The possibility of performing

volume data management capacity in which either a topological or a geometric model can be mapped into a relational database to create the 3D model. The data is retrieved from the database tables and the model is constructed at the front-end application runtime. If the selected model is topological, certain topological relationship operations can be performed as a standard SQL
query at the database level. The level of SQL interaction usually depends on the topological

computationally demanding GIS operations at the database level opens up the possibility of
developing Web-enabled 3D systems for 3D GIS domains, including geological and subsurface
modeling.

model and the accuracy of relationships mapped within the DBMS. Although DBMS is used to Because of the large volume of 3D data, effective data management capacity is necessary for well-designed 3D solutions. DBMS systems are ideal for storing the resulting 3D model as well as the raw data used to create it. Geomodeling tools allow end users to construct, visualize, interact and analyze the constructed models as well as the input data. In the domain of geology, a successful integration of geomodeling tools and DBMS will produce a 3D system capable of
capturing, modeling, storing, retrieving, sharing, manipulating, analyzing and presenting 3D
geological models.

store the model in this type of system, the underlying DBMS is unaware of spatial characteristics of the modeled data; spatial functions and operations need to be implemented in front-end
applications.

DBMS Centric 3D Systems
Some major DBMS vendors have implemented spatial data types and tools that allow certain

GIS tasks, using simple SQL query operations. Vendors include Oracle Spatial, IBM DB2
Spatial Extender, Informix, Spatial Datablade, PostGIS (PostgreSQL) and MySQL.

Because the integration is the key for a successful realization of 3D systems, it is important to correctly identify which group of the functionalities can ideally be implemented in frond-endapplication and which in DBMS. A balanced approach for implementing the 3D GIS functions is
critical

Implementing common GIS functions at DBMS, ensures consistency of the models and performance optimization of the system. Avoiding unnecessary transport and conversion of data
between DBMS and GIS application provides for better data maintenance. For instance,

operations that organize data according to topological rules set by the model may be better

Front-end Application Centric 3D Systems

implemented in DBMS.

Select, navigate through spatial objects, and create an object based on

This approach includes most GIS functions and operators at the front-end application level and is used by most traditional CAD and geomodeling tools; file-based data storage is commonly used

an existing one are some of the operations that can be implemented in a database [Zlatanova and Stoter, 2006]. Furthermore, some selection operators, namely metric, proximity, and relationship

40

41

operators might also be possible to implement in DBMS; however, some domain-specific
functions must still be implemented in the front-end-application.

spline curve, or Non-uniform rational B-spline (NURBS) curve/surface; however, because these
surfaces are not supported by rendering engines, they cannot be considered in 3D systems.

5.1.2 Problem Areas of 3D System Development

Other Visualization Related Issues
3D visualization differs from 2D map visualizations in term of user interaction and delivery of

In general, a 3D GIS system is expected to provide all basic GIS functions.

Specifically, a 3D
information. In traditional 2D GIS applications, interaction means the request and response for

system that can be used for complex geological modeling may need to provide additional
each scene. In 3D GIS interaction, the user can move and investigate the model by performing functions to support specific requirements of the geological domain.
operations such as zooming, panning, walk-through, and fly-over; as well, the user can examine

Visualization refers to the process of extracting data from a model and representing the extracted object on screen. In the 3D GIS, context visualization denotes the 3D graphic on screen,

the objects without changing the original parameters of the scene. Accessing elements of a scene
and changing the scene entirely, or in part, by performing operations such as edit, add, delete, scale, rotate and translate [Zlatanova, 2000] are among the user interactions desirable in both 2D and 3D GIS systems. 2D GIS systems have already achieved all desirable user interaction

detection of user interaction, and re-computation of the model's parameters to produce a new

screen graph [Zlatanova, 2000]. Visualization of 3D data is in high demand by any GIS system

because it is the only way an end user can see, and interact with, the 3D model, regardless of the
underlying complexity of the system architecture. Traditional CAD systems employ capabilities

operations, but 3D GIS systems still face the challenge of accessing 3D elements from the scene.

for visualization of complex 3D models that are higher then traditional GIS systems, but neither provides all the desired 3D system functions of the geological domain.

5.1.3 Options for Storing and Managing Geological Data and Models

To create a 3D geological model using the boundary representation technique, surface space

must be delimited into distinct homogeneous regions based on either qualitative or quantitative

Rendering Engines, Constraints and Interoperability
Rendering engines require geometric objects to be organized in a manner that allows the interpreter to understand the structure. At the system architecture level, complex data models and specialized viewers can be implemented when there are no interoperability concerns. Another

parameters

obtained

with

direct

observations,

or

on

information

derived

by

laboratory

examination. Kothuri et al. (2007) specify commonly used geological objects in a 3D model as geological units (lithological or chronostratigraphic), structural elements (faults and fractures), hydrocarbon reservoirs and ore deposits. Geometric objects such as point sets, lines, curves, surfaces, and solids can be used to represent geological objects and structures.

rendering engine constraint relates to the type of surfaces supported. For example, most man made objects can be modeled more precisely with free-form shapes such as Bezier curve, B-

42

43

Either these constructed geological objects can be stored as an integrated model or as disperse
layers. In an integrated model, all geological objects must be maintained within a single model

will contain reference to the faces that form volume. In principle, each primitive consists of lower level primitives and primitive tables that store links to lower level primitives.

where maintenance may be difficult. In the disperse layers option, geological objects are
This option strictly uses a selected topological model and all metric operations needed to be maintained in separate layers, similar to data layers in 2D GIS, where each distinct volume group
implemented in the front-end-applications. constitutes a distinct parameter, and the model permits overlapping volumes among separate (RDBMS) implementation of a 3D model can integrate various sources of 2D and 3D spatial
layers.

The Relational

Database Management

System

data, as well as descriptive data. However, data interpretation must be performed outside the

In both integrated or disperse layers options, the volume of data to be managed makes DBMS the
best option. Geological 3D model requirements suggest that original sampling data obtained by direct observations and surveys, laboratory examination results, and the resulting 3D model must be stored in a system that can support and manage all data types. Although some GIS applications still use file based solutions for managing 2D/3D modeling data for small scale

DBMS, and the resulting 3D geological model must be converted and mapped into the primitive

tables of the topological model. This implementation allows representation of topological
relationships and material properties of geological objects, but the geometry required for visualisation must be derived from topological relationships.

Because the underlying database is unaware of the distinct characteristics of 3D model

operations, DBMS is more appropriate for a geological 3D system. The next section discusses components, it does not provide capacity to update or analyze a 3D geological model. three options for managing 3D geological models in a DBMS based solution.

Option 2: Object-Relational Model in a DBMS
Option 1: Relational Database Management Systems
Alternatively, a geological model can be implemented as an object-relational model in a DBMS. A 3D topological data structure can be directly mapped into a relational database to create a 3D
This can be accomplished by extending existing data types of an underlying DBMS. User-

geological model. This implementation translates the conceptual model's topological primitives defined object type data will be based on a variable array or nested table principle, where into separate relational database tables [Zlatanova and Stoter, 2006]. For example, a conceptual references to lower dimension primitives are stored as arrays. Examples of this alternative

model consisting of three topological primitives (node, face, body) will be converted into three
implementation are discussed in the literature [Zlatanova, 2000; Zlatanova et al., 2004; Store and

tables where each table presents one topological primitive. The node table will contain an
Zlatanova, 2003; Groger et al., 2004; Zlatanova, 2005; Pu and Zlatanova, 2006].

identifier and three columns for node coordinates. The face table will contain a unique identifier

for the face and node IDs. These tables can optionally denote face orientation. The third table

44

45

The object-relational model also requires that geological observations be processed with separate
modeling applications for 3D geological model construction. The resulting model can then be

by Oracle) to operate on selected sets of PC subset data. Generated surfaces can also be stored in

Oracle as TIN data type as well as large TIN datasets. The existing procedure to create TIN
objects uses Delany Triangulation from selected point sets [Oracle and Murray, 2007]. A

organized according to the user-defined data type in the RDBMS. Integration of various sources of 2D and 3D spatial data, as well as the descriptive data requirement of geological modelling
can be satisfied with object-relational models.

geologist can then process these TIN surfaces with the help of geomodeling software in order to
construct a 3D geological object as either 3D surfaces or volumes. A 3D geological object can be
stored as Oracle 3D data type in the same DBMS.

Option 3: Object-Oriented DBMS
The third alternative reported in the literature is object-oriented DBMS (OODBMS). Several

Oracle and Murray (2007) outline the typical steps to create a 3D model. The following modifies
these steps to suit the domain of geology:

examples of implementations for modeling complex 3D object exist. This alternative is suitable
for certain applications that require very specific modeling and computational capabilities [Shi et al., 2003].

1.

Direct observation, or information derived by laboratory examination, is organized in a

structure, and a point cloud representation of the distinct geological objects is created. This point cloud representation is a set of three-dimensional point values.

Although OODBMS implementations are specialized, a well-designed model can meet all user
requirements; however, in the domain of geology, there has been no major accomplishment using OODBMS for modeling 3D space.

2.

Typically, Delaunay triangulation is used to create TIN surfaces for data points sharing

common attributes representing the vertical and parallel surfaces, which are the faces of
3D geological objects. Oracle provides a utility that can create TIN surfaces from a selected set of Point Cloud data by using Delaunay Triangulation. (Delaunay

5.1.4 Oracle 3D for Subsurface and Geological Modeling
Geology usually defines observed data as a finite set of points in 3D space. An approximation of

a geological object is generated by interpreting and extending this point dataset. This process requires extensive human interaction and geological knowledge. One geological data-modeling

triangulation is the method provided by Oracle as a utility package.)

3.

Triangulated surfaces are further refined in order to create a smooth 3D geological object.

requirement is that observation data must be available for further consideration, or reinterpolation of the model.

Figure 5.La shows the typical workflow of 3D modeling in Oracle. Figure 5.1.b shows the typical workflow of 3D geological modeling.

Oracle's PointClouds (PC) data type, suitable for storing a large amount of geological 3D data

points, allows the Triangulated Irregular Network (TIN) surface generation function (provided
46 47

Point Cloud (PC)
Direct observations or information derived by
laboratory examination

TIN data type
Surface Computation Using Delaunay

Triangulation
1.
i

Direct observations and information
derived by laboratory examination can

T

\

y

7

be organized in appropriate tables 2. Surfaces can be created for a selected set of point data (vertical and parallel surfaces)

Generalize Surfaces
· Mesh TIN

;

surfaces
i i i i <"
\ s

. . . . 7

3.

Triangulated surfaces can be generalized
and mashed

...3D data type
Supported process (in Oracle 1 lg)

.
w

3D Object

\

4.

Generalized and mashed surfaces can be

Conceptual (needs to be developed)

^(

Model

.-·'
Data source: MIRARCO-Mining Innovation's Web site Software: ParaViewGeo

Figure 5. La Typical 3D modeling workflow in Oracle (modified after [Kothuri et al., 2007])

Process Direction

Figure 5.1.b Typical 3D modeling workflow

5.1.5 FME Server for Streaming 3D Geological Models
The capacity to serve data in real time to client applications makes the FME Server a valuable piece of technology, which can play an important role for enabling stakeholder sharing of 3D geological models. This is true even though no agreed-upon common data model exists for

ultimate interoperability of 3D data [FME, 2008]. FME Server technology can enable streaming 3D geological models (stored on an Oracle Database) to Web client applications. As well, onthe-fly format translation capacity of the FME Server is a desirable enabler for 3D geological model sharing in a collaborative GIS environment. Figure 5.2 shows how various geological data

sources feed into the FME Server to provide geological data to Web client applications.

48

49

database selected to implement modelling and managing 3D geological models. The FME Server component of this integrated design can stream 3D geological models as one of several
Geological Data
Stored in Oracle Spatial llg

commonly supported 3D data formats. However, because of the current limitation of the
GeoLink prototype, VRML has been selected as the primary streaming format. The FME server can convert among data formats on-the-fly, a function that is very important for a 3D system

File-Based 3D Geological Models

which aims to encourage collaborative GIS applications; it has therefore been incorporated into
the framework design.

Web
2D & 3D CAD

The framework design also enables format translation of external 3D geological data, which can

files

Client

not be used directly by the GeoLink prototype. Because several data formats are commonly used in 3D geological modeling applications, interoperability is one of the challenges of collaborative GIS applications. In a collaboration session, users may want to share data, but if they do not have a tool to convert their data into VRML format, the data cannot be used in the GeoLink collaboration session. The FME Server allows running created services with external data

Applications
Digital Terrain Models &
Imagery

Other
Geological

sources. The FME server uploads data, runs the conversion process, and streams back the resulting data which can then be used by the GeoLink Client. The FME Server supports this process, but a mechanism to redirect external data to the FME Service and use the resulting

Data Sources

Figure 5.2 Relationship of geological data, FME Server Services and Web client applications

stream may be needed to enable the GeoLink prototype. Figure 5.3 illustrates the framework of
geological data modeling and management.

5.1.6 Framework for Geological Data Modeling and Management
A framework, based on geological 3D data modeling requirements and 3D data access and

management requirements of the GeoLink prototype, was designed. It demonstrates the possibility of streaming large-scale 3D geological data, which is organized and managed in a DBMS. The Oracle llg database is the only DBMS providing 3D data types, and it is the
50 51

on the Oracle database) to the GeoLink collaboration client.
Geomodeling Tools (Create 3D objects; Geological
perform complex analysis)

FME Workbench was used to

manipulate the test data, populate the Oracle database, as well as to create and author FME
Server workspaces used for streaming the 3D data. Figure 5.4 shows the implemented prototype
system configuration and client interaction.

Data Stored in Oracle llg

CAD Applications
(Create 3D object)
r-'

GIS Applications

A test dataset was used to populate the Oracle 3D database layers that were served by the FME

Server to 3D web clients, such as free VRML Viewers (Commercial), Xj3D viewer (Open
FME Services

source) and the GeoLink prototype. After implementation of the prototype components, several client applications were used to test performance of the implementation. The following sections
discuss the details of the prototype implementation and testing.

- GeoLink Client (3) - VRML Clients
- Xj3D Browser

GeoLink Client (1)

Web Client Applications
(GeoLink Prototype, VRML Viewers, and the others )

Xj3D Browser

Geological data
(non-VRML)

- VRML Client
- Xj3D Browser

£ Oracle

VRML Clients

j

· Request

Respons

 Re-direct

<1

1

,-_ ::":::'> interaction

Possible future

Figure 5.3 Framework of geological data modeling and management
GeoLink Client (2)

5.2 Prototype Implementation

Xj3D Browser

VRML Clients

The prototype system includes an Oracle Server installed and configured on the SIMAL server in the Spatial Information Management and Applications Laboratory at Ryerson University. An

FME Server was installed on the same server to enable streaming 3D geological models (stored
Figure 5.4 Prototype System Configuration
52

53

5.2.1 Test Dataset, Data Conversion and Uploading Process
A dataset containing several geological structures, including four lenses, a body of ore or rock, or a deposit thick in the middle and thin at the edges, was obtained from the MIRARCO-Mining Innovation's Web site. The original dataset was in Visualization Toolkit (VTK) format and can
be viewed by using open source ParaViewGeo application, which is available at the same website. The company, Kitware, has made Paraview's complete source code downloadable, and MIRARCO has added to the Kitware's base code as a part of a Northern Ontario Heritage Fund project to promote the use of scientific visualization in the mining and exploration industry and

VTK, the original geological data layer format, is not supported by FME Workbench and no utility exists that can convert and load VTK format datasets into Oracle llg. In order to load VTK data into an Oracle database, the VTK files must first be converted into Geological Object Computer Aided Design (GOCAD) ASCII file format (.ts) using ParaViewGeo's GOCAD plugin. Then the GOCAD ASCII file can be converted to Environmental Systems Research
Institute (ESRI) 3D Shape files using GOCAD Software. (GOCAD is the project started in 1989
by Professor Jean-Laurent Mallet at Nancy Universite.)

FME Desktop supports ESRI 3D Shape files, as well as many other commonly used 3D formats. to create the ParaViewGeo application. Figure 5.5 shows test data visualized with the A copy of FME Desktop, provided by Safe Software, was used to translate the 3D Shape files MIRARCO's ParaViewGeo application [ParaViewGeo Wiki, 2008]. generated by the GOCAD into Oracle Spatial 3D data type in order to populate the Oracle tables. Figure 5.6 shows the flowchart of the data conversion process from the original VTK format to Oracle llg 3D. Figure 5.7 shows the screen of FME Workbench where the workspace transfers

} j CD i!S'< '' O stereo Mode: siereo off

}® "s
<m»i jj rww i

vewonje: loo ; jfojn*: <.«nt|; mtefJjJ

:

the 3D Shape files into Oracle 3D data type.

VTK format (Original)

ESRI3D

Shape file

i
i

ParaViewGeo
.

i
'

i (GOCAD plugin) |

GOCAD

Oracle llg

Figure 5.5 Test data visualized with MIRARCO's ParaViewGeo application

format

3D Data

Figure 5.6 Flowchart showing the data conversion process
54

55

itiHed - SHAPE

: 0HAC1EBI

FME Workbench

workspaces were published to the FME server using the publishing wizard available in FME
loots tjelp

fjle

Ed*

»ew Jrisert_Jource Data

Transformers

Qesttwtlon Data

§§«<
Navigator

Main Coordinate System: <not set>
Source Types "

Workbench.
I Pesliiation Types f"\

B 4fr Parameters
Source ESRI Shape File(s); D:\Horne DirectoriesiStudentsVloren\MassiveSurface^
Search Envelope Min >!: 0
Search Envelope MmY:0 FID_
Entity Handle U>.«r LyrFrsn Lyr Lock LyrOn LyrVPFrsn LyrHandle

F|D_
»"ENT]TY

J
j

Overall, the FME Workbench provides

all tools

necessary for creating and publishing

Search Envelope Max X: 0 Search Envelope Max V: 0 Search Envelope Coordkiate System: <not set> Treat Measures as Elevation: No Character Encoding: <not set> Dissolve Adjacent Holes: No Report Geometry Anomates: No

 HANDLE
 LAYERO

|

LYRFRZN

 LYRLOCK

'

workspaces to the FME Server. Figure 5.8 shows the Workbench with the workspace that exports the Oracle 3D data into VRML. Figure 5.9 shows the publishing screen of the FME

LYRON
LYRVPFRZN

!

BJ $ Advanced
ES £3^ Feature Types

LYRHANDLE

Color
Ent Color
Lyr Color

COLOR
ENTCOLOR

j

~ ordtORACLE8I]
Coordinate System; <not set>
Parameters

LYRCOLOR
BLKCOLOR
UNETYPE

|
;

Server.

: 

; ffl

# % £ ^ $ $ $

Destination Oracle Service: orcl (Published* BlHlMfanCMdiSirviCK? Username: spatial Password: ***** Enforce strict attribute conversion: No Writer Mode: INSERT Oracle Workspace: <notset> Advanced

elk Color
Ljnerype

EntUnetyp Lyr Ln Type
Blk briery p

entlinetyp lyrlntype

BLKLINETYP
 ELEVATION

i

- ORACLE8I -> VRML - FME Workbench

Elevation Thickness LineVW EntLneVft LyrlJneVW
Blkljn.V«

THICKNESS
UNEWI
ENTUNEWT

|

Fit*

£cft

yew

Insert

Source Data

Transformers

Qestk&aon Data

look

hje^

SHE Feature Types
Transformers
_ Bookmarks

Navigator
LJ B» orcl [ORACLE8I]

* X

Mail

B # Published Parameters
: # Source ESRI Shape File(s): D:\Home Directones\Students\nman\H»nlsreairf»aV»as_

I^LYRUNEWr_.
BLKLINEWT

* l

Xj
Souice Typ«i [~^ | OW* How n4

: i
:

# Coordinate System: <not set> # Source Oracle Service: ord (Published as 'Source Oracle Service:")
# Username: spatial
if}c Password: *****

DestinMian Types pj

^

# Destination Oracle Service: orcl [DestDataset_ORACLE8I] B 4> Workspace Settings © Workspace Title: <not set>

RelNime LTS=.I.

 REFNAME  EXTX

:

B 1^ Parameters

pi amain iran

!

?!P-

2J
Log

EaV

 EXTY

!

^ Grade Workspace: <not set>
El $c Advanced

ENTITY

.5*

ya

d

|

|i

R SUBSUR. .RML1)_|I

1

p

HANDLE
LAYERO

j>
|>

ffl I& Feature Types
B * subsurfacel [VRML]

LYRFRZN
LYRLOCK

p
t>

-
Opened napping File C:\D0CUME-l\noten\L0CALS~l\Teittp\fiie4C.tmp.fmw for output

M Coordinate System: <not set>

Siady

[Ml

'.

S§ Parameters
: $[ z Exaggeration factor: 1

LYRON
LYRVPFRZN
LYBHANDLE

P
t»
t>

# Drepby Attributes: No h<$ Attribute text size: 10 h ^ Face Grouping Attribute: <not set>

COLOR
ENTCOLOR

fc>
t"

Figure 5.7 FME workspace transfers of ESRI Shape files to Oracle 3D

;

!

fB # Advanced

LYRCOLOR
BLKCOLOR LINETYPE

£
t> C>

B ^D Feature Types

0 Bookmarks

V Transformers

ENTUNETYP
LVBLNTYPE
PI ^1 IK1FTVD DLIvLlfit iYH

t>
1>
Z^ lr*

B $ Published Parameters

5.2.2 Creating the Data Streaming Services
FME Workbench is the primary authoring tool to create workspaces and publish them to an FME Server. Its user-friendly graphic user interface allows access to the source data that will be streamed through the workspace. In our example, given the user name and password, FME

# Source Oracle Service: orcl [SourceDataset_ORAOE8I] 4 Destination VRML Dataset: E:\Tomcat 6.0\webapp5\DATA\subsurfacel.wri[DMtDat«et_ B & Workspace Settings

ELEVATION THICKNESS

p> 1>

; .

i ^ Log Fie: <not set> KJ ^ Advanced

ijj Workspace Title: <notset> igf Workspace Description: <notset> j£ Source Redirect: No Redirect

LINEWT
ENTUNEWT

S>
f>

LYRLINEWT
SLKLINEWT

>
t>

: ^ Destination Redrect: No Redirect

REFNAME

t>

LTSCALE
EXIX

E»
t>

EXIY
EXTZ DOCNAME

E>
> f>
i

DOCPATH

t>
t>

Workbench accessed the Oracle Database and populated a user interface with 3D data and tables

^j $^&

1 ^JBSURFACE.TEST [«]

M lJW^

<|

DOCTYPE

1

T~Sum|--/,

iF

that could be selected as the data source of the streaming service. Despite multiple source data

Figure 5.8 The workspace created to export Oracle 3D data into VRML format

options, our implementation used only a single source data option. After verification, the created
workspaces were published to the FME Server. The same process was repeated for four different

workspaces that had been created for each dataset previously loaded into Oracle.

Then, those

56

57

Publish to FME Server

He

&*t

yjew

Favorites

Ik*

Hdp

Publish Workspace

Choose a repository, then either accept the current workspace name, enter a new name or choose an existing workspace to overwrite.

EDhtlp:

. . smd.rrertor ca/fme»erver
SJwhafjHot 83wh«fiNew \flFeMured

Repository Name: |
Workspace Name: |oracle8i2vrml.fmw
Existing Workspaces:
l_TestDelete.fmw
Help

Welcome to FME Server
The current time is Tim Dec 11 0223:56 EST 2008

a? 2DParcel_Ora2VRML.fmw
airportsllll.fmw DataStreamingService_KML.fmw

Navigation
Home«

Shortcuts

Ora2WRL_WG584.fmw
oracle8i2vrml.fmw

g! oracle8i2vrml_Tl,fmw

^ shape2vrml.fmw
Stream Parks2KML.fmw
# Internet

<**

Publish

~j

Cancel

|

Figure 5.10 Web interface for accessing available services and services parameters

Figure 5.9 Publish to FME Server screen

Accessing Published Services
Navigation

The Web user interface is one of several methods to access the FME Server and published

f fl Data Download
Home

- & Data Streaming + fl CiientGenWS - i3 ParaviewGeoData

[ Browse | | Browse | [ Browse ]
unset | Configure ||Run|
unaet \ Configure |[Run|

workspaces. It can be used to examine, modify, and run available workspaces published to an
FME Server. The web user interface for the SIMAL server installation can be accessed from

Services «<

£8 LENS_1_0ra2vrml.trnw
fi| L£NS_2_Ora?vrml fmw

http://www.simal.ryerson.ca/fmeserver. Figure 5.10 and Figure 5.11 show the web interface for

accessing the four streaming services published as a part of this project. The web user interface

fi|LEN3_4_0ra2vrml.frnw
+ a Samples + fflTEST

unset | Configure j| Run |
| Browse | | Browse |
4 repositories in Data Streaming

also allows examination of published workspace details, such as service request information, as
shown in the Figure 5.12.

H9KML Network Link

| Browse |

i- ifi OGC Web Feature Service

Browse I
0 Internet

Figure 5.11 Web interface for accessing published Data Streaming services
58
59

0e

Edit

£ew

Fjvorites

look

b*

5.2.3 Testing Streamed 3D Data
e
P Sear* Web

O
«f-VuMl

S £

- J
.Weather

Adfress j jjj http]//imw.»ind.ryerson.ca/trreserver/5ervices/fa^^
fJwhafsHot 33 What's New (Q Featured m.Newi -

The four 3D geological data streaming services were first tested with several X3D/VRML client web applications in order to provide an understanding of the system's capacity to deliver Oracle
3D data to VRML clients, with the GeoLink collaborative GIS client prototype for visualization.

Home

Repositories

Workspace Service Request Information

Navigation
Home
fmedatastreamino

Service: Data Streaming
Complete URL: r

J

|ma| ryerson ca/fme(jatastreaming/ParaViewGeoData/L:|

^I
Run

The following section discusses this experiment in detail.

ParaViewGeoData

(defaults values excluded) HTML POST form

'°mpa

'http //www simal ryerson ca'fmedatastrearriing'ParaViewGeoData/L|

LENS_3_0ra2vrml.fmw

<form method="post" action="http //www simal ryerson cafmedatastreaming'ParaV <p>Click to run workspace 'LENS_3_Ora2vrml fmw in service fmedatastreaming <input type="hidden" name="DestDataset_VRML' value="E \Tomcat 6 Olwebapj <input type="rtidden' name="SourceDataset_ORACLE8l_3" value="orcr>
<input type="submit"> </form>

VRML Viewers
VRML viewers are commonly used to display 3D VRML and X3D files. Several open source

2.
Preview

and commercial VRML tools exist which can be used to view VRML and X3D models. Some of
these are stand-alone applications, while a number are open source and commercial plug-in

Close FME Server 6 2008 Safe Software Inc

products.

# Internet

Figure 5.12 Accessing Workspace Services Request Information

A combination of open source and commercial VRML/X3D viewers were identified for testing based on information available on the Web3D's resources Appendix A website shows a

Client applications can access created services using service request information. FME Services
that serve Oracle data as VRML streams can be called from any VRML client. This client can open VRML data coming from an HTTP stream. When the client application sends an HTTP request (in either opening the stream URL, or by an HTML post request), the FME Server runs the associated workspace to convert the current state of the Oracle 3D layer into a VRML file that is sent back to the requested client. This on-the-fly data conversion capacity allows 3D geological data stored in the Oracle database to be a real-time server to client applications.

(http://www.web3d.org/x3d/content /examples/X3dResources.html). detailed comparison of the selected VRML viewers.

BS Contact, FreeWRL, Heilan, InstantPlayer, Octaga Player, OpenVRML, SwirlX3D, Vivaty, and Xj3D viewers were selected to test the FME streamed VRML models. All nine applications

were tested with the FME Service streams for both Intranet and Internet connections.

Among the nine applications, BS Contact and Xj3D were successfully loaded the FME Server

data streams. Both viewers proved capable of loading the streamed models. The summary of findings for the tested VRML viewers is shown in Table 5.1.

60

61

Table 5.1 Summary of VRML viewer test results
Can Open FME
Stream
Yes

Sofware/Plugin
BS Contact
FreeWRL

Comment
Can open all the services in 10-30 Seconds
No Windows support
No VRML support

No No
No No No No No Yes

Heilan InstantPlayer

Can't load any of the FME Service data
Can't load any of the FME Service data

Octaga Player
OpenVRML SwirDGD

No Windows support??
Can't load any of the FME Service data
Do not support URL Locations

Vivaty
XJ3D

Can open all the services in 10-30 Seconds

Figures 5.13 to 5.16 show the BS Contact viewer with LENS 3 and LENS 4 FME streamed
# Internet

geological data layers. Figure 5.17 and Figure 5.18 show LENS 3 and LENS 3 data layers in
Xj3D viewer.

Figure 5.14 BS Contra VRML viewer (FME streamed LENS 3 data layer)

Be

E*

Do.

Fjwmw

lot*

a*

Figure 5.13 BS Contra VRML viewer (FME streamed LENS 3 data layer)

Figure 5.15 BS Contra VRML viewer (FME streamed LENS 4 data layer)

62

63

aV*wGeoOfltaAEN5_4_Ora2vrml. ftnw

P Search Web ' /?> - £J what's Hot

Figure 5.16 BS Contra VRML viewer (FME streamed LENS 4 data layer)

Figure 5.18 Xj3D Browser (FME streamed LENS 4 data layer)

GeoLink

GeoLink is a prototype that was developed at the Spatial Information Management and
Applications laboratory (SIMAL) at Ryerson University. This tool allows collaborative modeling

and sharing of surface and subsurface models, in a distributed team environment. The GeoLink
prototype is designed on principles identified in the collaborative GIS framework study [Chang

and Li, 2005].

The prototype system demonstrates how the synchronous sharing and

manipulation among geographically dispersed users of 3D subsurface models can be realized; the

focus is toward developing capacity that allows various types of domain-specific 3D models to

be displayed and shared [Chang et al., 2006].

The FME Server streamed data was tested with the GeoLink prototype to determine
Figure 5.17 Xj3D Browser (FME streamed LENS 3 data layer)

compatibility of the FME streamed VRML models with the Collaborative GIS prototype. The
65

64

GeoLink prototype successfully loaded the FME Server VRML streams. Each of the streamed
models included 10,000 - 30,000 faces. GeoLink was able to load multiple FME streamed data layers and perform the collaboration functions on the loaded data. Figure 5.19 and Figure 5.20
show the FME streamed VRML data visualized within the GeoLink Collaborative GIS

-Eclipse SDK
tcin Same** Refactor Navigate

R " -H 1^&!oUnk--acollabdr«*»GB client 191168^.104:57035 1 PackageExpToreTsT".j Rl« Help
ffl Jis^ GeoLink3D

ource

Refactor

Navigate

Search

Project

ElA

aplorer g^yHierafdiyl
*3D

"

-> ; «I

Problems Javadoc Declarj
GeoLink3D [Java Applicatic

operating getRight notifystatet :/S
found 3D:5::{192.1 OsersPanel:192.168

operating setFree:

Figure 5.20 GeoLink Browser (FME streamed LENS 4 data layer)
vadoc Declaration Q Console
ava Application) C:\Program Fil

(1:192.168.2.104:5438.
j setFree::1000

5.2.4 Summary

itet

:/SEPFloorO3er:

:5::(192.168.2.104:54:

51:192.168.2.104:5438'

Graphic representation of complex real world objects used in a geospatial models can assist a

more rapid understanding of reality, something only possible when there is a high level of
abstraction of the objects. A well-designed geospatial model can be used to perform tasks that
Figure 5.19 GeoLink Browser (FME streamed LENS 3 data layer)

are less convenient, too expensive or practically impossible to perform in the real world.

Spatial data, generated by different private and public organizations, is stored in a variety of data
formats based on the organisation's platform preference. Because geological data accumulates

over a long period of time and comes from many different sources, data compatibility is
important for sustainable 3D geological modeling. Several initiatives to address interoperability issues in 3D modelling have been developed over the past decade. In the 3D modeling domain,

66

67

CityGML and BIM have gained substantial support from industry and government organizations.
So far, no standard has been set for the 3D geological and subsurface modeling domain.

Chapter 6. Conclusions and Recommendations
Accomplishments

Because of the large number of organizations involved, and the number of platforms used, establishing standards to meet all requirements of 3D modelling is difficult. This results in challenges to the parties involved in streaming 3D models. A middleware application that can

A robust 3D geological modeling framework along with tools having few data format restrictions

is important steps toward real-time 3D collaboration systems to communicate models through the Internet. The following are the results of this research:

convert between formats to allow organizations to stream their 3D models can act as an interim solution, until a widely accepted data model has been developed.

1.

Comprehensive research on existing 3D data models and system implementations was

completed and the results documented. Characteristics of geological 3D modeling
Based on 3D geological modeling requirements, a prototype system capable of storing largescale 3D geological data and streaming the underlying model directly to Internet clients has been designed and implemented for GeoLink. It can stream different data formats, which can be organized as HTML responses. Several VRML clients, including the GeoLink Collaborative GIS prototype, can use the streamed data. GeoLink has been developed as a part of the topo3D
project.

workflow and requirements for a robust 3D system design were identified;

2.

A technology-driven integrated framework capable of managing the 3D geological modeling workflow and supporting real-time 3D data access capacity was designed.
Geological 3D data modeling requirements, and 3D data access and management

requirements of the GeoLink prototype were modeled into an integrated framework design. This design enables format translation of external 3D geological data which is not
directly usable by the GeoLink prototype;

3.

A prototype system using Oracle Spatial

llg and FME Server applications was

implemented. Some characteristics of the integrated framework design, such as storing

large

datasets

and streaming geological

models

from Oracle

3D

to

a GeoLink

Colloboratibe GIS client over the internet, were successfully tested.

68

69

Limitations of the Study
Because the prototype had been developed for a proof of concept, the results described in this
thesis are subject to several possible constraints and limitations:

types. Until Oracle and geomodeling tools mature adequately to accommodate the functions and operations required for a sustainable form of 3D geological models, this research area will
remain relevant.

1.

Because of geological modeling process complexity and dependency on manual processing, the identified process steps, and the order in which they occur, are not well defined. Therefore, the identified geological 3D modeling requirements may be too
general;

An FME Server can be integrated into any existing solution to enable streaming 3D data,

regardless of the underlying data format. The data access requirement set by the GeoLink Collaborative GIS client can be satisfied without data security concerns and without

overwhelming the collaboration clients with data conversion and data transformation issues.

2.

Spatial 3D analyzing capacities was discussed, but these functions were not tested or
modeled in the prototype. This is due partially to the client application's limited capacity

Future Work
This thesis provides a framework to manage the geological 3D modeling process and to communicate 3D models to client applications over the Internet. However, further research can
provide a better understanding of areas not addressed here, including:

to utilize 3D spatial queries and partially to the coding requirement for implementing
these features at the DBMS or FME server;

3.

The prototype system is capable of translating between most of the well-known spatial data formats. However, only Oracle 3D data was streamed as VRML format to feed the GeoLink, collaborative GIS prototype. Therefore, there may be constraints in data
translating and streaming of some of the other supported formats.

Editing the model on the client side and re-saving the modified version on the Oracle database.
This operation may possibly be implemented, but may require some programming on the FME Server. The client application may also need further development to provide editing tools.

1.

Converting Oracle's 3D data type to VRML worked for this project, but conversion to

Concluding Remarks

other formats and addressing data quality issues were not within the scope of this project.

The Oracle llg can offer a robust, efficient data-modeling environment for 3D geological modeling processes, providing that 3D data types can be used for storing all types of geological data and knowledge. However, 3D spatial functions and operators are not fully supported by
Oracle, and no existing geomodeling tool, CAD or GIS application supports Oracle's 3D data

2.

All 3D models, but specifically 3D geological models, are big in size. Because of
Oracle's capacity to store very large 3D models, a Level of Detail (LOD)

implementation, on either Oracle or FME Server, may be the subject of further study.

70

71

3.

Most 3D modeling formats, including VRML, use texture mapping to render picture-like models. This topic was not included within the scope of this project.

References
Abdul-Rahman, A. and Pilouk, M. (2008). "Spatial Data Modeling for 3D GIS",

Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Altmaier, A. and Kolbe, T.H. (2003). "Application and solutions for Interoperable 3d Geo-

Visualization", Available:
http://www.citygml.org/docs/Altmaier_und_Kolbe_PhoWo2003_englisch.pdf
Apel, M. (2006). "From 3D geomodelling systems towards 3D geoscience information
systems: Data model, query functionality,and data management", Computers &

Geosciences 32 (2006) 222-229.
Blessent, D. (2006). " GeoTopo3D project", 8th GEOIDE Annual Scientific Conference. Banff, Canada, May 31 - June 2. Accessed on June 11, 2007, Available:
http://geotopo3d.scg.ulaval.ca/documents/2006_Blessent_GeoTopo3D_presentation.pdf Chang, E.Z. and Li, S. (2005). "VRML-Based 3D Collaborative GIS: A Design Perspective", Web and Wireless Geographical Information Systems, Springer. Chang, E.Z., Li, S. and Kirkwood, D. (2006). "3D Synchronous Collaborative Modeling", 8th GEOIDE Annual Scientific Conference. Banff, Canada.

Chena, T.K., Abdul-Rahmana, A. and Zlatanova, S. (2008). "3D Spatial Operations for GeoDBMS: Geometry vs. Topology", The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part B2. Beijing.

Dollner, J. and Buchholz, H. (2005). "Continuous level-of-detail modeling of buildings in 3D
city models", 13th annual ACM international workshop on Geographic information systems, ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, pp. 173-181.

72

73

Groger, G., Reuter, M. and Plumer, L. (2004). "Representation of A 3-D City Model in Spatial
Object-Relational Database ", FIG Commission IV, WG IV/1, Available:
http://www.isprs.org/istanbul2004/comm4/papers/308.pdf

Nebiker, S. (2003). "Support For Visualisation And Animation in A Scalable 3d GIS Environment -Motivation, Concepts And Implementation", International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. XXXIV5/W10, Commission V, WG V/6 Oosterom, P.v., Stoter, J., Quak, W. and Zlatonova, S. (2002). "The Balance Between

Groger, G., Kolbe, T. H. and Czerwinski, A. (2007). "CityGML specification document version 0.4.0" Reference # OGC® project document: OGC 07-062, Available: http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=22120. Haist, J. and Korte, P. (2006). "Adaptive Streaming Of 3D-GIS Geometries and Textures for Interactive Visualisation of 3D City Models", Fraunhofer Institute for Computer
Graphics, Fraunhoferstr. 5, 64283 Darmstadt, Germany.

Geometry and Topology", Symposium on Geospatial Theory, Processing and
Applications, Ottawa.

Oracle and Murray, C. (2007) Oracle, Oracle Spatial Developer's Guide 1 lg Release 1(11.1).
Perrin, M., Zhu, B., Rainaudb, J.F. and Schneiderb, S. (2005). "Knowledge-driven applications for geological modeling", ELSEVIR, Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 47 89-104

Heuel, S. and Kolbe, T.H. (2001). "Building Reconstruction: Dilemma of Generic versus
Specific Models", KI - Zeitschrift fur Kiinstliche Intelligenz. Kaufmann, O. and Martin, T. (2008). "3D geological modelling from boreholes, cross-sections and geological maps, application over former natural gas storages in coal mines", Computers & Geosciences 34-278-290. Kolbe, T.H. (2007). "CityGML - 3D Geospatial and Semantic Modelling of Urban Structures",

Pouliot, J., Lachance, B., Brisebois, A., Rabaud, O. and Kirkwood, D. (2003). "3D geological modeling: Are GIS or CAD appropriate?", Proceedings of ISPRS Workshop, WG II/5,
II/6, IV/1 and IV/2 Joint Workshop on Spatial, Temporal and Multi-Dimensional Data Modelling and Analysis, October, 2-3, Quebec,Canada.

GITA/OGC Emerging Technology Summit 4, Washington D.C. Kothari, R., Godfrind, A. and Beinat, E. (2007). "Pro Oracle spatial for Oracle Database 1 lg",
Springer-Verlag New York inc. Latuada, R. (2006). "Three-Dimensional Representations and Data Structures in GIS and AEC,

Pu, S. and Zlatanova, S. (2006). "Integration of GIS and CAD at DBMS Level", The third Dimension", UDMS, Available: http://www.gdmc.nl/publications/2006/ UDMS%200907.pdf

Rahman, A.A., Zlatanova, S. and Pilouk. M. (2001). "The 3D Software Development: global

Large-scale 3D data Integration: Challenges and Opportunities, Taylor & Francis Group,
LLC.

efforts from researchers and vendors", Geoinformation Science Journal, Vol. 1, No. 2.

Safe Software (2008a). "FME® Server Administrator's Guide", Accessed on December 2008,

Marcus, A. (2004). "A 3D geosciences information system freamwork", PhD Dissertation,

Available: http://docs.safe.com/fmeserver/pdf/FMEServerAdminGuide.pdf

Doctorate de l'lnstitut National Polytechnique de Lorraine.

74

75

Safe Software (2008b). "FME Installation and Licensing Manual ", Accessed on December
2008, Available: http://docs.safe.com/fme/2008/pdf/FMEInstallationLicensing.pdf Safe Software (2008c). "FME Server Architecture", Available:http://www.safe.com/
technology/documents/whitepapers/FME-Server-Architecture-Whitepaper.pdf

Zlatanova et al., (2004). "Topological models and frameworks for 3D spatial objects",
ELSEVIER, Computer and Geosciences, (30) pp. 414-428

Zlatanova, S., Holweg, D. and Coors, V. (2004). "Geometrical and Topological Models for Real-Time GIS", Disaster and Risk Management- Real time GIS @UDMS. Zlatanova, S. (2005). "3D Geometries in Spatial DBMS", Innovations in 3D Geo Information
systems, Springer, Lecture notes in Geoinformation and Cartography.

Shi, W., Yangi, B. and Li, Q. (2003). "An object-oriented data model for complex objects in
three-dimensional geographical information systems", Int. J. Geographic information science, Vol. 17, No. 5, pp. 411-430 Stoter, J. and Zlatanova, S. (2003). "Visualization and editing of 3D Objects Organized in a
DBMS", Proceedings of the EuroSDR Com V. Workshop on Visualisation and

Zlatanova, S. and Stoter, J. (2006). "The role of DBMS in the new generation GIS
architecture", Frontiers of GIS architecture, Springer, pp. 155-197.

Rendering, 22-24, Enschede, The Netherlands, 16p.
Quadt, U. and Kolbe, T.H. (2005). "Web 3D Service", Open Geospatial Construction Inc, discussion paper, Available: http://www.opengeospatial.org

Wiki (2008) "Open Source - The Free Software Alternative", Available: http ://paraviewgeo. mirarco. org/index. php/About
Worboys, M. and Duckham, M., (2004). "GIS: A Computing Perspective, Second Edition", CRC Press.

Wu, Q., Xu, H. and Zou, X. (2005). "An effective method for 3D geological modeling with multi-source data integration", Computer and Geosciences 31-35-43

Zlatanova, S., (2000). "3D GIS for Urban Development", PhD Thesis, Graz University of
Technology.

Zlatanova, S., Rahman, A.A. and Pilouk, M. (2002). "3D GIS: Current Status and

Perspectives", Symposium on Geospatial Theory, Processing and Applications, Ottawa.

76

77

Appendix A - Player support for X3D components by www.web3d.org

Table key

Yes
Partial some nodes and fields supported

all nodes, all fields supported for all levels of this component (though some bugs may be present)

level #
no no support provided

which component level number (1-4) is supported (found at end of each component specification)
unknown, need status report

?

BS Contact
FreeWRL
Heilan

InstantReality

Octaga Player OpenVRML

SwirlX3D V2.1.7

Vivaty

Xj3D

Players, versions, and X3D Conformance Certification

v7.1

V1.21.2
vO.14

beta 5
V2.3.0.2
none
none

vO.17.9
none

v1.0 build 900
none

1.0 Interchange

Interchange Profile Interchange Profile
none
yes yes yes yes

Profile
yes yes

Interchange Profile
yes

File Encodings
- XML (.x3d)
yes
yes yes yes yes

- ClassicVRML (.x3dv)
yes no

yes

yes

yes

- Compressed Binary Encoding (.x3db)
no no

no

partial

no

no

no

no

yes

X3D component list

CAD geometry
yes no no

yes

yes

partial
yes yes yes

yes

no

yes

partial
yes yes

Core
Proto)
yes

(not

yes

yes

yes

Cube map environmental texturing
partial

no

yes

yes

no

no

partial

no

Distributed interactive simulation (DIS)
no no

no

no

no

partial

no

no

yes

78

Environmental

|effects|
Environmental
sensor

yes

yes

level 2
yes

yes

yes

partial level 2
yes no yes
no

yes

yes

yes

no
yes no

partial
yes
yes

yes yes
yes

partial partial
no

yes yes

yes

yes yes no
no

Event utilities
Followers

yes
no

Geometry2D Geometry3D Geospatial Grouping
Humanoid animation

partial
yes

yes yes

no

yes

yes

partial level 3 partial
yes yes
yes

yes

no

partial partial
yes yes yes
no
no yes yes yes

partial level 2
yes yes

partial partial

no

no
yes yes

yes yes

(H-Anim)
Interpolation Key device sensor
Layering Layout Lighting

partial
yes yes

no

partial level 3
yes

partial
level 2 level 2
yes
yes yes yes

partial partial partial
no
no no no yes

partial
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

partial partial
no yes
yes no no

yes yes

yes

yes

partial partial level 2 Navigation Networking
yes yes yes no yes

no

partial partial
level 2
yes yes

no
yes

level 1 level 2 level 3
no

yes yes

yes yes

partial partial

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

NURBS
Particle systems Picking sensor Pointing device
sensor

yes

no

no

yes

partial
partial
no
yes
no

partial
no
no yes

yes

partial
no
yes no no

no

partial
no
no no no no no yes

yes yes

yes

yes

partial Programmable shaders Rendering
yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

yes

yes

no

partial

no

no

level 3

level 4

level 4

yes

yes

partial

yes

yes

yes

Rigid body physics Scripting ECMAScript
Scripting - Java

partial
yes

no

no yes no

?
yes

yes yes

no

no

no

partial partial partial (external) partial (external)
yes yes no yes yes

no

yes

yes

partial

no

no

yes

Shape
- FillProperties node

level 2
yes (requires
yes

yes

yes

partial

yes

yes

yes

runtime shader support)

no

no

partial

partial

no

no

partial

79

- LineProperties
yes
no yes

node
yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes no

yes

partial partial
no no

Sound
partial partial partial
partial
yes no
yes

yes yes yes yes yes
yes no

partial partial
yes

Text
level 1
no no no
yes

yes

Texturing

yes

Texturing3D
yes
yes yes

yes

partial
yes

Time level 2 partial Heilan InstantReality

yes

Players FreeWRL

BS Contact

Octaga
OpenVRML SwirlX3D

Vivaty

Xj3D

80

