Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Productivity improvement in a client-based service company through value stream mapping and simulation
Sam Ataei
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Mechanical Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Ataei, Sam, "Productivity improvement in a client-based service company through value stream mapping and simulation" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 503.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

PRODUCTIVITY IMPROVEMENT IN A
CLIENT-BASED SERVICE COMPANY

THROUGH VALUE STREAM MAPPING
AND SIMULATION

By

Sam Ataei

B. Eng. (Industrial Engineering) Ryerson University, 2006

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Applied Science

in the Program of
Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 Sam Ataei, 2009

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation.
I authorise Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions
or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorise Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

* Signature

11

Productivity Improvement in a Client-based Service Company through
Value Stream Mapping and Simulation
Sam Ataei

Master of Applied Science, 2009 Mechanical Engineering, Ryerson University

Abstract
For many years, productivity improvement through value stream mapping and simulation has been studied in manufacturing industry where the flow of materials is visible
and the work can be standardized. In recent years, the service industry has become anew

arena for lean operations. Within the service industry, client-based companies have distinct
challenges in streamlining their process, as it may not be feasible to standardize the needs of different clients. This thesis focuses on a case from a client-based company in the area of

graphic communications and brand point management services. The thesis examines the
application of lean principles towards a set of subjective processes and provides directions
for improving productivity. Some lean methods utilized in the study include creating

process flows, conducting operator interviews to back-up the process flow, collecting data such as processing time and creating a detailed values stream map of the retail packaging
process in order to analyze any necessary areas of improvement/Value stream mapping has

been used to identify the areas where the non-value-added tasks can be reduced, and simulation models have been used to imitate and predict the company's different scenarios

in dealing with bottlenecks, different kinds of wastes, and to assess potential areas for
improvements. The analysis of results indicates that it is necessary to have two different

streams of the processes; one for a team-based job and another one for a non-team-based
job. The proper touch points from each department have been found and value-added and
non-value-added times have been determined in order to create the current-state.

Furthermore, future-states have been created with some recommendations kept in mind to
validate the time savings. The results have been verified through a simulation analysis.

111

Acknowledgements
I greatly appreciated the unlimited support and direction provided by Dr. Saeed

Zolfaghari of Ryerson University in

supervision of the entire thesis process.

His

suggestions and recommendations were very useful in reaching my goals. I have learned so
much, and without him, this would not have been possible.

I also wish to thank XYZ's management for allowing me to work on a topic, which
required access and support. I am thankful to Mr. Tony Senike and Mr. Ross Cree who

always provided unconditional support. Without their support, I would not have produced
excellent results.

IV

Borrower's Page
Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this

research report. Please sign below, and give the address and the date.

Dedication
I would like to dedicate this work to my parents, for their never-ending
unconditional love and support in all my efforts, and for giving me the foundation to be
who I am.

VI

Table of Contents
abstract:.... .. ...in

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
BORROWER'S PAGE

...IV
V

DEDICATION....... TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF FIGURES

........~

......VI VII
..........X

LIST OF TABLES...,

..

............XIII

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION AND LITERATURE REVIEW
1.1 Introduction

.....~... ........ 1
l

1.2

Literature Review..
1.2.1 1.2.2
1.2.3

6
.. 6 9
....... 18

Lean Value stream mapping......
Simulation.....

1.3 1.4

Objectives of the Thesis... Organization of the Thesis...

..

.. 23 24

CHAPTER 2 CASE STUDY
2.1 Introduction of XYZ.....

...

25
.........25

2:2 2.3
2.4

Problem Statement.... Solution Approach..
Methodology

.

25 26
._................. 26

2.4.1
2.4.2

XYZ process flow
Interviews..

.27
28

2.4.3 2.4.4
2.4.5

Timesheets XYZ Link
Value stream mapping

31 ..^..... .34
35

CHAPTER 3 MAPPING THE CURRENT STATE 3.1
3.2

36 36
,:, 38

Data Collection and Analysis
VSMFlow...

3.3

Value Stream Mapping

40

vn

CHAPTER 4 MAPPING THE FUTURE STATE
4.1
4.2

_...

45
..45"
47
47 54 58

Development of the Future State Map..
Value Stream Mapping.......
4.2.1 4.2.2 4.2.3 Scenario A Scenario B.......... Scenario C

CHAPTER 5 SIMULATION MODELING
5.1
5.2

63
63
64

Process Flow Path Recognition...
Input Analysis

5.2.1
5.2.2

Distribution analysis for value-added time
Distribution analysis for non-value-added time ..

65
..... 65

5.3

Building the Simulation Model...:..

................67

CHAPTER 6SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
6.1
6.2

70
70
.72

Scenario A........
Scenario B.I

6.3

Scenario B.2...........

72

6.4
6.5

Scenario C
Optimum Scenario.......

..
..::....

74
75

CHAPTER 7 CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
7.1 Conclusion

78
78

7.2

Recommendations and Contributions.

79

7.2.1
7.2.2

Service level agreements with the client (SLA)
Scorecard tracking

79
79

7.2.3 7.2.4 7.2.5 REFERENCES

Standardizing procedures...... Pre-Flight Standardization..... Generalizing the process flow path.....

...t........ 79 .....80 80 81

APPENDIX A: CREATING THE RANDOM PATH APPENDIX B: LAYOUT OF ARENA® MODEL
APPENDIX C: INPUT ANALYSIS

..85 92
104

APPENDIX D: SAMPLE TIMESHEET

125

vm

APPENDIX E: STANDARDIZING PROCEDURE APPENDIX F: OUTPUT ANALYSIS

126 128

IX

List of Figures
Figure 1-1: Common VSM Icon-Introduction (Manos, 2006) ,, 11

Figure 1-2' A current-state map (From VSM-Introduction (Manos, 2006) Figure 1-3: Future state map (From VSM -Introduction Manos, 2006).
Figure 2mV XYZ corporate process (team-based process flow) Figure 2-2: XYZ corporate process (team-based process flow).. Figure 2-3: XYZ non-corporate process (non-team-based process flow)
Figure 3-1* VSM flow for team-base process
Figure 3-2: VSM flow for non-team-base process ,.

12 _ 14
29 32 33
38
, 38

.

Figure 3-3: VSM for team-based (current-state)
Figure 3-4: VSM for non-team-based (current-state)
Figure 4-1: VSM for team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department

......41
42

(pessimistic case)
Figure 4-2: VSM for team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department

50

(optimistic case)

.

51

Figure 4-3: VSM for non-team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department

(pessimistic case)
(optimistic case)..

,,

52
53'

Figure 4-4: VSM for on-team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department

Figure 4-5: VSM for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman task (pessimistic case)
· 56

Figure 4-6: VSM for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman task (optimistic case)
57

Figure 4-7: General process flow with eliminating of foreman task and creating a Quality
Control department 58

Figure 4"9: VSM for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman task and redefining

the Quality Control department (optimistic case)
Figure 6"i: Layout of Arena® for Quality Control department Figure 6"2: Planner checks the ideal time for each process
Figure 6"3: Distributing job between operators
Figure B"l: Layout of Arena® model for current-state
Figure B"2: Team-based model

61
71 73
74
92
93

Figure B"3: Non-team-based category Arena® model for current-state Figure B"4: Layout of Arena® team-based (starting sequences) Figure B~5: Layout of Arena® team-based category (route to CSR)

94 95 95

Figure B-6- Layout of Arena® team"based category (CSR processing task)
Figure B-7: Layout of Arena® team-base category (route to assembly) Figure B"8- Layout of Arena® team-base category (route to QC2) Figure B-9" Layout of Arena® team-based category (POD l)
Figure B-10- Layout of Arena® non-team-based category (CSR task)

96
97 98 99
100

Figure B-ll* Layout of Arena® non-team-based category (foreman task)
Figure B~12- Layout of Arena® non-team-based category (assembly and QC2) Figure B-13 : Layout of Arena® (proofreading task) Figure Ol* Input modeling of the data for value-added time for CSR (non-team-based)

101
102 103 104

Figure C"2- Input modeling of the data for value-added time for assembly (non-team-based). 105

Figure C-3- Input modeling of the data for value-added time for QC2 (non-team-based)......... 106
Figure C-4- Input modeling of the data for value-added time for proofreading 107

Figure C~5- Input modeling of the data for value-added time for final QC (non-team-based).. 108
Figure C"6* Input modeling of the data for value-added time for CSR (team-based)......... , 109

Figure O7* Input modeling of the data for value-added time for assembly (team-based)......... 110

Figure C"8- Input modeling of the data for value-added time for proofreading (team-based).. Ill
Figure C"9- Input modeling^ of the data for value-added time for QC (team-based). . 112 113
114 115

Figure O10- Input modeling of the data for value-added time for final QC (team-based)
Figure C"ll- Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from CSR-CSR Figure C~12^ Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from CSR-assembly

Figure C"13- Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from assembly-proofreading

(team-based).................
Figure C-14* Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from.... Figure C-15- Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from CSR-foreman

116
117 118

Figure C"16- Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from assembly-foreman (non
team-based)... 119

Figure C-.17-' Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from assemblyCSR (nonteam-based) _............................... 120

Figure C" 18" Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from foreman-assembly (nonteam-based)...........
Figure C"19- Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from CSR-assembly

121
122

Figure C-20- Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from QC2-proofreading (nonteam-based)................. 123

Figure C"21: Input modeling of the data for non-value;added time from assembly-proofreading

(non-team-based)
Figure D"l- Sample timesheet.......

..

.....124
125

XI

Figure F-l' Unit order non-value-added time for team-based vs. each month

130

Figure F-2* Unit order non-value-added time for non-team-based category vs. each month.... 132

xn

List of Tables
Table 1-1" Applying lean production principle to service operation in healthcare and road

maintenance (Ahlstrom, 2006) --

----

------

------

5
------------- 38

Table 3-1- Total value-added and non-value-added time ---------------

Table 3-2- Value-added and non-value-added for all work-orders----
Table 3-3- VSM summery for non-team-based -- --: --

-----

39
---- 43

Table 3-4- VSM summery for team-based --

--

------

---

--

---- 43

Table 3-5* All different scenarios and their involved elements Table 4-1* VSM summery for team-based category with redefining the Quality Control
n Ol^ Q "V*^"TV* D Y1 "f f-rin CiQTTYl 1 P'i'T /"» i^OQOl \IJCoOXXXXXo l/XO I/CIDC/
\JL\5YJ Gil. L/XJXvsXXls -------- -- .----- -- ,,.--.--.____--_.._---- _--_ _

---- 44

_--__--____--

AQ

^tO

Table 4-1- VSM summery for team-based category with redefining the Quality Control
nOnQV^TYIDTTf I T\ D CGI TY11 of 1 P /~*QGOl VJ^CooXXXXXol/Xv^ KsCXtSKs/
UC^Ial LXXXCXXL " ~ "* ---- -- -- ------ -- -- -------- --------_______

^1S

to

Table 4-3- VSM summary for non-team-based category with redefining the Quality Control

department (optimistic case)-----

--

--

------

--

------------- 48

Table 4"4- VSM summary for non-team-based category with redefining the Quality Control

Table 4-5- VSM summary for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman (pessimistic

Table 4-6^ VSM summary for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman (optimistic

Table 4"7- VSM summary for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman task and

redefining the Quality Control department (pessimistic case)
Table 4"8- VSM summary for non-team "based category with eliminating foreman task and

59

redefining the Quality Control department (optimistic case) Table 5-1* Job circulation percentage for team-based process (From - To chart)
Table 5"2* Job circulation percentage for non-team-based process (From - To chart)
Table 5"3- Distribution fitting for value-added of team-based
Table 5-4- Distribution fitting for value-added of non-team-based

59 64
64
65
65

Table 5"5- Probability density function for non-value-added of team-based--~-- Table 5"6' Probability density function for non-value-added of non-team-based

:----;~ 66 66

Table 5-7- Average non-value-added time and value-added time for both team-based and nonteam process for the base-case scenario Table 6"2- Average non-value-added in the current situation vs. eliminating foreman 69 72

xm

Table 6"3* Average non-value-added in the current situation vs. reallocating foreman and using
I HA

Table 6-4: Average non-value-added in the current situation vs. reallocating foreman and using
Quality Control department -- -- 75

Table 6-5- Percentage of non-value-added in the current situation vs. reallocating foreman and
using Quality Control department---- _ -i 75

Table 6-6: Comparing the VSM and simulation non-value-added time

76

Table 6-8; Percentage of non-value-added time--

^--

77

Table A-l" Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of CSR station

(team-based)

85

Table A-2: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of assembly station

(team-based)
Table A~3: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of QC2 station

85

(teamrbased)
Table A-4: Cumulative distribution function for each job, which is going out of proofreading

85

station (team-based)

85

Table A-5: Random number generated to identify the random path for each job (team-based) 86
Table A~6: Matching the random generated number with probability distribution function for

each job (team-based)
Table A-7: Generated number of iterations for eachiob (team-based)--

87
i__ 88

Table A"8: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of CSR station

(non-teanrbased)

--

89

Table A~9: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of Assembly station

(non-team-based)

89

Table A-10: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of foreman station

(non-team-based)
Table A-11* Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of QC2 station

89

(non-team-based)
Table A" 12: Cumulative distribution function for each job, which is going out of proofreading

89

station (non-team-based)
Table A" 13: Generated number of iterations for each job (non-team-based)
Table E-l- Sample operator standard procedure

90
91
126

Table F"2: Simulation results for total number of complete orders during each month for teambased category 128

Table F"3: Truncations of cumulative means for unit order non-value-added time for teambased cate gory * 129

xiv

Table F-4- Simulation results for total non-value-added time for each month for non-teambased category 130

Table F"5- Simulation results for total number of complete orders during each month for nonteam-based category 131

Table F"6- Truncations of cumulative means for unit order non-value-added time for teambased category 1j i

xv

Chapter 1

Introduction and Literature Review

1.1 Introduction
Lean operation is one of the initiatives that many companies have been trying to adopt in order to satisfy their customers. Value Stream Mapping (VSM) is one of the best

tools that could be used to apply lean to manufacturing or service industry. VSM shows

both process flow and material flow in an organization. Process and material flows will
give the company an opportunity to identify and remove waste. Simulation is another tool
to analyze and optimize organizational performance. On the other hand, simulation can also

prove verification and validation. Combining simulation with information from VSM makes it possible to test different scenarios without any changes in the real system in order
to identify the optimum solution.

Lean mostly applies to manufacturing companies or to those companies that produce the
same product repeatedly. Applying lean principles to non-manufacturing companies is a

completely different situation. Unlike a manufactured product that is a tangible object that can be created, sold, and be used later, services are intangible. Services are also perishable;

they cannot be stored and they forever lost if not immediately used. Furthermore, services
are created and consumed simultaneously. The inability to store services precludes using

traditional manufacturing strategy of using inventory as a buffer to absorb fluctuations in

demand. In addition, services are usually labour intensive; this implies that labour is one of

the key resources that determine the effectiveness of the organisation (Fitzsimmons and
Fitzsimmons, 2004). In many cases, the skills required of the workers are very high and

such workers are often referred to as the knowledge workers. Management of these

knowledge workers becomes critical for the success of many service organisations.
Services provided to the customers also vary from one customer to another. Quality control of the services becomes critically important to ensure that each customer gets consistent,
good service. These differences between manufactured products and services have significant implications for the application of lean manufacturing principles to information

ajdpuud uoipnpoid treaj sqj A\oq isjpq pireisiapun ox *S9Lqsnpin qoiaiqs ojiii po:rejsire.ii aq

pjnoo sjdpuiid siqj A\oq si uopssnb aqi jnq 'pauijap-aid si sjdpinid siqj 'guunpBjnireui u\

uopBuuojux

"9

qsnd jo p^ajsux

QJSBAV JO UOT^UlUIIjg

*X

sb s^red }U9J3jjtp U9A9S o^ui p^piAip sq ueo 3|dpuud uoipnpojd

ipq (9661) souof pu^ ^o^ino^V "suoi^iodo 9otaj9S o^ut p9^|SUBJi oq
;snin S9|dpuud uoipnpojd ubqj 'ssodLmd sxqj QAarqoB ox 'suox^jado qoxajos o% uoxpnpoid jo uoijEoijddE qt# guipunoxins SQpu9§uijuoo 9i|i 0}in uop^SpsdAUi uxS^q oj si ds;s isjij Qjojajoqx 'juaiajjip si sjoo^ W3d\jo asn aq^i qgnoq^ 'ssjdpuiid oures ^q; osn oj punoj

op 'ajBoq^Qq '^u^q sb qons sau^npui sotAjas ^sop\[ uopHnjp ^uaiajjip Xpp|d
SQiueduioo Suunp^jnuBin-uou ovs9{dpuud ires^ §ui|ddy *A|pQ^Qd9J pnpoid oonpoid iBq; saiu^duioo osoq; oj jo ssiUBduioo guunpBjnu^ui oj sdT[dds.A]}soin.

u '9J1AU9S ui si fcpoq&jLdKTi '3jlv S9U}snpui U9i[iofo 9soi(i uvift ssdj jo J9}v9u8 div i

9DIAJ9S 9SO1JM. S9U}SnpUl (L\UO 9JLV 9jL91[X 'Ll%SnpUl 9DIM9S V SV Suil[l 1[DYIS OU SI 9U9l{X,,

-q^oq Aq jnq 'soiAias jo poo§ ^ A"q ;ou p^JOAipp si ^ijQUoq qjoo ssoqM spnpoid e\\\ asijEai s9|UBdxnoo assqx *spoo§ Jioq^ jo sb sqoiajos iioq^ jo Air[^nb aqj

ui pQ^soja^ui sb ojojsjsq^ qjb sj^jnpEjnireui pouuojui-jp^ "P9^I9J ^iq^^u^xQui oib sqoiajqs
pire spoo§ pQjnpBjnrrera QStiBoaq isixq ^ou soop sunij qoiajqs pxre SuutuoBjnuB ire i^q^ pQnSie (1661) UBiirejnsBjej pire Azrag 'pbj iq 'saoi

ui past! die sy&d o^ne sb qons spoo§ §upB;np^J 3ip ^tdin^xa io^j ·(^003 '
pire suounnisz^ig) spoo§ §ui^;npBj Aq poiireduioooB ojb ssoiajss \ip jsouqB

spoo§ pQjnpBjnuBin uiojj pooioAip Xpji^uo Qq ^ouubo sqoiajqs &msyt -ssoiajos

could be applied to service industries, healthcare and road maintenance are chosen. In

Table 1-1, the lean production principals to healthcare and road maintenance are discussed.

The next step after understanding the principle of lean production is to identify the tools

which must be used. Tools methodologies that are part of "Lean" are addressed in literature.
In (McDonald et al. 2000; Rahn 2001), the pull technique of only producing what is required when it is required is used in the improved phases. The results are less rework and scrap, lower work-in-process, reduced lead-time, increased throughput rate and higher service level. Other tools such as standard work (Cudney and Fargher 2001), quick

changeover (Van Goubergen and Van Landeghem, 2001, 2002), 5S (Henderson and Larco
2000), etc. can be referred to the works in the reference. 5S could be use for both

manufacturing and service industries. In service industries, all materials should be
organized within the reach of operators. Therefore, the operator should not have to leave

the work area. The 5S organization allows the operator to continuously utilize any material
in front of him/her as well as to keep an eye on a his/her work.

The next tool is line balancing in the system. The line balancing means calculating the
optimum utilization using the fewest operators to achieve the result requested. For example,

when two tellers in a bank are faced with tasks that requires to work 6 hours out of 8 hours
shift per day, the remaining 2 hours are non-value-added and must be eliminated or filled

with value-added activities in a standard work format. If the job is not standardized, the two individuals may absorb the time and appear 100% busy. There are many other instances
where job combinations are obvious.

One of the best long-term Lean Manufacturing tools in a service industry is the Kaizen1
event. Kaizen is a method that strives toward perfection by eliminating waste. It eliminates
waste by empowering people with tools and a methodology for uncovering improvement

Kaizen is a Japanese word constructed from two ideographs, the first of which represents change and the second goodness or virtue. Kaizen is commonly used to indicate the long-term betterment of something or someone (continuous improvement) as in the phrase Seikatsu o kaizen sum which means to "better one's
life."

opportunities and making change. Kaizen understands waste to be any activity that is not
value-added from the customer's point of view. For example, a Kaizen might be developed

to reduce hospital checks in time for testing. The team might include the individuals
conducting the check-in, a nurse, manager, and IT representative, and a couple of patients.

If the average check-in time, which means the time from walking into the building until seated in the waiting room, is 35 minutes, the Kaizen objective might be to reduce the check-in time to 20 minutes within 5 days. There are four common elements involved in
each kaizen event, which are:

1. Workers who execute a work process 2. Focus on improving the performance of that work process
3. Seek to make incremental improvements 4. Intended to be repeated over time.

Service industries -often use Kanban2. The same pull systems can be used in service
industries as in the manufacturing sector. A distribution centre is one good example.
Inventory waste can be reduced using pull systems beginning with the end downstream

customer. When implementing Lean Manufacturing in a service industry, it is important to tailor the training to the business. Most single minute exchange of die training is developed
using examples of setup activities for equipment. It is easier for people to recognizeand see the waste in their processes when the training has clear applicability.

The VSM is an excellent tool for service industries. VSM can be used in each department

of a service industry. An example would be the service desk at a department store. VSM
begins with the information flow and triggers for an activity, which could be a customer. It

then breaks the map into various parts showing the few activities that comprise most of the
work, such as merchandise return, request for information, or complaints.

2 Kanban is a tool for realizing just-in-time. For this tool to work fairly well, the production process must be
managed to flow as much as possible. This is really the basic condition. Other important conditions are

leveling production as much as possible and always working in accordance with standard work methods.
(Ohno, 1988)

Table 1-1: Applying lean production principle to service operation in healthcare and road maintenance (Ahlstrom, 2006)
Healthcare

Road Maintenance
of patients,

Elimination of waste

Unnecessary

surgery

or

test,

overtreatment

Reducing the unnecessary usage of materials such as
salt and asphalt that are used to keep roads

unnecessary movement.

functioning.

Zero defects

Quality of materials, such as equipment and drugs, is therefore paramount. To achieve zero defects, it is also important that methods, processes, and procedures be well developed.

Increasing dependability, for example, taking action to keep roads open in winter as soon as possible, without unnecessary delays

Multifunctional teams

Physician and nursing teams. It is possible to have a certain amount of flexibility in these teams period. For example, if the physician is busy with another patient the nurse could take care
of the job. Nevertheless, flexibility is restricted since there are

The

aim

was

to

change

the

previously

very

hierarchical

organisation

and

implement

result-

oriented teams. Teams of people with different
functions were starting to be used.

clearly defined roles for each staff. A nurse does not have the
same role and responsibility as a physician

These

teams

spanned

previously

quite

strict

functional boundaries.

Pull instead of push

Scheduling operations and keeping patients in a queue. Striving
towards a pure pull system is still desirable, albeit very difficult to achieve

Usage of materials on a pull basis, JIT transports.
For example, instead of having large shipments of materials, via ships, the aim was to use smaller
shipments, using trains instead.

Decentralization of

Appropriate, for instance through decentralisation to teams

Teams given responsibility for parts of the whole

responsibilities Vertical information systems
An information system plays an important role in healthcare. It is important to share information with value-added parts of an
organization.

Clear

indications

on

achievement

of

different

performance measures.

Continuous improvement

In all healthcare settings there are department meetings to check

No involvement of workforce in continuous improvement

and discuss about healthcare improvements

Standardized process, such as decision flow diagrams should be utilized to minimize the
movement and waiting. If the supervisor is called most of the time, the decision flow

diagram needs improvement. Obviously, the 5S and SMED (single minute exchange of
die) tools are also relevant, as well as root cause problem solving to eliminate the

complaints.

1.2 Literature Review
1.2.1 Lean

"Lean" has been originally created and defined as the elimination of muda3 in the book
"The Machine that Changed the World" by Womack, Jones, and Roos (Womack et al.
1990). Several cases are illustrated in the sequel "Lean Thinking" (Womack and Jones,

1996). Lean focused on pinpointing the major sources of waste, and then using tools such as Just In Time (JIT), production smoothing, setup reduction and others to eliminate the waste to maximize the value-added work. One approach of lean in business improvement is a set of tools that anyone can leverage in order to improve the workplace and work process productivity. The most common lean tools are given below (Monden, 1998; Feld,

2000; Nahmias, 2001);

· · · ·

Just-in-time (JIT) Total preventive maintenance (TPM) Total quality management (TQM) Setup time reduction

·

5S

JIT is a system where a customer initiates demand, and the demand is then transmitted backward from the final assembly all the way to raw material, thus "pulling" all
requirements just when they are required. TPM focus is started from fixing breakdowns

to preventing them. TQM is a system of continuous improvement employing participative

Muda is Japanese term for unproductive. It is activity that is wasteful and does not add any value to the
process.

management that is centered on the needs of customers. Setup time reduction is

continuously tried to reduce the setup time of the proceeds. 5S uses its process to create

and maintain an organized, clean, safe, and efficient setting that enables the highest level
of value-added performance.

Hirano (1990) introduces 6s as:
· ·
·

Sorting Set in Order
Shining

·
·

Standardizing
Sustaining

!

·

Standardized cleanup

j

Lean is not a project or an approach that includes instructions. Lean is a continuous
concept that does not have an end or destination point. To implement lean and make

changes happen, everybody in the organization must accept that lean is a new and a more
efficient way of doing things that everyone must be involved in it. To get the maximum advantage of lean, management must be part of the change, and be involved in the
monitoring of lean implementation as well as tracking company performance.

Toyota was one of the lean's pioneers that introduced the Toyota Production System

(TPS) to improve the customer's values by eliminating the source of waste. Ohno (1988) began to incorporate Ford production and other techniques into TPS. Ohno identified
seven sources of waste:



·
· ·

Over-production
Unnecessary motion Waiting time

|
I

I

·
·
·

Conveyance
Unnecessary processing
Extra inventory

·

Rework and scrap

Lean provides a way to make work more satisfying by converting non-value-added into value. Womack and Jones (1996) define five different ways to eliminate the waste or to
convert the muda to value.

·

Specify Value: The most important part of lean is to identify the values. Value can
only be defined by the clients and it has to meet the customer's needs at a specific price at a specific time. The value could be expressed in terms of product, service or
both.

·

Value Stream: value stream is detailed action that requires a complete cycle from the time of receiving an order from the customer to the time when the finished good is delivered to the client. The next step is creating a map from the current-state map with both value-added and non-value-added.

·

Flow: Once the specific value and the value stream have been identified and the

wasteful steps eliminated, the next step is creating the flow. All the valuable steps
from order taking or from the raw material to the finished product are in the hands of the customers. This is called the production flow.

·

Pull: Traditionally and before applying lean, most companies define what their
customers want or when the customers wanted based on their capacity and capability. After applying lean to a company, the company must make exactly what the

customer wants just when the customer wants it, which means throwing away the sales forecast and simply producing what the customer actually requires and wants.
That means the customer is pulling the product from the market.

Perfection: There is no end to the process of reducing effort, space, time, cost, and
mistakes while offering a product, which is ever more nearly what the customer
actually wants.

1.2.2 Value stream mapping
Value stream mapping was the main tool used to identify the opportunities for various
lean techniques (Abdulmaleka and Rajgopal, 2007). VSM played an important role in the service and manufacturing industries, as it served as an excellent visual tool to evaluate the value-added and non-value-added time. McDonald et.-al. (2002) believe VSM is prescribed as part of the lean production portfolio of tools and has been applied in a variety of industries. The VSM was a lean technique used to analyze the flow of materials
and information required to complete a cycle from the time of receiving the order from

the client to the time of delivering the finished goods to the client. Value-added time was
considered to be any processing time that directly adds-value to the final product. Inversely, non-value-added time was defined as any time that did not add value to the

finished product, such as transport time, waiting time, etc. Figure 4-1 demonstrated the
common VSM icon. Building a VSM offers a detail that goes beyond the amount of

information that can be obtained from any standard flow charts. The general method of
application for the VSM was to first identify the job process.

1.2.2.1 Kaizen kick-off The next step is creating the current and future-state maps. To create the current and future maps, Rother and Shook (1999) introduce the three-day VSM Kaizen events,
which are as~follows:

Day 1: Introduce VSM and determine the process families Day 2: Draw the current-state map and perform the lean concepts Day 3: Create the future-state map and develop the draft plan

·

Introduce VSM and determine the process families

The Process family or the product family is a group of products or services to which the
company has to apply the same or similar processing steps. The best way to find the

process family is to create the matrix with all the process steps on the first row and all the
parts or products in the first column. The process family matrix can save a great amount

of time in understanding the value streams, and in showing what step on the process the
manufacturer is engaged. The next step is grouping the products that have the same steps and procedures.

·

Draw the current-state map and perform the lean concepts

The current-state map of the company illustrates how the organization performs in the current situation Walking through the organization is the next step. The purpose of the walk through is to gather more information such as

· ·
·

The work process, The work areas within which it is performed,
The cycle time of each process,

·
· ·

Number of operators in each shift
Inventory level
  "\   . . 

Hardcopy and electronic information

·

Instances of waste

By collecting all information, the event mission can be defined and the goals can be set. After creating the mission, the current-state map of the organization can be created as it
illustrated in Figure 1-2.

·

Create the future-state map and develop-the draft plan

A future-state map is an improved version of the current-state map, with higher values
added to the work content and much less waste in the material and information flow. The future-state map of the organization can be created as it illustrated in Figure 1-3. Rother and Shook (1999) propose key questions for future-state design:

10

I nform at icn How
-- --* Huftto&py

Office
·o^iri1 tt\gr. t/v^-ofk c e«?T-*fr*

n
'~m
' 1

C/T

I"'"""'"" ""f^

Ps^f
CK) F'PY

A&C -» Accurate & Cswp'fit©

DTP *r
Ret
*~ Qu«intlt^ psr i

- Piioritizc
p plums

Qtv TM -^u^iitJty ^«sr_M ,,,,,
O

Jj\ Jwent

O
5upplicr {b&Zc-H«ij)

I
In

--HFQf F!.»-«!%t**?

]

J

I

Figure 1-1: Common VSM Icon -Introduction (Manos, 2006)

«*·*

P

~* fcr* f*

uas;--laajj--1-

Figure 1-2: A current-state map (From VSM -Introduction (Manos, 2006)

12

What is Takt4 time?
Are there bottlenecks or constraints?

Where can inventory (or queue time) be reduced?
Where can the flow be improved? What improvements are required? What process improvements will be necessary to have continuous improvement?

To design a future-state, Jones and Womack (2002) suggest, "Once the current-state
map is drawn, ask, which steps create value? which steps are waste? why is orderflow so erratic? why is quality so erratic? why is delivery so erratic? and how can value be
enhancedfor the end-customer?"

1.2.2.2 Levels of a value streams
Hines and Rich (1997) define seven levels for the VSM as follows:

·

Process activity mapping

·
·

Supply chain response matrix
Production variety funnel

-·
· ·

Quality filter mapping
Demand amplification mapping Decision point analysis efficiency

·

Physical structure mapping

Supply chain response matrix Beesley (1994) and Forza et al. (1993) consider the supply chain response matrix as the
second level for the VSM, which is based on logistics and time compression. This matrix

is a simple diagram that is based on the critical lead-time constraint for each process. This
constraint can be lead-time for the suppliers.

4 Takt time is delivered from the German word Takzeit which means the clock cycle. In general, Takt time
means the maximum time to producing a product in order to meet demand.

13

i

!


S
%

I
i

I »-.«--

- «

V4

Figure 1-3: Future state map (From VSM -Introduction Manos, 2006)

14

Production variety funnel

New

(1974)

consider

the production

variety

funnel

originates

in

the

operations

management area. Macbeth and Ferguson (1994) believe that the production variety

funnel is similar to IVAT analysis and helps to explain how products are produced. IVAT
analysis is used to view the internal operations in companies, consisting of activities that conform to I, V, A or T shapes.

"I" plants: Unidirectional production of multiple identical items is called an "I" plants. A chemical plant is an example of an "I" plant.

"V" plants: V plants consist of a group with a few raw materials diverging into the
greater group of intermediate items. The group with intermediate material then

diverges into the larger group of items and so on until the final process, (e.g.
metal fabrication industry) "A" plants: A plants consist of parts that converge into a subassembly, which, in

turn, converges into another subassembly and so on until the final assembly, (e.g.
Assembly industry)

"T" plants consist of a large number of end items that are made from common parts, (e.g. Household appliance industry)

The Production variety funnel helps to make changes in the processing products and reduce the inventory level.

Quality filter mapping

Hines and Rich (1997) believe that the quality filters are mappings into another tool to
identify the quality of the problem. There are three different types of quality

defectiveness in the supply chain, which include:

15

·

Product defect: when the defective goods are shipped to the customer and nobody in the assembly or the inspection line caught the problem.

·

Service defect: Service defects occur when the customer is happy with the
product but not happy with the service of the product. Snipping the

product late or early is an example of a service defect.

·

Internal scrap: when the defective goods are identified either during the assembly process or at the end of the production by the line inspectors.

Quality filter mapping tools help the company to identify the defects and discover where these problems occur in the system. Eliminating these problems could help to improve
the productivity.

Demand amplification mapping

Demand amplification mapping is another tool to indicate the company how the demand
shifts along the supply chain in a period of time. This information can be used in decision
making while designing the value stream.

Decision point analysis efficiency

Hoekstra and Romme (1992) believe the decision point is mostly used for T" plants or

the supply chains which make the same product. At this point products are made
according to the forecast demand instead of the actual demand. The purpose of this point

is to verify where the process is inclined, whether it tends to the downstream, or the
upstream. The push and pull strategy could help to align the process.

Physical structure mapping

Physical structure mapping involves value stream mapping tools that indicate the broad
overview regarding the industry level of the company. Physical structure mapping

illustrate how the industry is structured and what developments should take place on that level. Volume structure and cost structure are two types of diagrams that can be used in this process. Volume structure diagrams can illustrate all different tiers which that exist in

;'. ';. "  -:' :^v;v:'." ' . . i6

:----

:/).: - :-v'---"

the supply and distribution chain, These help in understanding the entire firm in each area of the value stream. Cost structure is similar to volume structure, but it depicts the value-

adding process or cost-adding process in each stage instead of capturing the number of
firms involved. Pavnaskar et al. (2003) proposed another scheme of classification for lean
manufacturing tools. This scheme of classification is structured around seven levels:
· · · ·
·

System Object Operation Activity
Resource

· ·

Characteristic Application

Each level is linked systematically so that lean manufacturing tools and metrics, or
manufacturing waste problems, are classified in a meaningful and logical way. The research and application scope increases many times as these tools can be applied

individually or in combination depending upon the requirements of value streams in different areas such as manufacturing or supply-chain management. Table 1-2 guides about the areas and key contributors in context to supplier interface characteristics for
different value streams.

Table 1-2: Value streams studied regarding supplier interface
Key contributors Sako (1992), Lamming (1993), Macbeth and Ferguson (1994)

Area of work
Supplier relationship and number of

suppliers
Supplier delivery lead time Bought-out components
Delivery frequency Manufacturing lead-time Customer base

Womack et al. (1990), Towill (1996, 1999)
Harland (1996), Lamming et al. (2000) Ohno (1988), Womack et al. (1990, 1994) Stalk and Hout (1990), Towill (1996) Harland (1996), Lamming et al. (2000)

17

1.2.2.3 Value stream management
Hines (1998) defines Value Stream Management as: "A new strategic and operational
approach to the data capture, analysis, planning, and implementation of effective change within the core cross-functional or cross-company processes required to achieve a truly lean enterprise".

Tapping et al. (2002) describe eight steps of value stream management:

· ·

Commit to lean Choose the value stream

·
·

Learn about lean
Map the current-state

·

Determine lean metrics

·
· ·

Map the future-state
Create Kaizen plans Implement Kaizen plans

Value stream management is communication between the management and the shop floor. By comparing the current state map and the future-state map managements can set target goals and target dates. To achieve these goals, it is critical to have monthly

meetings to monitor the process of the progress being made. Employing tools such as
value stream mapping and Kaizen will also maintain the development of the future
outcomes.

To evaluate potential gains and improvements, simulation model can be used. The purpose of using simulation is to verify and to validate the VSM model as discussed in
the next section.

1.2.3 Simulation
Simulation is capable of generating resource requirements and performance statistics whilst remaining flexible to specific organizational details. It can be used to handle

18

uncertainty and create dynamic views of inventory levels, lead-times, and machine

utilization for different future state maps. This enables the quantification of payback derived from using the principles of lean manufacturing, and the impact of the latter on
the total system. The information provided by the simulation can enable management to
compare the expected performance of the lean system relative to that of the existing system it is designed to replace (Detty and Yingling, 2000), and assuming that this is

significantly superior, it provides a convincing basis for the adoption of lean.

Kelton (2004) defined simulation as "a broad collection of methods and applications to

mimic the behaviour of real systems, usually on a computer with appropriate software." Simulation helps in predicting the system behaviour under varying key factors. It is utilized heavily in different fields, e.g., engineering, education, manufacturing, research and development. It allows us to find out an optimum solution or optimum parameters,
even at the design stage itself.

Simulation is defined as numerical technique for solving the complicated dynamical
systems or probability models by imitating their behaviour using a mathematical model

of the system implemented on a digital computer. Simulation is one the best method for
studying complex systems where uncertainty is present. Simulation has been found to be the most frequently used tool of an operations research specialist. Computer modeling and simulation programs may eventually be used more often for industrial planning.

Using simulation in manufacturing or service industry may have the general approval of facilities planners. Acceptance will be more common after simulation tools become easier
to use and after the word gets around that they can make engineering and management
decisions easier (Laughery, 1990).

1.2.3.1 Simulation system type
The first step in simulating the system is to check the types of the systems. Kelton (2004)

described different types system .The system can be either statistic or dynamic. A static
system is a system in which time is not an important factor in it, such as the Monte Carlo

19

simulation.

A dynamic system is similar to the static system where as time is an

important factor. A dynamic system could be divided into two different types; discrete or

continuous. In state model, changes occur at a separate point in time such as banking or
machine shops. Thus, in continuous model, the state changes continuously with respect to time. Reservoir levels and chemical processes are an example of continuous models. The

other classification of the system types is stochastic and deterministic. The difference
between these two systems is the effect of randomness in the system. Randomness does not affect the behaviour of the deterministic system but does affect on stochastic system.

1.2.3.2 Advantages and disadvantages of simulation
Advantages of using simulation (Craig, 1996; Sadowski et al., 1998) include:

· ·
·

Flexibility to applying alternative model Does not interrupt running system
Does not consume resources

· ·
·

Allows uncertainty, no stationary in modeling Advances in computing/cost ratios
Advances in simulation software

The first advantage of simulation is that the designer can give practical feedback to the

company. Simulation can allow for determination in correctness and the efficiency of the
system before physically constructing the new system. On the other hand, simulation can

also provide the company alternative designs or solutions. By analysing the behaviour of
the designs and weighing the ramifications of each model, the best design can be elected. In reality, applying different alternative to the system is very costly and time consuming.

Simulation, however, can help a designer to verify the problems in the different levels of
the company. Therefore, it is better to start the simulation from the higher level. Starting

from the higher level will give the designer an opportunity to understand briefly the instruction of all higher-level components in the system. Therefore, they have the capability to fix the complexity of the system. By having the knowledge from the higherlevel components, the lower level components can be simulated for verification and

20

performance evaluation. The other advantage of simulation is the way it demonstrates behaviour and relations in the system. Simulator software developers make an intelligent
use of computer graphics and animations allowing them to be more visualise and
understood by everybody.

Disadvantages of simulation are (Craig, 1996; Sadowski et al., 1998; McDonald et al.,
2002):

·
· ·

Do not get exact answers, only approximations,
Solves only one scenario at a time, Time consuming and costly.

Simulation is the manipulation of a number of variables of a model indicating a real
world system. Nevertheless, simulation only solves one circumstance at a time. Using a
single variable often means that the reality of the system as a whole can be lost. In reality,

some factors have a lot of influence on the system, but they have indistinct relations in

the system that cannot be represented in a model. These factors, however, cannot be forgotten in the learning process. The other disadvantage is the fact that many people not
believes on what they see, hear, or feel it. Simulation result and output is not exact

because the result is in the form of a distribution. In addition, accurate simulation models
is time consuming- and costly.

1.2.3.3 Simulation tools
There are two types of tools, which can be used to simulate a model; it can be either

simulation of languages or using the simulation graphical packages. Simulation of
language means using the programming language for simulating the model. Even though

using the simulation language is very flexible, it needs the professional programs to make
the model as precise as possible.

A simulation package uses graphical building blocks to simulate the model. This tool uses the blocks with the parametrical values instead of using the long programming

21

language. Graphical interface makes these simulation packages to be as easy as possible
and user friendly. Arena is an example of simulation packages.

McDonald et al. (2002) believe simulation analysis is a useful and important part of
VSM, but they are not proposing that simulation always be utilised with VSM, it can form an integral part of the tool set. Application of the VSM appears to be a perception

within the VSM community to developing the best simulation model and not to utilize the
simulation. On the other hand using simulation software, results cannot just improve the

quality of solutions, but do so in a relatively short time frame (Chan, 1995; Chan and
Abhary, 1996; Chan and Jiang, 1999; Mize et al., 1992; Tabucanon et al., 1998; Zahir et
al., 2000).

1.2.3.4 Simulation steps
In order to have the best result for the simulation model, the following simulation process

can be applied (Altiok and Melamed; 2001; Chung, 2005; Sadowski et al 1998; Ball,
1996).

·

Problem Analysis: The first step is setting up the goals for the project and
defining what needs to be solved to map the solution.

·

Information Collection: This step involves identifying the input parameter and the
performance measurements for the system.

·

Data Collection: Data collection means collecting all kinds of data to estimate the
model input parameters.

·

Model Construction: This next step is to verify how the real system is working, as well as all the requirements, which need to develop the simulation model.

·

Model Verification: Verification means to ensure that the model is working
accurately that could be done through debugging the system.

·

Model

Validation:

Validation means to verify that there is no significant

difference between the real world and the simulated model that could be achieved

through the statistical analysis. In general, validation means making the right
model.

22

·

Simulation Experiments and Output Analysis: -Simulation experiments means

comparing all statistical alternative models with the real systems and subsequently
selecting the optimum solution.

·

Final Recommendations: Based on results, final recommendations are made to
clarify and justify the optimum result.

1.3 Objectives of the Thesis
In most previous studies, application of lean was only in manufacturing or service

environments where the martial or process flow is visible. However, the challenges of

applying lean principles towards a subjective set of processes were not addressed
adequately. In some client-based service sectors, the job is more artistic and the
procedure cannot be the same for all jobs. The variability of the clients' request, coupled

with the creative thought process for completing a product is of an extremely subjective
process, where there exist different methods for achieving a standard product. These

kinds of jobs have too much creativity in it and employees need the environment to apply their ideas towards the job. In this kind of situations, it is not very practical to standardize
each task or perform work measurement and time study that are commonly used in other
processes. On the other hand, circulation of the job is through a computer, which means

each person must submit the final design or retouched design to the next person through

e-mail. Therefore, it is too hard to track either the process flow or the material flow. As a
result the objectives of this thesis are listed below:

·

Identifying the process flow,

·

Finding the bottleneck station and its improvement,

·

Improving the productivity by reducing the process cycle time and increasing the
customer satisfaction,

·

Line balancing and increasing the utilization of each process,

·

Studying and designing a new work standard procedure or revising the old work
standard procedure, and

23

·

Analyzing the efficiency and reducing waste.

1.4 Organization of the Thesis
The objectives and the motivations of this study were discussed in this chapter. In Chapter 2, a case study from company XYZ is described; the company's problem is defined, and finally the methodology is introduced. Chapter 3 provides the mapping of the current-state. This mapping includes the process flow, data collection, data
analysis, and VSM flow and explains extended value stream mapping. Chapter 4

presents the mapping of the future-state. It covers the development of the future state

map and analysing the ideal states. Chapter 5 talks about simulation models and use
of simulation to answer most of the questions, which cannot be addressed by value
stream mapping. Chapter 6 provides the details of the simulation results, discussion, and analysis of this research work. In addition, improvements from every stage of the value stream mapping are compared with each other in this chapter. In Chapter 7,

recommendations and concluding remarks are listed.

24

r
Chapter 2 Case Study
This chapter introduces the business partner where the study was conducted. Due to
privacy and confidentiality issues, the company is referred to as XYZ. This chapter will also provide a discussion of what the problem is and how to approach it.

2.1 Introduction of XYZ
XYZ can best be described as a service company that produces innovative brand imaging solutions that help their clients achieve their own strategic business goals. XYZ specializes in two markets: packaging and advertising. Some of the world's largest companies rely on XYZ to produce quality-branding solutions to stand up to the
competitive advertising world. Their services take the raw concepts from their clients and

transform these into a finished product by undergoing a series of processes, including
printing and plating for the construction of the product.

2.2 Problem Statement
The purpose of the study is to identify and recommend changes that would help improve
XYZ's process in the packaging department using Industrial Engineering techniques.

Identifying and recommending improvements in XYZ proved to have more obstacles
than originally anticipated which is going to be discussed in the next page. The first step is applying lean principles to the subjective set of processes within XYZ. The variability among the request of clients in addition to the need of creative thought process makes it an extremely subjective process. There exist different methods for achieving a standard product. The initial step taken in this study was to meet and discuss with XYZ
representatives. The task was to create a standard framework for this subjective process

in order to indicate performance measures to help track process improvements within the
system. Hence, the following issues arose:

25

·
· · ·

Unclear and ill-defined process fromthe beginning to the end,
Lack of systematic knowledge to optimize the process, Too much delay in the system, Too much redundancy and lack of efficiency in the system,

·

Ill-defined procedures and lack of systematic approach that causes back and forth
flow in the system,

·
·

Lack of customer satisfaction due to inability to deliver on time, and
Lack of balance in operation and poor utilization of resources.

2.3 Solution Approach
In order to solve the problem and achieve the objectives, the primary action was to

understand the workflow from start to finish, with the aid of management. As the first step, VSM needed to be applied to all processes within XYZ that would show the big

picture to everyone involved. In fact, VSM helps everyone to understand the process
flow, responsibilities, and the process time. In addition, VSM highlights the areas which
require improvements. The next step was to apply a simulation model to ensure that the VSM findings are accurate and to find other potential areas of improvement. Since the

process varied from client to client, it was challenging to design a single flow to represent the work within XYZ in the optimum form. Therefore, it was decided later that two distinct flows would be better suited to capture the processes. Based on each process flow, standard performance measures and an analysis of operator workflows were
established in order to perform lean improvements. The next section describes the

methodology that has been used to tackle the stated problem.

2.4 Methodology
This study utilizes several Industrial Engineering methods to identify and measure XYZ's retail packaging process. These methods allow for the collection of relevant data to be

26

served as the basis for the analysis. These methods entail creating a process flow, conducting interviews, collecting processing time via timesheets, obtaining data from

XYZ Link5 and creating a VSM. Each of the above will be discussed in detail.

2.4.1 XYZ process flow

The study started with descriptions of the target work process. The descriptions had two
components: (1) an overview that captures the purpose of the work process flow from the
raw concepts to a finished product and certain details about it (e.g., inputs, outputs,

departments with which it coordinates); and (2) a process flow map that highlights the
sequence of operations that executed it. The initial process flow has been developed

through a series of meeting with management (Figure 2-1). The first process flow
contains the following elements:

·

Clients:

o ·

Sending the designs scope and initial design of product to XYZ,

Account manager/Customer Service Representative (CSR): o Dealing with clients regarding cost, projects deadline, project properties,

o

Distributing the job between operators in team-based process or sending the
job to the foreman for non-team-based process,

o
·

Final quality control.

Foreman:

o

Scheduling the operators,

o
·

Distributing the job between operators (in non-team-based process).

Operator:

o
o

Designing the files,
Preps the products,

XYZ Link: XYZ software data base contains employee's schedules, the number and name of the

employee who is working on each job, the duration of each job, the time that each employee spends on each task, the number of replications of each job, complete details of each order, the task on each order
and the total cost

27

o
o

Quality check,
Proofreading

The early work process map was shown to the management team for approval, and necessary corrections were made. Based on their opinions, the study was divided into two
categories:

·
·

Team-based (which was originally known as Corporate),
Non-team-based (originally known as Non-corporate).

Once the process flow for each stream was finalized, interviews were conducted with the

personnel that worked on the production floor. Each job position that touched the product was interviewed to obtain a more detailed understanding of the flow and identify
opportunities for improvement. Once completed, these interviews provided a new outlook on the overall process flow; hence, more process flows were generated. The process flows for Team-based (Figure 2-2) and non-team-based (Figure 2-3) were revised four times until the final process flows were formed and accepted by management.

2.4.2 Interviews

The work process was closely observed by focusing on and understanding the process
from beginning to end. Some observations were made by asking questions and making notes of what account managers, operators, CSR's, and foremen pointed out. After the walk through, informal personal interviews were conducted from each employee (5 CSR, 3 Foreman, 3 Proofreaders and 9 operators in assembly department) in order to gather perception regarding the work process, understand the process, and understand the potential elements of waste in the process and ways to eliminate it. Informal interviews
helped to better understand the role and the responsibility of each employee in process. In

addition, it helped to realize where/who the job is coming from and where/ who the job going to next. It is concluded that personal informal interviews for gathering workers' judgments had a better outcome than asking the questions during the walk through.

28

XYZ Process Flow v1.0
September 22,2007

T

f

err =

Kick off meeting

Sort out details such
as printer specs, # of colours, Art, timeline,
deadline, etc.

' with client to
discuss the design of the product

Assigns a Team

HCjneet Customei\>

xDoesProbfv

Sends finished
product to

^xjemandsjK

Customer

C/)
-Yes-

Team preps the file

Quality check by
Team

Team adds colours

2nd Quality check
by Team

and creates a proof

to proof

b
Create Plates / Send files to print shop

a. .£ o.
LL O

Q

Figure 2-1: XYZ corporate process (team-based process flow)

By interviewing employees, it was also found that there were no standard procedures for each task, and, therefore, the work-order needed to go through several iterations, back and forth between different departments, until the final desired outcome was achieved. Operators' comments brought up the fact that the work-orders were not standardized,
which caused them to misunderstand and be unclear about the actual work that needed to

be done. Once the interviews were concluded, the data showed inconsistency between what management perceived of the workflow, and what the production floor personnel
perceived to be the process flow. These interviews demonstrated more detail about both team-based and non-team-based processes, which are going to be discussed.

Team-based process: The team-based process always starts from account manager task. The account manager filters all incoming files and ensures that they are complete, and
then sends them to the CSR for creating pre-flight. Any incomplete file is filtered back to the client for revision. CSR creates pre-flight documentations based on client files and sends them to the operators for assessment. The operators complete the assessment, then send the files back to the CSR. The CSR then sends the pre-fight to the client for

approval. The next step is having the kick-off meeting, which involves the CSR, account
manager and client to discuss timelines, costs, deadlines and other details for the product. The CSR creates a work-order outlining the precise client requirements for the product. The operator preps the product and converts the file using the illustrator programs. The

product is sent to the colour department for colouring after the first quality check, which is performed by the same assembly operator. The product is then given back to the CSR
to assign another operator to perform the second quality check. After the second quality check, the product is given back to the CSR, who hands it off to the proofreading department. The proofreader checks the clayture, architecture, and typography of the

product according to ISO standards. Any discrepancies are handed back to the CSR. They
send the product to the client for final approval. If the client is unsatisfied with the

results, the process will start from the beginning. The product (soft copy), proof, and the
plates are sent to the client or printer. Non-team-based process: Team-based and non-team-based processes are identical up to

the point that the CSR creates the work-order. In the non-team-based process, the work-

30

order is handed over to the foreman to assess the job and assign it to an operator, based
on job complexity, priority, and operator availability. The operators are responsible to prep the product, convert the file using the illustrator program and do the first quality

check on the product. The product will be sent to the foreman to be assigned to another
operator to perform a second quality check. After completing the second quality check,

the product is given back to the foreman to hand it off to the proofreading department. The proofreader checks the clayture, architecture, and typography of the product
according to ISO standards; any discrepancies are handed back to the foreman in order to be returned to the CSR. The CSR sends the final product to the client for further
approval.

In addition, the employees' points of view were helpful to define the complete process

flow. The next step was to identify the elements of the waste and the bottleneck stations in the process. Timesheets were created to collect all data relating to the current-state
processing times of each task.

2.4.3 Timesheets

To measure the current-state process of a docket (a single job), a timesheet was

developed to identify starting time, handoff time, duration of each task, period of time

that the job is idle and nobody is working on it, operator's feedback and so forth. These
would serve as the main performance measures to determine system efficiency. A timesheet was attached to each docket and any personnel that worked on the docket would sign off and write the specific heading details on the timesheet. The information would yield the value-added time (the time the production personnel performed changes

to the docket) as well as the non-value-added time (the time the docket spent in transport,
waiting to be picked up, etc.). This non-value-added time produced waste in the system's
efficiency that could be tightened up to increase productivity potential.

31

Customer Service
RepVAccount Manager

to to

1
o

3

1
8
o

?

6e
CD

XYZ

Non-Corporate Process v4.0

off meeting with client and
acont manager to

Sort out details such as printer specs, # of

discuss the design f the product

colours, art, timeline,
deadline, etc.

Create production work order.

Verifies proof with client

product to Clten

Send finished

Create a schedule

Assign 2n"
Operator for Quajtjf..check

Finalizes proof
and sends to GSR / Accoun

and assign an operator

2nd Quality checK
by Departmen

Errors?

>-Yes^< Errors fixed?

Figure 2-3: XYZ non-corporate process (non-team-based process flow)

"S<]AISA 3}B}S-9Jninj pue 9}eis iu9S9jd 9qj joj uoiiepunoj

ou pu# anjEA 9q} urejqo 0} J/\[SA 9TP °lu! p^nduioo 9J9AV
9qx "P9JJOO ojoav sdurejs 9iup aqj ieq} AJIJ9A oj 5[uiq ZAX ^ p9JEduioo seav sp9qs9inp

sq* uo 9ui| qoug *(^'8I ~ S'Ll) "^'3 ssuip §ud[joa\ \qtx\ou sqj sqsbo quios ut pire '(smoq

3*0) '§'9 5[sbj lEjnopied ^ uo ;usds grap jo uop^jnp oq; pspiAOjd 5[UTq ZAX "S1AISA
dopAOp o) posn 9J9a\ B^p 3[uiq ZAX Pu^ spoqsouip Suiqo^ui p^q ^qj sjqpjo-5[jom.
sjQpio-5[iOA\ 9|qBjd333^ jo isquinu aq; poonpaj ^q; punoj J3}ej qjq

tda^s jBptuo ^ s^av siqx 'juiod qono} Ajqaq jb papiduioo qiqav
uo B^p oqi }eq} Qinsus o^ pasn sbav ^uiq ZAX m0JJ uop^uuojux

p aqj uiojj paureiqo ^iBp oqj ajusa 01 jopjo uj -;soo yzw\ sq^ pu^ japjo qoB9 uo

'jgpjo qoB3 jo s^repp opjduioo 'sjnpaqos 39Ao|dui9 oqj surejuoo ji pue qof jo SU0TSIA9J jo jgqumu aqj '5[s^ qoB9 uo pirads 39Ao|dui9 qo^s i^qi suip sq; 'ssaooid
jo uop^inp oqj spjoosj ;x uoptpp^ uj ·93A"ojdui9 qo^a joj A^d pu^ sinoq §ud[joa\

oj pasn si ;x pu^ Xu^duioo sq^ \v 3\qv\\VAS si iBqi uop^oqdd^ aieAvgos b st ^pixq ZAX

vvz

9J9AV pUE p9S§BJJ 9J9AY

I99qs9uip oqi o^ psieduioo sbav ^piiq ZAX
-qof qo^9 uo ;u9ds auip jo lunoui^ aqi pu^
'joo]J uoipnpojd 9qi 01 pg^nqiJisip puB Sj9p

'sSuxpuxj sssqi
Jisqi ui paflij

9J9A\

90UQ *P9fojd 9qj jo sisA^bub 9qj joj p9p99u
uotibuuojui 9qi q^iM sujjoj

9qa p9onpojd
o;
9J9A\

p9A0jduii ub psppiK (q xxpu9ddy)

a\9U uiojj

·9SI0UO0 9joui si ^qi BiBp 9A9iqoB 01

J9qioire pire 4x9|duioo
JO SIS£[UW3 9qi OJUI

OOl 9q 01 p9A0jd UUOJ IBT1IUI 9qi 'J9A9AV0JJ *9Uip P9P9HO0
5[0^qp99J StJOlEJ9dQ 9q^ SUIA{GAUI UO p9SllOOJ

oi 4idui9^ ue ui p9ApAut 5[ssi gqi sb qotis 'B^p 9ApB^x{Bnb uo p9snooj

p 9qx

r
2.4.5 Value stream mapping

The Value Stream Map (VSM) plays an important role in the study as it serves as an
excellent visual tool to evaluate value-added and non-value-added time. The VSM is a

lean technique that is used to analyze the flow of materials and information required to complete a work-order and deliver the finished goods to the client. Value-added time is
considered to be any processing time that directly adds value to the final product. It is categorized as any number of tasks including adding a die line, proofreading, completing a pre-flight, etc. Inversely, non-value-added time is defined as any time that does not add value to the finished product, such as transport time, waiting time, etc. The general

method of application for the VSM is to first identify the process to be studied. Once the
process is identified, time studies are used to determine the Takt time for a work-order. To gather data for the time studies, timesheets were attached to the work-order and all
personnel that 'touched' the work-order were required to document their times and tasks.

This data led to the current-state map for the VSM, which provides an overall idea for the production time of one work-order. The current-state maps also allows for the

hypothesized development of a future-state map, where certain processing scenarios
could be reallocated to eliminate or decrease the production time.

After collecting data from all sources, the next step is to map the current-state in order to

calculate all value-added and non-value-added time. This step will be discussed in the
next chapter.

35

Chapter 3

Mapping the Current State

This chapter is about mapping the current-state, which represents the value stream of the company as it is today. VSM is used to identify the processes and set in value-added

and non-value-added times. From the knowledge obtained through the interviews and the

finalized process flows, a 'map' is created that outlines the general procedural flow that
any given docket follows. The systematic approach to mapping the current-state follows
three steps that are discussed in this chapter:

·

Data collection and analysis

·
·

VSMflow
Value stream map

3,1 Data Collection and Analysis
Since the criterion of each job is imaginative and artistic, the information and time studies
cannot be collected by walking through the process from the account manager's end to the

customer's end. Therefore, time sheets are created in order to gather the data. The timesheets are created for two different reasons. The first reason is a qualitative aspect to find more

details about each task that every operator is working on, and secondly, it is necessary to measure the time during which each process takes place and the time between each two
consecutive tasks. The first timesheet provided less desirable quantitative information

than expected; hence, the second timesheet was created. The purpose of the second timesheet is to record the touch times by each person to determine the non-processing time. The timesheet is attached to the work-order in each docket and starting to record data from the point when the CSR creates the work-order until the job is finished and it is ready to be sent to clients. All employees should fill in their tasks and the amount of time
spent on the job plus the time it takes to hand the docket to the next person. In order to validate these findings, data from XYZ Link is compared to the timesheets that

employees have filled out. This data is verified with the time stamps from XYZ Link later

36

to find cases of inconsistent data. There are cases where the employee enters hours worked into XYZ Link but not on the timesheets, and vice versa. However, the data obtained through XYZ Link proved to be unreliable due to the fact that employees only
record the duration of their work, and not the actual hours worked. Work durations are

helpful to identify value-added time; however, the non-value-added time or the amount of time that the work-order spent in transit, and waited to be picked up is unknown.
Therefore, the completed timesheets are divided into two categories.

The first category is composed of all the data that is used to develop the VSMs. This data
consists of all the information that is correctly filled out with valid time stamps and is

validated by data collected from XYZ Link. The second category consists of all data that

did not fit the criteria needed for the VSM. This data is not included on the VSM because
the employees produce incomplete timesheets that cannot be validated by XYZ Link.

Out of 45 time sheets received, 29 had some data. From those 29, 14 time sheets are used

for the VSM, and 15 time sheets are unusable because of the lack proper data. Any
discrepancies are flagged and examined at a later day.

The next stage is to create the summary sheet- for all the collected data. The summary

sheets are divided into categories of team-based and non-team-based. The next step is to identify the value-added and non-value-added times for each category. The value-added time is derived from the timesheets and XYZ Link, whereas the non-value-added time is calculated from the timesheets. The non-value-added time is calculated in two ways: the hand-off time from one person to another and the time between receiving the job and the
actual start time. When calculating the value-added and non-value-added time for each

work-order in each category, the average non-value-added time in the team-based
category is found to be 116 hours and 58 minutes. Moreover, the non-value-added time in

the non-team-based category is calculated to be 240 hours and 59 minutes, which is more

than double the value of the non-value-added time that is found in the team-based
category (Table 3-1 and Table 3-2). In general, for team-based and non-team-based, the

37

percentages of the non-value-added time verses the total time are 85% and 95%
respectively.

Table 3-1: Total value-added and non-value-added time
Item

Team-based 6085 35094

Non-team-based

Total value-added (min)
Total non-value-added (min)

7799 14639
14460 94.8%

Average non-value-added (min) Percentage of non-value-added

7019
85.2%

3.2 VSMFlow
The first stage of the analysis involves organizing the data from the timesheets. This data

is transferred into Excel®. This step involves analysing XYZ's process flow. In each
timesheet there is a column entitled "Who is the job going to next?" By using that column, the process flow for each work-order can be found. Meanwhile, by gathering all the common process flow in each work-order, the complete VSM process flow for the company for team-based and non-team-based could be finalized as shown in Figure 3-1
and Figure 3-2.

Figure 3-1: VSM flow for team-base process

Receive

1

1

Create

Product from Client

 "fl
1

Pre" flight

,,!

Kick-off Meeting

Create Work Order

Product Allocation

Assembly

Quality
control

^

ProofReading

Figure 3-2: VSM flow for non-team-base process

38

Team Based

Non-Team Based

Client Client

B A A

154:09:00

87 673* 2 9 8 : 5 2 0 38:420
ABC

PNon-valued eorcnftag
82.72%

O W r o d e k N V A V A S u m 3 7 : 4 0 8o.5f4%
Table 3-2: Value-added and non-value-added for all work-orders
ABC

Average Non-Value Added for Team Based

Average Non-Value Added for Non-Team Based

87 049 2 8 1 : 2 8 0 12:30
S A A

97.30%

8 7 5 4 3 2 2 3 : : 0 0 3999527...7420%%% 215::010 865
8 8 7 7 6 0 4 5 3 2 4 5 : 1 0 229635::5130 20:1
SAA BAA
129:59:00

Non-valued
N896..8%%Peorcntfag3S7um0546:V21A8OW7rod3e0k5
116:58:48 240:59:48

Total

101:25:00

686:19:00

584:54:00

2539:57:00

2409:58:00

94.88%

85.22%

3.3 Value Stream Mapping
In order to create the value stream map, all the value-added time and non-value-added
time for each tatsk is calculated. However, due to the complexity of the current procedures, there is a significant amount of backtracking in the processes. Therefore, the

VSM only considers the data that is related to the general process. Backtracking is not
included in the VSM (i.e. proofreading to operator) and it is allocated to a separate

section labelled "Unknown". By inputting all the values that are related to the general path in the VSM shell, the average non-value-added time and the value-added time for each task are calculated. Figure 3-3 and Figure 3-4 show the current-state map for both team-based and non-team-based processes that are constructed. The small boxes in the
map represent the process and the big boxes underneath of them represent the description of each task. In addition, each process has a data box below it, which contains the process

cycle time (value-added time). In addition, between each two processes there is a data
arrow bar, which represents the production waiting time (non-value-added time) between

each two processes. For example, the average process time for CSR to create the workorder in the team-based category is 94 minutes and the average waiting time after creating the work-order until the operator starts to work on it, is 5 hours and 58 minutes. Thus, the average lead-time for a team-based process is around 8 hours and 7 minutes and for a non-team-based category is around 7 hours and 7 minutes. The average non-valueadded time for the entire team-based process is 35 hours and 56 minutes. However, the non-value-added time for the non-team-based is 108 hoursand 51 minutes; this works out to 11% of the total production lead-time for team-based and 2% of the lead time for nonteam-based. Table 3-3 and Table 3-4 illustrate key indicators for the value-added and non

value-added time for both the team-based and non-team-based categories oh the current-state.

40

TEAM-BASED VSM
(CUKRINT STATE)
Account Manager filters

The proofing department creates a proof.

ncomming files and ensures

that they are complete
Any incomplete files are

If the client requests, plates will also be created.
The product (soft copy). proof, and the plates are sent to the client or printer.

filtered back to the client for revision

SR creates preflight documentation based on

client files and sends to the operator for assessment. The operator completes the
assessment and send it back

fhe CSR then sends the

CSR sends finished product for»pprora I CSR sends preflight to Client for approval
L ueai approves product

woduct to the client for final
approval. f the client is unsatisfied with

to the CSR. The CSR then send the preflight to the client for
approval.

he results, the process will start form the beginning.

Involves the CSR. ACM. client, andtor Printer. The product is sent to the proof reading department.

Account manager finalizes printer specifications, number of colours, art, timeline, cost, deadline and other details for
the product.A purchase order

The proof reader checks the clayture, architecture and
typography of the product according to ISO standards.

is created by the Client for XYZ outlining the proper
identification numbers and
SKU's for the work order

Any discrepancies are handed back to the Foreman in order
to give to the CSR

The product is then given to

the Foreman f CSR and they assign another operator to CSR creates a work order
outlining the precise Client
equirements for the product

perform a quality check. After the second quality check, the product is given

NVA that does not follow the VSM path

back to the CSR. who then hands it off to the F
and then is given to the Proof

The operator preps the
product and converts it using the illustrator programs.The product is sent to the colour

14:15:21

department for colouring.

Value- Added Time: Unit Proctes Time

After the colour department, the same operator converts (ESKO) the file/The same operator then performs a quality check on the product.

Non-Value-Added Time = Set up time + wait time + Transfer Time

Figure 3-3: VSM for team-based (current-state)

NON-TEAM BASED VSM

(CURRENT STATE)
The proofing department

Account Manager filters incoming files and ensures

creates -s proof. If the client requests, plates

that they are complete Any incomplete files are sent
back to the client for revision

will also be created.

The product (soft copy).
proof, and the plates are sent

to the client or printer.

Involves the CSR. ACM, client, andtor Printer. Account manager finalizes

printer specifications, number of colours, art, timeline, cost,
deadline and other details for

CSR Mads funked pro duct fo r approval
C lieat approves pro duct

the product.A purchase order is created by the Client (or

XYZ outlining the proper identification numbers and
SKU's for the work order.

The product is sent to the proof reading department.

CSR creates a work order
outlining the precise Client requirements for the product

The proof reader checks the clayture, architecture and
typography of the product

according to ISO standards. Any discrepancies are handed back to the Foreman in order to give to the CSR

The product is then given to The job is handed over to a

Foreman. The Foreman assess the job, and assigns it to an operator
based on job

the Foreman f CSR and they assign another operator to perform a quality check. After the second quality check, the product is given back to the CSR. who then

NVA that does not follow the
VSM path

completfityr'priority and operator availability

hands it ofF to the Foreman
and then is given to the Prool

operator preps the product and converts it using the illustrator programs.The product is sent to the colour department for colouring. After the colour department.
the same operator converts

26:05:08

(ESKO) the file.The same
operator then performs a

Value- Added Time: Unit Procces Time

quality check on the product

Non-Value-Added Time - Set up time + wait rime + Transfer Time

Figure 3-4: VSM for non-team-based (current-state)

42

Table 3-3: VSM summery for non-team-based

1

J Value-added

Non-value-added 2:47:26

i

^^^^^
Quality Control

3:25:39

i

1

EBE^^I^^^H
7:01:36

:

4:40:38

EB^H^M^WII^B^^BBri'^fr52
i i ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^B0:56:50
^

45:32:50 19:18:00
26:05:08 108:51:17

1

JBBB^^^B!^^^MBB"7:07:52

--

Table 3-4: VSM summery for team-based

l^^^^^^^^^^^^^^l Value-added

^^^^^^^^^^^^Jj^^J|^^^j"T^34!o2

Non-value-added

5:58:25
2:20:37

r
1

itJlMHillJMMi^^B^Mil^MWWn'ziR-nQ

1
1

2:00:00
5:37:24

5:45:00

Unknown Non-value-added

^^^^^^^^Hl^^l 14:15:21

1

|^^

..--J

~

35:56:47

"

81(

43

By looking over the current-state map VSM, several factors can be identified andare listed
below:

·

The difference between the total production lead time (36 hours) and the value-added time (8 hours) is fewer than 19% of the total time for team-based. The difference

between the total production lead-time (108 hours) and the value-added time (7
hours) is fewer than 6% of the total time for non-team-based category.
·
·

QC2 and proofreading tasks deal with the quality of the product.
The average non-value-added time in the non-team-based category is more than

double the value of the average non-value-added time in the team-based category.
· · There is a large amount of non-value-added time between each station. CSR must wait for client to respond, this may be a lengthy process.

The first step to create the ideal future-state map is to identify lean manufacturing tools, by looking at the schedule across the entire value stream. Therefore, the following scenarios can
be considered which will be discussed in detail in the next chapter:

· ·

Scenario A: Redefining the Quality Control department Scenario B: Redefining the foreman task

o o

Scenario B.I: Eliminating the foreman task Scenario B.2: Reallocating the foreman and introducing a planner

·

Scenario C: Redefining the Quality Control department and eliminating the foreman
task

Table 3-5: All different scenarios and their involved elements

CSR

Foreman

Planner

Assembly

QC2

Proofreading

Quality

Control
Department Base-case
-

Scenario A
Scenario B.I Scenario B.2

</

-

-

V
v

</

-

-

; ''.:

-

.

.

-

 

/

.


-

V
 .--: .

'.. ;-' :. .-.- '
V

Scenario C

-

44

Chapter 4

Mapping the Future State

4.1 Development of the Future State Map
A future-state map is an improved version of a current-state map. The first step in creating
the future-state map is to identify the elements of waste in the current-state map:

·

Waiting: due to unbalanced working stations, operators have to wait to receive the
job from the previous operators.

·

Unutilized processes: to improve the utilization of the workers and the work
processes, some steps such as quality control and proofreading must be combined.

·

Unnecessary processes:

due to various delays in the system, unreliable and

unnecessary steps must be revised or eliminated.

·

Unnecessary transportation: due to the push system, jobs are moved within and

between different stations. Every additional movement of parts involves double
handling, which causes waste.

The next step is to follow a systematic procedure where the structured questions can be
answered; this allows one to come up with an ideal future-state map that would help to eliminate or at least reduce different types of waste in the current service system.

1.

What is the Takt time?

Takt time refers to the rate which customers receive the product from the company. The unit production rate is needed to match customer's requirements. It is calculated by dividing the total available time per day by the daily customer demand. The average
customer demand is 47 orders per month for team-based and 73 orders per month for

non-team-based. XYZ continuously runs for 10 hours per day, which translates to 200

working hours per month, so that the Takt time is approximately ( 200/47 ) 4.26 hour per order for team-based and (200/73 ) 2.74 hour per order for non-team-based category.

45

2.

Is there any bottleneck or constrain? In this system, the foreman position creates too much delay in the system. Therefore, the
foreman position could be called as a bottleneck station.

3.

Where the inventory (or queue time) can be reduced? The queue time in the system could be reduced through having the standard processing
flow and by utilizing all stations. In this case, the process could be utilized by creating a Quality Control department. The Quality Control department will be responsible for both proofreading and controlling the quality of each job.

4.

Where the flow can be improved? The flow can be improved through having unique process flow, standard working

procedures for each station, and having the standard work-orders and standard preflights.

5.

What improvements are required?
Service Level Agreement (SLA), which is a contract between clients and XYZ, is required to improve the process. The SLA addresses the conditions for quality of the services, such as response time, availability, and timelines. After reviewing all the worksheets, it is found out that the waiting time for a client to get an approval for the job from the CSR is rather lengthy. In fact, the job shows as being in process, but is not being worked on by anyone. Therefore, by having SLA, the production time of the process could be improved and eliminate some of the non-value-added time of the
process.

6.

What process improvements will be necessary to have improvement?
The following are some of the improvements required to reach the future-state:

·

Reduction in change-over time, reworks, defects, and total delays at the foreman station.

46

·

Elimination of waste in Assembly Line, Quality Control, Proofreading, and CSR departments by creating the standard working procedure.

· ·
·

Reduction of the process cycle time and total work content. Elimination of waste by replacing planner instead of foreman.
Standardization of the pre-flight

4.2 Value Stream Mapping
Since the goal is to identify the potential dynamic gains from implementing lean and to

develop a desirable future-state map, four scenarios are going to introduce that can be
quantified and modeled objectively. In this section, each of these scenarios will be explained
in detail.

4.2.1 Scenario A

The first potential development for improving the process time in each job would be to combine the Quality Control and Proofreading departments. Since both of these tasks deal

with the quality of the product to ensure that there are no errors, they complement each other.
With the combined department, processing time for the team-based would yield a 5%
pessimistic case improvement as illustrated in Table 4-1. Pessimistic case means all the data

in the "Unknown" block, which was the combination of value-added time and non-valueadded time, was considered as the non-value-added time so there is no value-added time in the "Unknown" block. On the other hand, with the combined department, processing time for the team-based would yield a 46% optimistic case improvement as illustrated in Table 4-2.
Optimistic case means, all the data in the "Unknown" block, was considered as the value added time, which added the value to the whole process. Similarly, the improvement with a non-team-based scenario would yield 6% as shown in Table 4-3 for a pessimistic case and

35% for the optimistic case as illustrated in Table 4-4Both proofreading and quality control
are also performed toward the end of the set of tasks needed to finalize the docket before the CSR submits it to the client. The formation of the new Quality Control department, which
encompasses second quality check and proofreading, allows for better utilization of

employees through cross-training and job rotation. In addition, to improved process times,

this department provides a better level of accountability as all dockets will be processed

47

through this department. A task for the continuous improvement office team could be the evaluation of the feasibility of having the work-order proofread at the initial stages of production. This would not only identify the client and XYZ errors, but also prevent the errors from traveling through the production line, thereby eliminating the unnecessary time and cost of rework. Hence, the Quality Control department has the potential to improve
quality, accountability, personnel utilization, and processing time. Figure 4-1 to Figure 4-4

illustrated the VSM for both team-based and non-team-based category for pessimistic and
optimistic cases. Table 4-1: VSM summery for team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department (pessimistic case) Value-added time Create a Work Order 1:34:02

Non-value-added time
5:58:25

1
Assembly

1
3:44:17
Quality Control Department Final Approval
Unknown Non-value-added 8:07:14

2:20:37

1:55:37

1

5:37:24 5:37:24

| 0:53:18
14:15:21 33:56:47 5.6 %

I

Improvement Percentage :

Table 4-2: VSM summery for team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department (optimistic case) Value-added time
Non-value-added time 5:58:25

BSEEIMBBSBBBBBf^34!o2"

2:20:37

1

Quality Control Department

BiBstfldfiMW^^^^B
5:37:24

Final Approval

IflEJffEBBMB^MI
19:41:26

BiSBBBBBBB^BBBi 8:07:i4
Improvement Percentage :

mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm

HJ^^HHH^^^KESE9^^HHIH^H

48

Table 4-3: VSM summary for non-team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department (pessimistic case)

1

Value-added time
Create a Work Order Product Allocation Assembly

Non-value-added time 2:47:26

I
1

 

tzzzzz
.
0:05:00 2:36:12
2:08:41

1:18:20

 :.,-  

3:25:39
4:40:38

I

Quality Control Department
Final Approval Unknown Non-value-added

zzzzzz
0:56:50
-----7:07:52

45:32:50 19:18:00

26:05:08
101:49:41

1

Improvement Percentage :

r

% 6.5

Table 4-4: VSM summary for non-team-based category with redefining the Quality Control
department (optimistic case)

I--. :,--.

Create a Work Order

,

Value-added time 1:18:20

Non-value-added time 2:47:26

Product Allocation

I

| 0:05:00
3:25:39
2:36:12

Assembly

4:40:38

Quality Control Department

2:08:41

45:32:50

1

0:56:50 19:18:00

Final Submission
7:07:52

E^OII^HHIHHHHii
Improvement Percentage :

75:44:33
30.5 %

49

TEAM BASED VSM

(REDEFINE THE QUALITY DEPRATMENT)
Account Manager filters The proofing department

ncomming files and ensures that they are complete Any incomplete files are filtered back to the client For revision

creates a prooF. IF the client requests, plates will also be created. The product (soft copy), proof, and the plates are sent to the client or printer.

SB creates preflight documentation based on client files and sends to the operator for assessment. The operator completes the assessment and send it back to the CSR. The CSR then send the preflight to the client (or
approval.

The CSR then sends the product to the client for final
Cheat approve* product

approval. If the client is unsatisfied with the results, the process will start form the beginning.

Involves the CSR, ACM. client, and/or Printer.

Quality department/The proof

Account manager finalizes printer specifications, number of colours, art. timeline, cost. deadline and other details For the product..0, purchase order is created by the Client for XYZ outlining the proper identification numbers and
Sk'l I'c fnr rhp wnrk nrrlpr

reader and operator perForm a quality check and the clayture, architecture and typography oF the product according to ISO standards.Any discrepancies are handed back to the Foreman in order to give to
the CSR

CSR creates a work order

operator preps the product and converts it using the illustrator programs.The product is sent to the colour
department for colouring. After the colour department,
the same operator converts

outlining the precise Client requirements for the product.

NVA that does not Follow the VSM path

(ESKO) the file The same operator then performs a

qualitu check on the product.

14:15:21

Value- Added Time: Unit Procces Time

Non-Value-Added Time = Set up time + watt time + Transfer Time

Figure 4-1: VSM for team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department (pessimistic case)

50

TEAM-BASED VSM
QUALITY DEPRATMENI)
Account Manager filters ncomming files and ensures that they are complete Any incomplete files are

The proofing department
creates a proof. If the client requests, plates will also be created. The product (soft copy).

filtered
back to the client for revision

proof, and the plates are sent
to the client or printer.

SR creates preflight

documentation based on

client files and sends to the
operator For assessment. The operator completes the assessment and send it back lotheCSR.

The CSR then sends the product to the client for final approval.

If the client is unsatisfied with
the results, the process will start form the beginning.

The CSR then send the
preflight to the client for

approval.

Involves the CSR, ACM. client, andtor Printer.

The product is sent to the Quality department.The proof

Account manager finalizes printer specifications, number of colours, art. timeline, cost,
deadline and other details for

reader and operator perform a quality check and the

clayture. architecture and
typography of the product according to ISO standards.Any discrepancies are handed back to the

the product.A purchase order
is created by the Client for

XYZ outlining the proper identification numbers and
SKU's far the work order

Foreman in order to give to
the CSR

The operator preps the

product and converts it using

the illustrator programs.The
CSR creates a work order outlining the precise Client requirements for the product product is sent to the colour
for colouring.

After the colour department, the same operator converts

(ESKO) the file.The same
operator then performs a

2:20:37

quality check on the product.

Value- Added Time: Unit Procces Time Non-Value-Added Time = Set up time + wait time + Transfer Time

Figure 4-2: VSM for team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department (optimistic case)

NON-TEAM-BASED VSM
(REDEFINE QUALITY DEPRATMEiNT)
The proofing department creates a proof. If the client requests, plates

Account Manager filters
incoming files and ensures

that they are complete
Any incomplete files are sent back to the client for revision

will also be created. The product (soft copy).
proof, and the plates are sent to the client or printer.

Involves the CSR.ACM.

client, andtor Printer.
Account manager finalizes

printer specifications, number

of colours, art. timeline, cost,
deadline and other details for he product.A purchase order

CSR«n<hfhusked product for approval
Client approves pro due t

is created by the Client for
XYZ outlining the proper

identification numbers and SKU's for the work order.

product is sent to the
Quality department The proof reader and operator perform CSR creates a work order

a quality check and the
clayture, architecture and

outlining the precise Client requirements for the product.

typography of the product

according to ISO standards.Any discrepancies are handed back to the
F

The operator preps the
The job is handed over to a

product and converts it using

Foreman. The Foreman assess the job,
and assigns it to an operator

the illustrator programsThe
product is sent to the colour department for colouring. After the colour department,
the same operator converts

NVA that does not follow the
VSM path

based on job
complexityr'priority and
operator availability

(ESKO) the file/The same operator then performs a quality check on the product

26:05:08

Value- Added Time: Unit Proecu Time Non-Value-Added Time = Set up time + wait time + Transfer Time

Figure 4-3: VSM for non-team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department (pessimistic case)
52

NON-TEAM-BASED VSM
(REDEFINE QUALITY DEPRATMENT)
The proofing department creates a proof. If the client requests, plates
will also be created.

Account Manager filters incoming files and ensures
that they are complete Any incomplete Hies are sent

The product (soft copy),

back, to the client (or revision

proof, and the plates are sent to the client or printer.

Involves the CSR. ACM. client, and/or Printer. Account manager finalizes printer specifications, number of colours, art, timeline, cost,
deadline and other details for

CSR leads finished pro duct for approval
Client approves product

Th* CSR tt.fr, j*«4, It.. WhU to MM
:li»M for final approval.

If th» iffuli «M rtfrfb I uith th*

he product.A purchase order is created by the Client for XYZ outlining the proper identification numbers and SKU's for the work order.

J
19:18:00

nivma I'll vji hi

I outlining the precise Client

CSR creates a work order

requirements for the product.

operator preps the

The job is handed over to a Foreman. The Foreman assess the job. and assigns it to an operator based on job

product and converts it using the illustrator programs.The product is sent to the colour department for colouring. After the colour department,
the same operator converts

02:27:46

complexity/priority and operator availability

03:25:39

(ESKO) the Hle.The same
operator then performs a quality check on the product.

04:48:30

0:05:00

Value Added Time: Unit Procces Time

Non-Value-Added Time - Set up time + wait time + Transfer Time

Figure 4-4: VSM for on-team-based category with redefining the Quality Control department (optimistic case)

4.2.2 Scenario B

The second possible step to improve the process is to compare and find the bottleneck stations of the system. By comparing both team-based and non-team-based non-values-added

time, one of the first ideas is to eliminate the foreman's role. The foreman has two responsibilities in the current system, these being scheduling the operators and assigning the
jobs to each operator. The role of the foreman causes a delay in the system because each
operator must submit the job to the foreman, who then has to allocate it to another operator

to continue the process. This back and forth in the system causes a huge amount of delay.
Therefore, the first idea is to eliminate and the second is to reallocate the foreman position,
and both will be discussed in the next section.

4.2.2.1 Scenario B.I

Based on the analysis of the VSMs, it is concluded that a potential method to reduce the
overall processing1 time would be to eliminate and redefine the foreman position. It is

determined that with this change, an overall improvement of the process by 3.2% in a
pessimistic case as shown in Table 4-5 and 35% in an optimistic case as illustrated in Table
4-6 could be obtained. Redefinition of the foreman position would eliminate a series of

unnecessary touch points, thus improving productivity by eliminating the waste time
involved. The necessary tasks that the foreman executes could be transferred to the CSR's or

operators' duties. With this potential change, the GSR would work with other CSRs and schedule tasks according to job priorities. The CSRs could also perform the necessary quality
checks, and transport the files to Proofreading or Quality Control department. This, in turn,

would increase the value-added time for the CSRs; however, this increase would be less than

the value-added and non-value-added time for the foreman. Still, it should be noted that the foreman is a salary-based position and does not input work hours into XYZ Link. Hence, if the foreman does not accurately record the information in the timesheets attached to the
work-order, there would be no data obtained for the task. A broader range of data gathering

methods, such as video capture and stopwatch studies could determine what the foreman's
daily duties are, and how much time is required for their completion. However, based on the
observed data sheets, completed by XYZ's employees, the reallocation of the foreman's

 '  :  ' '· V- '

. '· -.. ' " '

-.;. " , 54

. v . : ;: ' ^ ^

" '  - : ,.' .

duties to operators and CSRs would benefit the work-order process and lead time per docket.

Figure 4-5 and Figure 4-6 illustrated the VSM for non-team-based category for both
pessimistic and optimistic cases.

Table 4-5:

VSM

summary for non-team-based category with

eliminating foreman

(pessimistic case)

|
Create a Work Order

| Value-added time

Non-value-added time
2:47:26

1
1
i

Assembly

1

| 1:18:20

| 2:36:12
4:40:38

0:51:49
7:01:36 Proofreading 1:16:52

1

Final Approval

1

45:32:50
19:18:00

1 0:56:50
26:05:08

Unknown Non-value-added

1
case)

Improvement Percentage :

'

7:07:52: ^

105:25:28
3.2%

Table 4-6: VSM summary for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman (optimistic

1

i Value-added time

Non-value-added time
2:47:26

Assembly

2:36:12

1

Quality Control
Proofreading

1

4:40:38

I
1

I

"0:51:49
7:01:36

1:16:52 45:32:50

Final Approval

Unknown Non-value-added

1
I

0:56:50
19:18:00

I
Improvement Percentage :

26:05:08 70:42:40
35.4%
55

NON-TEAM-BASED VSM

(ELIMINATING FOREMAN)
The proofing department

Account Manager filters incoming Hies and ensures that they are complete Any incomplete Files are sent back to the client fot revision

creates a proof. If the client requests, plates will also be created. The product (soft copy).
proof, and the plates are sent to the client or printer.

Involves the CSR, ACM.
client, andfor Printer. Account manager Finalizes printer specifications, number of colours, art, timeline, cost, deadline and other details For the product A purchase order

product for approval
Client appro w pro due i

Th» CSR «h»M*r>4r tti* proJu<« iv th*

is created by the Client for XYZ outlining the proper identification numbers and SKU's for the work order,

The product is sent to the proof reading department.

CSR creates a work order outlining the precise Client requirements for the product.

The proof readei checks the clayture. architecture and typography of the product

according to ISO standards. Any discrepancies are handed back to the Foreman in order to give to the CSR

1:18:20
operator preps the product and converts it using the illustrator programs.The product is sent to the colour
department for colouring.
After the colour department,
the same operator converts

product is then given to the Foreman t CSR and they
assign another operator to

perform a quality check.
After the second quality

check, the product is given back to the CSR, who then hands it off to the Foreman and then is given to the Prool reading department.

WVA that does not follow the
VSM path

02:47:26

(ESKO] the file The same operator then performs a

quality check on the product.

2:36:12

26:05:08

Value- Added Time: Unit Praxes Time

Non Value Added Time = Set up time + wait time + Transfer Time

Figure 4-5: VSM for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman task (pessimistic case)
56

NON-TIAM-BASID VSM (ELDIINATING FOREMAN)
The proofing department creates a proof. If Che client requests, plates will also be created. The product (soft copy), proof, and the plates are sent
to the client or printer.

Account Manager filters ncoming files and ensures hat they are complete Viy incomplete files are sent
>ack to the client for revision

Involves the CSR.ACM.
client, and/or Printer. Account manager finalizes

printer specifications, number of colours, art, timeline, cost,
deadline and other details for

CSR send! Busked pro duct for a ppraval
L heat a ppro ves pro duel

CSR (h«ftx»nJi-«Ko product * theIf tke cli»nt u unratirrui duith «k»

the product A purchase order is created by the Client for XYZ outlining the proper identification numbers and SKU's for the work order.

"Jlt-" «!«» L^

The product is sent to the
proof reading department.

CSR creates a work, order outlining the precise Client requirements for the product.

The proof reader checks the clayture. architecture and typography of the product according to ISO standards. Any discrepancies are handed back to the Foreman in order to give to the CSR

45:32:50

operator preps the product and converts it using the illustrator programs.The product is sent to the colour
department for colouring.

The product is then given to the Foreman f CSR and they assign another operator to perform a quality check.
After the second quality check, the product is given

02:47:26

After the colour department, the same operator converts (ESKO) the file.The same operator then performs a

04:40:38

back to the CSR, who then hands it off to the Foreman and (her is given to the Proof reading department

J
07:01:06

quality check on the product.

0:51:49

Value- Added Time: Unit Procces Time

Non Value Added Time  Set up time + wait time + Transfer Time

Figure 4-6: VSM for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman task (optimistic case)

b SupEaro pOE 5[sbj UBU13JOJ jo Suijeuiuiip ipiAv Avog ssaooad IBJ3U3Q :/,-i7

li.

r
:(i~p QjnSiij) SAVonoj sboq ixsqi pjnoAv sssoojd jBJQiiQg aqx *S9SB0 oxisximido pxiB opsxmxsssd

qjoq joj AjoSqibo pssBq-uiBO^-uou joj ytSA ^mvd^^^[\} 6~P
jo quios guxqjosqB Aq uopBzi|pn jQqgxq snp psjjo pxno

ts^jsO PUB ..siajBJodo joj 5[joav sq^ QS^ojoux pTtioo 5[s^ UBUI3JOJ sqj jo

siSQ§§ns BjBp sxqx '%-p siq^X «I UMoqs sb qsbo opsxraxido sq^ ux %j^ pu^ ^ux pspoxpux sb 3SB0 opsxuixssad sq^ ux %XI sx juoraQAOjdxHX ssoooid p3uxqinoo aqx
aqj uo pssuq 'opj ubiiiojoj sqi SupBuxxuxp puB luaxixpBdop pjiuo3 A*|XjBn£) gqi
*9*x 'snopBpU9uiraoo3J oav; uqai2 oq; jo uopBxiiB§jBinB ub sq pjjioav OXJBU30S pixqi

oq UB3 uopBOXjxpoxn sp99u jo poidaooB sx qof oq; aBqa

o^ uoxiBOXjxiou 4siu9xp sqi pUB ;u9indxqs U99Mpq aiaxi jo pouod Qqx *uo p95[JOM Sxipq
sx puB 9|px sx qof gqi uaqM mohoj pjnoo J9UiiB|d oqv '5[sb; qoB3 jo d\ai\ dojs pxiB ijbis sqi Ag -ssooojd qoB9 aqi jo uopBjnp sq; ;snf iou pxiB 45[sbi qoBQ jo ouixa do^s pire ijbis oqi

pUB 4ss90OJd qoBQ jo Q\mx-d\o/io aqi §uxiB{noxBO jo o^qBdBO sx 3pixq ZAX 91IX '^IJ^dojd p9zx|xin
Sxipq 10x1 sx ix 'Ap^Bun^Jojun inq 'jBxixiaiod wsjS q^xA\ poi |tijJ9Avod b sx ^t^ ZAX "^tissx oqi 9Aps3J puB uoxaBas ^ooua^oq aqi Xjpugpx 01 sjqB sq a*bxii uosjsd sq; 'xixoxqojd Aub jo

9Sbo iq *Xx9Sop pojoixuoxn sq iibo uoxisjdxnoo sax jo auixi gqj pxiB qbf oqi jo AaxjBtib sq; 'oouqh

·qof aqi jo sh;b;s oqi 5[OQqo pxiB qof qoB9 5[obji o; t_ooj b sb ^pixq ZAX Smsti '^pixq ZAX P11^
sqof jjb joj oxnpoqos b oibqjo 01 pouxBJ^lp^ 9Cl PItioqs jQUUBjd oqx *3§biubapb s4XuBdxnoo
pJBMO^ 5[JOA\ UB3 JOUUBjd B SB XIBXIIQJOJ 9qV SllXSn 'SSQOOjd 9qi OZXJptl pUB QAOjdlXIX OX

Table 4-7: VSM summary for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman task and redefining the Quality Control department (pessimistic case)

l_
Create a Work Order

Value-added time 1:18:20

Non-value-added time
2:47:26

I
Quality Control department

I
2:08:41

~~~

4:40:38
45:32:50

1
Final Approval

I
0:56*50

1
1 :

.

:
.

1
1
: -. v -

19:18:00

Unknown Non-value-added



.

26:05:08
98:24:02

1

Improvement Percentage :

1
|

-

~

9.6%

Table 4-8: VSM summary for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman task and
redefining the Quality Control department (optimistic case)

1

Value-added time

Non-value-added time 2:47:26

1
I
1
I

Create a Work Order
Assembly

1:18:20 0:56:12

Quality Control Department
Final Approval

I

4:40:38
2:08:41

45:32:50
0:56:50 19:18:00 7:07:52
-

1

Improvement Percentage :

'

63:41:04
41.5 %

59

NON-TEAM-BASED VSM

(ELIMINATING FOREMAN AND REDEFINE THE QUALITY DEPARTMENT)

Account Manager (liters incoming tiles and ensures

CHeut stnds product to XYZ

The proofing department creates a proof.

that they are complete
Any incomplete Mies are sent

If the client requests, plates will also be created.
The product (sort copy), proof, and (he plates are sent to the client or printer.

back to the client for revision

Account number filter* ijuatnpUk fik*

Involves the CSR. ACM. client, andtor Printer. Account manager finalizes printer specifications, number
of colours, art, timeline, cost,

The CSR then sends the product to the client for final approval. If the client is unsatisfied with the results, the process will start form the beginning.

deadline and other details for the product.A purchase order

is created by the Client for
XYZ outlining the proper

CSR creates a work order

outlining the precise Client requirements for the product

The product is sent to the Quality departmentThe proof reader and operator perform a quality check and the clayture. architecture and typography of the product according to ISO standards.Any discrepancies are handed back to the Foreman in order to give to

NVA that does not follow th*
VSM path

The operator preps the product and converts it u

the illustrator programs.The

26:05:08

product is sent to the colour department for colouring. After the colour department,
the same operator converts

(ESKO) the file.The same operator then performs a

check

Value- Added Time: Unit Praxes Time Non-Value-Added Time - Set up time + wait

Figure 4-8: VSM for non-team-based category with eliminate foreman and redefining the Quality Control department (pessimistic case)

60

NON-TEAM-BASED VSM (ELIMINATING FOREMAN AND REDEFINE THE QUALITY DEPARTMENT)

Account Manager fillers incoming files and ensures (hat they are complete
Any incomplete riles are sent back to the client For revision

C lie at sends pro due i to XYZ

Client receives final product

The proofing department creates a proof. If the client requests, plates will also be created.
The product (soft copy), proof, and the plates are sent to the client or printer.

Arcuuni iiuruyw fitter* ijuumpfcfc f»k«

Involves the CSR, ACM,
client, andi'or Printer.

Account manager finalizes
printer specifications, number

of colours, art, timeline, cost, deadline and other details for the product.A purchase order is created by the Client for XYZ outlining the proper

The CSR then sends the product to the client for final approval. If the client is unsatisfied with the results, the process will start form the beginning.

The product is sent to the

;SR creates a work order outlining the precise Client equirements for the product.

Quality department.The proof reader and operator perform a quality check and the clayture, architecture and typography of the product according to ISO standards. Any discrepancies are handed back to the Foreman in order to give to

J
45:32:50

The operator preps the

product and converts it using the illustrator programs.The

02:47:26

product is sent to the colour department for colouring. After the colour department, the same operator converts (ESKO) the file.The same operator then performs a quality check on the product.

04:40:38

Value Added Time: Unit Procces Time Non-Yalue-Added Time - Set up time + wait time + Transfer Time

2:36:12

Figure 4-9: VSM for non-team-based category with eliminating foreman task and redefining the Quality Control department (optimistic case)

After creating the VSM for the current-state and the future-state, the next step is to create a model for the current situation, to ensure a similar correlation is present between the model and the real performance. The next chapter will discuss about the current simulation model.

62

Chapter 5

Simulation Modeling

Following the description of the tools in Chapter 4, this chapter will evaluate the potential

gains by developing a detailed simulation model using system modeling corporations' Arena®
software.

To do so, the current system is modeled, which is further modified to propose a future-state.
However, at first the current-state is to be built and verified to validate the system that further

should be debugged to match the real world situation. To create the simulation model; the
process flow path must be identified, and furthermore calculations must be made for the task
duration as well as the idle time between each of the tasks.

5.1 Process Flow Path Recognition
The XYZ Company does not have any specific path for its work-orders; therefore, it is difficult
to track the process flow of each job. Due to the subjectivity of each job and being client based,

each work-order has a different path. However, to create the current model a random path for each work-order must be created. To build the random path, the process flow is broken down

into smaller tasks and sub-tasks, which help to create a "From-To Matrix" to track down the flow
between each of the stations. As a result, by gathering and grouping all the identical paths of each work-order and putting them together, the number of repetitions for each step could be identified. By adding up all steps that have similar starting points, the total number of jobs being

distributed from each station could be calculated. Furthermore, to know the percentage of jobs
that end up at each station, and the associated ratio of the total number of steps from one station

to the next, is calculated by dividing the total number of steps which have the same starting and
ending point, by the total number of steps which have just the same starting point (Appendix A).

These ratios are shown in Table 5-1 and Table 5-2, for both team-based and non-team-based
processes. The numbers in each chart indicate the ratio of the flow for each work-order from one
station to another.

63

Table 5-1: Job circulation percentage for team-based process (From - To chart)
CSR CSR 13 Assembly QC2
-

Proofreading Pr<
-

Clients
14

73 5
33 20

Assembly
QC2

49 50 50

30
-

16
17 20

Proof

10

Table 5-2: Job circulation percentage for non-team-based process (From - To chart) CSR CSR
Foreman
Foreman

Assembly 36
74

QC2
-

Proofreading
1

Clients

14

33
-

16

26
3

21
14
-

2 31
1

Assembly
QC2

16
35 37

9
-

55
3

Proof

26

4

3

By having a different ratio for each task, the random path for each job is being recognized. Also, the number of the revisions for each job is a random variable, which is determined randomly as
is depicted in Appendix A.

5.2 Input Analysis
BestFit® (Version 4.5) is used to determine the quality of fit of probability distribution functions
to input data. Its result shows four types of graphs to assess visually the quality of fits i.e.

·
·

Comparison graph: superimposes the input data and the fitteddistribution on the same
graph.

Difference graph displays the absolute error between the fitted distribution and the input
data.

'·

Probability-Probability (P-P) graph plots the distribution of the input data vs. the
distribution of the result.

·

Quantile-Quantile graph plots percentile values of the input distribution vs. percentile
values of the result.

It also

shows basic

statistics

(mean,

mode, and

variance etc.) Root-Mean

and fit statistics square error) for

(chi-square, each fitted

Kolmogorov-Smirnov,
distribution.

Anderson-Darling,

mmm of
64

5.2.1 Distribution analysis for value-added time

The starting point is to identify the Probability Density Function (PDF) for all value-added time of each station for the system at the current-state. To calculate the PDF of each station all the

value-added times of each process are imported to the BestFit® software in order to select the
best performance (Appendix C). Table 5-3 and Table 5-4 illustrate the PDF of value-added time
for each station in team-based and non-team-based processes.

Table 5-3: Distribution fitting for value-added of team-based
PDF

Mean 32.12 50.28

Variance 14.08

CSR
Assembly Quality control 2 Proofreading Final approval by CSR

Normal
Exponential Exponential Lognormal Exponential
PDF

31.056
27.130

29.39

8.333
Mean 43 95

Variance

CSR
Assembly Foreman

Exponential Exponential Exponential Exponential

Quality control 2 Proofreading

10.6

35.87
22.35

Final approval by CSR

Normal

10.91

Table 5-4: Distribution fitting for value-added of non-team-based

5.2.2 Distribution analysis for non-value-added time

The next step is identifying the PDF for the non-value-added time, which represents all idle time
between workstations. In most cases, it is easy to recognize the station that has the non-valueadded time; however, in some cases it is hard to pick the station. This situation occurred where

the operators do not fill out the time sheets properly; as a result, an unknown non-value-added
time is being entered to the system. This event often happens where there are more than two stations getting stations getting involved; this mode is called "Unknown non-value-added".
65

To simulate a better model ail available data is to be used. To get the best result; first the "Unknown non-value-added" events should be distributed between participating stations by

considering the calculated average ratios of "Non-value-added" between two stations, and the
"Unknown non-value-added" using the former as the base and correcting the latter by applying

the former ratio. As a result the "Unknown non-value-added" of each station is being corrected
based on the real value of a known non-valued-added, which could be used to calculate the nonvalue-added probability density function between each two stations of both team-based and nonteam-based processes as shown in Table 5-5 and Table 5-6.

Table 5-5: Probability density function for non-value-added of team-based
Quality CSR CSR Assembly Quality Control 2
Proofreading

Assembly
N (308,227)
-

Control 2
-

Proofreading
-

Exp (1409) Exp (40)
Triangular (20,16,282)

N (66.6,27.2)
-

Exp (107.5)
-

-

Triangular (3, 47, 215)

-

-

-

Table 5-6: Probability density function for non-value-added of non-team-based
Quality

CSR
CSR
Foreman

Foreman
Exp (190)

Assembly
Lognormal

Control 2

Proofreading

(325.66,188.76)
Triangular

N (178.5,177.45)
Exp (19.20)

Triangular (15,90,105)
Lognormal (184.2,410.7) Exp (112.27)

(5,40,45)
Assembly Exp (2968.2)

Quality Control 2
Proofreading

Exp (540)
Exp (97.2)

66

5.3 Building the Simulation Model
The base-case scenario is developed based on the "Current-state" of VSM. To keep the model
manageable, it is divided into two sub-models (team-based and non-team-based) as shown in
Appendix B and is described as follows:

·

Team-based model: Team-based model begins with a "create box" that generates

different entities into the system, which assigns each entity a specific label named "job index" that represents the total number of orders received. Moreover, after knowing the
number of orders, the actual process starts by assigning the "job sequence" and "work-

order number". The "job sequence" shows the path that each entity or job should follow, while "work-order" represents the total number of the revisions for each job. Due to the
subjectivity and complexity of the process, each of the jobs has to go through a random

path provided by Arena® software imported from the Excel sheet. In addition, it is
important to note that each path starts with CSR and ends with clients. There are two or

three CSR's in the system that deal with different groups of clients. CSR also has two
responsibilities in the system, the first is to review the job and create the new workorder, which at times follows the normal distribution function with a mean of 32.12

minutes and a variance 14.08 minutes. The second is to do the final quality check, which
at times follows the exponential distribution function with a mean of 8.333 min.

The job often follows the given path and it takes either of the following routes: to the
assembly station, which at times follows the exponential function with a mean of 50.28
minutes, to quality control, which at times follows the exponential function with a mean

of 31.056 minutes, or to proofreading, which at times follows the lognormal function
with a mean of 27.130 minutes and a variance of 29.39 minutes. After the job is done in

each department, Arena® recognizes them with a specific label. The label specifies
which department completed the work. For example, if the job is done by the CSR,

Arena® labels it as "Job was finished by CSR". Arena® checks the starting point and the
final destination while assigning a non-value-added time, which shows the idle between two points. Non-value-added time was determined by a source and destination station,

67

where the time is taken from a predetermined table (Table 5-5) considering the source
and the destination.

CSR distributes the job between operators in assembly departments; however, Arena®
assigns an operator randomly to the job based on the operator's availability.
Furthermore, there are some restrictions in the process, such as if the work was done by

any operator in the assembly station, the docket cannot go back to the same person for
the second quality check.

When the job is accepted by clients, it has to go out of the system. However, because there is always some back and forth communication between a CSR and a client, another delay module was created to configure the non-value-added time, which is called client's

non-valued-add time. This non-value-added is the time that the CSR or company has to wait to get acceptance, declaration, or modification from the clients. In spite of the fact that the company does not have any ability to eliminate the client's non-valued-added
time, the creation of SLA can diminish this non-value-added time.

·

Non team-based model: The non-team-based model is very similar to the team-based
model; the only difference is the foreman task, which is added to the system. In this case, the foreman is the person who distributes the job between employees. Therefore, the CSR creates the new work-order, which at times follows the exponential function with a

mean of 43 minutes. Furthermore, CSR hands off the job to the foreman in order to distribute it between operators. The job often follows the given path and it takes either of
the following routes: to the assembly, to second quality check, proofreading, or it goes back to the CSR for revision or for final quality check. The duration of each task is
demonstrated in Table 5-5.

After running the system for 300 days, the following information is captured by Arena®
(Appendix F). Table 5-7 explains the average value-added time and non-value-added time for
both team-based and non-team based categories. As illustrated in Table 5-7, the non-valuedadded time for non-team based is approximately double the value of the non-value-added time

that is found in the team-based category, which is similar to data that was captured from the

VSM. On the other hand, the percentage of non-value-added time in both the team-based and the

68

non-team-based is respectively

) 80% and (

176.31+13.6

J 93% which is very similar to

the ratio that was captured by VSM (81 % for team-based and 93% for non-team-based).

Table 5-7: Average non-value-added time and value-added time for both team-based and nonteam process for the base-case scenario

Average time Team-based Average non-value-added time (h) Non-team-based Average non-value-added time (h)
106.09 176.31
27.27 13.6

Team-based Average Value-Added time (h)
Non-team-based Average Value-Added time (h)

Once the simulation model for the current system is verified and validated, it is used to evaluate the future-state map and assess the relative impact of adopting the lean approach detailed in the previous two chapters. The next chapter is going to discuss the modeling of the future-state map
and compare all improvement scenarios.

69

Chapter 6

Simulation Results and Discussions

Chapter 4 discussed three proposals. This chapter will develop these three proposals, and in addition a forth proposal will discussed and developed. The processes will be improved in order

to reduce the amount of non-value-added time for each process. All four proposals will be
created and afterward validated by utilizing a simulation method.

6.1 Scenario A
The first case scenario is to create a single Quality Control department instead of the present

"second quality control check" and" proofreading task" (Figure 6-1). As discussed in the previous chapter both of these tasks, even though one is in charge of quality of design and the
other is in charge of proofreading, handle the same job of quality control, Therefore by combing

the two tasks the idle time between the two departments is going to be diminished. Following the establishment of a new Quality Control department and running the simulation for 300 day (10
times for 30 days), the total non-value added time for team-based is reduced from 106.09 hours to 79.87 hours, which is a 5% improvement in the system. As well, the non-valued-added time for non-team is reduced from 176.21 hours to 137.45 hours, which shows a 3% improvement as is shown in table 6-1. Moreover, the total number of finished products which are shipped to the clients increased by 28 orders (from originally 546 orders to 574 orders) for team-based, and 5 orders (from originally 916 orders to 921 orders) by non-team-based.

In this case, instead of the job going to either quality control or proofreading stations, it goes to

the Quality Control department. The Quality Control department checks the work-order reviews
and applies the necessary procedure to each job. On the other hand, either the CSR or the foreman distributes the job among assemblies, based on their availability, the number of jobs in
the queue and the total utilization of each station. In this case, without adding any resources or employees to either of the team-based process or the non-team-based process, the non-value-

added time of the system is decreased and the utilization of each station is increased as shown in
Table 6-7.

70

Quality Depratment

Route ID

Figure 6-1: Layout of Arena® ® for Quality Control department

Table 6-1: Average non-value-added time in the current situation vs. redefining Quality Control
department Current

Scenario A
574

Improvement

Total number of jobs coming out the system
Team-based

546 916

+28
+5

Non-team-based Average non-value-added time (h)
Team-based Non-team-based

921 79.87

106.09 176.31

5% 3%

137.43

6.2 Scenario B.I
In the second scenario, the foreman's position in the non-team-based is being eliminated due to the fact of the comparison, which is done between the non-value-added time of the team-based and the non-team-based. In this comparison, it was observed that the non-value-added in the non-teambased almost doubled the value of the time that is found in the team-based category. Furthermore, by eliminating the foreman from the non-team-based process, the CSR has taken the responsibility to distribute the job among departments. In this situation, the total non-value-added time of the

system for non-team-based is reduced from 176 hours to 51.12 hours, which is equal to a 71%
improvement as, is shown in Table 6-2. In addition to the above mentioned observation, the number of despatched orders for the team-based has increased from 546 to 564, and for non-team-based
raised from 916 to 937.

Table 6-2: Average non-value-added in the current situation vs. eliminating foreman
Current Total number of jobs coming out the system Team-based
Non-team-based

Scenario B
564 937

Improvement

546

+18
+21

916

Average non-value-added time (h)
Team-based Non-team-based

106.09
176.31

106.09
51.12

-

71%

6.3 Scenario B.2
To improve and utilize the process effectively, a planner was introduced to the system. To reduce

the non-value-added time, the planner's duty is to create different schedules for different jobs and further track and check the status of each job. As a result, the quality has increased drastically while the idle time decreased. The planner is responsible for tracking the idle time of each job. If a job is

72

idle for more than 15 minutes, then the planner should pick the job and release it to the scheduled
station (Figure 6-2). On the other hand, the planner with the help of the XYZ Link is able to identify

the bottleneck in and between the stations and resolve all the issues by balancing the utilization of
each of the stations (Figure 6-3). In this case, the non-valued-added time of the system for the team-

based is reduced by 79% (from 106.09 hours to 22.20 hours) and 91% (from 176.31 hours to 14.71 hours) in the non-team-based as illustrated in Table 6-3. In addition to the above mentioned
observation, the number of despatched orders for the team-based has increased from 546 to 562,
and for non-team-base raised from 916 to 925.

CSR
CSR.CSR

>;
AssemblyXSR

QC2.CSR

Proof.CSR

Do To CSR i

csm

Kans

TJPK

3 |2-way by Conditional
[Expression
Value:

((Time Out  Time In] >= 0.5 U NQfPlanner Process ZQueue) <= 3

jK__J

Caned j

Help

Figure 6-2: Planner checks the ideal time for each process

73

1ckStationlllllli
Name:


Tesl Condition:

mmMl
Pick Operator Ir

j [Minimum

^

AssembySta
  ·

£t&er£n* fize*Afln

F Nwiber in Queue

F Number tsfOesouicss Busy
F EKptession

F NusteErtRoute loSldtbn
State:

Piek Operator in

tesemby Station
sx

Decide ucwue 162 i Oil

j^~r~

Bin SUSIJfiii-ii

Assemblj>2.Station, Assembly 2.Queue, Assembly 2, [ <Endoflist>

Add. I
'

g^
Delete

Pick Operator in
Assem&y Stations , Transfer Tipe:
Route

Route Xrn^

|0.0

d lHours
OK 1 Cancel 1

i!
He^ I

Figure 6-3: Distributing job between operators

Table 6-3: Average non-value-added in the current situation vs. reallocating foreman and using
planner

Current

Scenario B.2 562

Improvement

Total number of jobs coming out the system
Team-based
Non-team-based

546 916

+16 +9 79% 91%

925 22.20 14.71

Average non-value-added time (h)
Team-based Non-team-based

106.09
176.31

6.4 Scenario C
The forth scenario is a combination of the first two scenarios which eliminates the foreman's task and redefines the Quality Control department. In this case the non-valued-added time of the system
for team-based is reduced by 5% (from 106.09 hours to 79.49 hours) and for non-team-based by

72% (from 176.31 hours to 52.25 hours) as illustrated in Table 6-4. In addition to the above

74

mentioned observation, the number of despatched orders for the team-based has increased from 546
to 569, and for non-team-based raised from 916 to 935.

Table 6-4: Average non-value-added in the current situation vs. reallocating foreman and using
Quality Control department

Total number of jobs coming out the system
Team-based 546 916 569
935

+23

Non-team-based

Average non-value-added time (h)
Team-based

+19
5% 72%

106.09
176.31

79.49
52.25

Non-team-based

6.5 Optimum Scenario
Further, in creating the optimum solution, it was decided to use all successful scenarios and

combine them together, to create the optimum solution. To do so, the quality department was added,

while the foreman position was eliminated and a planner was introduced, then the simulation

models with the new inputs were run for 300 days. As a result, the total non-value-added time for

the team-based is reduced from 106.09 hours to 14.66 hours, which is an 86% improvement in the
system. As well, the non-valued-added time for non-team is reduced from 176.21 hours to 15.50

hours, which shows a 91% improvement as it shows in Table 6-5. Moreover, the total number of finished product which is shipped to the clients increased for team-based by 45 units (from
originally 546 to 591), increased for non-team-based by 40 units (from originally 916 to 956).

Table 6-5: Percentage of non-value-added in the current situation vs. reallocating foreman and using
Quality Control department

Current

Scenario C
591
956 14.66 15.50

Improvement
+45 +40 86% 91%

Total Number of Jobs Coming Out the System
Team-based Non-team-based 546 916

Average non-value-added time (h)

Team-based Non-team-based

106.09 176.31

After completion of VSM, simulations were applied to validate the judgements and to ensure that the
model is working accurately. By applying the simulation model for all different scenarios, the next step

was validates the finding of VSM such that there is no significant difference between the real world and

75

the model, as shown in table 6-6. In addition, the percentage of the non-valued-added time, as well as

the utilization of each station was calculated, as it shown in Table 6-7 and Table 6-8. By comparing all these scenarios, the best scenario, which is the optimum scenario, was identified as was shown in the

previous section the optimum scenario is the combination of introducing the quality department while
using a planner instead of a foreman. However, to improve the utilization of each station, each of the
CSRs should work with two or three operators of their own group, As well, to utilize the planner

position most effectively and to increase the efficiency; the planner should watch for the idle jobs and
assign them to the first available station.

Table 6-6: Comparing the VSM and simulation non-value-added time
% of Non-value-added time for team-based VSM Pessimistic
Base-case VSM

% of Non-value-added time for non-team-based VSM Pessimistic VSM Optimistic 92% Simulation

Simulation

Optimistic

81% 80% 80%

80% 71% 80%
71% 73%

93%
92%

Scenario A Scenario B.I Scenario C

90%

90%
78%

79%
72%

93% 93%

79%
88%

80%

78%

Table 6-7: Instantaneous system Utilization for each station
Base-case

Scenario
A

Scenario
B.I

Scenario B.2

Scenario C

Optimum

Scenario

Team-based CSR Assembly 35% 40%

35%
31%
44%
-

37% 48%
41%
-

38% 31%
44%
-

57%
52%

30%
43%
-

31%
43%
-

Non-team-based CSR
Foreman

69%
-

Assembly Both Proofreading
QC department

39%
48%
-

43%

40%

49%

43%
-

53%

-

48%
-

56%
-

-

53%
-

53%
-

58%

Planner

-

-

70%

60%

76

Table 6-8: Percentage of non-value-added time
Basecase

Scenario
A

Scenario
B.I

Scenario
B.2

Scenario
C
72%

Optimum

Scenario
33%

% of Non-valueadded time for teambased

80%

73%

79%

61%

% of Non-valueadded time for nonteam-based

92%

90%

78%

47%

78%

43%

% of total nonvalue-time added

88%

83%

79%

56%

78%

37%

77

Chapter 7

Conclusion and Recommendations

7.1 Conclusion
In this research, VSM is applied to the client-based service industry, which the

inconsistency of the clients' request is variable, each process is subjective, the procedure of each job
is different and the material flow is not visible. Furthermore, it is applied to both team-based and

not-team-based processes. The completed VSM provides a big picture in very simple way and
shows all the non-value-added time and value-added time for each process. By having all this data the future VSM for the company is created based on three improvement scenarios, i.e. creating the Quality department, eliminating the foreman, creating the Quality department, and eliminating the
foreman at the same time.

Following the completion of VSM, the next step was to evaluate the potential gains by developing a

detailed simulation model using system modeling corporations' Arena® software. To do so, the
current system is modeled, which further is being modified to propose the future-state. However, at

first the current-state is to be built and verified to validate the system that further should be

debugged to match the real world situation. Due to the subjectivity of each job and the client-based
orders, each work-order has a different path. However, to create the current model a random path
for each work-order must be created. The next step after creating the current model is to create the

future-state models to improve the process and reduce the amount of non-value-added time for each
process. All these proposals, and in addition to introducing the planner position, are created and

validated afterward by utilizing a simulation method. After creating the model for each scenario and
seeing all the improvement percentages in the process, as well as the utilizations of each station, the optimum scenario was identified. Therefore, to have the optimum solution, the quality department was added, while the foreman position was eliminated and a planner was introduced. As a result, the total non-value-added time for the team-based and non-team-based was reduced by 86% and
91 % respectively.

78

7.2 Recommendations and Contributions
This research generates many new opportunities and recommendations. This section outlines some
worthy ideas and recommendations.

7.2.1 Service level agreements with the client (SLA)
The first recommendation is to have a Service Level Agreement (SLA), which is a contract between clients and XYZ Company. The SLA addresses the service quality conditions, such as response times, availability, and timelines. After reviewing all the worksheets, it is realized that the waiting time for the client to approve the job is rather lengthy. In fact, the job shows as being in process,

while it is not being worked on by anyone. Therefore, by having SLA, the production time of the
process could be improved and some of the non-value-added times of the process may be
eliminated.

7.2.2 Scorecard tracking
A planner can generate a scorecard with the aid of the Continuous Improvement Office. The application of this office is to set long-term goals and develop solutions for the XYZ Company. To

reach the long-term goals, XYZ has to work toward standardizing the processes and reducing the
non-value-added times by eliminating waste, such as re-work and waiting times. To achieve this goal, it is crucial to have monthly meetings to monitor the process of the progress being made. Application of the tools, such as VSM and Kaizen will also maintain the development of the future
outcomes.

7.2.3 Standardizing procedures
Standardizing the procedures is another recommendation that would aid the production process. It
would improve production time by creating a certain production process, which could be done by

having a number of pre-determined procedures for certain tasks, thus eliminating any deviation
from the production process itself. In addition, using standardized procedures improves the quality
and accountability of the work, as the final product would be produced based on a set of standard procedures and processes that are the same every time. As a side advantage, the aforementioned method gives the employer a more efficient and accurate way of measuring employees proficiency.

As each employee performs a specific job description and the same set of procedures, it is easier to

79

08

sq pjnoo ss^d

ppoux guiunirejxtojd jboutj aqi Sutajos A*q
pynoqs ajqeueA sjuoinojnsesui aou^uuojjQd juajajjip 'os op, ox '
'soujsnpui paseq-sjuoip jie I0J uoiiExnrais jo
jo qo^s uoQMpq avojj sq^ UMOp 3[OBJi o; c<xu;ej/\[

tcxu}ej/\[

oj psuSissE

pinoqs mojj ssoooid

oj dpq qoxqM 'S5[SB;
sbm J9pjo-5[JOA\ qo^s joj

pire S5[s^^ jsn^tus o^ui UMop U95[ojq sba\ mojj ssaooid

uiopirei oqj Xpn^s siq; uj uoTjnps ;s9q aqj si saxu^dmoo jo pup[ sxqi joj qi^d aqa jo uoiiBzq

b ppoxn gqj q^ojo 01 'j9A9a\oh *q^d juajQjjip ^ s^q qof qo^s 'psseq ^uaip Supq puB qof qoea jo
oqi o; qtiq *qof qo^s jo avotj ssooojd aqj 5[o^j; o; pj^q si }i ^u^duioo pas^q-iuoip oqj uj

d

ss93OJ

oa

joj J9ISB9 qonui jt S93[Ein qoiqM 'pazipJBpu^is pire jgdojd 9je ^qi sjopjo 5[joa\ sq^

istppsqo s^udojddB sq^ paps o^ AjijiqE oq^ 9A^q ppoA\ ^[§3 9lfl ^-i^q^ ss^q^^p b 01

sq uoqi p|tiOA\ sjqSiyj-Qjd ssaqx 'qof oxjpads ^ joj pojrnboj suoip^ sqj n^ JOJ sjsippoqo apnpux

qoxqM iq§i|j-3jd ozipj^pLre^s v 9^qjo puB sjspjo 5[joa\ sqj qSnojqi o§ p|tiOA\ ooxjjo jusuiQAOjdun
snonutiuoo sqi '9S^o siqi uj *9uip uoxpnpojd aqj oa sppe qoiqM 'uioqi oj qof oqi ure|dx9
JO treuigjqj aqj 9A^q o; poau sjo^jgdo 'jynsoj b sy *3uop oq 0} spaou l^qi 3[joav ^np^ sqj
mgiqui^ puB sSuipuBisjapunsxui oj spu9| qoiqM 'pozipj^pu^is iou div sjopjo-^JOM Qq;

dn iqSnojq siuoinmoo stjoam9do 'posn aq Xbui ^qi Bopx jaqjoue si iq§iij-9jd

uoi)HZipjHpu6)S
'3 xipusddy in
si uop^as X|qui9ss^ oqj joj ajnpQoojd pjupirejs Qqx "^iredinoo sq^ qSnojqi iresq §uiiuQui9|dini ds;s ^ptno ^ si siqx *q^oj os pire 'pjauoo Aiiienb 'JoS^ireui yanooov '^S
ia qof joqjo joj suoipru;sui 5[joa\ ojninj joj a^tdmoj ^ sb oajqs pjnoqs jo^jado oq^ joj unojjod os|B oqA\ sooAojdiiiQ joq^o asureSe Aouapijojd jo pA3{ jpqi

References
1. Abdulmaleka, F. A., and Rajgopalb, J. (2007). Analyzing the benefits of lean manufacturing
and value stream mapping via simulation: A process sector case study. International Journal
of Production Economics, 107(1), 223-236.

2.

Altiok, T. and Melamed, B. (2001). Simulation modeling and analysis with arena, Cyber
Research, Inc. and Enterprise Technology Solutions, Inc.

3.

Ahlstrom, P. (2004). Lean service operations: translating lean production principles to service
operations: International Journal of Services Technology and Management, 5(6), 545-564.

4.

Ball, P. (1996). Introduction to Discrete Event Simulation, 2nd DYCOMANS workshop on
"Management and Control: Tools in Action", Algarve, Portugal, pp. 367-376.

5.

Beesley, A., (1994). A need for time-based process mapping and its application in
procurement, Proceedings of the 3rd Annual IPSERA Conference, University of Glamorgan,
pp. 41-56.

6.

Berry, L.L. and Parasuraman, A. (1991). Marketing Services: Competing through Quality^
The Free Press, New York.

7.

Chan, F.T.S. (1995). Using simulation to predict system performance: a case study of an
electro-phoretic deposition plant. Integrated Manufacturing Systems, 6(5), 27-38.

8.

Chan, F.T.S., and Abhary, K. (1996). Design and evaluation of automated cellular
manufacturing systems with simulation modeling and AHP approach: a case study. Integrated
Manufacturing Systems, 7(6), 39-52.

9.

Chan, F.T.S. and Jiang, B. (1999). Simulation-aided design of production and assembly cells
in an automotive company, Integrated Manufacturing Systems, 10(5), 276-283.

10.

Chung, C, Lecture Notes, INDE 3361: CAD/Simulation, University of Houston

11.

Craig, CD; (1996). "Extended historical object-oriented logic simulation with an adaptable
graphical user interface", Lecture/Class, University of Newfoundland.

12.

Cudney, E.A. and Fargher, J. (2001). "Using Standard Work in Lean Manufacturing", IIE
Annual Conference.

81

13.

Detty,

R.B.

and

Yingling,

J.C.,

(2000).

Quantifying benefits a case

of conversion

to

lean

manufacturing with discrete event simulation:

study. International Journal of

Production Research, 38(2), 429^45.
14. Fitzsimmons, J.A. and Fitzsimmons, MJ. (2004). Service Management: Operations, Strategy, and Information Technology, Fourth Edition, Irwin/Mcgraw-Hill, New York.

15.

Feld, W.M., (2000). Lean Manufacturing: Tools, Techniques, and How To Use Them. The St.
Lueie Press, London

16.

Forza, C, Vinelli, A., and Filippini, R. (1993). Telecommunication services for quick
response in the textile-apparel industry. Proceedings of the first International Symposium on Logistic, The University of Nottingham, 119-26.

17.

Harland, C. (1996). Supply chain management: relationships, chains, and networks. British
Journal of Management, 7, 63-80.

18.

Henderson, B.A. and Larco, J.L. (2000). Lean Transformation:How to Change Your Business
into a Lean Enterprise, The Oaklea Press.

19.

Hines, P. and Rich, N. (1997), The Seven Value Stream Mapping Tools, International Journal of Operations and Production Management, 17(1), 46-64.

20.

Hoekstra, S. and Romme, S. (Eds) (1992). Towards Integral Logistics Structure-Developing Customer-Oriented Goods Flows, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.

21.

Ishiwata, J. (1997). Productivity through Process Analysis, Productivity Press, Cambridge,
MA.

22.

Jones, D., and Womack, J.P. (2002). Seeing the whole: mapping the extended value stream,
Lean Enterprise Institute, Brookiine, Massachusetts.

23.
24.

Kelton, S. (2004). Simulation with Arena, third Edition, McGraw Hill Publication, New York.
Lamming, R. (1993). Beyond Partnership: Strategies for Innovation and Lean Supply,
(Prentice-Hall: New York).

25.

Lamming, R., Johnsen, T., Zheng, J. and Harland, C. (2000). An initial classification of supply networks. International Journal Operations and Production Management, 20, 675-691.

26.

Laughery, R. (1990). Simulation changes the way industry thinks about planning. Industrial
Engineering, 50.

82

27.

Levitt, T. (1976) 'The industrialisation of service', Harvard Business Review, 54(5), 32-43.

28.

Macbeth, D., and Ferguson, N. (1994). Partnership Sourcing: An Integrated Supply Chain
Approach, Pitman Publishing, London.

29. 30.

Manos, T. (2006). Value Stream Mapping -An Introduction. Quality Progress, 39(6), 64-69. McDonald, T., Aken, E.M.V. and Rentes, A.F. (2002). Utilizing Simulation to Enhance Value Stream Mapping: A Manufacturing Case Application. International Journal of Logistics:
Research and Applications, 5(2), 213-232.

31.

McDonald, T., Van Aken, E. and Butler, R. (2000). "Integration of Simulation and Value
Stream Mapping in Transformation to Lean Production", IIE Annual Conference.

32.

Mize, J.H., Bhuskute, H.C., Pratt, D.B. and Kamath, M. (1992). Modeling of integrated
manufacturing systems using an object oriented approach. IIE Transactions, 24(3), 14-26.

33.

Monden, Y.(1998). Toyota Production System-An Integrated Approach to Just In Time,
Engineering & Management Press, Norcross, Georgia.

34.

Nahmias, S., (2001). Production and Operations Analysis. McGraw Hill, New York.

35.

New, C. (1974). The production funnel: a new tool for operations analysis. Management
Decision, 12(3), 167-78.

36.

Ohno, T. (1988). Toyota Production System: Beyond Large Scale Production, Productivity
Press, Portland, Oregon.

37.

Pavnaskar, SX, Gershenson, J.K. and Jambekar, A.B. (2003), Classification scheme for lean
manufacturing tools. International Journal of Production Research, 41, 3075-3090.

38.

Rother, M. and Shook, J. (1999). Learning to See: Value Stream Mapping to Add Value and
Eliminate Muda, Lean Enterprise Institute, Brookline, Massachusetts.

39.

Sako, M. and Price, M. (1992). Quality and Trust: Inter-firm Relations in Britain and Japan,
(Cambridge University Press: Cambridge).

40.

Sadowski, D., Sadowski, R., and D. Kelton, (1998). Simulation with Arena, McGraw Hill.

83

41.

Stalk, G. H. and Hout, T. M. (1990). Competing Against Time: How Time Based Competition
is Reshaping Global Markets, (Free Press: New York).

42.

Tabucanon, M.T., Batonov, D.N., and Basu, S. (1998). Using simulation to evaluate the batching approach to part type selection in flexible manufacturing systems. Integrated
Manufacturing Systems, 9(1), 5-14.

43.

Tapping, D., Shuker, T. and Luyster, T. (2002), Value Stream Management: Eight Steps to Planning, Mapping, and Sustaining Lean Improvements, Productivity Press. Portland, Oregon.

44.

Towill, D.R. (1996). Time compression and supply chain management: a guided tour, Supply
Chain Management, 1, 15-27.

45.

Towill, D.R. (1999). Simplicity wins: twelve rules for designing effective supply chains.
Institute of Operations Management Control Journal, 25, 9-13.

46.

Van Goubergen, D. and Van Landeghem, H. (2001). "An Integrated Methodology for More
Effective Set-Up Reduction", IIE Annual Conference.

47.

Van Goubergen, D. and Van Landeghem, H. (2002). Reducing Setup Times of Manufacturing Lines, International Conferenceon Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing,
Dresden.

48.

Womack, J., Jones, D.T. and Roos, D. (1990). The Machine That Changed the World,
(Macmillan: New York).

49.

Womack, J. and Jones, D.T. (1994). From lean production to lean enterprise. Harvard Business
Review, pp. 93-103.

50.

Womack, J. P., and Jones, D.T. (1996). Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in
Your Corporation, Simon, and Schuster.

51.

Zahir, I., Hlupic, V., Baldwin, L.P. and Love, P.E.D. (2000). Re-engineering manufacturing processes through simulation modeling. Logistics Information Management, 13(1), 7-13.

52.

http://en.wikipedia.org/

84

Appendix A: Creating the Random Path
Table A-l: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of CSR station (teambased)
Cumulative
From To

Cumulative Probability
[0-0.13)
0.00

Probability
0.13

Probability
0.13 0.85

Path
1

Task

CSR

CSR

CSR
CSR

CSR

Assembly Clients

0.73
0.15

[0.13-0.85)
[0.85-1)

0.13
0.85
1

2
5

Assembly
Clinets

1.00

Table A-2: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of assembly station
(team-based)
Cumulative
From
Assembly

Cumulative Probability
[0-0.49)
[0.49-0.54) 0.00 Path
1

To
CSR

Probability
0.49 0.05
0.30

Probability
0.49
0.54
0.84

Task CSR
Assembly QC2
Proof

Assembly Assembly

0.49
0.54 0.84
1

2

Assembly Assembly

QC2
Proof

[0.54-0.84)
[0.84-1)

3
4

0.16

1.00

Table A-3: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of QC2 station (teambased)
Cumulative
From
QC2

Cumulative Probability
[0-0.50) [0.50-0.83)
[0.83-1) 0.00
0.50 0.83
1

To
CSR Assembly Proof

Probability
0.50

Probability
0.50
0.83
1.00

Path

Task
CSR

QC2
QC2

0.33
0.17

Assembly Proof

Table A-4: Cumulative distribution function for each job, which is going out of proofreading station
(team-based)
Cumulative
From
Proof

Cumulative
Probability
[0-0.50) [0.50-0.70) 0.00
0.50

To
CSR

Probability
0.50 0.20 0.10 0.20

Probability
0.50 0.70
0.80

Path 1
2

Task

Proof Proof

CSR Assembly
QC2

Assembly
QC2 Proof

[0.70-0.96)
[0.96-1)

0.70

Proof

3
4

1.00

0.96
1

Proof

85

Table A-5: Random number generated to identify the\ random path for each job (team-based)
Job
Path
1 2

Job
2

Job
3

Job
4

Job
5

Job
6

Job
7

1

CSR

CSR
Assembly
0.969552 0.425438 0.955246

CSR
Assembly
0.213070626
0.118150516

CSR
Assembly
0.240320858 0.949809068
0.609860793

CSR

CSR Assembly
0.862421314 0.32182095 0.36326807 0.349845887

CSR Assembly
0.56859979
0.66071283
0.73382219

Assembly
0.4482893
0.006262

Assembly
0.896608396

3
4

0.932897225 0.723952615 0.554560753 0.665054728
0.13903567

5

0.5285749

0.554806655
0.272776472
0.66911674 0.003012987

6
7

0.6545135
0.1172896 0.93731 0.7032935 0.3950636
0.8413241 0.6443937 0.2237597
0.6405787 0.8524822

0.299119 0.667391
0.003587 0.749472

0.275563436
0.692855047

0.97471026
0.64391334

0.536662769
0.538814164

8 9 10
11

0.938819033 0.27272121-5
0.358091627 0.425425132

0.46408096 0.18570449
0.53009197 0.44127341 0.68737548 0.25426071 0.82848823
0.53128842

0.06587927

0.290657199 0.38375361 0.654647673
0.153326782 0.389525782

0.200284243 0.415574878
0.39225032 0.770168752

0.785392

0.26385233
0.680173028 0.245241119
0.813570604 0.286287534 0.490658342 0.228209328

0.763381

12

0.885398
0.847762

0.180773039
0.687630638
0.107110657

13
14

0.312920831 0.771196813

0.04849 0.019129
0.129866

0.071223674 0.783575293 0.572281788 0.34636858 0.380584173
0.523484281 0.790885494 0.284785954

15
16
17

0.293513429
0.428295205 0.227379723
0.884521821

0.18969456 0.33735148
0.116278293

0.0359671
0.7849306

0.16360073 0.08449283

0.752799 0.128611
0.481601

0.34493514

18 19

0.4109455
0.5792188
0.2532602

0.705286635
0.670881221

0.218500215
0.099040605
0.649353066

0.35367069
0.5296047

0.512091144
0.894984067

20
21 22

0.880745
0.597278

0.260787455

0.25641705

0.5190117

0.734033945
0.628895811

0.829087236

0.573118749 0.742438095 0.756567888
0.216558215

0.40736458
0.53478352_

0.0088398 0.90555
0.6162852
0.5181047

0.367156
0.681502

0.434162731
0.500450026
0.71412741

0.658792452
0.472411653

23 24
25

0.873576709
0.967878527 0.996671617

0.48194076
0.73373537

0.586729
0.997067

0.747319949 0.351048686
0.368700517

0.107448386
0.706535071

0.547556158 0.828541005
0.540305015 0.711281349 0.290359491

0.85245323
0.09253971

26
27

0.502476
0.6966472 0.1816892

0.355139
0.407387 0.183362 0.699308 0.575312

0.879676923

0.792276862
0.558154157

0.520560083 0.73445889 0.527254963

0.07419133
0.236348014

0.04015142 0.51857426
0.58963644

28 29

0.7778139 0.6502046

0.099121655

0.61138333 0.583711565 0.914958355
0.337625632

30 31
32

0.518971253
0.658117979
0.636640957

0.400514799
0.747274

0.289773658
0.523653592

0.98006659

0.1525926

0.311596 0.353586

0.72990479
0.78884936 0.20782746

0.6135598
0.7723188 0.6460129 0.9112499 0.2047833 0.1350326
0.9205543

0.703025738

0.828678131
0.9425497 0.447178882

33
34

0.921376
0.417244

0.852556125
0.974410162

0.208233095 0.069286813
0.826140634

0.152956008 0.90407017
0.839893576
0.828566432 0.820097787 0.809815543

0.06627929
0.74592869

35 36
37

0.018139
0.991824
0.422824

0.921628265
0.113574064 0.516581732

0.606973013
0.52264132 0.419884904 0.36829042

0.147243318
0.157778 0.643803705 0.554972429
0.906011957

0.65076799
0.186244

38 39 40

0.659281

0.676049911

0.10414014
0.58042484

0.2827566
0.1688658

0.637355

0.618461851
0.464306754

0.777985613

0.013527208

0.489708

0.881248011

0.694550395

0.00197051

86

..

.

.

.

.-

. 

.

 





· 



.

.

-.



.

"1

job (team-based)
Path
1

Table A-6: Matching the random generated number with probability distribution function for each
Job
1

Job
2

Job
3

Job
4

Job
5

Job
6

Job
7

CSR

CSR

CSR Assembly CSR CSR

CSR

CSR

2

CSR
Assembly

Assembly
CSR CSR

CSR

Assembly
Proof CSR

Assembly
CSR

Assembly
Proof
QC2

3
4

Assembly
QC2

Proof
, CSR

Assembly
QC2

5 6
7

Assembly
QC2 CSR

Assembly
CSR

Assembly
QC2

Assembly
CSR Assembly
CSR

Assembly
QC2

Assembly
CSR Assembly

CSR

Proof

Assembly
CSR

Assembly
Proof CSR

Assembly
CSR

8 9 10
11

Assembly
QC2 CSR

Assembly

Assembly
CSR Assembly
CSR

Assembly
QC2

CSR Assembly
QC2

CSR

1

I

Assembly
CSR

Assembly
Assembly CSR

Assembly
CSR

Assembly
QC2 CSR

Assembly
Proof
QC2

Assembly
CSR

12

CSR Assembly
CSR

Assembly
QC2

Assembly CSR

13
14

Assembly
CSR

Assembly CSR

Assembly
Proof
CSR

CSR CSR

15
16 17

CSR Assembly
CSR Assembly Proof

Assembly
CSR

Assembly
CSR Assembly CSR Assembly
CSR

Assembly
QC2

- Assembly
· ^Assembly
CSR

!
;


Assembly
QC2 CSR

Assembly
CSR

Assembly
QC2

CSR Assembly Assembly
QC2

18
19
20 21

CSR

Assembly
CSR

Assembly
Assembly
CSR

Assembly

Assembly
CSR Assembly
QC2

Assembly
Proof QC2

Proof Assembly
CSR Assembly
QC2 Proof CSR

Assembly
QC2

Assembly CSR Assembly
QC2

CSR

22

Assembly Assembly CSR Assembly
Proof CSR CSR

CSR Assembly
QC2

Assembly CSR

23
24

Assembly
QC2 CSR

Proof Proof Proof
QC2

Assembly
CSR Assembly CSR

25 26
27

Assembly

s

CSR Assembly

Assembly
QC2

Assembly
QC2 CSR

Assembly CSR

Assembly
QC2 CSR

Assembly
QC2

28 29
30
31 32 33 34

Assembly
QC2

Assembly
QC2

Assembly
QC2

Assembly
QC2

Assembly

Assemblv CSR Assembly
QC2

CSR

QC2
CSR

Assembly
QC2

Assembly Proof CSR
Assembly

Assembly Assembly
QC2

CSR Assembly
QC2

Proof
QC2 Assembly CSR CSR

Assembly Proof
CSR
CSR

Assembly Proof
Proof QC2

CSR
CSR

Proof
CSR

Assembly Proof
CSR

Proof
QC2

35 36
37

Assembly
CSR Assembly
QC2

Assembly

Assembly ;
QC2

Assembly
CSR

CSR Assembly
QC2

Assembly
QC2

Assembly
CSR Assembly
CSR

Assembly Proof
CSR Assembly

38 39 40

CSR CSR Assembly CSR

Assembly
QC2

Assembly
QC2

Assembly
CSR

Assembly
Proof

CSR

Proof

Assembly

87

Table A-7: Generated number of iterations for each job (team-based)
=RANDBETWEEN(^C$JJ 1 ,$<2

=IF«i
Number of

,0)
39
Job
1

t
9
2

1
10


60
39

Tasks

1

'

35

16

30

Pathl

2

J Job
CSR
Assembly

Job
3

Job
4

Job
5

Job
6

Job
7

Assembly Proof

H

CSR Assembly
QC2

CSR
Assembly

CSR
Assembly

CSR
Assembly CSR CSR Assembly CSR Assembly
QC2

CSR Assembly
QC2

3
4

CSR
Assembly

QC2
CSR Assembly Proof

CSR
Assembly Proof
QC2

Assembly

CSR

CSR Assembly
QC2

5

CSR
Assembly

CSR
Assembly Proof

CSR
Assembly CSR

6
7

CSR Assembly
QC2 CSR

CSR
Assembly CSR Assembly
QC2

CSR
Assembly Proof
QC2

Proof CSR
Assembly
QC2

8

Assembly CSR
Clients
0 0 0 0

Assembly
QC2

9
10
11

Assembly
Proof

CSR Assembly
QC2

Assembly
CSR

Clients
0
0

CSR
CSR

GSR

12 13
14

Proof
Assembly

Assembly^ Proof CSR CSR Assembly
QC2 Assembly

CSR
Assembly Proof CSR

CSR

Assembly CSR
Assembly

Assembly
CSR Assembly
QC2

CSR Assembly CSR Clients
0 0 0
0

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0

15
16
17

0
0

CSR
Assembly
CSR Assembly

Assembly
Proof CSR

0
0 0

18 19

CSR Assembly CSR

CSR

20
21 22

Assembly
Proof CSR Assembly

0 0 0 0 0
0

CSR Assembly
QC2

Assembly
CSR Assembly Proof Assembly CSR Assembly CSR CSR
Assembly

Assembly
CSR Assembly CSR
Assembly QC2 Proof

0 0 0
0

23
24

Proof
QC2 Assembly

Assembly
' CSR
Assembly

25 26
27

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0

0
0 0

CSR Assembly
Proof

CSR Assembly
QC2

28 29 30
31
32

CSR

Assembly CSR
Assembly CSR
Assembly
QC2

0
0

0
0 0 0 0 0 0
0

Assembly CSR Clients
0
0

CSR

Assembly CSR Assembly
Proof

Assembly
CSR Assembly

0
0 0 0

33
34

CSR Assembly CSR Assembly
QC2

0 0 0 0 0

CSR Assembly
QC2

35
36
37

CSR
Clients
0 0

0
0 0 0 0

0

Assembly
QC2

38

0
0 0

39
40

CSR
Clients

0 0

0 0

0 0

CSR

0

Clients

88

Table A-8: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of CSR station (nonteam-based)
Cumulative
From

Cumulative Probability
[0-0.14) 0.00
0.14

To xCSR x Foreman

Probability
0.14

Probability
0.14

Path
1 2

Task xCSR xForeman xAssembly

xCSR

xCSR
xCSR xCSR
xCSR

0.33
0.36 0.01
0.14

0.48
0.84

[0.14-0.48)
[0.48-0.84)

xAssembly Proof Clients

0.48
0.84

3
5

0.86

[0.84-0.86)
[0.86-1)

Proof
Clients

1.00

0.86
1

6

Table A-9: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of Assembly station
(non-team-based)
Cumulative
From

*;
Cumulative Probability
[0-0.49)
[0.49-0.54)
[0.54-0.84)
[0.84-1)

To

Probability
0.49
0.05 0.30 0.16

Probability
0.49
0.54

Path
1

Task

Assembly Assembly
Assembly

CSR
QC2

0.00 0.49
0.54 0.84
1

Assembly Assembly
Proof

CSR Assembly
QC2

2

0.84

3
4

1.00

Proof

Table A-10: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of foreman station
(non-team-based)
Cumulative

Cumulative
Probability
[0-0.21) 0.00 0.21 0.81
Path
1

From
xForeman

To
xCSR

Probability
0.21

Probability
0.21

Task

xCSR

xForeman xAssembly

0.60 0.17 0.02

0.81 0.98 1.00

[0.21-0.81)
[0.81-0.98) [0.98-1)

3
4

xAssembly xQC2
Proof

xForeman xForeman

xQC2

Proof

0.98
1

5

Table A-11: Cumulative distribution function for each job which is going out of QC2 station (nonteam-based)
Cumulative Cumulative
Probability
[0-0.55)
0.00 0.55

From
xQC2 xQC2 xQC2

To
xCSR xForeman Proof

Probability
0.55
0.35

Probability
0.55 0.90 1.00

Path

Task xCSR
xForeman

[0.55-0.90)
[0.90-1)

0.10

0.90
1

Proof

89

Table A-12: Cumulative distribution function for each job, which is going out of proofreading
station (non-team-based)
Cumulative
From

Cumulative
Probability [0-0.30)
[0.30-0.67) Path
1

To xCSR
xForeman

Probability
0.30
0.37

Probability
0.30
0.67

Task

Proof

0.00
0.30
0.67

xCSR
xForeman

Proof
Proof Proof

2

xAssembly
xQC2

0.26
0.04 0.04

0.93
0.96

[0.67-0.93) [0.93-0.96) [0.96-1)

3
4

xAssembly
xQC2

0.93

Proof

Proof

1.00

0.96
1

5

Proof

90

i

Table A-13: G enerated number of iterations for each job (non-team-based)
=RANDBETWEEN(^C$131 '$(3

=IF(B| <^^JPI,O)
Number of Tasks
Path

t
7

,
t 39

1
30

60
27

31*
Job

37

15

Job xCSR
xForeman

Job
xCSR xForeman xCSR

Job xCSR xForeman

Job xCSR xForeman

Job
xCSR xForeman Proof

Job
xCSR

t xCSR


2

foreman
xQC2 xCSR

xForeman
xCSR

xCSR
xCSR

xAssembly
Proof xCSR

xAssembly xAssembly
xCSR xForeman

3
4

xAssembly xCSR xAssembly xCSR xForeman
xQC2

xForeman

xAssembly xCSR xAssembly
Proof

xForeman xCSR xAssembly
xAssembly

xForeman xCSR
xForeman xCSR

xAssembly
xForeman

5

xCSR Clients
xCSR xForeman xCSR

6
7

xCSR xForeman
xAssembly xCSR

xAssembly
Proof
xCSR xForeman . xCSR

xAssembly
xCSR

8
9

xAssembly
xQC2

Clients
0
0

Proof
xCSR xForeman

Clients
xCSR xForeman

10
11
12

xCSR xAssembly
Proof

xAssembly
xQC2

xForeman xAssembly xCSR xForeman
xAssembly xCSR xForeman xQC2 xCSR Clients xCSR xAssembly xQC2
xForeman

0

xForeman
xCSR

0
0

xAssembly
Proof xAssembly
xQC2

xCSR

xAssembly
xForeman
xQC2

13
14

Proof xAssembly
Proof xForeman

xForeman xCSR Clients
0 0 0

xAssembly
xQC2 xForeman xCSR xForeman

0
0

15 16
17

xCSR xForeman

0 0
0

xCSR xCSR

xAssembly
xQC2 xCSR

xAssembly
xForeman

18
19

xForeman
xCSR

xAssembly xCSR
xCSR

0
0
0

0
0 0
0

xAssembly
xQC2 xForeman

20
21
22

xForeman

xAssembly

xCSR xForeman
xCSR xForeman

Proof
xForeman xAssembly xForeman
xCSR

xAssembly
Proof xCSR

0

xAssembly

23
24

0
0
0 0

0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0

xAssembly
xCSR xForeman
xQC2

xAssembly
xQC2

Clients
xCSR

25 26
27

xAssembly
xForeman xQC2 xForeman xAssembly
xQC2

Clients
xCSR Clients
xCSR

xCSR xForeman
xQC2

xAssembly
xCSR

0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
0 0 0 0

xCSR

28
29

xAssembly Proof
xCSR

Clients

xCSR

30 31
32

xAssembly
xForeman xAssembly -

Clients
xCSR xForeman
xQC2

0
0 0 0 0
0

xCSR

0
0

Clients
0 0 0
0 0
0

Clients
0 0

33
34

xAssemblv
xAssembly xForeman
xAssembly xCSR

0
0
0 0 0 0 0

xForeman
xQC2

35 36
37

0 0
0 0

0
0 0 0 0

Proof xForeman

38 39

Clients
0
0

xAssembly
xCSR Clients

0 0

0
0

40

0

0

0

0

91

Appendix B: Layout of Arena® Model

Team Based

Non Team Based

F

r-F

Kjn
I OB 2

iodi

I0D2

·«<«,

(~~~

jr.

F--<r

J_

Figure B-l: Layout of Arena® model for current-state

92

fS^

POD 1

POD 2

POD 3

csa

Figure B-2: Team-based category Arena® model for current-state

93

>uuu» I

L
Assembled

Figure B-3: Non-team-based category Arena® model for current-state

94

Account
Manager

Assign The We

Work Order Seq(

Order and The

J Order Release
j Station

Start Sequence

O
O

Basic Process
Advanced Transfer Exit

Convey


Start


Stop


Activate


Allocate


Free


Hart


Move


Request
Sequence 4SS Sequence 459

Transport

Sequence

S&cfuence 4&i Sequence 461

Reports

Sequence 462

Navigate

g£

® team-based (starting sequences) Figure B-4: Layout of Arena®

Go To CSR 2

Do To CSR 3

Figure B-5: Layout of Arena® team-based category (route to CSR)
95

CSR

CSR.CSR

1 1 ,,,,;

Dfld*55

Figure B-6: Layout of Arena® team-based category (CSR processing task)

96

Pick Operator in

Goto/ssemHy

Decide 58

teemby Sta

Pick Operator in %semby Nation

Figure B-7: Layout of Arena® team-base category (route to assembly)

97

Pick Station for

QC2 2O

Route To QC2

Jlx|;

F Number in (Jueue

W Number of Resources gus?

!

F Number En Route to Station
SfcSkm:
Assembiy5. Station, QC2 Assembly4.Station, QC2 Assembly3.Station,JQC2 AssemblyZStation, QC2 <End of list>

F Egression

|

5. Queue, Assembly 5 4.Queue, Assembly 4 3.Queue, Assembly 3 2. Queue, Assembly. 2

Delete

Transfer Type:

| Route
J0.0
OK

.11
Zl Hours
Cancel

zl
Heip

Figure B-8: Layout of Arena® team-base category (route to QC2)

®

98

CSR

Route 03

Route 04

Route 05

Route 06

Route 07

Figure B-9: Layout of Arena® team-based category (POD 1)

99

CSR 1

CSR2

CSR3

Proo***i»si3 i"

30QC2JOCSR3

KV.Wv"iW.V^(k"*.
Foi«maij<CSR3

Figure B-10: Layout of Arena® ® non-team-based category (CSR task)

100

Foreman

Figure B-ll: Layout of Arena® non-team-based category (foreman task)

101

Assembly Pod

Assembly 1 statio

^

Route 8

Figure B-12: Layout of Arena® non-team-based category (assembly and QC2)

102

ProofReading:

® Figure B-13 : Layout of Arena® (proofreading task)

103

Appendix C: Input Analysis
Expo (43.000) Shift=+8. 1304
--^

V

y





Me

u

I
^U|

uu o

^

bu|

H

I

12&

t

14p

r

16b

i

18b

20)

r

1
N/A
Test Value
P Value

--OMWimiii iiiiiibwpwmm--HBj
10.3

5.0%
136.9

Chi-Sq
5.478 0.2416 1 1.9226
3.3567

A-D

K-S
0.2247

0.8733

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
5

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
6

Rank C.Val @ 0.75
CVal <S> 0.5

N/A N/A
0.4885

N/A
N/A
0.1653
0.1836

C.Val @ 0.25
C.Val @ 0.15

5.3853 6.7449
7.7794

0.5925 0.6740 0.8486

C.Val @ 0.1 C.Val @ 0.05

0.1967 0.2169

9.4877

Figure C-l: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for CSR (non-team-based)
104

Expon(95.000) Shift=+7.2857

12.2

291.9

N/A
Test Value P Value
Rank

Chi-Sq
11.60 0.0715
3.4546

A-D

K-S

0.7636
0.05 <= p <= 0.1
7

0.1485

0.15 <=p<= 0.25
10

C.Val @ 0.75

N/A
N/A
0.5289 0.6417
0.7308

N/A
N/A
0.1357

C.Val @ 0.5 C.Val @ 0.25
C.Val @ 0.15 C.Val @ 0.1

5.3481

7.8408
9.4461

0.1509 0.1619
0.1787

10.6446
12.5916
14.4494

C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val (S) 0.025 C.Val (5)0.01
C.Val @ 0.005

0.9249
1.0697 1.4069

0.1925

16.8119
18.5476

0.2045

N/A

N/A

Figure C-2: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for assembly (non-team-based)

105

Expon(10.600) Shift=+8.9400

Q.00

9.48

40.69

N/A
Test Value
P Value
Rank

Chj-Sq
3.600 0.0578
3

A-D

K-S
0.3746

1.085
<0.01
4

<0.01
7

C.Val @ 0.75 C.Val @ 0.5
C.Val (5) 0.25

0.1015

N/A

N/A
N/A
0.2381
0.2634 0.2811 0.3090
0.3314

0.4549
1.3233

N/A
0.3811

C.Val @ 0.15 C.Val @ 0.1
C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025

2.0723
2.7055

0.4615
0.5224
0.6434

3.8415 5.0239

0.7469
0.9455

C.Val @ 0.01
C.Val @ 0.005

6.6349
7.8794
10.8276

0.3539

N/A N/A

N/A

C.Val @ 0.001

N/A

Figure C-3: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for QC2 (non-team-based)

106

Expon(35.875) Shift=+7.5156

115.0

N/A
Test Value P Value Rank

Chi-Sq
5.478

A-D

K-S 0.2247

0.8733 0.025 <= p <= 0.05
5

0.2416
1

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
6

CVal @ 0.75
C.Vai @ 0.5 CVal @ 0.25

1.9226 3.3567

N/A N/A
0.4885 0.5925
0.6740

N/A N/A
0.1653 0.1836
0.1967

5.3853 6.7449 7.7794 9.4877 11.1433 13.2767 14.8603
18.4668

C.Val @ 0.15
C.Val @ 0.1

C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025
C.Val @ 0.01

0.8486 0.9822
1.2827

0.2169
0.2335 0.2483

C.Val @ 0.005
C.Val @ 0.001

N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A

Figure C-4: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for proofreading
(non-team-based)

107

Normal(22.353,10.914)
7-V

4.40

40.31

N/A
Test Value

Chi-Sq
5.478 0.2416 1 1.9226
3.3567

A-D

K-S
0.2247 0.025 <= p <= 0.05

0.8733 0.025 <= p <= 0.05
5

P Value
Rank

6

C.Val @ 0.75 C.Val @ 0.5 C.Val @ 0.25

N/A N/A
0.4885

N/A N/A
0.1653 0.1836 0.1967 0.2169 0.2335 0.2483

5.3853 6.7449 7.7794 9.4877 11.1433
13.2767

C.Val @ 0.15 C.Val @ 0.1
C.Val @ 0.05

0.5925 0.6740 0.8486
0.9822 1.2827

C.Val @ 0.025 C.Val @ 0.01 C.Val @ 0.005
C.Val @ 0.001

14.8603
18.4668

N/A N/A

N/A N/A

Figure C-5: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for final QC (non-team-based)

108

Normal(32.122,14.088)
8-s:

7-

6-

5-

?

o

X
CO

^

CD

>

3-

2-

1-

--

0
c

<=>
^-

^

5^0%

"*TMwTMmTMMWW^^

mMiMlllllilllllilIliiriiiiiiiiiiiiiyiiiiiini

8. 35

kii.L
C>
cm

i

O
co

C3

·>*

G>

in

to

r

»'if»i'»if»»»''i"'f'»i»»iiiMMfiiiit[|[iifjiMair

s!o%

I

55. 29

N/A
Test Value

Chi-Sq
5.478 0.2416
1

A-D

K-S

0.8733

0.2247

P Value
Rank C.Val @ 0.75
CVal <g> 0.5

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
5

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
6

1.9226 3.3567 5.3853 6.7449
7.7794

N/A
N/A
0.4885 0.5925 0.6740 0.8486
0.9822
1.2827

N/A
N/A
0.1653

C.Val @ 0.25 C.Val @ 0.15 C.Val @ 0.1 CVal @ 0.05

0.1836
0.1967

9.4877 11.1433
13.2767

0.2169 0.2335 0.2483

C.Val @ 0.025
C.Val @ 0.01

C.Val @ 0.005 C.Val @ 0.001

14.8603 18.4668

N/A

N/A N/A

N/A

Figure C-6: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for CSR (team-based)

109

Expon(50.284) Shift=+5.4286

8.0

156.1

N/A
Test Value P Value
Rank

Chi-Sq
5.478 0.2416
1

A-D

K-S
0.2247

0.8733

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
5

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
6

C.Val @ 0.75

1.9226 3.3567 5.3853 6.7449 7.7794
9.4877 11.1433 13.2767

N/A
N/A
0.4885 0.5925 0.6740
0.8486

N/A

C.Val @ 0.5
C.Val @ 0.25

N/A
0.1653 0.1836
0.1967

C.Val @ 0.15 C.Va! @ 0.1
C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025
C.Val <S> 0.01

0.2169
0.2335 0.2483

0.9822
1.2827

C.Val @ 0.005
C.Val @ 0.001

14.8603 18.4668

N/A

N/A N/A

N/A

Figure C-7: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for assembly (team-based)

110

Lognorm(27.130,29.389) Shift=+2.7559

81.1

N/A
Test Value P Value
Rank
C.Val @ 0.75

Chi-Sq
32.95

A-D

K-S

1.913

0.2428
<0.01

2.7036E-05
4.2549

< 0.005

N/A N/A
0.4610

N/A
N/A N/A
0.1188
0.1255 0.1371 0.1525
0,1586

C.Val @ 0.5

6.3458
9.0371

C.Val @ 0.25 C.Val @ 0.15
C.Val @ 0.1

10.7479 12.0170 14.0671 16.0128 18.4753

0.5502
0.6189

C.Val @ 0.05
C.Val @ 0.025 C.Val @ 0.01

0.7375
0.8562
1.0151

Figure C-8: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for proofreading (team-based)

111

Expon(31.056) Shift=+3.2747_

ao

96.3

N/A
Test Value P Value Rank C.Val @ 0.75
1.111
0.7744 2

Chi-Sq
0.6287

A-D

K-S
0.2007
0.15 <=p<= 0.25
4

0.1 <=p<= 0.15 5

1.2125 2.3660 4.1083

N/A
N/A
0.4603 0.5582 0.6343 0.7951
0.9208

N/A N/A
0.1848 0.2051 0.2196

C.Val @ 0.5
C.Val @ 0.25 C.Val @ 0.15
C.Val <S> 0.1

5.3170
6.2514 7.8147 9.3484

C.Val @ 0.05
C.Val @ 0.025

0.2420
0.2603
0.2771

C.Val @ 0.01

11.3449

1.1953

Figure C-9: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for QC (team-based)

112

Expon(8.3333) Shift=-+3.6111
V

4.04

28.58

N/A
Test Value

Chi-Sq
5.478

A-D

K-S

0.8733

0.2247

P Value
Rank

0.2416
1

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
5

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
6

C.Va! @ 0.75
C.Val @ 0.5

1.9226
3.3567 5.3853

N/A
N/A
0.4885 0.5925

N/A N/A
0.1653
0.1836 0.1967

C.Val @ 0.25 C.Val @ 0.15
C.Val @ 0.1

6.7449
7.7794

0.6740
0.8486 0.9822
1.2827

C.Val @ 0.05
C.Val <g) 0.025 C.Val @ 0.01

9.4877
11.1433 13.2767

0.2169
0.2335 0.2483

C.Val @ 0.005 C.Val @ 0.001

14.8603 18.4668

N/A N/A

N/A N/A

Figure C-10: Input modeling of the data for value-added time for final QC (team-based)

113

Expon(1409.0) Shift=-101.80

Values in Thousands
4.119

-0.Q30

N/A
Test Value

Chj-Sq
1.800 0.1797
1

A-D

K-S

1.333

0.5351

PVaiue
Rank

<0.01
6

<0.01
9

CVal @ 0.75
C.Val @ 0.5 CVal @ 0.25 C.Val @ 0.15

0.1015 0.4549 1.3233
2.0723

N/A N/A
0.2805

N/A
N/A
0.3054

0.3384 0.3787 0.4421 0.5171 0.6030

0.3350

C.Val @ 0.1
C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025
C.Val @ 0.01

2.7055

0.3546
0.3868 0.4119 0.4436

3.8415
5.0239 6.6349
7.8794 10.8276

C.Val @ O.dO5
C.Val @ 0.001

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Figure C-l 1: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from CSR-CSR
(team-based)

114

Normal(308.08,227.22)

-65.7

N/A A-C
Test Value

Chi-Sq
0.1538

A-D

K-S

0.2743 >0.25
1

0.1203 >0.15 1

P Value
Rank

0.9260
5

C.Val @ 0.75
C.Val <S> 0.5

0.5754

N/A N/A
0.4388 0.5238 0.5892 0.7021

N/A
N/A

1.3863 2.7726
3.7942
4.6052

C.Val @ 0.25
C.Val @ 0.15 C.Val @ 0.1

N/A
0.2023

0.2138 0.2336
0.2597 0.2701

C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025
C.Val @ 0.01
C.Val @ 0.005

5.9915

7.3778 9.2103
7.8794 10.8276

0.8151 0.9664

N/A N/A

N/A N/A

C.Val @ 0.001

Figure C-12: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from CSR-assembly
(team-based)

115

Expon(107.50) Shift=+12.083

eslFIt Student-Version

17.6

334.1

N/A A-P
Test Value
P Value Rank CVal @ 0.75
C.Val @ 0.5 L_

Chi-Sq
0.000
1.0000
1

A-D

K-S 0.2589
>0.25

0.4199
0.05 <= p <= 0.1
7

10

0.1015 0.4549 1.3233 2.0723

N/A N/A
0.3063 0.3700

N/A N/A
0.2884 0.3172 0.3368 0.3684 0.3933
0.4223

CVal @ 0.25

C.Val @ 0.15

CVal @ 0.1.
C.Val @ 0.05
C.Val @ 0.025

2.7055
3.8415 5.0239 6.6349
7.8794

0.4158
0.4955

0.5778
0.6962

C.Val @ 0.01
C.Val @ 0.005

N/A N/A

N/A

C.Val @ 0.001

10.8276

N/A

Figure C-13: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from assemblyproofreading (team-based)

116

Normal(66.600,27.208)

21.85

111.35

N/A
Test Value

Chi-Sq
0.1429

A-D

K-S 0.2351 >0.25 11

0.4436

P Value
Rank C.Val @ 0.75 CVal @ 0.5
C.Val @ 0.25

0.7055
2

0.1<=p<=0.15
8

0.1015 0.4549 1.3233 2.0723

N/A N/A
0.3288 0.3976
0.4480

N/A N/A
0.2733
0.3012

CVal @ 0.15 C.Val @ 0.1 C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025 C.Val @ 0.01 C.Val @ 0.005
C.Val @ 0.001

2.7055 3.8415 5.0239 6.6349
7.8794 10.8276

0.3205 0.3511

0.5407 0.6294
0.7734

0.3755
0.4024

N/A

N/A N/A

N/A

Figure C-14: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from
assembly-QC2 (team-based)

117

Lognorm(184.21,410.70) Shitt=+11.961
1 n T7
7

Q.9-

0.8-

Otf-

a&-

<

o

x
v>

tt5"

a>

CO

>

0l4--

a3-

a2-

L3
CDOOOOOOO

ai-

ao
csoooooooo

[

^BBilllllill^
20.3 691.5

^°%

;

>

N/A
Test Value

Chi-Sq
0.1429
0.7055 3
0.1015

A-D

K-S 0.2796

0.5939

P Value
Rank

N/A
3

N/A
3

J

C.Val @ 0.75 CVal @ 0.5
C.Val @ 0.25

N/A

N/A

0.4549
1.3233

N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A

C.Val @ 0.15 C.Val @ 0.1 C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025
C.Val @ 0.01

2.0723
2.7055
3.8415

N/A
N/A N/A
N/A N/A N/A
N/A

5.0239

6.6349
7.8794

N/A
N/A N/A

C.Val @ 0.005 C.Val @ 0.001

10.8276

Figure C-15: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from CSR-foreman
(non-team-based) 118

Expon(19.200)Shift=-2.8400

45--

40-

35-

ao-

o

x
m

25--

©

la >

20-

15-

1.0-

05-

ao
c

JBHBIIHlHi
!lllliai»MIIIIi^

I

|

|
5468

| --
D
o

3OOOOOOOC

5.0%

>

-1.

86

~~
Chi-Sq
0.2000
0.6547
1 A-D

N/A
Test Value P Value
Rank

K-S

0.5333 0.01 <= p <= 0.025
2

0.2648
>0.25
2

C.Val @ 0.75 C.Val @ 0.5 C.Val @ 0.25

0.1015

N/A N/A
0.2805
0.3384

N/A
N/A
0.3054

0.4549 1.3233
2.0723

C.Val @ 0.15
C.Val @ 0.1

0.3350 0.3546
0.3868 0.4119 0.4436

2.7055
3.8415 5.0239

0.3787
0.4421
0.5171

C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025
C.Val @ 0.01

6.6349

0.6030

Figure C-16: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from assemblyforeman (non team-based)

119

Expon(2938.2) Shift=-267.82

j§

I
H|H

BeitFit Student Version

n ^
q ^-

^
om « rf

1
»o

Values in Thousands
|§§§y

1
5.0% >

-0.090

5.1 505

N/A
Test Value P Value
Rank

Chi-Sq
0.000 1.0000 1 0.1015 0.4549 1.3233

A-D 0.5110

K-S
0.2117

0.1<=p<=0.15 3

>0.25
1

C.Val @ 0.75 C.Val @ 0.5

N/A
N/A
0.3811 0.4615
0.5224 0.6434

N/A N/A
0.2381
0.2634 0.2811

C.Val @ 0.25
C.Val (5)0.15
C.Val @ 0.1

;

2.0723 2.7055 3.8415 5.0239 6.6349 7.8794 10.8276

C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025 C.Val @ 0.01 C.Val @ 0.005 C.Val @ 0.001

0.3090
03314

0.7469

0.9455

0.3539

N/A N/A

N/A
N/A

Figure C-17: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from assembly-CSR
(non-team-based)

120

Normal(178.50,177.45)

J2

03

-113.4

470.4

N/A
Test Value

Chi-Sq
1.200 0.7530
3

A-D

K-S
0.1961

0.9494

P Value
Rank C.Val @ 0.75
C.Val @ 0.5 C.Val @ 0.25 C.Val @ 0.15 C.Val @ 0,1

0.01 <= p <= 0.025 6

0.025 <= p <= 0.05
6

1.2125
2.3660

N/A N/A
0.4506 0.5378
0.6049

N/A

N/A
N/A
0.1666 0.1760

|

4.1083
5.3170

6.2514
7.8147

C.Va! @ 0.05
C.Val <S> 0.025

0.7209 0.8369 0.9922

0.1924

9.3484 11.3449

0.2139
0.2225
7.8794 10.8276

C.Val @ 0.01
C.Val @ 0.005 C.Val @ 0.001

N/A N/A

N/A
N/A

Figure C-18: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from foremanassembly (non-team-based)

121

Lognorm(352.66,188.76) Shift=+5.1549
4.5-^7

141.3

715.1

N/A
Test Value
PVaiue Rank CVal @ 0.75
C.Va! @ 0.5 CVal @ 0.25 CVal @ 0.15 CVal @ 0.1

Chi-Sq
0.1429

A-D

K-S 0.2115

0.2591

0.7055
4

N/A
2

N/A
3

0.1015 0.4549 1.3233 2.0723 2.7055 3.8415 5.0239 6.6349
7.8794

N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A

N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
N/A N/A

CVal @ 0.05 CVal @ 0.025 CVal @ 0.01 CVal @ 0.005
CVal @ 0.001

N/A N/A N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A

10.8276

Figure C-19: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from CSR-assembly
(non-team-based)

122

Expon(112.27) Shift=+6.2578

12.0

342.6

N/A
Test Value P Value
Rank C.Val @ 0.75 C.Val @ 0.5

Chi-Sq
3.200 0.6692
1

A-D

K-S

0.5494

0.1453
>0.25
7

0.15 <=p<= 0.25
5

2.6746 4.3515 6.6257 8.1152 9.2364 11.0705 12.8325
15.0863

N/A

N/A N/A
0.1460 0.1623

N/A
0.5152

C.Val @ 0.25 C.Val @ 0.15 C.Val @ 0.1 C.Val @ 0.05 C.Val @ 0.025
C.Val @ 0.01

0.6251 0.7116 0.8991
1.0402

0.1740
0.1920 0.2068
0.2198

1.3650

C.Val @ 0.005 C.Val @ 0.001

16.7496 20.5150

N/A N/A

N/A
N/A

Figure C-20: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from QC2proofreading (non-team-based)

123

Lognorm(184.21,410.70) Shift=+11.961

20.3

691.5

N/A
Test Value P Value Rank C.Val <5> 0.75

Chi-Sq
0.1429
0.7055

A-D

K-S 0.2796

0.5939

N/A
3

N/A
3

3
0.1015 0.4549 1.3233 2.0723 2.7055 3.8415

N/A
N/A

N/A

C.Val @ 0.5
C.Val @ 0.25

N/A
N/A N/A N/A

N/A
N/A N/A

C.Val @ 0.15
C.Val @ 0.1 C.Val @ 0.05

N/A
N/A

N/A N/A
N/A N/A
N/A

C.Val @ 0.025
C.Val @ 0.01 C.Val @ 0.005
C.Val @ 0.001

5.0239
6.6349 7.8794 10.8276

N/A
N/A N/A

Figure C-21: Input modeling of the data for non-value-added time from assemblyproofreading (non-team-based)
124

Appendix D: Sample Timesheet
Work order Number

1

01

John Smith

CSR

Create Work order

12/1/2007 9:00am 9:00am ll:30ar Foreman ll:35an Hand off time was delayed b/c of phone call

2

02

Linda Daves

Foreman

Assign job to operator

12/1/2007 11:35am 1:20pm 1:22pm

3

02

it

enter job in schawklink

12/1/2007

1:22pm 1:30pm Operator 1:30pm

4

02

Rhys Fernandez

Operator

trapping

12/1/2007 2:30pm 3:00pm 3:45pm

5

02

n

QC1

12/1/2007

4:00pm 4:30pm Proofreac 5:00pm Took a break fro 3:45 -4:00pm

6

02

Michele Chiang

proofreader

proof read product

12/2/2007 9:00am 9:00am ll:30ar foreman 11:35am

Figure D-1: Sample timesheet

125

Appendix E: Standardizing Procedure

Table E-l: Sample operator standard procedure

XYZ
Job Title [Operator Revision No. 001

Mississauga Division
Document No. R-OP-A0001 Rev.Date:23rt)2/2008 | Pg. 1 of 2

Procedure: Assembly Operations
Responsibilities/ Duties: The Operator work col (abortively with the CSR (Customer Servi ce. Representative) or Foreman to ensure client satisfaction. The Operator will perform their work in a timely

manner,ensuretheirtheirworkis reasonablyfreefromdefects. Operatorswill beprovided
adequate tools and trainingto complete their work order in an effective and efficient manner. Procedure:

-

The CSR/ Foreman will hand off a work order to an Operator to be completed by a pre determined time. The Operator preps the file by fi II ingthe in the appropriate code and nomenclature
The file is converted into an-tilustratorfile. and then to ESKO. Usingtemplates (if available) the die lines, printer specifications, and colorschemes
are coded i nto the fi I e.

-

The Operator performs a quality check to make sure the amended file conforms to the
client's requests, Printers specifications.

-

This first draft is passed backtotheCSR/ Foreman who then distribute itfor a second
quality check

-

Once passed thesecond qual ity check, the.CSR /Foreman hands off the fi I etgjgjj,
original Operator

The Operator convert the One-off to a Step-up {if required)
Another qual ity check is performed, and a 1 BitTIFFfile is created The Operator releases thefileto the CSR / Foreman/ Pi ate Department / Proofer

Rev.
001 002 003

Date

Prepared by
Sam£

Approved by
Sam&tagl

Signature

23/02/2008

Approved By:
Signature:

Date:

Qu a 1 i ty D e p a rtm e nt S i gn off:

126

XYZ
Rhvd*No.QQ1

Misassauga Dirision

Figure E-l: Operator standard process flow

127

Appendix F: Output Analysis
In output analysis, total non-value-added time with respect to the number of work-orders is calculated. The system has run for 300 days with five replications. Table F-1 and Table
F-4 show the total non-value-added time during each month for a total of 10 month.

Table F-2 and Table F-5 illustrate the total number of order, which goes out of the system
during each month.

Table F-1: Simulation results for total non-value-added time for each month for team-

based category

Simulation
Length

Total non-value-added time for team-based

Mean Total

Runl
4240.542

Run 2

Run 3

Run 4

Run 5

NVA time

(Days)
1
2

0-30 30-60 60-90 90-120 120-150 150-180 180-210 210-240 240 - 270 270 - 300

4863.696 6292.116
6210.546 6219.948

3961.29
6282.714

4039.68 6472.398
5519.154

3952.236 L 5742.528
6648.342

4211.49
6222.70 6002.67 6020.95
6315.34

6323.736

3 4

5377.716 6138.81
6144.684

6257.598
6103.812

5939.982
6777.612

5702.22 6446.232

5

6381.726
5919.15
7289.604

5826.426
5737.722

6
7

6282.636 7047.936 7170.216
6894.498 7268.124

6231.108
7064.112 6377.808
7195.944

6525.936 5985.336
7333.134 6949.572

6139.31 6784.00
7225.48 7038.81 7354.36

6533.028
7791.192

8

7455.048
6787.74
7390.932

9
10

7366.302
7269.654

7372.896

7470.216

Table F-2: Simulation results for total number of complete orders during each month for team-based category Simulation Length Runl
24

Number of Finished Order
Run 2
24

Mean Total Run 5 26 Order

Run 3
24

Run 4 28 66 55 63 50

(Days)
1

0-30

25
66 52

2 3
4

30-60 60-90
90-120 120-150 150-180
180-210

68
48 62 48

68 55
70

61
49 69
54

68
54

62

65 49 66
55

5

46 66 61
57

49 68 56 63
51

6
7

66
52

63 49 61 61

68
57 62

8

210 - 240

59
62

60

9
10

240 - 270
270 - 300

58 63

61 57

59
64

66

69

63

128

"Mean unit order non-value-added time" will be calculated trough division of "Mean

non-value-added "by "Mean number of finished order". Numbers are shown in the Table
F-3 and Table F-6.

Table F-3: Truncations of cumulative means for unit order non-value-added time for

team-based category
Mean

Unit
Order
NVA
O-Truncate

1-Truncate Cumulative Mean
94.21
104.72

2-Truncate
Cumulative Mean

3-Truncate
Cumulative
Mean

4-Truncate
Cumulative Mean

5-Truncate Cumulative Mean

Cumulative
Mean 168.14
131.17

(Y./)
168.14
94.21

115.23
92.52

125.86
117.52

115.23
103.87



100.65 107.58 104.60 107.81

92.52

128.35
92.71

119.69
115.19
116.43 116.86 117.28

112.03
107.20 110.53 112.08 113.31

110.43 104.53
109.35 111.46 112.99
113.44

128.35 110.53
114.97 92.71 108.27 112.14

123.84 119.86
120.64 116.14

109.53
110.92

116.19 117.08
116.92

114.26
114.64

117.16

111.50

113.66

By plotting different truncations in a chart, it is easy to see the initialization bias. The line which has the least fluctuations is the best truncation and number of batched based on the plot could be skipped. Figure F-1 and F-2 have shown the plotted truncations for both teambased and non-team-based categories.

129

180.00
 O-Truncate Cumulative Mean

1 -Truncate Cumulative Mean

160.00

· 2-Truncate Cumulative Mean
· 3-Truncate Cumulative Mean

140.00

S
(0

120.00

100.00

80.00

60.00

8

9

10

Figure F-l: Unit order non-value-added time for team-based vs. each month

Table F-4: Simulation results for total non-value-added time for each month for nonteam-based category

Simulation Length

Total non-value-added time for non-team-based Runl

Mean

Run 2
4194.186
9334.02

Run 3
4644.336 8821.482 10599.08
11095.53 11980.54

Run 4 4859.652 8752.812 10812.62
11114.92

Run 5

Total

(Days)
1

NVA time 5441.166
8107.326 4879.308 8925.558 5441.166

0 - 30

2 3 4 5

30-60 60-90
90 - 120

8107.326 11187.49
10856.45 10501.76 12594.23 11106.04

11187.49
10856.45 10501.76 12594.23 11106.04 10272.61 10738.13

10114.86 12513.01
10976.84

10800.86
11195.72

120-150

11335.37

10891.27

6
7

150-180
180-210

12091.08

12128.87

11499.68 11054.63
11370.37
9453.492

12077.09
10163.1
10888.75

10944.91
9284.112

11399.59
10790.02

8

210 - 240
240 - 270 270 - 300

10272.61
10738.13

9
10

12320.53 10231.99

10015.87 10867.11

11663.97 11060.03

10980.19

10749.35

10980.19

130

Table F-5: Simulation results for total number of complete orders during eachi month for
non-team-based category

Simulation
Length (Days)
1

Number of Finished Order
Runl

Mean Run 5
37 87 98 Total

Run 2
31

Run 3
34

Run 4 33 86 98 108 101
88
102

NVA time

0-30

39
81 98 111
92 100 107 95

35

2

30-60

89
88 96
102 85 125
94

88 98
92

86 96
100 94 93
112

3
4

60-90
90-120 120 -150 150-180 180-210 210-240
240 - 270 270 - 300

95 86 99
117 91

5

91
92

6
7 8

108
95

101 81

95

9 10

88

79
97

89
101

85
102

,

84

89

105

99

Table F-6: Truncations of cumulative means for unit order non-value-added time for
team-based category
Mean

Unit
Order

NVA

(Y./>
138.11 101.92 111.56

0-Truncate Cumulative Mean
138.11 120.01 117.20
116.37 116.79 119.08

1-Truncate Cumulative Mean
101.92
106.74

2-Truncate

Cumulative Mean

3-Truncate Cumulative Mean

4-Truncate Cumulative Mean

5-Truncate Cumulative Mean

111.56

113.90 118.46
130.54

109.13

112.73
114.64 118.62

113.90

111.46 115.28
112.47

116.18
120.97

118.46

124.50
115.81

130.54

98.43
110.54

116.13
115.43

114.58 113.91 116.05
115.22

115.33
114.37

114.48
113.17

112.19 114.28
113.74

114.49
117.37

128.89

116.93 116.18

116.79

117.10
115.57

109.45

115.75

116.05

131

O-Truncate Cumulative Mean 1-Truncate Cumulative Mean
- 2-Truncate Cumulative Mean 3-Truncate Cumulative Mean

1

2

3

4

5

Figure F-2: Unit order non-value-added time for non-team-based category vs. each month

The optimum number of replications and the length of each run have calculated in an

Excel sheet and it came to one replication for 800 days for both team-based and nonteam-based categories.

132

