Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Intersections of violence : the role of immigration status in women's experiences of and responses to domestic violence in Canada
Ariane Campbell
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Sociology Commons Recommended Citation
Campbell, Ariane, "Intersections of violence : the role of immigration status in women's experiences of and responses to domestic violence in Canada" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 501.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

s 9 -

INTERSECTIONS OF VIOLENCE:

THE ROLE OF IMMIGRATION STATUS IN WOMEN'S EXPERIENCES OF AND RESPONSES TO DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IN CANADA

by

Ariane Campbell, BA, University of Guelph, 2007

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts
in the Program of

Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009

© Ariane Campbell, 2009

PROPERTY OF

BYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for
the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the
purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

u

INTERSECTIONS OF VIOLENCE:

THE ROLE OF IMMIGRATION STATUS IN WOMEN'S EXPERIENCES OF AND RESPONSES TO DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IN CANADA

Ariane Campbell Master of Arts, 2009 Immigration and Settlement Studies
Ryerson University

ABSTRACT

Domestic violence is a serious problem affecting women in Canada. Immigrant women in

particular may be more vulnerable to abuse and face more barriers in seeking help. This
paper will examine the experiences of abused immigrant woman through a critical review of the literature. Domestic abuse does not operate in a vacuum; it is shaped and compounded by other interlinking forms of oppression. In particular, gendered

immigration policies and reduced access to social services exacerbate experiences of
violence. Responses to violence against immigrant women thus must be holistic and long
term, challenging societal inequalities and underlying structures of power.

Key words:

immigrant women; domestic violence; gendered immigration policy; multicultural social services

in

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Introduction

Definitions Methodology
Research Question

Domestic Violence in Canada
Measurement Issues

Theoretical Background
2. Barriers and Vulnerabilities 11

Language

Isolation and Loss
Lack of Information

Community and Family
Home Country and Migration Experience Economic Discrimination

Immigration Status Lack of Appropriate Services
3. Relevant Government Policies
23

Spousal Sponsorship Humanitarian and Compassionate Grounds Criminal Justice-Focused Strategies
International Policies:

United States United Kingdom Australia 4. Available Services Mainstream Social Services Ethno-specific Social Services
Language

37

Innovative Programs

Funding Challenges
Gaps and Unmet Needs 5. Recommendations 51

Spousal Sponsorship Humanitarian and Compassionate Grounds Criminal Justice System Strategies

Furthering Economic Equality Treatment of Non-Status Immigrants
Language

Information Dissemination
Decreasing Isolation Community Approach to Service Delivery Conclusion

Appendix A: General Social Survey 2004

59 60
62

Appendix B: List of Domestic Violence Services in the GTA_ References

IV

Chapter 1: Introduction
This paper will examine, through a review of the literature, what government policies and social services work best to help immigrant women suffering from domestic violence (DV). This question will be addressed in three parts. First, the specific vulnerabilities and barriers common
to immigrant women will be examined. Second, relevant government policies will be outlined

and assessed based on their impacts and implications. And third, the programs and services currently available to abused immigrant women will be evaluated based on their cultural
competency and overall effectiveness. This paper is grounded in the recognition that societal

inequalities play an integral role in the continuation of violence against women, and immigrant women may face multiple and interlinking forms of inequality. The thesis of this paper is that responses to DV among immigrant women must be holistic and long term, challenging underlying structures of power.
Definitions

This paper will use two central terms: "domestic violence" and "immigrant women." DV
refers to the exercise of control over a partner or family member through physical, psychological,

economic, or sexual abuse or continual threats (Ritchie & Eby, 2007, p. 4). This practice does not occur in a vacuum; it is supported and continually reinforced by social, institutional, familial,
and cultural practices (Jaaber, 2001, cited in Ahmad, Ocampo, & Shakir, 2009). Though the term appears gender neutral, it is understood that DV is a highly gendered practice, generally non-

mutual, and overwhelmingly perpetrated against women (Justice Institute of British Columbia
[JIBC], 2007, p. 13). The term "Intimate Partner Violence" (IPV) will also occasionally be used

because of its prevalent use in the literature. Its definition is similar to DV, except that it refers
only to "abuse by a current or former spouse or non-marital partner" and not by other family

members (Guruge & Gastaldo, 2008, p. 1). And finally, the term "abuse" will be used interchangeably with violence. Abuse is defined as: "a pattern of behaviour in which physical
violence and/or emotional coercion is used to gain or maintain power or control in a
relationship" (Community Safety Office, 2006, If 1).

For the purpose of this paper, "immigrant women" will refer to women born outside of Canada. This definition is intentionally flexible, and may include long-term residents,
newcomers, refugees, temporary residents, and those without immigration status. Though this group is immensely heterogeneous, it is their position outside of the mainstream, their

experiences of migration, and their susceptibility to immigration laws that create similarities. As Menjivar and Salcido (2002) argue: "pinpointing the commonalities in immigrant women's experiences with domestic violence allows for theorizing about the conditioning factors that
shape these experiences and what strategies women use" (p. 3).
Methodology

This paper utilizes a wide variety of literature related to issues of DV against immigrant
women. Sources analyzed include scholarly papers, books, conference presentations, newspaper

articles, websites, government documents, and reports from non-governmental organizations.

The aim of including such a wide range of literature is to ensure that multiple perspectives including that of service providers, academics, community groups, government, the non-profit sector, and the media- are well represented. Studies from the U.S. have been used alongside Canadian studies because of the two countries' socio-cultural similarities (for example in the

challenges immigrants face, the discourse on immigrants and violence, public attitudes towards
DV, and the availability of DV social services). This was also necessary because of the
comparative scarcity of literature on immigrant women and DV in Canada. On the few occasions

where non-North American studies have been used, it is because the context was deemed close enough to Canada to be applicable. Though more academic research is needed on immigrant women and DV, the information currently available provides a solid groundwork for
understanding this problem and examining what needs to be done. Domestic Violence in Canada

DV is an important social problem affecting all women in Canada regardless of class, race, culture, or immigration status. In 2006, police received 38,000 reports of spousal violence
nationally, with women accounting for 83% of victims (Statistics Canada, 2008, p. 6). Spousal violence accounted for 15% of all police-reported violent incidents, and spousal homicides

accounted for 17% of all solved homicides (Ibid., p. 7). In 2001, 75 women were murdered by their current or former spouses or boyfriends (Status of Women Canada, 2004, p. 5). From April
1999- March 2000, 96,359 women and children were admitted to shelters for abused women, and many more were turned away due to lack of space (Ibid., p. 4). Though all women can be

affected by DV, as Bograd (1999) argues:
Intersectionalities color the meaning and nature of domestic violence, how it is experienced by self and responded to by others, how personal and social consequences are represented, and how and whether escape and safety can be obtained (p. 276).

These intersectionalities may include socio-economic status, race, ethnicity, age, disability,
family size, sexual orientation, or immigration status. For immigrants, the stress and isolation of the migration experience as well as the effects of gendered immigration policies create a

situation where women may be more susceptible to violence and less able to obtain adequate
help. In 2006 there were 6.2 million foreign-born Canadians from over 200 different countries (Statistics Canada, 2006). At almost 20% of the population (and nearly 50% in large urban

centres such as Toronto), this group is substantial, and it is important that their specific social
service needs be well-understood and provided for.
Measurement Issues

DV is poorly measured and understood among the general population. For example,

Canada currently uses the General Social Survey (GSS) to define and measure domestic
violence, but it is highly problematic (see Appendix A). For one, it does not measure the severity or impact of violence (Ahmad et al, 2009). Perhaps as a result, its findings have been

misleading; in 2004 it reported almost identical rates of victimization for men and women (Ibid.). It is also limited, as it includes only ten scenarios of violence, and no "other" option; this ignores the myriad types of abuses women may face, especially in different social, cultural,
economic, and geographical contexts (Ibid.). For example, Yoshihama (1999) notes that in Japanese culture, throwing liquid on a woman is an abusive gesture that suggests she is impure

and polluted (p. 873). Immigrant women may experience diverse and intersecting forms of abuse

based on gender, race, and immigrant status that are not included in the GSS.2 The GSS also
treats physical and emotional abuse as entirely separate, and only includes physical abuse in DV prevalence rates. Because these two forms of abuse are often closely intertwined, separating them and reporting only on one distorts and simplifies women's experiences with DV (Ahmad et al., 2009). Hyman, Forte, Du Mont, Romans, and Cohen (2006) argue that the GSS should remove value statements, as these may influence whether and how abuse is reported (p. 691). For
example some women (particularly those new to the country and unfamiliar with telephone

surveys) may not report their experiences if they are framed as criminal abuse, out of fear of

In 2004 the GSS reported that 7% of women and 6% of men had experienced physical or sexual abuse from thencurrent or former partner in the previous five years (Ahmad et al., 2009).

Immigration-related abuse may include threatening deportation, hiding or destroying legal documents, or refusing to file sponsorship papers (See Immigrant Power and Control Wheel: NCDSV, 2009).

papnpuoo ApAijBjua; aq ubo }i '.reap utag: ibj si ssjbi 90U9jba3.kI aq no souspiAa aqj q8noqx

'£661 «^S # poai3Bj\[ tfrOOZ 'Pa) AO -ipj saoiAias tb§3t. puB 'sibo q;jB3q 'S9ui^oq
'sja;pqs aziujtuspun usuioay jubjSiuiuii }Bq; uAvoqs 9ABq saiprqs 'J9q:iin»j "(8 -d) uaiuoM uioq

ireip sss^ ;jnBSSB jcnxas puB Adi J° ssousppra podaa pjsusS ra usuioav
punoj (£002) trespuj^-pra uaqo3 (689 -d ''piqi) dnojS auaj-Suoi sqj \moos ssn o; Ap^i ss9j ;nq 'goi^od gqj o; AO vodai oj Ap>[ij sjoui sbav dnoiS punoj Aptus aqx usuioav jubjSiuiuii (sjbsX +oi) juapissi uua; Suo| pire

xp sqj vz psijooi (900^) 'IB
in s;u9ui3jejs an|BA aqj Aq
'moiABqaq 3|qBjd900B si jBqM uo sa\9ia jBJin|no UBipBUB^ qjiAV
a\9u

pus Xj;unoo

qA

U9UIOAV ;ubj§|uiuix 9snB09g '(£VZ ''P
; qoiqA\ 's

'job jBrarauo snou9s Aj9a b sb usaq 3ABq Abui Sinpodajj
ujoq-uBipBUB3 joj %£'8 "s

Xpnjs sq; j9A9a\ojj '(
9snqB jBuopouig jo spA9j

u9uioa\ juBJ§iiuun '

spA9| JB|rans pgpodgj sdnoaS qjoq 9jxqAv jBqj punoj

sdnoj§ oavj aqj Suouib asnqB |buoijoui3 puB poxsAqd 9jnsB3ui oj BjBp ssaqj pazifijti (goOZ)
"|B J3 pBUiqy USUIOAV JUBjSlUIUIl pUB UJOq-UBIpBUB^ U33A\J9q S3JBJ 30U9|BA3jd Ul S90U3J9JJXp

9qj 9JTISB9UI 0} SSO 9lP 3sn Wm S9ipnjS U99q 9ABq 9J9qj 'SUOI}BJIUH
%i ssgjppB

oj J9pjo ui SJSIX9 jBqj Aa J° si^os nnj gqj puBjsjgpun oj sj9piAOid 9oiaj9s puB si95[Bui-Aonod joj IBIJU9SS9 si jx sb 'juBpoduii si spo; }U9ui9insB9iu jo AjinqBipj 9qx 'is^Z 'd) psp-ioogj 9jb gsnqB jo
S9dAj \\V pqj 9JtlSU9 pUB 90UBA9pj JB.m4JtlO S;i 9SB9J0UI O; SB OS SSO 3qjUO SUOIJS9Tlb p9pU9-U9do

jo uoisnpui 9qj joj j|BO (£00£) PK^3^ Pub 'TIV 'P^mqv 'OPM) pa^qsnq gq; uo suoissnoisdaj

that immigrant women have rates of physical abuse similar to Canadian-born women, higher
rates of emotional abuse, are less likely to seek help, and are more likely to encounter barriers to
seeking help. Theoretical Background

Before examining issues of violence against immigrant women, it is important to look at some of the societal values, prejudices, and stereotypes that shape perceptions of and reactions to this problem. First of all, "immigrant" is a highly charged word in Western society, and often carries negative connotations. Supriya (2002) argues that: "the institution of immigration

functions through a discursive and material logic of differentiation and hierarchization in
organizing American society" (p. 127). Essential to this economic and social stratification is the
representation of immigrants as 'Other'- as different, inferior, and less deserving of the nation's
resources than the native-born population.

Bhuyan (2008) argues that embedded in immigration policies are normative values that construct the "worthy" immigrant based on dominant ideologies of class, race, gender, productivity, and state loyalty (p. 4). She gives the example of the differing understanding of the term "battered immigrant" in U.S. law vs. among community organizers. While the former gives a structured definition of who is eligible for benefits under this category, the latter see it as "a broader range of people for whom legal immigration status plays a role in their options for safety

planning and/or leaving an abuser, the potential threat of deportation, and the eligibility for
public benefits" (Ibid., p. 1). Bhuyan further explains how the U.S. Violence Against Women

Act ideologically constructs "good" and "bad" immigrants through the "good moral character"
requirement (Ibid., p. 12). Speaking from the British context, Anitha (2008) argues that the

problem of DV among women with insecure immigration status is too often seen as an

immigration problem, and needs to be reconceptualized as an issue of human rights (p. 12). Negative societal views of immigrant groups often act as barriers to their effectively seeking help. Ferraro (1989) found that police officers were reluctant to make arrests in DV cases among immigrants because they saw it as "a waste of time" and "a way of life for them" (p. 67). Certain ethno-racial groups may face heightened stereotypes which disproportionately impede their ability to seek help. For example, Ammons (1995) found that African-American women suffering from DV were not taken seriously by police officers because of stereotypes of them as aggressive, tough, and unaffected by violence. Though the experiences of people of

colour and immigrants are not synonymous, they are interlinked as both categories tend to be
stereotyped and excluded from the mainstream society. Also, the two groups overlap significantly; from 1990-2001 79% of immigrants to Canada were identified as 'visible

minorities' (George & Doyle, 2005, U 6).3 Stereotyping and targeting of minority groups by
police may act as a strong disincentive for abused women to seek help from the criminal justice
system.

Harmful stereotyping also occurs in the health sector. Jiwani (2001) found that physicians

responded less to DV among immigrant women of colour, largely because of stereotypes that their cultural groups were inherently violent (p. 1). In a study of emergency nursing in
Vancouver, Varcoe (2001) found that:

...stereotypical ideas tended to obscure abuse. Nurses and other health-care providers associated abuse with direct physical trauma, poor people, or racialized people.... I was constantly directed to go to other hospitals where certain racialized groups and poor people were thought to be more concentrated (p. 103).

3 Statistics Canada uses the term "visible minorities" to define people who are non-Caucasian. However the United
Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination has deemed the term racist (Canwest, 2007).

Varcoe recounts one story of an Arabic-speaking family where the wife was admitted to hospital for paralysis and aphasia. The hospital staff immediately assumed DV was the cause, and offered no explanations to the family, who became extremely distraught and angry (which was perceived by the staff as more evidence ofDV) (Ibid, p. 104). These stereotypes may cause health professionals to unnecessarily assume DV is present or dismiss it as inevitable in racialized communities. Racist stereotypes and cultural blaming also appears in the legal system. In cases of women who murder their abusive husbands, the "Battered Women's Syndrome" has been used as a defence. However, Ahmad et al. (2009) argue that Battered Women's Syndrome is only seen as legitimate if the victim is white and middle class, as stereotypes oflow income women of colour are incongruent with how this condition is understood. Another issue is the use of culture as a defence for men who commit violence against women. On several occasions in the U.S., wife batterers have received reduced sentences due to the "cultural defence" (Dasgupta, 2005, p. 69). Though in Canada the cultural defence is not formally accepted by the courts, the notion of "cultural difference" has nonetheless been used as a defence for certain gendered crimes (Fournier, 2002, p. 7). This occurred in two specific cases of sexual assault by men of colour against women of colour, resulting in reduced sentences for the perpetrators (Ibid.). 111 R.v. Ammar Nouasria (1994), a Muslim man sexually abused his wife's daughter for three years starting when she was only nine years old. The judge concluded that "in a certain way, the accused spared his victim" because they had not had vaginal sexual relations and he had preserved her virginity- "a very important value in their religion" (Ibid., p. 27). In R. v. Lucien (1998), two Haitian-Canadian men raped an 18 year old girl they had met at a bar. Injustifying their reduced sentence, the judge stated that: "the absence of remorse ofthe two accused seems

8

to me to arise more from a particular cultural context with regard to relations with women than to a real problem of a sexual nature" (Ibid., p. 10-11). Thus violence against women was represented as natural in Black Caribbean and Muslim cultures. Fournier concludes: .. .courts, by relying on culture as a mitigating factor in the context of sexual assault cases, have maintained and reinforced a position of superiority towards people of colour. In this process of racial stigmatisation, the male "Other" is painted as a coloured body which is culturally ill and sexually deviant while the woman of colour is rendered

dramatically invisible (p. 4).
This demarcation of difference situates Canadian culture as moral and progressive and the

cultures of immigrants and people of colour as oppressive and patriarchal. Racialized women's
experiences of gender violence are thus both compounded and belittled by racist stereotypes.

The representation of non-Western cultures as inherently violent and patriarchal appears frequently in the media as well. In her study of media coverage in Sweden, Reimers (2007)
argues that "honour killings" are represented as a distinct practice of "traditional" societies, inherently different from DV murders in the West. This kind of patronizing and ethno-centric double standard also occurs in the Canadian media. For example, in December 2008 Toronto

Life published a cover story on 16 year old Aqsa Parvez, who was murdered by her father in Mississauga. The article frames the tragedy not as a case of family violence but of religious
zealotry, apparently caused by Aqsa refusing to wear the hijab. The author of this newspaper

article, Mary Rogen (2008), writes:
Canada prides itself on its multiculturalism and, to varying degrees of success, condemns institutionalized patriarchy. But there is growing concern that recent waves of Muslim immigrants aren't integrating, or embracing our liberal values... Is it possible that Toronto has become too tolerant of cultural differences? flj 6). Through stereotypes and generalizations, the author represents their story not as an individual

tragedy but as a cultural problem caused a Pakistani Muslim family's failure to integrate. A binary is constructed which situates Canada as progressive, multicultural, and empowering, and

"Muslim immigrants" as backwards, patriarchal, and inassimilable. Though family violence occurs in Canadian-born families, and Islam in no way sanctions murdering one's daughter, this
story is nonetheless portrayed as an issue of clashing cultural values rather than a DV case.

It is against this highly charged backdrop that any discussion of DV in immigrant or minority communities takes place. Addressing the problem thus necessitates challenging
dominant discourses which situate non-Western cultures as inherently violent and misogynistic and construct violence as an imported "cultural problem" rather than a relevant societal issue. By

pathologizing other cultures, Canadian society frees itself from blame for -and avoids addressing- the substantial structural inequalities that immigrants face. While culture is relevant
to women's experiences of DV, it is too often decontextualized and essentialized to create racist

stereotypes and tropes of violent immigrant men. This stereotyping creates a discursive violence which exacerbates the societal and interpersonal violence that abused immigrant women face, and cripples their ability to seek help. Any successful approach to addressing abuse against immigrant women must recognize intersectionalities and the ways in which multiple interlocking forms of oppression may condition a woman's experience of and responses to DV.

10

II

aiBoiunuicuoo o\ M}\}<ye Jiaxp pgjiuiij \(j jo sssijs 9q; ;Bqj punoj qsijSug ui Aq pg

pjnoo oqAv gsoip U9A9 ianssi jboijuo b 9q oj punoj sba\ 9§Bn8uBj 'AQ psousxisdxa pBq

jubiSiihuii jo Apnjs b u\ (g d '600Z 1:51OIAON 3? 'BUisqiqso^ 'jauan^a) S9pus§B jgojd-uou
oj S30IAJ9S aoipd uto^[ 'pjBoq aqj ssojob uiaiqojd |Bopiio b 9J3m siaiJieq 9§bti3ubj yem punoj
'ST1
S9SB0

"S9uioo;no

pus

in jjnoijjip gq ubo

sb

jbioijjo-uou b

jou

iA raojg 33^: saij o; A;iunpoddo jBnbs ub 3ABq

BpBUB3 UT U9UI0AV \\U }Bq; 9jnSU9 0} J3piO til U3UIOAV JUBjSlUKCn SUTOBJ S3§U3^Bq3 JBXJU3J3JJip 3qj 3UIIUBX3 0} SJSpiAOld 90IAJ9S pUB SJ95[BUI-A3qod JOJ JUBUOdtUI SI 1} 'J9A9AV0H 'U9UI0M
ra usihoav juBjSituun ;Bq; 90U9piA9 ou
si

psssnosip sy '

'JnPlBS '9O0^Bp^ 'asuusqos 'jautisqsuia^w

966T '

"dd

9pB]AT ^> U9qo3) unpiA jo J9upBd 9q^ Aq

9snqB joqooyB puB 'spAgj uot^Bonpa a\oj 'aouapisaj UBqjn 'guiooui ppqgsnoq avoj 'ju9JBd 9^§uis b
9§b SunoA :9jb AQ °l 9iqBJ9ii[nA aiora |BJ9U9§ ui u9uioa\ uBipBUB3 95[bui qoiqM jou op u9iuoav uioq-uBipBUB3 ;soui ;sq; §ui5[99s-dpq oj sjgiireq puB 9ou9[oia o;

oijpgds 9JB9J0 oj Ap>[i| 9jb saouguadxg 9S9qx 'uib9j;siiibui 9qj jo gpisjno uoijisod
piIB UOlJBlSlUI JO S90U9U9dX3 p9JBqS JI9q; UO p9SBq S9pi|BUOUIUIO0 Xjp oj 9yqissod si ji 'dnooS snogtraSojspq Apsuauiuii ub 9jb u9uioav jubiSiuiuii qSnoq^y

2007, p. 42). In Canada, the diversity of the immigrant population makes addressing language
barriers especially complex. The 2001 Census recorded over 100 different mother tongues

spoken, with one in ten Canadians speaking a non-official language at home (Statistics Canada,
2001).

Aside from language barriers, interpretation becomes particularly problematic in situations of DV. For example, husbands may act as their wives' interpreters in health care settings, creating a barrier to disclosure and screening (Jiwani, 2001, p. 3). Children are also

often used as interpreters, creating an uncomfortable role reversal and likely dissuading the mother from openly discussing abuse (Ibid.). JIBC (2007) found that even women who had used professional interpreters often found them inadequate, and many felt at a disadvantage because they could not advocate for themselves (p. 44). Different cultural understandings manifested in
language may also cause miscommunication. For example, the same term may hold vastly different meanings in different languages, causing misunderstandings between the service provider/ health professional and client/ patient (Ibid.). As Mason et al. write: ".. .in many

cultures and languages, the words IPV (or domestic violence) do not exist and are not readily
translatable" (2008, p. 2). Therefore immigrant women may experience both an inability to
communicate in their own language and across languages. Isolation and Loss

In the migration process women are often separated from their extended family, friends, and social support network. Macleod and Shin (1993) point out the profound sense of loss and
despair that can arise after migration, including:

... loss of their place in the community and respect they may have enjoyed before they came to Canada; loss of their close friends and family members; loss of the work they performed in their home country; loss of recognition of their professional credentials, sometimes the loss of respect of their children because they cannot speak English or

12

'auioq sqj in abjs oj psojoj aq abui uauioyv\.\'(£ d '800Z ''lB I3 uosbim) uiaqi uiojj Aauora
ptre 'sassBp (isa) 9§BnSuBq puooas b sb qsi^Sug pua^B jo 'spuaijj ass 'jjiom oj uiaqi
pxqjoj 'pjjoay apysjno aqj qjiM. pejuoo ss9aim Jiaqj ;iuiii Xbui sptreqsnq 9Aisnqv ps^osi aiora

|93J U9UI0M 95[BUI XbUI AO J° S90U3U3dX9 piIB 'AO J° Op^BJ B SB p9Stl
·ssnqB 0}

puB 'jBAiAins puB sti;bjs uoijbj§xuiuii joj qjoq sjgu^jBd iigq; uo jugpugdgp Appjduioo

9q Abui suo];Bn;is qons m ugtuoyw '3J3A9S jsoui usyo si gouB^Bqiai uoijbjost pire J3Avod
SB qons S9§BIXIBtU UJ '(^ I Jt)
ui p9J9A\odui9sip AjjBpos puB AnBU9pra si oi[A\ 9jia\ b jnq 'puBqsnq jgq pjBAvoj

;u9iAj9sqns ApjBudoiddB gqj qjiM 9jtav b Ajuo jou si ioj §ui5ioo| 9jb U9iu ssaqj :s9jum 9i[s pBOjqB rao^ sapuq igpio-jrera §ui>[99s U9iu ui9js9^ puB sjxav b pug oj Xjjunoo 9uioq iigqj oj gununpj ugui juBJ§iraun jo goipBid gqj u99Avpq

SA\Bip (g66l) uba'ibjsi
'uoiibjosi 'uisixas 'xxispBJ

"(681 'd) ,,sj9iJJBq 9§biiSubi ptre 'saomosai p9;nnn 's9aoui
ra U9iu jo sapuq uSpioj jo 's9SBixiBra XjBjxnra 'S9puq uiojj spuq b J3AO sSmiq uazijp uBipBUB3 b

(6661) u°wnQ PU
qjiA\ sb \pns '

sssbo ra p3U3jq§pq aq Abui

·(S9 -d
S301AJ9S ppos §uiss3oob xo 'dBiu b Snisn 'SraqojBas qof 'uopBpodsuBj; oijqnd
'SrajfUBq sb qons S|ji5[s jBoiSojouipai jo uBqjn 5[ob^ Xbiu (sbsjb jBjnj/padopAapjapun

jo sduiBO 33§tij3J uiojj Suiuioo asoqi XiJBjnoipBd) U3UIOAV 3uios ~(\z 'd '/,00S 'D9K) suiojsno
puB savbj UBipBUB3 qiiAv A^UBTjuiiBiim jo 'uopBuiuiuosip puB raspBJ jo JB3j 'sSuipunojjns AV3U 'jfooqs gjnijno 'sjamBq 3§bti§ub^ jo asnBoaq psiBjosi paj os^b jCbui usuioav jubj§iuiuii

ua\o Jiaq; ui japxsjno ub 95[i| Srapaj taojj saxuoo qoxqA\ sso^ SraoSuo sqj ptre

under surveillance, prevented from learning about their rights, misinformed about the process of
sponsorship, or face threats of deportation from their husband (Cote, Kerisit & Cote, 2001, p.

60). Differing norms (such as family structure) between the home and host country may also cause conflict, especially as women try to adjust to shifting gender roles (Pan et al, 2006, p. 2).
As Epsin (1999) writes:

Groups that are transforming their way of life through a vast and deep process of

acculturation focus on preserving tradition almost exclusively through the gender roles of
women . .. The control of women becomes the means of asserting moral superiority in a racist society. As a consequence, women.. .face restrictions on their behaviour (p. 7). Thus the challenges of immigration, particularly emasculation and loss of status through systemic racism, may cause men to assert increased control over women. Unfortunately, leaving an abusive situation may also increase a woman's isolation. A woman who is new to Canada may be forced to leave her entire community and social network when she leaves her husband. As Smith (2004) reports: "Because many cultural communities are small and closely interconnected, the woman and her children may have to run away from the whole community in order to be safe, if family and friends take the abuser's side" (p. 20). This situation would apply to abused women living in rural communities as well. However, immigrant women may have the additional burden of being unfamiliar with shelters, welfare, and the various social services available, in addition to facing language barriers and discrimination. In a

study of immigrant survivors of abuse, many compared leaving their husbands to the shock and isolation of first arriving in Canada (Cote et al., 2001, p. 60). Isolation and loss are thus factors
that may make immigrant women more vulnerable to abuse and less able to seek help.
Lack of Information

Lack of information about legal rights, immigration status, what constitutes abuse, what
services are available, and how to use them is another barrier. Immigrant women may be

14

unfamiliar with these issues because they are new to the country, cannot speak the language, are

isolated, or do not know how to access information (JIBC, 2007, p. 21). A study of immigrant
women who had suffered DV found that: "At every step, access or lack of access to timely, accurate information in a language they could understand was key to their ability to access safety" (Ibid., p. 46). Particularly important was information on immigration laws, on the

dynamics and nature of violence against women, and on practical issues such as how to use
public transportation (Ibid., pp. 47-48, 50). Misinformation was also found to be a problem. Many of the women had incomplete or incorrect information about their immigration status and rights (JIBC, 2007, p. 50). In some cases, women had stayed with their abusive husbands because they thought it would affect their immigration status if they left (Ibid.). Misinformation can thus be used as a tool of control by men, for example by convincing a woman she will be deported if she leaves the relationship. JIBC (2007) reported that: "service providers contributed to the women's confusion and
inaccurate information due to their lack of knowledge or understanding of the complexity of immigration status" (p. 42). Immigration scams and unscrupulous immigration consultants also

likely contribute to the problem of misinformation.4
The problem of lack of information is created by government inaction. Women are not given sufficient or appropriate information about their rights when they enter Canada. Cote et al.

(2001) argue that the sponsorship process inadvertently denies the sponsored person information by making the sponsor in charge of the application and financially responsible for those sponsored (p. 46). In their study of sponsorship, Cote et al. found that women's contact with immigration officials focused only on their obligations rather than their legal rights and status

4 See Citizenship and Immigration Canada. (2009). Fraud Warning. (Accessed June 12,2009):
http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/department/media/notices/notice-fraud.asp

15

(Ibid., p. 93). Lack of information about DV may also be exacerbated by stigma around
discussing such issues. This stigma may be cultural or may be a defensive reaction if a

community is consistently represented as inherently violent and misogynistic (West, 2005, p. 158). Lack of information and misinformation is a central barrier that needs to be addressed, for it is the first step or the gateway to women successfully dealing with DV.
Community and Family

Community and family can be very positive supportive elements in confronting DV. However, it is important to understand the ways in which they can also act as barriers to helpseeking. Many immigrant communities are small and tightly knit, and hence their sanctioning or silencing of abuse can have a huge impact on abused women's choices. A woman who has only a few contacts outside her ethno-cultural or linguistic community may be fearful of going against it or outside of it for help (Guruge, 2007). Jiwani (2001) argues that immigrant women, and particularly women of colour, may be more dependent on their family and community because of their exclusion and marginalization from mainstream society (p. 1). As Flynn and Crawford

(1998) write: "as oppressed people in a predominantly white society, a sense of'community' is
essential" (p. 96). Minority women may thus have particular difficulty disclosing abuse for fear it

will bring shame upon their family and community jlbid.). Cote et al. (2001) note that in some
cultures, marital problems (and particularly abuse) are taboo topics, and speaking about them

~ i

outside of the family could cause disapproval and ostracism (p. 54).
Family structure can also make women more vulnerable to DV or serve as a barrier to help-seeking. In most cultures, the family rather than the individual is the most important social unit, and divorce or separation may be out of the question, even for abused women (Ayyub,
2000, p. 243). Marriage is viewed by some as a lifelong sacrament. According to one Tamil-

16

Canadian woman, "We cannot separate, even in an abusive situation. We cannot seek help for problems, but we have to live this forever and only at the time of death, only then, can we be separated" (Mason, n/a, cited in Roberts, 2008, If 6). Many immigrant women also live with their in-laws, a situation which can exacerbate marital power imbalances and reinforce women's

subjugation (Cote et al., 2001, p. 53). Several studies of DV in Asian/ Pacific communities have found incidences of woman abuse perpetrated by in-laws and extended family (Mehrotra, 1999,
p. 637; Shiu-Thornton, Senturia, & Sullivan, 2005, p. 10).

Patriarchy exists in all cultures, but the upheaval and strains of migration may cause
conflicts in families and reinforce gendered power relations. In a study of DV among

Vietnamese-American immigrants, Bui (2004) concluded that:
The inversion of elements of the traditional gender order in the family due to men's downward mobility and women's increased economic power often causes family

conflicts leading to men's use of violence to restate their authority (p. 29). Smith (2004) also found that immigration can destabilize traditional family structures, as gender roles are shifted and extended family and community is lost (p. 17). Many of his interviewees said that DV only began after migration; in the home country, extended family (particularly the wife's natal family) provided "checks and balances" that prevented abuse (Ibid.), a finding also noted in Guruge (2007)/ The loss of a social network such as extended family can mean that men also have less support when dealing with anger/ trauma/ frustration, and that women have less support when dealing with DV (Guruge, 2007). Though culture, family, and community are not factors unique to immigrants, they can become barriers when they are ignored by service providers and not incorporated into DV responses.

17

Home Country and Migration Experience

An immigrant's experiences before and during migration can influence how they respond to abuse (Guruge & Gastaldo, 2008). Refugees in particular may be deeply affected by

experiences of trauma and violence in their home country such as war, displacement, torture,
civil unrest, or inhumane living conditions (Ibid.). The migration process itself may have been traumatic, especially for those who have been trafficked, smuggled, detained, or crossed borders illegally (Ibid.). Women have the additional burden of possibly being exposed to sexual violence,

harassment, and exploitation based on their gender before and during migration (Guruge, 2007; Yoshihama, 2008, p. 49). These experiences may result in post-traumatic stress, an inability to
cope, or desensitization to violence (Ibid.). The psychological effects of trauma can include deep

attachment to the abuser and feeling indifferent to or deserving of abuse, diminishing a woman's ability to respond or seek help (Alaggia, Maiter & Vine, 2006, p. 105). Sanchez-Hucles and
Button (1999) argue that experiences of violence and trauma can be passed down through

generations, conditioning how families experience DV. Oppression and violence in the home
country or country of migration can lead to "the internalization of anger and hatred and the acting out of these emotions in the form of violence against each other" (Ibid., p. 187).

Immigrants may also use a home country frame of reference when dealing with abuse
(Menjivar & Salcido, 2002, p. 13). For example, many come from countries where the

authorities are corrupt or ineffective, and where it would be unheard of to call the police in
situations of DV (Ibid.). In some countries DV is condoned or silenced and services for abused
women are rare or non-existent (Ibid.). Immigrants coming from countries with authoritarian governments may distrust government services and institutions, particularly law enforcement.

Many refugees have fled persecution by the authorities in their home country, making it

18

61

Ti ssaj pus sqof pajT.i:5[s-A\oi hi >[jom jo paAoidxiiaun aq o; Aja^i ajotu ajB siuBj8iiuxrn

ssojob pqi pxmoj snsxxaa JOO2 9xil "OPM) suopipuoo SupfiOM. jood pxiB ABd avoj qiiA\ 'sqof
auxii-iJBd snoiJBoajd oixxi paojoj bjbav a"ubui pxiB 'Sra>[99s jiraraAojduia in raspBJ jo 33J§3p qSiq

pBUB3 oijub^v ^ U9UI0M ;ubj3iuiuii jBqj punoj (800Z) II3XWO3 '(600Z 'lI^lAt ^
!-piqi) s;uBJ§iraun 3|bxu UBqj sqof psnt^s-qgxq ui aq oj ^35pi sss^ qonxu 3J3AV s;ubjSiuhui

p3;B3np3 'jsqjjntj -(LI 'd 'LOOZ 'DSIf) ssjBnpejS iuoq-UBipBUB3 jo %gx ^o o; psjBduioo
'Sqof p3J|I5[S-AVO| XII 8UI5[JOM 3J3AV S39J§3p qjXAV SJUBjSlUKUI JU909JJO %\£ JBlfl pimOJ ApnjS

LOOZ V '{ZII '6002 'BpBUB^ sotjsxjbjs) sjtrao gg psujB3 u9tjioav juBjSitxirai jusosj snqAv 'u9ui
Aq pStUBS JB^Op AJ9A9 0} SJU90 £9 P3UIB3 U3UI JUBJ§IUIUII ;U909J '£00£ UI ·sqof snouBogjd puB piBd-Avoj ra jjjoav oj rasq; sojoj S9pi|Bnb9in oiuigjsXs

%nq 's;uBjSxtxttui pgjBonpg puB p9n?>is ^n^R ^ sSuuq uig^sXs s^uiod gqx '(l "d '8002 'n3JW°D)
9IUBU §UipunOS-uSl9JOJ B SlXIABq JOJ JO '9DU3U3dX3 UBIpBUB3 JO 5[0By JI9qj 'p9ZTuS039J §XIX3q 1OU SJBI}U3p3J3 JI9qi JO 9SnB09q lU9UlAO|dlU3 m p3JBUIUIU3Sip 9JB ^9qi 'S9UIO0;nO 3TUIOUO39
ui sgpuBdsip sausuadxs puB }95[jbui qof 9q; oj SS333B jBnbsun 33Bj uayo
UOIJBUIUIU3SIQ 3lUIOUO3g

·s3§B5pnjJ9jui gsgqj oj saiiisuss AjiBinoiiiBd
3q XbUI U3UIOAV 33§TIJ3J pUB JUBjSlUiail pUB 'pspSUUOO STiqj SIB SJSASJ WV JB BUinBJJ pUB 90U9|OIA

jo s90U9iJ9dxg "(i002 'TUBAVTf) snoxiBosid sx snjBjs Jiaqj jx ApB|nox^jBd 'dpq joj sgpuoqjnB agqjo
oj Sraiunj uiojj sj9uiooa\9u gpBtissip Abiu sspuoq^nB uoijbjSxuiiui jo spuBq aq; jb uopBzijBiiixiiuo

jo S3oxi3u9dx3 qong "9JBOIJI5J3O Ajijnoss b panssx jx sjqSu (bSsj iisq; ssoi Abxii Xsqj puB 'suazijp
§xxiuxoo3q ajojaq ami} aiib ;b papodap aq ubo Aaqj 'sti;b;s 5[0Bj 0) pxmoj bjb Aaqj jx jo japjoq aqj jb

paxxiB;ap pxre pajsajjB aq Abxu Aaqj is^Buixraja sb pajBaj; uaijo bjb bpbub^ xii sjuBjSimun 'jaqpriij

'(92 'd '6002 ''IB I3 -i9xian>i '/,Q02 'sStunr)) d|aq joj suoijnipsra qans oj xunj oj ^noijjip Xpraaj;xa

to have high-skilled jobs than the Canadian-born (cited in JIBC, p. 18). In 2006 the unemployment rate among recent immigrants was 11.5%, compared to only 4.9% for the
Canadian-born (Globe & Mail, 2009).

These economic disparities occur despite the fact that immigrants tend to be more

educated; in 2007 37% of working-age immigrants had a university degree, while only 22% of
the Canadian-born did (Ibid.). Unfortunately, economic inequalities have only been increasing over the last 25 years; the earnings gap between Canadian-born and immigrant workers has

widened, and a greater proportion of university-educated immigrants are now working in lowskilled jobs (Statistics Canada, 2009, lj 2).

Economic discrimination has two important implications for DV outcomes in immigrant

communities. For one, low household income makes women more vulnerable to IPV. Cohen and Maclean (2003) found that in Ontario, prevalence rates of extreme physical IPV increased with lower annual household income (9.9% for less than $30,000, 4.7% for $30,000-49,999, and 2.8% for 50,000 and above) (p.7). Also, because immigrant women are more likely to be in low-wage jobs than Canadian-born women, they may be more financially dependent on their husbands and less able to leave the abusive relationship and support themselves on their own. Economic discrimination against immigrants thus both increases their vulnerability to DV and limits their
choices in responding to it.
Immigration Status

Immigration status can be a barrier to seeking help and can be used by abusers as a tool

of control. If a woman's immigration status is dependent on her abuser, or if she believes it is, leaving the relationship or seeking help may not be an option. This dynamic may be caused by immigration policies or lack of information and misinformation. Studies such as Bauer,

20

Rodriguez, Quiroga, and Flores-Ortiz (2000), Dutton, Orloff and Hass (2000), and Sorenson

(1996) have found that undocumented and more newly-arrived immigrant women are less likely
to use DV services because of isolation and fear of being deported.

There are currently an estimated 100,000 immigrants living in Canada without legal
status (Jimenez, 2004). They may have entered the country illegally or lost status due to sponsorship breakdown, losing a refugee claim, or overstaying a work/ study/ visitor visa. Non-

status women may either have no access to social and health services, or risk being apprehended
by immigration authorities if they attempt to access them. In their study of non-status access to

services in Toronto, Berinstein, McDonald, Nyers, Wright and Zerehi (2006) found that undocumented women dealing with DV face serious barriers to receiving help. Their study
reported that many of these women are detained and deported after calling the police or

attempting to access social services (Ibid., pp. 8-9). Though Toronto Police Services has

formally adopted a Don't Ask Don't Tell policy,5 there are reports of police officers continuing
to turn in non-status people to immigration (Ibid., p. 10). This study found that fear of being reported acted as a major barrier to women calling the police in situations of violence. Abusers often used this fear of the authorities as a tool of control over women (Ibid., p. 22). One nonstatus woman who was interviewed explained:

So, now he has control. So, he is controlling because, number one, he knows you can't call the police because they will send you, you don't have a landed. They're going to take your kids. So, that's the only thing you're so scared of, so you will not call for the help. And you will not let anybody know your situation because you are afraid! Very much
afraid! (Ibid., p. 23).

There are numerous examples that prove the legitimacy of such fears. Immigration enforcement

has been known to target women's shelters, rape/ trauma crisis centres, group counselling

5 Don't Ask Don't Tell policies mandate that service providers must not ask clients about their status, and if they find out inadvertently, they must not report it to the immigration authorities. (See nooneisillegal.org)

21

facilities, and community agencies (No One Is Illegal, 2008). Aside from police turning over
women to immigration, there have also been reports of women not receiving help because they

could not speak English (Smith, 2004, p. 20). On several occasions when abused women called the police the officers listened to their husbands because only the husbands spoke English (Ibid.).
Children are also problematic when translating for the police as they may minimize abuse to

keep their family together or so their father does not get into trouble (Ibid., p. 21). Language
provisions and Don't Ask Don't Tell policies are thus essential to making DV services accessible
to non-status women. Unfortunately, they are currently the group most vulnerable to DV and

who face the greatest barriers to seeking help.
Lack of Appropriate Services

Finally, a challenge specific to immigrant women suffering from DV is the lack of culturally and linguistically appropriate social services. This is especially a problem outside of

large-immigrant receiving cities and for small, newly-arrived minorities. Appropriate services
are those that are culturally sensitive, operate from an anti-oppression framework, and offer competent and professional interpretation. The issues surrounding appropriate services will be
discussed further in Chapter 4.

22

Chapter 3; Relevant Government Policies
Government policies are rarely neutral. For example, though immigration policies are no

longer explicitly racist,6 they remain gendered (Arat-Koc, 1999; Kelley & Trebilcock, 1998). It
is thus important to examine both how immigration policies may contribute to women's
vulnerability, and how DV policies may have differential impacts on immigrant women. This chapter will look at spousal sponsorship, humanitarian and compassionate grounds, and criminal

justice-focused DV policies in Canada. Immigration policies relating to DV in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia will also be examined in relation to Canada's policies.
Spousal Sponsorship The principle area of policy where women suffering from DV are affected is in spousal sponsorship. Under this provision, a permanent resident or citizen can sponsor a spouse, common

law, or conjugal partner to come to Canada through the family class. The sponsor must sign an agreement with the government which makes them financially responsible for their spouse or partner for a period of three years (Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants [OCASI],
2007, p. 3). This includes providing for food, housing, clothes, utilities, household items,

personal needs, dental and eye care. It also includes covering any medical needs during the three
month waiting period for provincial health insurance (Ibid., p. 2).

Spouses may apply to be sponsored from abroad, and enter Canada with permanent residency, or apply from inside Canada, and wait until their application is processed to receive status. While waiting for their application to be processed, they will have no access to provincial

health insurance, social services, post-secondary education, or employment (unless they apply separately for a work or study permit) (Goldring, Berinstein, & Bernhard, 2007, p. 31). If the

' Immigration restrictions based on race were removed in 1967 with the introduction of the points system.

23

sponsor withdraws the application before a decision has been made, the sponsored person is left without any status and must leave the country (even in situations of DV) (Ibid.). Spouses being sponsored have a strong incentive to apply within Canada despite the lack of rights and vulnerability it entails. This is because out-of-country applicants are not allowed to enter Canada while their application is being processed, forcing couples to stay separated for prolonged periods of time (Ciarula Taylor, 2009a). For applicants from high-backlog regions such as central Africa, this process can take as long as 20-23 months (Ibid.).
The sponsorship application process puts at a huge disadvantage women whose

relationship breaks down while they are in Canada awaiting a decision. They will no longer be
able to become permanent residents and will be deported, even if DV was the cause of the sponsorship breakdown. Applications can take up to two years to be processed, during which time the sponsored person will be completely dependent on the sponsor, vulnerable to abuse, and lacking a social safety net (Cote et al, 2001, p. 36). Women who give birth in Canada while awaiting sponsorship are especially vulnerable, as the abuser can threaten to take custody of the

child, and if they flee back to their home country they could be charged with abduction (Ibid., p.
58). Abuse of women awaiting sponsorship decisions in Canada has been documented by the Latin American Coalition to End Violence Against Women and Children (2000) and JIBC
(2007).

Once an application has been successful, the three year sponsorship undertaking begins. During this period if the sponsored person receives social assistance the sponsor will be held in

violation of the agreement. They will be held responsible for paying back the government the social assistance money, and will be unable to sponsor further family members until they do
(Cote et al., 2001, p. 32). Sponsored women suffering from DV may be fearful of such ;

24

repercussions on their sponsor if they leave the relationship and access social assistance. They
also may face the psychological burden of feeling indebted to their sponsor for bringing them to

Canada, exacerbating power imbalances in the relationship and discouraging separation (Ibid., p. 54; Bui, 2004, p. 53; Guruge, 2007).
This financial undertaking can also be harmful if the abused woman is the sponsor. If her

partner accesses social assistance, she will be responsible for paying the government back
(Guruge, 2007). This may be a strong incentive for abused women to stay in the relationship. To sponsor a parent or child one must prove to the government that one has the financial resources to support them (Citizenship & Immigration Canada [CIC], 2009). However this is not required for spousal sponsorship, and hence many sponsors may not have the money to repay the

government. If the sponsored person accesses social assistance for the full three year period, the sponsor can become thousands of dollars in debt (Ciarula Taylor, 2009b). Whether the abused woman has the money to pay back or not, the sponsored batterer can use the threat of accessing social assistance as blackmail to gain further power in the relationship.
If there is evidence of abuse by the sponsor or sponsored person, the government will

stop actively pursuing repayment. However the debt is not forgiven; it will continue to accumulate with interest until the end of the sponsorship period (OCASI, 2007, p. 5). As of 2004 there was $70 million in sponsorship debt owed to the government (Ciarula Taylor, 2009b). A
sponsor who is in debt to the government cannot sponsor any additional family members,

making the threat of sponsorship default serious. Thus in situations of DV the sponsored abuser not only has leverage over his sponsor's finances but over her chances of reuniting with family
members.

25

Another challenge is the financial requirement for sponsoring family members other than intimate partners. If a woman wishes to sponsor her relatives to come to Canada but does not make the minimum income required, she must get someone (generally the spouse) to co-sign the
sponsorship application. For dependent children and parents, the sponsorship undertaking lasts

for 10 years; during this time the sponsor and cosigner will be financially responsible for their sponsored family members (OCASI, 2007, p. 3). Women may stay in an abusive relationship
until their family's sponsorship application has been processed, or may be fearful of breaking up

the family and putting the husband in default of the financial agreement by leaving (Smith, 2004,
p. 24).

The sponsorship process thus fosters dependency and vulnerability among women in

abusive relationships. Sponsors may use the threat of sponsorship withdrawal, deportation,

feelings of indebtedness, or the financial power to sponsor family members as leverage to
increase control over women. This situation exacerbates power imbalances and limits women's
choices in dealing with DV.

Humanitarian and Compassionate Grounds

Women who have suffered sponsorship breakdown due to DV can apply to stay in

Canada on humanitarian and compassionate grounds (H&C). To receive permanent residency through an H&C application, they must prove that they have successfully established themselves in Canada and would face undue hardship if returned to their home country. H&C applications

usually take several years to be processed, and are only granted in exceptional circumstances
(CIC, 2006). It is estimated that only 5% of applications are accepted, and there is no right of appeal (Goldring et al., 2007, p. 29). This process is prohibitively expensive (costing $550 per

26

LZ

xrapiA aqj jo sjssxib jBnp qjoq ui pajjnsaj SBq \\ sasBO Aubui u\ ·oijBiuajqojd sb paijpuapi uaaq SBq jBjnoipBd ui jsaxre Ajo;BpuBp\[ ACI tnBjsns }Bqj sapijBtibaui TBJtvprms SuiAjjapun aqj ssaippB jou

saop jx ;Bq; ui a;BtibapBui si ASbjbjjs siqj ;eqj sngjB (^66l) uB3ioBp\[ put? siiin^ -(io£ 'd '000Z
'BtU9p3IJ/\[ ^> ZJOippB/W) U9XII0M JSUIbSb 30U9JOIA JO yCjI|BUIUnjO pUB SS9USIIOU9S 9qj 9SISBqdui3

oj pggu gqj jo ;no 9sojb it tso86I 3m s^uis ^\a °J ssuodsgj AjBxxnj
siqx "A§9;bjjs aq pgsnooj-goijod s^p^ewej si Xoijod oj SupBpi gnssi juai
AQ

^ Itvjss9oons Suigq uguiOM jubj§iixitxii oj sjgiiiBq snoyjgs 9jb jooid jo uapmq pire 'mjg^uo ;u9mqsi|qBjs9 |BiouBiig 'uoi^podgp jo
5[su '^soo q§iq 'sjbj aoirejdaooB avoj sq; 'uoisnpuoo uj "SAoad 0} Jtnoijjip asnqe Sui^Bai 'psxinoDO \(j aqj uaqM jopop b o; jusav jo aoqod sqj psTjBO 3AEq ^ou Xbui yCsqj 'sjsixreq ^jnj|no pus opsin§uij jo astiBOsq 'os^y "raaqj p§ oj saomosaj aq; jo uiaq; qjiM sjusuinoop Jisqi \\u 9ABq jou

Amu Asqi sb 'uopBttiis SAisnqB ub paTj 3ABq oqA\ uauiOM joj ^nogjip aq ubo siqx '(901 'd '900Z
'biSSb^y) uopBoqddB o^»H 9IP ^T sp^ui suirep jjb poddns oj papiAOjd aq jsnui uoij
jBqjsi aSuauBqo jsqjouy "(piqi) asnqB aqjuiojj J3A009Juiaqj dpqoj ssoiajss jbioos puB sjtnbaj X];u9§jn abui puB puBqsnq jisqj uo juapuadap Ahbioubuij uaaq aABq Abui Xaqj sb '

Suiaayj aiB oqA\ uaraoAV joj pjBq Ajp3padsa aq ubo siqx '(89T "^ 'TOOZ ''IB J9 ?WD) 'dJ3 '9
'ajBO qjjBaq 'saoiAjas |Bpos SuistuaAO Xq oi^qnd aq; uo uapjnq b auiooaq ;ou \\i/a puB saApsraaqj

poddns ubo Aaq; jBqi aAOjd jsnui sjuBoijddv (62 'd 'Z.OOZ '"IB J3 ^uiippr)) Xjijnoas |BpuBug
Aq pajnsBaui AnBnsn si qoiqAV 'BpBUB3 ui tt;u9uiqsi{qB;sa nussaoons,, jo juauiaiinbaj aqa si D3PH q§nojqj Aouapisaj ^uauBUuad SuiyaS uaraoAV pasnqB o; sjamBq a^dpuijd aq; jo auo

·(·pxqj) passaoojd Suiaq si uoxiBoqddB jpqj apqAv 9irai Aub jb papodap aq ubo sjuBoijddB pus (jz -ispun jugprodap jad o£I$

and abuser and retaliatory arrests of the victim (Bui, 2004; Rajah, Frye & Haviland, 2006). In
this way police intervention carries the risk of revictimizing rather than helping women
experiencing DV.

Police-centred responses can be especially problematic for immigrant and racialized women. This is due to the widespread criminalization, profiling, and police brutality inflicted against these groups (Ritchie, 2006; Saucedo, 2006). For example, African-Canadians make up

only 2% of Canada's total population but 6% of the federal prison population (Wortley, 1999).
On any given day in Canada approximately 455 immigrants (including 20 minors) are

incarcerated in provincial jails or immigration detention centres because they lack status (No
One is Illegal, 2009b, ^ 6). Over 20,000 asylum-seekers have at some point been detained, for

periods ranging from 2 days to over 18 months (there is no time limit on immigration-related
detention) (Ibid.). In Ontario in recent months the targeting of immigrants by law enforcement

has escalated. On April 2 2009, immigration enforcement raided homes and businesses in
Leamington, Danforth and Bradford, arresting 90 non-status migrant workers (CTV Toronto,

2009). The workers were detained and deported but the employer (Cericola Farms) faced no
consequences, suggesting that the purpose of the raids was not to enforce labour laws but to target and criminalize immigrants.

Ritchie (2006) argues that mandatory arrest policies have led to increased targeting of
DV victims, compounding the violence against them through arrests, strip searches, degrading detention conditions, and threats of removing their children (p. 140). One New York City study

found that 66% of abused women arrested after a DV call were Black or Hispanic, and 43% lived below the poverty line (Haviland, Frye, Rajah, Thukral & Trinity, 2001; cited in Ibid.). Flynn
and Crawford (1998) argue that although mandatory arrest and prosecutorial policies are

28

'A:ixiBnbgin jBJtiptuis sb qons sanssj vCSgjBJjs J3pxA\ b jo padsB guo gq sabmjb pjnoqs jx '

uo 3oub;s 9AipB0jd puB Suojis b 35(bj oj ui9}sAs gopsnf jbuiuiuo gqj joj lUBiJoduxx si ji q§noqx
·9^qBJ3UJtlA 9J0UI U3A9 9UI0S 95[BUI A{duilS XbUI 90I|Od 9q^ §UIA]OAUI pUB 'StlJBJS UOl^

puB 'ssBp '9obj 'jgpu9§ sb qons sjojobj Xq pgdBijs gq Abui juaragojojug a\bj oj di
s jBnpiAipuj u9uioa\ juBjgturoii joj oi}Biu9jqo.id gq ubo ssi
·(·pxqi) asnqB ubuioav

II qjIAV |B3p OJ ABAY 9|qBJlS9p JSOUI 9qj SB SJUBdlOIJJBd 9qi JO ft? A\\Un\MA Aq
p9ijpu9pi 9J3A\ sdlqsJ^u^Bd uoi^Bonpg Ajranuraioo puB 'uotjBip9ra 'uoxssgjddo oxuiouoog -opos stu9uioA\ ;uBjSitarai ssgxppB oj S9ioxiod jbioos '90i|od sm §uizi|iqora pgpnpuoo Xpnjs gqx p3JS9xiB ji igstiqe 9q; joj S9ou9nb9suoo puB 'S9i;uoqitiB uoijBjSixurai o; pgpod9J §ra9qjo '9jb;s gqj Xq jojjuoo Suipgfqns jo 'A;ranuiuioo s(9uo raojj jpsguo SupBpsi jo JB9j o; pgjBpj osjb sbav goijod

§UI|B9p JO JB9J '(S\Z *d '"PM) SOIUIBuAp J9AVOd JBtlb9UTl pUB 'jOJJUOO 'XjIJBnb9UT 'UOpBJOSI :9StiqB
punojjns jBq; s93U9U9dx9 puB suopipuoo gq; 'j9A9j guios uo 'gjBoxidgj,, :oj |Biju9;od gqj psq
Sxnoipj -u9uioa\ juBjSirauix jo uoissgjddo oiuiouoo9-oioos J9piA\ gqj jo jxgjuoo 9qj in ^njxxuBq

gq pjnoAY X§9jbj;s siqj jpj jsoui jBq; pimoj Agqx BpBUB3 '5[0iA\sunja A\9jsj ux U9UI0a\ ;uBJ§xitraix

Suoxub gsnqB ux uoiiu9aj9jux goxjod jo suoxrado pauxuiBxg (0002) Biugpgi]Ai puB zpqqoByw

·(66 -d '-pxqi) usuioav n^
joj gAxpgjjg gq oj J9pjo ux sgpxpd xiisxobj-ijub 9axss9j3Sb Aq pgju9iii9jduioo aq jsnm S9i§9jbjjs p9snooj-90i|od }Bqj gptijouoo Aaqx (^6 d 'TNl) ttX]|BJ9U9§ sgoxpBjd goxjsnf |buihitjo jsxobj
pUB 'AnB0XJX09ds XU9JsXs IBIOiptlf 9qj pUB U9UIOAV 3[OBjq U99A\pq diqSUOIJBJ9J

gqj pjB§gjsxp sgxoxiod gsgqx,, :9;xja\ (8661) P-k>javb.q puB uu/L\P[ 'ojuojox
ux Xiiunuiuxoo uB9qqxjB3 9qj jnoqB §ui5[B9ds uig^sAs 9Dijsnf p3uiunjo gq; raqiiAV uoijBuxuixjosxp puB s9i;i|Bnb9ui oxiuouoogoxoos jgpiA\ Aq pguxuijgpun 9jb Xgqj 'Xpjbs s.uguioM joj pxi

socio-economic oppression, racial-profiling, criminalization of immigrants, and police brutality
must first be addressed for DV policing to be successful.
International Policies

It is important to look at what initiatives are being taken internationally to deal with the

intersections of immigration policy and DV. Several countries have recognized that their
sponsorship policies may make immigrant women more vulnerable to DV, and have instituted
measures to address this problem. Because of their similarity to Canada as Western, English-

speaking, large-immigrant receiving countries, relevant policies from the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia will be examined. Though it is difficult to ascertain how effective these international policies have been, they can serve as tentative examples of how
Canada might begin to better address these issues.
United States

The U.S. has perhaps the most expansive system of provisions for immigrants who have experienced DV. The aim of the Violence against Women Act (VAWA) of 1994 (amended in 2000) is to allow abused immigrant women to apply for status independently through Removal of Conditional Status, Self-Petitioning, Cancellation of Removal, and U visas (Greater Boston Legal Service, 2009). Spouses of U.S. citizens (USC) or Legal Permanent Residents (LPR) who

have been married less than two years can only be sponsored as conditional residents in order to
prevent marriage fraud. After a two year probationary period they must submit an application

(supported by their spouse) to obtain LPR status (Ibid., p. 3). VAWA allows women in situations

of DV to apply for a removal of conditional status independently of her spouse. However, she
must prove both that the abuse occurred and that the marriage was entered into in good faith
(Ibid.).

30

"(41sj3isi<3 irajojs,, jjodsj £002 sjBuopBiuajxq Ajsauuiy ass) usuiom. jBinSuoqy jo
sip spjeA\o} aoiraiagipui pire uoipum aoijod ut jaapiAa iCjjBjnoiyBd ussq SBq }i bpbubq uj "S3;bjs ps;iun aip
in suipoiA 5pBjq 'sa sjiqA\ jsuibSb saaiiiD o; uoipbsj [BOijipd pire jo aSBiaAOD Bipaui aip ui psAjasqo usaq SBq siqx i

pus 'uoijBiijnra jbjiusS 3{Bui9j ';s3oui 'souqoiA oijssxuop 'uox

Ui 'juauraosudun '9dm,, :9pnpra pus u9snqB jBjugra jo ^oisAiid |BpuBjsqns,, 9ajoaui

(S ^ 'J002 'irejnXngB^i $> Xjpijs) 90U9pys9J 'S'llJ°
9q

oj Ajranyoddo ub \\%\/a 'sguiuo snougs jo sunpiA joj snjBjs AJBJodtugj sgpiAoid sxqx
'9|qTSSod 9xb suorjdo 99iqj 9AoqB sq; jo 9uou ji

bsja flB J0J ^idd^ ^boi u9uioa\

·(·9 d '600Z '901AI9S |B§9q uo;sog j9jb9J{)) papodgp
ji diqspjBq 9UI9JJX9
'pgxmooo SBq

snoranjuoo sjb9A 99iqj t/i9pBJBqo ^bjoui poo§,, 9§btjjbui 9innu9§ b pBq Xgq; 9AOJd jsnui sjuBoxjddy

'(L 'd '8002 '
pgsn gq Xbui puB '|baoui9^ jo

jb puB "gjq /DSflB ^ pssnqB uggq 9ABq u9uioa\ Xq
b P9JJBD si VAVVA -isptiTi 9jnsB9ta piiqj gqx

'POOA\)

juBiSiuian joj opBra9|qojd XjjBjnoipBd gq Xbui snqi puB H'anpiA

sb p9ju9S9jdaj u9uioa\
uoiptujsuoo siqx 'Ajiibjoui 9]Bra9j jo S9uoiJ9pan |BqojBij;Bd 9qi qjiA\ §uo|B tuipT

·sa §uiAJ9S9p jo Auiojoqoip 9Aisjnosip gqi S91B9J09J ij "('piqi) oxaBuigjqojd sotbuiqj uopxpuoo
stqj 'ssnqB jo Ajojsiq jiaqj oi pajBpj pjoogj jbuiuiuo b 9ABq oqA\ sjuBoqddB joj 9pBui suoxjd90X9

9jb 9jaqa qSnoqx (£91 d '8002 'uBXnqa) l(unpiA q§nou9 poo§ b Stngqjo
'gAipgfqns Ajq§iq si }U9iu9Jinb9j ;sb^ gqx "(£ 'd '600Z 'aoj q uoisoa jgjBgjr)) ttJ9pBJBqo jbjoui pooS,, jo 9jb Agqi iBqi puB '"H<n jo 3SH B IP p9piS9J
AjsnoiA9jd 9ABq Xgqj '"S'Jl 9qj ui Suiaij uggq 9ABq Agqj 9AOjd jsnui os^b Xgqj sjuauiajinbaj SAoqB sqi oj uoijippB ui 'j3A3a\ojj "g,n ub auiooaq 01 uopipd-jps osjb ubo uopBoijddB diqsjosuods b psjij jsasu asnods Jiaqx ssnBoaq sniBjs ou 9ABq oqA\ uaraoAV pasnqy

Boston Legal Service, 2009, p. 7).This allows women who were abused by someone they were not married to or who is not a USC/ LPR to apply for residency. One problematic aspect of this provision is the condition that victims must assist law enforcement in investigating or prosecuting their case (Ibid.). For women who are traumatized or fear for their lives, the requirement that they become involved in a criminal investigation or testify against their abuser
could be a serious obstacle.

The above measures were first introduced in the Immigration Act of 1990 and VAWA

1994. The 2000 and 2005 VAWA updates expanded who could apply, increased access to public

benefits, and relaxed the evidentiary requirements (Yoshihama, 2008, p. 51). As of 2006, 80.8%
(or 42,000) of self-petitions had been successful (Ibid). Also, up to 10,000 immigrant victims of violence can receive status through U Visas every year (Shetty & Kaguyutan, 2002, p. 5). These
provisions can be used by a wide variety of individuals including those abused by their

boyfriends, husbands, same-sex partners, fathers, employers, or coworkers, regardless of their
immigration status or the status of the abuser (Ibid). The threshold of "battery or extreme cruelty" used in VAWA includes both mental and physical abuse, making it potentially inclusive

of diverse experiences of DV, however it is unclear what qualifies as "extreme" (Ibid.). The
administrative fees may be waived for all immigration applications made under VAWA if

victims are unable to pay, making it more accessible than Canada's H&C policy (National
Network to End Violence against Immigrant Women, 2008).

Raj and Silverman (2002) identified two other challenges to women achieving protection

under VAWA. First of all, the Immigration and Naturalization Service does not require judges or

officers to be trained in DV issues (Ibid., p. 21). Second, applicants are required to report their
abuser to the criminal justice system. Unless the abuser is a USC, he could be deported (Ibid.).

32

(pxqi) sjuauiajxnbaj AjBiiuapiAa pijjs AjqBuosBajun aqa uo (%££) aiBJ aouBjdaooB a\oj aqj sattrejq

aqs 'uoijxppB ui ($ -d) saoiAjas jBpos oj ssaooB on aABq tjia\ auo uaqAV diqsuopBpj aAisnqB
ub 8uiABaj jo A^jnoijjip aqj jo astiBoaq /ao\ uaaq aABq suoijBoxjddB jo jaquinu aq; ;eq

(8003) BH1TW '(£ 'd 'Bqjiuv in psjp -LOOZ 's9oubjb9|3 Xjpg aouaioj/^ oijssuioq) pajda

joj SuiA|ddB pus uopBtijis aAisnqe sqj Suiab9| uio^ rasq; saSBinoosip jnq 'ssnqB o; snjBjs uoi;Bj§iraun 9jno9sui qjiA\ uaraoAV S9AB3J Ajuo jou ;u9tu9Jinb9J tt9Sjnoo9"a ojs[ ·(pxqi) ssgpuioq Smuioogq 10 diqsuopBpj
SAisnqB aqj xn §uiAbjs o; pgiiuiij gq Xbui saoxoip jaq (uauioA\ snjBjs-uou pssnqB Awsva qjiAV

3sbo aqj si sb) ^auora oj ssaooB jo spbjuoo ppos ou SBq raipiA b jj -(f & '8003 'siajsig 5pBjg
puopBiuajuj Ajsauuxv) saoiAias [Btoos jo sia^pqs sssoob jouubo sjuapisaj ^uaumuiad

9jb oqA\ ugaiOAv pgsnqB jBqj SUB91U «9itrg spunj onqtij °J 9SJtioo9"a o^,, sxqx "('Piqi)
pgssaoojd sq o; uopBo^ddB ^j\ Jigq; joj §ux;ibav 9nqA\ sjxjgugq Di^qnd joj 9jqi§ipm sjb suitjoia

si Xoi|od siq; oj ?[0BqA\BJp snouas y ("piqi) juapisaj juauBiujad b amooaq puB ("ail) uiBuia^
o; aABaq ajiuxjapui ub joj X]ddB weo aqs uaqj 'pajjnaoo jt aAOjd ubo ubuioav aqj puB uoxiBJBdas

aqj oj pa| SBq AO J! '-tsAaAYOH '('Pim) pawodap aq jjjav uosjad pajosuods aq; 'sjbbX oavj
q; inq^iAV saApssip diqsuopBpj aq; ji puB 's3§bijjbui jua^npnBJj juaAajd o; pau§isap si ajnsBaui

SFLL (l d '8002 ^WV) ^ouapisaj juauBuuad uibjjb ubo Xaqj ajqjaq pouad AjBuot;Bqojd
omj b aoBj Xaq; jnq 'ajBJ§iuiuii oi pajosuods aq ubo saou^g puB sasnods '^^ 9tB UI
rji pajiufj

adoos aAisuaqajduioo puB aAisuBdxa Jiaq; ui si (uiojj ujboj p^noo BpsuB^ jBqAV puB)

jBijuaiod Jiaq; 'spadsB ox;Biua|qojd aABq sapijod asaqi qSnoqx ('PNl) uoijB^odap sb snouas
sb ajB jasnqB aqj joj saouanbasuoo aqi jx AQ podaj oj §ui|nA\un jo a^qBun aq a"bui uauio^\

A letter from a DV agency attesting to the abuse is required as proof; however the victim must have visited this agency while still in the abusive situation (Ibid., p. 10). If a woman is being monitored or forced to stay in her home (both tactics of DV) then she will not be able to contact
a DV agency and provide this proof. This requirement is thus a serious weakness of the ILR policy.

These measures are similar to Canada's in the lack of public benefits available to nonstatus women escaping violence, including during their application process. Both have strict

evidentiary requirements for proving DV and low acceptance rates. Though Canada does not

have a probationary period for sponsorship, spouses/ partners are nonetheless permitted to apply from within the country, creating a similar situation. The main advantage of the UK's policy
over Canada's is that the problem of non-status women experiencing DV is clearly articulated. By subsuming DV victims under the limited concession of H&C, Canada is ignoring the significant interlinkages between dependent/ insecure immigration status and vulnerability to

abuse. However aside from having a clearly articulated policy, the UK's measures are not a positive model to follow. Their "No Recourse to Public Funds" rule represents a serious human
rights violation for abused non-status women. As Amnesty International and the Southhall Black

Sisters (2008) write: "Fundamental to tackling the human rights violations implicated in violence against women is the need to ensure women have a safe place to which to escape" (p. 8).
Denying women protection from DV because of their immigration status is a harmful practice
which completely delegitimizes the ILR policy's intent of helping abused women.
Australia

Australia also provides a pathway to permanent residency for immigrants who have experienced DV. Like the U.S. and UK, there is a two year probationary period for spousal/

34

puB 'asnqB jBoisAqd-uou apnpui 01 Ad psisjdjaiin 3ABq saSpnf ijb iou 'j9A9Ayoh '(£89 'd '£002
'BXnqv-oquiBiqpo) asnqB ]BOisA"qd puB jBiuaui qioq apnpui 01 siinoo aqi /Cq paiajdjsiui uaaq
li 'snonSiqure iBqA\9ixios si uopiuipp siqi qSnoqx "(21 'd '6002 'pueure^f in pa;p ts

uopvjSijq aqj jo (q)(z)££'I uoxjB{ti39j) ttAj9jBS jo STipqjpM uavo jaq jo siq · · joj jbsj
oi unpiA pg§9|p 3m sasneo jb^j ·  (Apsdojd Jiaqj jo jaquiaui X|iuibj b jo unpiA aqi) · · 's

'p9uaiB3jqj jo ibthob jaqpqAV 'pnpuoo,, :sb paugap si y\a suoisiAOjd assqi Japun
'(£69 d) sjsSubj^s oj pasopsip sao^B jq pauopuaui

sq oj J3A3U psfqns ooqBj b si Aa s-ra^ s3-111^^0 roojj usuioav joj oijBuiajqojd Xj^Bpadsa
aq Xbui ju3ui3Jinb9J siqi jBq; sanSjs (£003) BAnqv-oqraBiqpo IP ib jou jo 'Aiiuibj puB spuaijj
uiojj 'Aou3§b 3uo iuojj dpq jq§nos Apo oqM usuioav pasnqB joj jaizreq snouss b ju9S3jd a"bui

siqx '(g89 "d '"Pl^l) psj-mooo 9snqB ;Bqj 9iBJoqojjoo oj Aiiouipsa} 9ai§ spgdxg omj ;sB3y ib

pgjinbgj si ii 'j3A9avoh (z.89 d '£002 'BXnqv-oquiBiqpo) jpqaq ^^[ uo os op Abui
B (Sj9ll9q IBJlllJTlO JO 'qi^BSq '9§B 01 9tip -9-1) 1JT1O0 Ul 90U9piA9 9Alg OJ 9iqBUtl SI UlipiA 9qi U9qAV

'os|Y -(x I "d '6002 'piretuBx) (japiAOjd 9oiaj9s b jo uoimdo ]Buoiss9jojd gqi sb qons) jBpipnf
-uou jo (ijodgj 90i]od b sb qons) |Bpxpnf 9q Abui 11 isiqixgij si p9Jinbgj 90U9piA9 sqx

·(f d '"piqi) JssnqB 9qi jo uoiino9sojd 9Jinb9J iou saop Aou9pis9J iu9UBuu9d uiBiqo 01 uoisiAOjd Aa 3tU §tnsn 'osjy -(g ·d ''piqi) bsia jpqi uo lUBoqddB gidpuijd aqi si jgsnqB sqi ji U3A3 pire 'Ajiuibj aqi jo jgquiaia Xxib
isuibSb paiBjpdjad sbav asnqB aqi ji AjddB ubo jaupsd /asnods y (£ d '-pxqi) sbsia 5[joa\ snoiJBA

uo sb |pAV sb '(sjoqsjjo jo ajoqsuo) bsia diqsjosuods pjnp luapuadap jo 'jauiJBd xss-suibs 'asnods b uo psjsius 9ABq oqAv siubjSiuiuii oi saijddB uoisiAOjd aq sNX "Aouapissj lusuBiajsd
joj XjddB Xbui uosjad pajosuods sqi 'paAjoAui usjpiiqo sjb ajaqi ji jo 'qiBap jo Aa °J 3tlP

ajojaquAvop s>[B9jq diqsuoxiBpj sqiji J3A3avoh '(t "d '6002 'puBuiB^j) diqsjosuods

hence there is a need for a more concrete and inclusive legal definition to remove this
subjectivity (Ibid., p. 685). Another weakness of these measures is that they do not apply to fiances who are experiencing DV (Ibid., p. 703). Also, they do not address the needs of nonstatus women who are being abused by their non-status partner.

There are thus several challenges to the Australian provisions for sponsored immigrants experiencing DV. However, there are also many potentially positive aspects that Canada could learn from. Australia's DV policies are expansive, inclusive, and acknowledge the multiple ways

in which abused women can lose status. They also have a relatively high degree of evidentiary flexibility, and every year about 65% of applicants are successful in achieving permanent
residency (Kamand, 2009, Ibid., p. 4). The subjectivity in defining DV, the two expert testimony requirements, and the exclusion of fiances and women abused by non-status men are all problematic issues that need to be addressed. Nonetheless, these policies are better than Canada's
in their clear articulation of the problem and wide-ranging scope.

36

Li

pire X^xunimuoo usuioav a"ubui ioj ;nq 'jiiauijaModura iBnpiAipui 9siseqdui3 o\ pua; saoi

xuB3JjsuiBp\[ ·justujaAvoduia jo sguxpuBjsiapun Suiiajjip spunojjns anssi laqiouy ajqBjapid sq
abui (Suiuibjj lusuiA'oidura sb qons) suisouoo tujaj-Suoj sssippB }Bqi suiBJ§oid 'usuiom asaqj joj

"(it7 d) i^suiBqs st ajBjs aqj uo souspusdap puB pan^BA A"ji[grq si Aouapgjns-jps sisqAV saitmno
uiag uaraoAV joj ^noijjip sq /Cmn (-oja '3JBjpA\ 'sXbjs jajpqs q§nojqj) Xouapusdsp uuaj-poqs uo sisBqduis 901AJ3S s\\\ ye\\\ ;no ;uiod Asqj 'jsjij qs^p Xbui usiuoav jubjSiuiuxi Aubui pue

30IAJ9S UIB3JJSUIBUI JO S9tipA 9qj 9J3qAV SB3JB JBJ9A9S AjpU9pi (£661) ^

90IAJ9S

9JBqs puB qsxi§ug puBjsjapun Asq; }Bqj puB 's90iaj3s azijpn puB
SS900B OJ AVOq AVOU5J S^U3ip JBq} 9UI11SSB 0} pU3} S30IAJ3S UIB3HSUIBUI

PUB uiojjsSug "(8661 'A\au§y 't766T '-is^osa 3? sureHnAV) sajrujno jgq^o jo SAissiuisxp
puB oinuao-ouqp §ui9q joj pgzpijuo U99q 9ABq Aaqj }SBd sqj u\ ·JB{nox^iBd m dnojS
xreqj

U9UIOA\ pasnqB \\u §radpq jb pguiXB sjb ^Bq; asoqj sib ssoiajss

jubjSiuiuii joj sssoob jo sanssi puB BpBUB3 ra syqBjiBAB ssoi

aq; 3UTUIBX9 jjiav uoipss sxqx '(£ & ''PI^l) usuioav Ajijoxiiui puB jubjSiujuii pasnqB joj surejSoid
ogpads pauuoj X|jBnju9AS pire 'a&raura o; uB§aq suoijbziubSjo A;iunuraioo reitupo-ouqja

snoiiBA SO86T PUB s0Z-6I 9lll UI (91Z 'd '8661 'msuSv) sjoui puB 'uopBonpa oqqnd 'qoB3j;no
'uajp|xqo joj surej§ojd 'jjoddns Suisnoq puB juauiAoiduia 'Suijpsunoo apnpra oj papuBdxa

3ABq saoifAjas uaqi 30UIS pire 'j9AnoouBy\ puB ojuojox u| £L6\ ^ pausdo uaraoM pasnqB joj
sjsjpqs jsig; sqx BpBUB3 ur \q qiiM SmjBap u9xuoa\ oi a^qB^iBAB sjb ssoiajss snoj9ran^[

If

family may be much more important (Ibid.). Likewise, the emphasis on individual rights and happiness in counselling may not make sense to women who see the family and community as the most important social unit (Ibid).
In recent years mainstream services have made efforts to become more culturally

competent. Also, mainstream services have been steadily becoming more accessible. However many challenges persist. A 2006 study of the Somali, Vietnamese, and Latino communities in
San Diego, California concluded that huge gaps exist between the conceptions and

manifestations of DV in these groups and the understandings and responses of mainstream DV services (Pan et al., 2006, p. 8). Arora (2004) and Guruge (2007) found that mainstream social service workers sometimes make assumptions about immigrant women based on their ethnocultural background rather than responding to their individual needs (p. 42). Linguistic and

cultural barriers and lack of training in cross-cultural communication, immigration laws, and health issues were also identified as challenges (Arora, 2004, pp. 4, 43; Guruge, 2007). Jiwani's
(2001) study of the health sector response found that immigrant women (particularly those

lacking English skills) are often prescribed antidepressants or even put in psychiatric facilities
when they show symptoms of abuse. Both Jiwani (2001) and Guruge (2007) also found that multilingual information on health services are not reaching immigrant women. Clearly, there are still issues to be resolved for mainstream services to be truly effective and accessible for all
women.

According to Bhuyan and Senturia (2005):

Culturally competent services must include examination of agency policies and practice
that discriminate against non-White, non-English-speaking, or non-Christian

communities, in addition to hiring bilingual and bicultural staff with the goal of developing staff who are trained to respond to the structural, social, and cultural issues
confronting immigrant and refugee women (p. 899).

38

Williams and Becker (1994) emphasise that culturally competent services should provide ongoing training to staff on working with minority clients and conduct networking and outreach in diverse communities (p. 287). Alaggia, Maiter, and Vine (2006) add that cultural competency should involve continual analysis of one's own prejudices and an examination of the structural
inequalities and systemic barriers that exist in society (p. 121). Many mainstream agencies now

hire diverse staff and offer services in multiple languages (21 lToronto.ca). They have expanded
their services to include (for example) employment counselling, support groups, ESL classes,
multicultural events, and programs for children and men (Ibid.). Many shelters now have anti-

racism policies and accommodate different ethnicities through measures such as allocating
money to buy culturally-specific foods (Agnew, 1998, pp. 230-231). While mainstream agencies

still face challenges in successfully serving abused immigrant women, there have been major improvements over the years.
Ethno-specific Services

Ethno-specific services are run for and by a particular ethno-cultural community in their own language, focusing on their specific needs. Many argue that these are preferable to
mainstream services because they create a comfortable environment where service providers understand and share the clients' language and cultural context, and can thus form more appropriate responses (MacLeod & Shin, 1993; Agnew, 1998). Collins, Shakya, Guruge and Santos (2008) write: "Through their formal and informal links to linguistic and kinship

communities, these agencies provide a holistic approach to services, taking into account the physical, social, and spiritual dimensions of newcomer women's lives" (p. 125). Ethno-specific
agencies are also more likely to acknowledge the multiple levels of oppression abused women face (i.e. through race, ethnicity, religion, or immigration status, as well as gender). Many ethno-

39

specific DV services are one program within a larger ethno-specific community centre or settlement agency; this allows women to access a variety of services at one place, all in their own
language. Ethno-specific agencies can also be a valuable place for women to expand their social
network and decrease isolation (Alaggia et al., 2006, p. 119).

There are several potential drawbacks to ethno-specific services. First of all, some
women may not want members of their own community to know abuse is occurring; they may be

ashamed or fearful of a breach of confidentiality (Alaggia et al., pp. 119-120; Collins et al., 2008,
p. 126). They may fear being "re-victimized by their own communities through isolation and

ostracism engendered when they do not fit stereotypical notions of'deserving' abused women" (Flynn & Crawford, 1998, p. 97). Supriya (2002) argues that certain religious and cultural discourses, such as codes of shame and honour, may serve to silence abused women and inhibit their help-seeking. However she also notes that ethno-specific services have the potential to re-

imagine these discourses in ways that are empowering to women (Ibid.).8
Another challenge is the homogenization of extremely diverse communities which

glosses over differences such as class, caste, skin colour, place of origin, etc. (Agnew, 1998, p.
120). The idea of a cohesive ethnic "community" has been criticized by Bannerji (1999), who

argues that it is an artificial construction based on exclusion from the mainstream society and silencing of internal power relations (p. 263). Saphir (2008) points out that what Canadians

typically view as "the Latin American community" is actually a group of "different and
disconnected cultures," deeply divided by country of origin, political ideology, and wave of immigration (p. 261). It is also unclear whether a better understanding of a woman's cultural
context will necessarily result in better outcomes for her (Agnew, 1998, p. 10). For example,

8 One example she uses is transforming South Asian ideals of womanhood by emphasizing the presence of strong,
independent women in Hindu and Islamic religious texts and mythology (Supriya, 2002, p.252)

40

ethno-specific DV counsellors may ignore the ways in which patriarchal values and norms
embedded in cultural practices can negatively affect women suffering from DV (Ibid.). Though

ethno-specific agencies have the potential to be very helpful to immigrant women, the idea of ethno-cultural communities as homogenous and cohesive entities should always be looked at
critically. It is likely that both mainstream and ethno-specific agencies can be highly beneficial to

women depending on the agency's leadership, vision, programs, and the context.
Language

There are currently a wide variety of languages of service available to abused women through mainstream and ethno-specific agencies in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA) (21 lToronto, 2009). There are also three interpretation/ translation agencies that specialize in
serving victims of DV. Multilingual Community Interpreter Services offers free services specifically to non-English speaking women experiencing DV through referrals (Ibid.). The Barbra Schlifer Commemorative Clinic also provides free interpretation services for abused

women in community programs or the legal system (Ibid.). Access Alliance Multicultural Health
and Community Services is another agency that specializes in community and health interpretation. They offer over 60 languages but charge a fee for service (Ibid.).

Though these provisions are promising, there is evidence that there remains a shortage of
trained interpreters in courts, health care, and community services. In a cross-Canada study of IPV against immigrant women, Smith (2004) found that the majority of interpretation work is informal and done by volunteers or family. As discussed earlier, this could be problematic for
abused women who may be uncomfortable talking about DV through a family member. Also,

untrained interpreters may not understand the importance of confidentiality, exact translation, or explaining cultural subtleties (Goggins, 2008). It is thus important both to promote the use of

41

trained interpreters in DV services and to ensure that information on these resources reaches
immigrant women.

Innovative Programs

Most shelters and agencies dealing with DV in the GTA provide a wide range of programs (211 Toronto, 2009). For example, many emergency shelters also provide food,

clothing, counselling, children's programs, appointment accompaniment, long-term housing
support, and referrals (Ibid.). Dr. Roz's Healing Place is a shelter that offers the above services

as well as ESL classes, Building Opportunities for Women (BOW) and Violence Intervention Breakthrough Empowerment (VIBE). BOW provides computer training, skills development, and help with resume writing, job searching, interviews, and academic programs (Ibid.). VIBE is a

violence prevention program that operates in schools, communities, and the shelter itself, and
includes recreational activities, music therapy, group meetings, leadership and mentoring, and academic help (Ibid.). The Family Service of Toronto is an organization which provides
programs and counselling for individuals or families of women in abusive relationships, abusive men, gay and lesbians, people with HIV, those suffering family separation, abused seniors or those with disabilities (Ibid.). These are just two examples of the many DV-related services and
shelters in the GTA (see Appendix C).

In addition to services aimed at abused women, there are 10 rehabilitation programs for men in the GTA, eight of which are court-mandated Partner Assault Response programs. These
programs are offered in English, Cantonese, Farsi, Italian, Polish, Punjabi, Mandarin, Russia%

Tamil and Urdu, and interpreters are available for other languages (National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2008, pp. 27-29). Community organizations such as the Family Services of
Peel and Catholic Family Services of Peel-Dufferin also offer voluntary counselling services and

42

prevention programs for abusive men (Ibid.). Simbadumwe (2005) conducted interviews with immigrant men in Winnipeg on their understandings of DV and culturally-appropriate responses. One major recommendation was more inclusion of immigrant men in DV information campaigns and prevention programs (Ibid., p. 1). Responding to community-based research such as Simbadume's (2005) study is an important way that organizations can continually adapt their programs to better meet the needs of their clients. Collins et al. (2008) observed that: "A growing number of community and ethno-racial agencies... have begun to do community-based research as a way to engage in evidence-based service design" (p. 127). The utilization of community
research in program planning is a promising step in improving responses to DV.

There have also been some interesting immigrant outreach initiatives across Canada. The
Vancouver Sath Cultural and Literary Society is a South Asian theatre company that uses drama and culture to address social issues (MacLeod & Shin, 1990, p. 18). In the 1980s they produced two plays (in English and Punjabi) dealing with DV and violence against women (Ibid.). They covered topics such as wife assault, the oppression of women, and the treatment of immigrants in Canadian society (Ibid.). In 2003 in Toronto the Tamil community started their own DV

prevention campaign (Mason et al., 2008. p. 13). It began with a message played at Tamil movie
theatres during intermission, which ran for over 18 months (Ibid.). They later ran a short Tamil video on a multicultural TV station; the message in both was "family violence hurts your family" (Ibid.). In 2005 a presentation on IPV was included in a Tamil community health fair, and in 2006 there was a training workshop held for social workers serving the Tamil community (Ibid.). The Rexdale Women's Centre also is involved in a wide range of outreach work. The Centre include issues of DV in their ESL classes, has an outreach worker in the neighbourhood library, and sets up information booths at community fairs and on parent-teacher nights (Roberts, 2008).

43

As these initiatives demonstrate, successful outreach should be creative, extensive, and carefully
targeted.

Shirwadkar (2004) proposes that community cultural activities are an ideal venue for DV prevention and information dissemination (p. 875). He cites the tradition of Indian nationalists

using folk theatre during the Ganesh festival to challenge British colonialism as a positive example of this (Ibid.). He insists that for many Indian immigrant women, community is integral to identity and well-being, and hence community must also be integral to DV prevention and
treatment. Immigrant cultures are often constructed as outside the mainstream, as "Other," or as

disempowering for women. It is thus particularly important that outreach efforts work against these stereotypes by using culture as an empowering force for change. Multilingual and multimedia messages are also likely to have a strong impact. In conclusion, creative and innovative approaches to information, outreach, and treatment have the potential to improve DV
outcomes in immigrant communities.

Funding Challenges

One major challenge in service provision is the funding structure for DV and immigrant-

related services in Canada. Non-profit agencies usually receive short-term project-based funding from the government (Smith, 2004, p. 35). Generally funding applications must be made annually (for accountability), creating instability and time/ resource-consuming administrative

requirements (Agnew, 1999, p. 108). Agencies generally do not receive continual core funding,
and thus they must rely on private donations and money from all three levels of governrnent to survive. Funding for service contracts is given on a competitive basis to agencies that can serve the most clients at the lowest cost (Ibid.). This policy was cited in Guruge (2007) as a barrier to
women receiving adequate time and comprehensive services at some DV agencies.

44

jo %8"28 'sidurexg jo,j -psiBooi 9jb

9J9qA\ puB 9aij sjubjSiuiuii sjgqAY u99Mpq sisi

qojBiusiui iBijBds b jBqa pxmqj (£00Z)
}U9UI9]a}9S JO Aprils B UI 'SB9JB UBqjtl

iragis 'oq 'unq 'VIO 3TP ^ s9pu9§B
UI S;SIX9 OSJB S30IAJ3S OJ SS300B ]BpU9J9JJIQ

S90IAJ9S

UISIOBJ p3AI90J9d pUB S9I0U9§B |BJn^tlO-OUqj9 JO 5[0B| B JBqj pUTlOJ OS|B (866l)
otMsurua a\3^[ ut u9raoM jubj§iuiuii jo Apnjs iiaqj ui -(f-£ "dd in §uitiibjj jo jjobj iigqj puB s9oiaj9s jo uoi;b;u9ui§bjj gqj uo raajqoid siqj 90IAJ3S '(z d) 90U9|Oia uiofl; pgpgjojtd jo pgdpq XpjBnbgpB jou 9J9A\ puB 'S90IAJ9S in A^iAijisugsux puB §xndXjO9i3js p90U9U9dx9 Xgq; jBqj punoj (8002) IT3JW°D '^pBUB^ opuBjjy

UI U9UIOAV JUBjglUIUIl JO ApnjS B UJ S9DjnOS9J JBngui|IJ|tlttI pUB SUOIJBZIUBgjO 0lJI09dS-OUqj9 J9A\9J 9JB 9J9qj S31J10 §UIA19O9J-JUBJ§IUIUII 9§JB| 9q^ JO 9piS}T10 'U9UIOAV JUBjSlUIUIl JOJ
9JB 9J9q; 'SJB9A 9Vj) J9AO S90IAJ9S \(J O; SJU9UI3AO.ldttll
Sp33JSl J3UIUQ

"3jnSOp JO 5[SU JUBJSUOO fB pUB 'XjinqiX9]J 9JIUIIJ qjIAV '3|qBJSUn S3I0U3SB \(J S9AB9J pUB 9§BJUBApBSip B JB SUOIJBZIUB§IO

oiji33ds-ouqj3 s;nd ji sb gjBtibspBin si gjnptujs Srapunj jgoid-uou jusxmo s ju9uiuj9aoS 9qx
·ss9U9Aip9jj9 s(uoijbziubSjo ub jo 9JIISB9UI gq; 9q pjnoqs jBq; ';soo avo| UBqj jgqjBi 's9oiaj9s jo XjijBnb 9qj si }i j9A9avoh Aguoui }U9uiuj9ao§ pusds Agqj Avoq joj 9jqBjunoooB p|9q gq ;ou p|noqs

S9pu9§B jBqj jsgSSns o% jou si sju9ui9Jinb9J Suipunj ui S9§U9||Bqo §uiAji;u9pi ui juiod gqx '(5002
'313) S90IAI9S 9S3qj SpiAOid 0} S9pU9§B ;U9UI9p9S JOJ JjnOIIJip AJ9A SI JI 90U9q pUB 'SUIBJ§Ojd

J0J §u!Pa1¥ 3AT§ J°u S30P spBUB3 uoi;bjSiuiuii puB diqsugziji^ 'os^y "(8002 'l
SUOpBZIUB§JO UIB9J1SUIBUI UBqj S90JTIOS9J pUB SJU9ip J9AV9J 3ABq pUB J9||BUIS 9JB

sb 9§BiuBApBsip b jb s9iou9§b oijio9ds-ouqj9 S9AB9| os|B 3Jtiptujs Suipunj si

settlement agencies are located in the city of Toronto, compared to only 57.8% of the total
immigrant population of the GTA (Ibid., pp. 15-16). Collins et al. (2008) note that many of the neighbourhoods with the highest population of immigrants remain the most underserved (p. 126).
Travelling long distances to access settlement or health services can be difficult, expensive, and

stressful, especially for newcomers who face language barriers or are unfamiliar with public transportation (Ibid.; Guruge, 2007). Spatial mismatch can be especially problematic for abused women, as they may be unable to travel long distances to access DV services (for example if
they are being monitored by their husband).

Others gaps in services identified in the literature are in outreach and intervention. For
example, Runner et al. (2009) found that DV organizations often have difficulty getting community leaders involved in their work (p. 6). Agencies also find it challenging to get

survivors of DV to return to their communities and raise awareness about the issue (Ibid., p. 7).
One reason may be that women who have been abused have enough things to deal with. It is also

perhaps related to the stigma around talking about DV present in many immigrant communities
(Jiwani, 2001, p. 2). In groups which are continually constructed as inherently violent and misogynistic, silence on DV may be used as a defence mechanism against entrenching or
validating racist stereotypes. As Bannerji (1999) writes: We are worried, understandably, to speak of "our" brutalities and shortcomings, because

of not being even minimally in control of the public and political domains of speech or ideological construction. The pre-existence of a colonial/racist/ Orientalist perception ^nd
stereotypes of us, embedded in official and everyday structural and cultural practices meanings, have been powerful sources of distortion and misrepresentation... (p. 264).

Thus, working against racist stereotypes and misrepresentation is essential to increasing the
involvement of immigrant groups in DV awareness-raising and prevention efforts.

46

Another gap identified in the literature is the involvement of faith-based organizations in
DV issues. In many communities religious institutions and clergy are extremely influential,

however their presence has been largely absent from DV prevention and treatment efforts (Yoshihama, 2008, p. 51). Studies have found very low rates of DV help-seeking in faith-based organizations and a prevailing fear among victims that religious leaders will condone abuse

rather than provide support (Dutton, Orloff & Hass, 2000; Ingram, 2007; Latta & Goodman,
2005). However there is evidence that religious institutions may be particularly important
resources in some immigrant communities. A 2004 study by Statistics Canada reported that two-

thirds of immigrants attend religious services.9 Further, 41% of immigrants have a high degree of
religiosity (a measure of the importance of religion, religious affiliation, attendance and personal practices) compared to only 26% of the Canadian-born (Statistics Canada, 2004). Thus for certain groups, religious institutions may be an important and even crucial site for spreading
information about DV and supporting abused women. One example of a faith-based outreach strategy is the Safe Havens Family Violence Prevention Project in Boston (Latta & Goodman, 2005, p. 20). This is an interfaith group that

trains religious organizations (including clergy and lay leaders) in DV issues, including strategies
for prevention and intervention (Ibid.). There are also institutions which, though not faith-based,

encourage the role of religion in abused women's recovery. In Supriya's (2002) study of Apna Ghar, an Asian women's shelter in Chicago, she found that faith often played a vital role in the healing process. She observed that religion can act as: "a space imbued with the possibilities for resistance and transformation of self," and a creative force from which abused women can draw strength and rebuild their identities (Ibid., pp. 18, 232). However, the use of faith as a tool of empowerment necessitates challenging representations of'authentic' cultural traditions which ' The age range of the study is 15-59, and "immigrant" refers to those who arrived in the previous 20 years.

47

are harmful to women (Ibid., p. 252). The role of religion and faith-based institutions in anti-DV efforts remains a complex issue, and more research is needed to better understand how this
significant resource might best be utilized.

Another important issue is DV screening in health care. In a study of DV responses in two Vancouver hospital emergency rooms, Varcoe (2001) found a complete lack of protocol,
programs, or policies regarding abuse (p. 98). Further, she found that the hospital staffs

responses to signs of DV were conditioned by racist and classist stereotypes. This study suggests that standardized procedures for DV screening are essential to ensure that all women receive equal protection from violence in the health care system. As Jiwani (2001) found:

Service providers were overwhelmingly in support of protocols for screening domestic violence. They mentioned that when doing accompaniments with immigrant women who had been abused, hospitals with protocols in place provided better service and health professionals were more empathetic with women (p. 2). It is therefore important that health care sites implement DV screening protocols, and that nurses
and other health care professionals receive adequate training on DV issues and cultural
competency. Such training should take place in both college/ university and practice settings.

Another challenge in service provision is the inadequacy of the criminal justice system.

Runner et al. (2009) found that law enforcement tended to lack training in socio-cultural issues, did not have adequate language provisions, and were unprepared to deal with immigrant and refugee victims (p. 7). Smith (2004) reported that DV charges take far too long to move through the system, and courts are too overburdened to give attention to individual cases (p. 26). His
i

study found that abused women often felt confused and mistreated by the criminal justice system (Ibid.). They were concerned about their safety after the abuser was released, as probation

officers tended to be too busy to effectively monitor their clients (Ibid., p. 27). They were also
concerned about the limited number of rehabilitation programs available for abusive men (Ibid.).

48

AillfiJIil AlSSHSAiNfl NOSIQAIf dDAIH3dOBd

in

i qjwv

01

izi
d 'JOO£ 'BtaiBqs) sdB§ asaip ssgjppB dpq pynoo S9iou9§B ssoiob uoxjBigdooo ptiB 'spaau ogxosds
puB 'sanssT uoi^jSiuiun 'sassaoojd \b23\ jo 3§p3]AvoiD[ jo 5[OB| Jiaqj joj pazxoijuo ussq
S30IAJ3S

sq pjnoo stqx '(8003 '"IB ^9 suIIl°3) sao.mos9.ijo uoijBzx^;n \\r$ 3§Bjnoou9 puB sunpiA uo J9ISB9
SS90Ojd SlII5[99S-dl9q 9q; 95(BUI pjnOA\ S90IAJ9S ]BI0OS pUB 'q^B9q '|B§9J U99MJ9q UOIJBJOqB||O0

'osjy -spggu opsinSmi puB guoz pojraoo yBJtijjno Jigq; guixnBixnBUi ]ips snqAv 'suiBoSoad jo
9§UBJ J9piA\ B SS90DB O% SJU9ip AjUOUIUI AVO^B pJTlOAV UOpBZIUB§JO UIB9HSUIBUI pUB 0IJI09ds-OUqj9

UB U99A\;9q UOpBJOqB|JO0 '9jduiBX9 JOg ·(£ -d '{B J9 J9>lB;iqyVV) SJUSrp OJ 9|qBJIBAB SUIBJ§Ojd
jo ApuBA gq; 9SB9Jora pire sgojnosgj oijsinSuii puB sgoipBjd ;u9}9duioo AnBinjjno 9JBqs p|noo

S9I0U9§y 'SUOIlBindod XjUOUIUI iOJ S90TAJ9S 9AISU9l[9jduiO0 SmpiAOjd OJ JBIJU9SS9 SI S9T0U9§B

SSOJOB UOpBJOqBJ|O0 JBlfl 9tlgjB (iQQZ) 9§nJtl{) pUB (LOOZ) 'Vs J3 ·t35!6^1^ S90IAJ9S U99M}9q
UOi;BOTpJOO0 JO 5[0B| B ST 9JtlJBJ[3JI| 91JJ SSOJOB p9XJTJU9pi UOISIAOjd 901AJ9S UI dB§ |BUg 9l[X
9AIJ09JJ9 uggq 9ABq Aoq; jgqjgqM urepgosB oj papoou sx qoiB9S9J .raiflinj 'Smsiuiojd

9JB SJU9UldO|9A9p 9S9qj qStlOqX "(PTcll) SJ90IJJ0 90I|Od pUB 'JJBJS 9|0JBd pUB UOIJBqOjd 'ytlOO JOJ
P9SB9J0XIT pUB 'S9.mp900.ld ;U9UI9§BUBUI 9SB0 pUB 'U0p09H00 90U9piA9 'UOI}B§IJS9AUI

tP 'sawttuaioo XjosiApy

'otjbjuo) uibjSojj (3AQ) ^03 souqioxa oxjs9xxioq stouBiuo sx 9ax}bx;xxii qons
·SUIXPXA JOJ S90XAJ9S ^BX09ds SB |J9A\ SB 'AOJ0 S9TISSX XII p9IIIB.I} JJB1S qiXAV S^nOO \(J p9ZIJBI09dS

p9qsx^qBjs9 9ABq suopoxpsxjnf uiBp93 -(gz "d 'Piqi) suoijbzxub§jo Aixxitinmioo qjiAv sdxqsjguyBd
S|O0OJOld AQ p9JXI9UI9T.dirn 9ABq S90IAJ9S 901^Od 9UIOS IBq; p9;OU OS]B SBAV JI 'J9A9AVOH

Coordination across services can be challenging. A three year pilot project is currently underway in the GTA entitled Service Coalition in the South Asian Community. According to
their website:

The mission of the Service Coalition is to develop a culturally and linguistically integrated, coordinated, responsive service delivery model that will address pre-crisis

intervention, crisis intervention, and post-crisis support (rehabilitation and follow-up) for the South Asian community in the Greater Toronto Area affected by issues of family
violence (SCSAC, 2007,11).

This is a promising initiative that may improve service delivery through coordination and resource-sharing. Unfortunately its development has been slow and marked by disagreements by

the stakeholders on what constitutes DV, what the causes are, and how services should be provided (Ahmad et al, 2009). Reaching a consensus between multiple individuals and groups is a difficult process. However a coordinated response network such as SCSAC has the potential to
address the gaps in service provision and create a more effective model for immigrant women
suffering from DV to receive comprehensive help.

As demonstrated by the above discussion, several key challenges as well as a few

promising developments currently exist in DV services for immigrants in Canada. Gaps remain
in the criminal justice system, in the funding structure for service delivery, in the absence of

religious institutions in DV responses, in the lack of DV screening protocols, and in the limited culturally appropriate services available outside major immigrant-receiving cities. Training in DV and cultural competency, innovative outreach programs, inclusion of community leaders,
and coordination between agencies are all positive initiatives that should be promoted.

50

i-ifoijod sinjnj ipqj ||b ui sisajbub ispusS apnpui pjnoqs }U3uiuj3ao§ aqj '.raqptbj ' oj A^inqBisiqnA -ipqi §uiqsiuiunp 'ssoiajss jBpos sssoob pUB 'oibo ifljBsq ssn '^ioay oj uisip mojjb

pjnoA\ siqx "sjireonep aaSiyaj jo jBqj oj uijjb snjB;s AJBJoduia; usaiS aq pjnoqs uoxjBoi|ddB Ji

uo uoispsp b §ra;iBAVB BpBu^3 in 9jb oqM suosjad psiosuods '(6661 '5o>j-jbjv) SM
S30IAJ3S ppos oj ssaooB oj jqSu aqj Suipnpui 'sasSt^sj jo s}UBJ§iuran oituouooa sb

stubs aqj u3ai§ aq pjnoiis s;ubj§iui ssBp Xiiuibg dxqsjosuods jBsnods uiojj Stn>[Bp9pun [B
3tfl 3A0UI3J p|tlOqS JU3raiU3A0§ 31^ OIUIBUAp J3A\od [Btlbaun Siqj JU3A3ld OX 'di 9i{; ui J3i[ da35{ oj |iBui5[0B|q sb 90UBJSISSB jBpos SuTsssooB jo ^B3jq; aq; asn abui asnods

'josuods aqj si ubuioav pasnqB aqj ji "(lOOZ ''Vs J3 ?*9D) suoissnoiadai aq; jo jbsj joj diqsuoijBpj
aqj 3AB3J 0} a^qBun pue pajqapux psj Abui usuioav pasnqB ajaqAV uoijBnjis b sajBajo asnods Ji
ioj 3|qisuodsaj X^BpuBuij josuods aqj §up[Bj/\[ -Aouapuadap 3sbsj:oui puB sdiqsuopBpj UI S3IlI|Bnb3Ul J3A\0d 9JBqi30BX3 Sapijod diqSJOSUOdS S JU9UIUJ3AOS UBipBUB3 3U.1
onpiosuoas
90IAJ3S

SSipBOlddB pUB 'SSOIAISS JO UOI^BUipiOOO 'UOpBJOSI §UISB3J03p 'U0i;BUIUI3SSip UOIJBUIJOJUI

'sSbtiSubj uo Sutsnooj 'ssoiajss joj apBui sq usq; niM suoijBpusureuoos'a sjubj§iuiuii
StlJBJS-UOU JO JU3UIJB3JCJ 3qj pUB 'SSpiJBTlbsiII 0IUIOUO03 ';S3JJB AJOJBpUBUI 'SUOIJB0I|ddB
spunoiS ajBuoissBdraoo puB UBUBjiuBuinq 'diqsiosuods jo sbsjb aqj ra suoijBpusuiuioosj

Xoi|od ssnosip jsxg ||iav uoipss siqx "S3ijiunrauioo jubjSiuiuii ui \q oj sasuodssi SAOidrai S3i;iJBdsip 3S3U.1 3SB3J09p 0} U35[BJ 3q pjnOO S3JtlSB3UI SnOUBA 'U3UI0AV UJOq-UBipBUB3

Sui5[33S-dpq oj sjsixiBq aaora sobj puB ssnqB oj 3jqBJ3iqnA sjoui sq Abui Asqx AO WM usqA\ sobj usuiOAV jubjSiuiuii jBqj ssSus^Bqo snouBA sqj psraraBxs SBq asdBd siqx

so that policies such as sponsorship do not end up having a disproportionate negative impact on
women. Though Citizenship and Immigration Canada does currently have a gender-based

analysis unit, it is made up of only two employees, and as its work is research-focused, its actual

impact on policy has not yet been clear (Harder, 2002). u
Humanitarian and Compassionate Grounds

Canada's current H&C provisions are far too restrictive and limited. H&C does not meet the needs of women who experience DV while their sponsorship application is being processed. Nor does it serve non-status abused women whose partner has not yet sponsored them or is also
non-status. Because of the low acceptance rate, high cost, and strict requirements for proving

establishment in Canada and hardship upon removal, H&C is rarely a viable option for abused

immigrant women. The government should either expand H&C to provide exceptions for abused
women (such as a fee waiver or reduced evidentiary requirements) or create a new venue through

which to regularize their status. For addressing the needs of abused women who have suffered
sponsorship breakdown or who are in Canada on temporary visas, the Australian DV

immigration provisions could be a positive model to follow. To better protect non-status women who have experienced DV or other forms of abuse such as trafficking, Canada should adopt
measures similar to the U.S. VAWA provisions, particularly the U-Visa. Under such a provision, women who have experienced DV while in Canada would get temporary immigration status with the eventual option of applying for permanent residency. This would give victims a greater degree of safety and stability and allow them uninhibited access to social services.

Impact of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act. (Accessed August 24; 2009):

11 For more information on GBA see Citizenship and Immigration Canada. (2008). Gender-Based Analysis of the

http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/annual-report2008/section7.asp

52

uoi}Bunuuosip aiuiouoog ·diqsuoijBia.i aAisnqB ub aABaj oj A*)i|iqB itaqj sjiuiij osjb uiq

oj a|qBJ3iqnA ajoui uauioAv sa^Btti Ajuo jou araootn Avoq '(600Z 'bpbubq soijsiibjs)
AjipBajs uaaq SBq sja^JOAN. tuoq-UBipBUB3 puB s;ubj§ixhuix uaaAvpq dB§ 3§bm aqj 'isqpnj -(LOOZ

'39If) T9A9T uoxjBonpa jo ssqpiB§3J 'uoi^ndod iuoq-uBipBUB3 aqj UBqj S3§bm jsavo

pus sqof psnx^s-J9^0! w ^o^ °J PU31 s}UBi§nnuii tusiobj puB SBiq iBuoijmtjsm qSnojqj
aqj hi }sutb8b pajBinuniosip sjb 'snjBjs jnoq;iAv asoqj XpBjnoipBd puB 's;ubj3tuiuii
a onuouoog sutj

(6 d '8661 'P-iojavbjo ^> uu^iii) AOJO sssnBO jooj
aqj sassaippB puB s3JtnsB9tu SApBjno puB 9ApBju3A9jd sspnpui jBqi qoBoiddB oijsipq b jo psd

sq jsnra Xsq; 'auojB pUBjs jouubo saiSajBJjs pasnooj aopsnf [Binraijo j3A3a\oh 'dsjs §uisxraojd

b aq oj sui93s synoo pasnooj-AOjo juaxuqsxjqBjsa aqx '(it7 "d '1700Z 'H^^S) sanssi aSBtiSuBj sjb
jgqj jx p9sn 9q sabmjb ppoqs sjapjdigjin |Buoiss9joid puB 's9otaj9s Kjiunuicuoo qjxAV uostbxj
(siaoxjjo 9|Biu9j Suxpnpux X|9AxpBOjd) s^xun j\(j pgzxjBpgds iixbjj p^noqs ssojoj aoxjoj 'SAi

Aftuj aq oj gmjxjojd [biobj §ux;BoxpBja puB Xouajaduioa jB.ntijno StixAoidxin uo snooj oj paau

';uBpodun aiB sasuodsaj aox;snf ibxixuixjo anq^ '(9Z "d '17002 tmtaiS -900Z 'PUBUABH ^ 3^i
uaraoM pazx^BjoBJ puB auioom-Avoj yC|JB]nox^iBd 'sraxpxA jo sjsaxiB pasBajoxn in pajjnsaj

saxoxpd jsaxiB AjojBpuBiu jBq; aouapxAa sx aiaqj 'jaqpnj '(000Z '^raapaxjAl ^> zioqqoByw

·17003 'tpi^S -9002 '^^ra) sapuoqinB aqj bajoaux Aaq^ jx uoxiBzxmxpxA jaqjitij JBaj fosax
uatuoM juBjgxuiuix 'xiisxobj aoxjodjo ajBtaxp b ui (866 T 'zioW^AV ^ ^raapaxx/j) ;uatuaajojua ubxpbub3 Xq saxjxunmuioo Jiaqi jo SxixaaSjBj jo asttBoaq jo AJiunoo axuoq Jiaqj in uoxssajddo

jo saouauadxa 01 anp sapuoq^tiB aqj qjiM SmiBap o; asaaAB aq Abui AuBp\[ uatuoA\ ;ubj§iuiuii
joj oipixiajqojd aq ubd ;saxiB Xio^BpuBui sb qons saiSajBxis AQ pasnaoj aapsnf jbuiuiu3
sAs aopstif jBuiun

reduces abused women's options, leaving them dependent on the abuser and compounding their
experience of DV. The government should address these inequalities through expanding credential recognition, increasing the availability of high level profession-focused language

classes, and implementing anti-racism education initiatives. Further, employment, language, and
training programs should be integrated into services for abused immigrant women.
Treatment of Non-Status Immigrants

The lack of rights accorded to people living in Canada without status exacerbates DV and
prevents abused women from seeking help. Non-status women are often put in the position of

either having no access to services, or risking arrest and deportation if they try to access them
(Berinstein et al, 2006). The oppressive treatment of immigrants in detention, monitoring, and

deportation processes also may discourage women from turning to the authorities for help (No One Is Illegal, 2009b). To improve access to DV services for non-status women, city services should implement Don't Ask Don't Tell policies wherever possible. Instituting such policies

does not necessitate contravening the national government, but simply means that: "municipal
funds, resources and workers will not be used to enforce federal immigration laws" (No One Is
Illegal, 2009a, 1f 6). Further, the criminalization of non-status people and disregard for their

human rights must be addressed. To facilitate this, support for migrant-rights advocacy groups
such as No One Is Illegal is essential. Also, Canadians should pressure the government to honour their human rights obligations as set out in the Canadian Charter ofRights and Freedoms (which the Supreme Court declared applicable to non-citizens in Singh v. Minister of Employment and Immigration, 1985) (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 2009).

54

99

ssojoe sjuapjsaj luaireuuad jjnpB oj sasmoo qouajj pire qsiTSug aa.g apiAcud sassep 3NI1 z,

pajBuixuassip aq osjb pjnoo saoiAjas puB uoijuaAajd Ad uo uoijbxujojui uaxuoM qjiAv Suojb
> xn papnpui 9jb Aaqj jBqj os '^uanbaij uaxu jBqj saoBjd oj pajaSiBj aq ostb uoijbiujojui

'suoijnjxjsxn snoiSipj 'sapijpBj qj|B9q 'ssjjuao ajBoABp 'sassBp qsg 'saiojs AjaoojS 's

oiuqp in 'oxpBJ puB AX u0 sptipui pjnoo siqx sranipaui jo A^auBA apiM b q§nojqj sSui^as
asiaAip xn pajuasajd aq pTnoqs AQ uo uoijbiujojui (£ 'd ''PNl) siq^liBAB aiB saoiAias |Bpos jBqM sb \\3/a sb 'AO o} pa;Bpi savbj Buipnpux 'sapxpqisuodsaj puB s;q§u [BSaj ixaqj Suiui|;no a§BjpBd

b uaAi§ aq ppoqs Aaqj BpBUB3 ui baixib sjubj§iiuuix uaqyw "(l "d 'I00Z 1UBAVIf) uoijBuixuassip
ui si uiaiqoid aq; 'sjsixa uoijbxujojui |Bti§ui|i^nui qSnoqx -avb[ aq; ;suib§b si ao V^ pirejsjapun puB uiajsXs iB§a^ s^bpbubq qjiAv jbiixxubj aiuooaq s;ubj§iuhxii jBq; juByodun si ;j '("piqi) pasn
aq ;ou ^iav Kaq; uaq; ajBiado Aaq; Moq puB;siapun jo ;sixa saoiAjas avou>[ ;ou op uaiuoA\ pasnqB

JI '(Loot '3§tun£)) §ui5[aas-dpq o; jaixreq ;uboijiu§is jaqjouB si uoi^bxujojui jo
uoi;bxiiui9SSxq uoij

9|qissod sb 9jqxss900B sb 9pBiu puB u9uioa\ juBiSiunxii oj pgjouioid ApAipB gq pynoqs sgssBp (3NTI) «pBUB3 o; sjsuiooAvaj^ joj xioipnzisiii 9§BiiSuBq 'Xubxii} pxiy X^p 9§Btl§UBT 9SB9J0XII O^ p9qSljqBJS9 9q pTTlOqS SUOIJBZIUB§JO UIB9JJSUIBIU pUB 0lJp9ds-0Xiqj9 sdiqsjgu^iBj 'jjBjs |BnSxii|i;TTixu 9Jiq o; yojj9 ppsds b 95[bui pjnoqs S9pu9§B X;i ·pgjouiojd 9q pjnoqs sanssi \q w jjb;s xiibj; }Bq} sgpu9§B uoijB^jdigpi ·sjgpjdjgjxn sb pgsn jou 9jb sjgqragra Ahuibj ;Bq; ;uBpodati XjjB|notpBd si ;i Sxnuggjos puB sgoiAigs Aa uI "siqis

i9A9U9qA\ pasn 9q p]noqs sigpidigjin pgxnBj; 'sSxn^gs \eS9\ puB 'sibo qjiBaq 'ssoiajss X^i
ui ·3§Bn§xiBi xiavo jisqj in sjBoxunraaioo oj qqB sjb sxuipiA jBq; jBpxiassa si ji \q sb qons ssnssx

9Apisu9S q;i7\v sjuBiSixxran joj uoisiAoad soiajss jo pui5[ a"ub ui anssx Xs5[ b si

through cultural mediums such as folk theatre (Shirwadkar, 2004). Community health centres
and settlement agencies are also important venues through which many new immigrants receive information. Because of issues such as language barriers, isolation, and unfamiliarity with
Canadian culture, it is particularly important for newcomers that outreach and informationsharing occurs in far-reaching, creative, and innovative ways.
Decreasing Isolation

Isolation is another factor that can prevent help-seeking. Immigrants often lose their social network and support system upon migrating (Macleod & Shin, 1993). Lack of official

language ability, unfamiliarity with Canadian culture, and not being able to work or go to school
can increase isolation (JIBC, 2007). When women have few social contacts, they have less

people to turn to for help and fewer sources of information. Community groups and ethnospecific agencies should thus create social and support groups or drop-in centers for immigrant
women (Macleod & Shin, 1990, p. 45). Community health workers should conduct outreach with

immigrant women, particularly during vulnerable times such as after giving birth or during
prenatal consultations (Jiwani, 2001, p. 3). Social services outside of large immigrant-receiving cities should actively work to decrease immigrant women's isolation and build community.
Approaches to Service Delivery

It is important that immigrant women have access to both mainstream and ethno-specific organizations. When services are accessible and well-coordinated then clients can choose the
agency that makes them most comfortable, and resources can be expanded through cross-agency partnerships. Immigrant communities should be involved in DV prevention and program planning to ensure initiatives are culturally appropriate. Services should be focused on female
empowerment, articulated through each individual's particular beliefs and needs rather than

56

pjnoA\ saoiAjss jo 5[jomj3u aSiBj b ssaooB oj AjijiqB aqi '.raifijn.j -(i00Z: 'uiBAvif ^6661 'PBJ[§0S)
passajppB aq o; paau }Bqj sapijBnbaut Supoasiajui ajdpinui aaBj uayo oqAV 'uaiuoM

pasnqBjo sapjjBaj sqj paija-i lawaq jqSiui ppoui sjqx 'spaau ogpads jisq; uo Srapuacfep saoi
jo XjauBA spiM b sssooB AjiSBa p|tioo usraoAV pssnqB Xbm siq; ui ·suoi}bziub§jo puB 'soimp pgq 'S30TAJ3S 3oqod 'S3JJU90 AjiuTOioaoo 'sjgjpqs 's9ioua§B q;iB3q 'jop aq; apnpra pjnoqs 5{joa\j3u b qons ^ipapi laxxwsm aAipajja puB A|3unj b ux paau Asqj ssoiaiss sqj 3AI303J asuioM pasnqB gjnsua ptiB 'saojnosai aziuixxBui 'sapuaSB u93A\pq uoijBuipJooo SAOiduii o; jBpusjod sq; 9ABq suoxjijboo 30TAJ9S p3ziuB§jo-|pA\ puB SAissqo^ ·siqj J^q^r^ oj Xba\ ;ssq sqj ^p^rji si suoi^boo soiajss jo jusuiqsiiqBjss sq; 'suopbziubSjo jsoui jo suoijbjiuiij
30J110S3J 3q; U3AI£) -U9UI JOJ SUIBjSojd UOIJB;i|iqBq3J piIB UOTJU3A3ld SB TJ3A\ SB 'S31JTUIBJ puB usipjnp 'sajdnoo joj 9|qBjiBAB saoiAjas sq os^b pjnoqs sisqx ·sanity sqj joj ssqsiAV

pUB '§UIJB3q |BU0p0UI3 pUB JBOISyCqd 'StlJBJS UOpBJ§IUIUII 'Sp33U 31UIOUO09-OI0OS J3
s.ubuioav b ssgjppB Xiao jou jstoii Xsqx "tujg; Suo^ puB opsijoq aq oj p93u S30TAJ3S
·jsoo uBqj jgqjBj AjxjBtib uo pssBq p9jBn|BA9

gq pjnoqs S9O|AJ9S puB 'papoddns gq pjnoqs suoijbziub§jo 9§jb| sb \\3sa sb \\ums 'Smputij

gjoo 9jqBjs U9AI§ aq pjnoqs S9pa9§v ^iqixgyj 9Joui spBiu sq pinoqs §uipunj ju9uhu9ao§
'sp33U SmSuBqO OJ jdBpB pUB SlUBjSojd 3AIJBAOUUI JU9UI9|dlUl Ol SUOpBZTUB§JO AVO^B OX "SlIIIBSq
stu9raoA\ pgsnqB sjouioid o; pssn 9q ubo qoiqM ssomossj ^UByodun 9jb A"}ijBn}i.nds puB qjrej 's3^Bj;suoui9p jvifQ oudyjo aopBuraiBXS (JOO2) s.BXudns sy "p9qojB9S9J J9qpty gq o% spssu sgsuodsgj \(j ui ASiop puB suopnjpsui snoiSipj jo 3\ox ^Bpus;od aqj 'uopxppB uj -jryissn aq Abui sdnoj§ s,.u9xuoav pgjBpj 90U9joia-uou jb jo 'sjBApsgj iBJtij|no jb 'ajjBgqj Ajiunuiuioo qgnoiqj
uo uoijBuuojuT SrapBajds sb qons qoBaj^no aApBAOuui ·sraSipBJBd ^siuxraaj pasnooj-oiajsay^

allow abused women to choose their own path of recovery based on their particular cultural
context and individual needs.
Conclusion

Immigrant women are not a homogenous group; they are immensely diverse with

differing experiences and needs. However, they may face common barriers in their access to and
utilization of DV services. They are also subject to gendered immigration policies, and are often placed in disadvantaged social positions, increasing their vulnerability to abuse. Immigrant
women may face multiple forms of oppression (based on gender, race, religion, class,

immigration status, etc.) that interact with their experiences of DV. As such, responses must be
multifaceted, and challenge both the underlying power structures within society as well as in

intimate relationships. DV services must promote individual, family, and community
empowerment. They must be holistic and long term, and address the diverse needs -whether

practical, legal, economic, medical, or spiritual- of women who have experienced abuse.

Violence against women must be fought alongside the many other intersecting forms of societal
violence that exist in order to truly make a difference in the lives of abused immigrant women.

58

APPENDIX A General Social Survey (2004^ "Spousal Violence" Definition: Experiences of physical or sexual assault that are consistent with

the Canadian Criminal Code definitions of these offences and could be acted upon by a police
officer.

Physical/ Sexual Violence
During the pastJive years, has your partner:

1. Threatened to hit you with his/her fist or anything that could have hurt you.
2. Thrown anything at you that could have hurt you.

3. Pushed, grabbed, or shoved you in a way that could have hurt you. 4. Slapped you. 5. Kicked, bit, or hit you with his/her fist.
6. Hit you with something that could have hurt you. 7. Beaten you.

8. Choked you. 9. Used or threatened to use a gun or knife on you.
10. Forced you into any unwanted sexual activity by threatening you, holding you down,

or hurting you in some way.
Emotional/ Financial Abuse

/ am going to read a list ofstatements that some people have used to describe their spouse/ partner. I'd like you to tell me whether or not each statement describes your spouse/partner. 1. He/she tries to limit contact with family and friends. 2. He/she puts you down or calls you names to make you feel bad. 3. He/she is jealous and does not want you to talk to other men/ women. 4. He/she harms, or threatens to harm, someone close to you. 5. He/she demands to know who you are with and where you are at all times. 6. He/she damages or destroys your possessions or property.
7. He/she prevents you from knowing about our having access to the family income, even if you ask.

Source:

Statistics Canada. (2005, Fall). General Social Survey Cycle 18: Victimization (2004): Users Guide to Public Use. Government of Canada, pp.117-121. (Accessed August 26, 2009):

http://www.statcan.gc.ca/dli-ild/meta/gss-esg/cycle 18-2004/gssc-esgc 18gid-v2-eng.pdf

59

APPENDIX B

Domestic Violence Services in the GTA

(211 Toronto, ca)
SHELTERS:

Anduhyaun Emergency Women's Shelter Bethesda House
Denise House
Dr Roz's Healing Place

Ernestine's Women's Shelter Family Service Toronto Halton Women's Place
Herizon House
Interim Place

Interim Place. North Shelter Interim Place. South Shelter Interval House

Jewish Family and Child
Jewish Family and Child. Gordon S Wolfe Branch Julliette's Place

Muslim Welfare Centre of Toronto
Nellie's

North York Women's Shelter Ontario Association of Interval and Transition Houses Red Door Family Shelter
Red Door Family Shelter. Red Door VAW Shelter Redwood Shelter

Salvation Army. Evangeline Residence Salvation Army. Florence Booth House Salvation Army. Honeychurch Family Life Resource Centre Sandgate Women's Shelter of York Region
Shelternet for Abused Women Women's Habitat of Etobicoke Yellow Brick House

Yorktown Shelter for Women YWCA Durham. Y's WISH Shelter
YWCA Toronto

YWCA Toronto. Housing and Support. 1st Stop Woodlawn. Shelter YWCA Toronto. Housing and Support. YWCA Arise YWCA Toronto. Housing and Support. YWCA Women's Shelter
COUNSELLING: Abrigo Centre Arising Women Place

Barbra Schlifer Commemorative Clinic Barbra Schlifer Commemorative Clinic. Counselling Services Bloor Information and Life Skills Centre Canadian Centre for Women's Education and Development Catholic Family Services of Toronto. North Branch

60

Centre for Spanish-Speaking Peoples. Women's Program

COSTI. North York Centre. Family and Mental Health Services

Counterpoint Counselling and Educational Cooperative
Court Support and Counselling Services Elspeth Heyworth Centre for Women
Ethiopian Association in the Greater Toronto Area

Family Service Toronto
Flemingdon Neighbourhood Services

Greek Orthodox Family Services and Counselling. Wife Assault Program

Greek Orthodox Family Services and Counselling. Wife Assault Program. Donlands Branch
Halton Women's Place

Heritage Skills Development Centre Interval House. Building Economic Self Sufficiency Iraqi Canadian Society of Ontario Jamaican Canadian Association Jewish Family and Child Jewish Family and Child. Gordon S Wolfe Branch Kababayan Community Centre KCWA Family and Social Services Lighthouse Manantial Neighbourhood Services North York Women's Centre

Oasis Centre des femmes
Opportunity for Advancement

Rexdale Women's Centre
Riverdale Immigrant Women's Centre

Riverdale Immigrant Women's Centre. Bloor Street Location Riverdale Immigrant Women's Centre. Midland Avenue Location

Riverdale Immigrant Women's Centre. Shorting Road Location
Salvation Army. Honeychurch Family Life Resource Centre

San Romanoway Revitalization Association
Scarborough Women's Centre
SEAS Centre

South Asian Family Support Services
South Asian Women's Centre

St Christopher House. Children, Youth and Family Support Program
St Joseph's Health Centre

Thorncliffe Neighbourhood Office. Overlea Office Tropicana Community Services Organization University Health Network. Toronto General Hospital Vietnamese Women's Association of Toronto Women's College Hospital Women's Habitat of Etobicoke. Outreach and Family Support Service Women's Multicultural Resource and Counselling Centre of Durham
Working Women Community Centre

Working Women Community Centre. North York East Centre Working Women Community Centre. North York West Centre

Yorktown Shelter for Women. Women and Communities Against Violence (WACAV)
YWCA Durham. Y's WISH Shelter

YWCA Toronto. Housing and Support. Breakthrough

61

References

Agnew, V. (1998). In search ofa safe place: Abused women and culturally
sensitive services. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Ahmad, F., Ali, M.E., & Stewart, D. (2005, October). Spousal-abuse among Canadian immigrant
women. Journal ofImmigrant Health, 7 (4), 239-246.

Ahmad, F., O'Campo, P., & Shakir, U. (2009, March 11). Language of violence? How we talk about domestic iolence in different cultures. Centre for Research on
InnerCity Health (CIHR Lecture).

Alaggia, R., Maiter, S., & Vine, C. (2006). Domestic violence and child abuse: Issues for immigrant and refugee families. In Alaggia R. & Vine, C. (Eds.), Cruel but not unusual: violence in Canadianfamilies. Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier University
Press.

Ammons, L. (1995). Mules, madonna, babies, bathwater, racial imagery and stereotypes: The African-American woman and the Battered Woman Syndrome.
Wisconsin Law Review, 1003.

Amnesty International Canada. (2004, October). Stolen sisters: A human rights
response to discrimination and violence against Indigenous women in Canada.

(Accessed July 30, 2009): http://www.amnesty.ca/campaigns/resources/
amr2000304.pdf

Amnesty International, & Southhall Black Sisters. (2008, March). Wo recourse' no safety: The Government's failure to protect women from violence. London, England: Amnesty International UK. (Accessed July 1, 2009): www.refuge.org.uk

/cms_content_refuge/attachments/0803-No%2520Recourse-No%2520Safety.pdf
Anitha, S. (2008). Neither safety nor justice: The UK government response to domestic violence against immigrant women. Journal ofSocial Welfare & Family Law, 30
(3), 189-202.

Arat-Koc, S. (1999). Gender and race in "non-discriminatory" immigration policies in Canada: 1960s to the present. In Dua, E & Robertson, A. (Eds), Scratching the Surface: Canadian Anti-Racist Feminist Thought. Toronto: Women's Press.

Arora, A. (2004). Experiences of front-line shelter workers in providing service to immigrant women impacted by family violence. Practice-based research paper for the York University Graduate Programme in Social Work. (Accessed April 28, 2009): http://www.womanabuse.ca/resources/show.cfm?id=31

62

Ayyub, R. (2000, July ). Domestic violence in the South Asian Muslim immigrant

Population in the United States. Journal ofSocial Distress and the Homeless, 9
(3), 237-248.

Bannerji, H. (1999). A question of silence: Reflections on violence against women in communities of colour. In Dua, E & Robertson, A. (Eds), Scratching the Surface:
Canadian Anti-Racist Feminist Thought. Toronto: Women's Press.

Bauer, H.M., Rodriguez, M.A., Quiroga, S.S., & Flores-Ortiz,Y.G. (2000). Barriers to health care for abused Latina and Asian immigrant women. Journal ofHealth Care for the Poor and Underserved, 11 (1), 33-44.
Berinstein, C, McDonald, J., Nyers, P., Wright, C. & Zerehi, S.S. (2006). 'Access not

fear': Non-status immigrants and city services. Report prepared for the 'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' Campaign, Toronto. (Accessed March 1, 2009): http://www.socsci.mcmaster. ca/polisci/emplibrary/Access%20Not%20Fear%20Report%20(Feb%202006).pdf Bhuyan, R. (2008). The production of the "Battered Immigrant" in public policy and domestic violence advocacy. Journal ofInterpersonal Violence, 23 (2), 153-170. Bhuyan, R., & Senturia, K. (2005, August). Understanding domestic violence resource utilization and survivor solutions among immigrant and refugee women: Introduction to the special issue. Journal ofInterpersonal Violence, 20 (8), 895-901. Bograd, M. (1999) Strengthening domestic violence theories. Journal ofMarital and Family Therapy, 25 (3), 275-289. Bui, H.N. (2004). In the adopted land: Abused immigrant women and the Criminal Justice System. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger Publishers. Canwest News Service. (2007, March 8). UN calls Canada racist for 'visible minorities' tag. Canada.com (Accessed August 24, 2009): http://www.canada.com/
Story_print.html?id=f469b36e-c587-40e7-98e5-3aa50a371318&sponsor=

Ciarula Taylor, L. (2009a, June 30). 'Cruel' Ottawa blasted as couples forced apart.
Toronto Star, Al, A17.

Ciarula Taylor, L. (2009b, June 11). Fighting the debts of sponsorship. Toronto Star.

Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC). (2006). Applyingfor permanent residence from within Canada: Humanitarian and compassionate considerations. (Accessed June 10, 2009): http://www.cic.gc.ca/ENGLISH/information/applications/
guides/5291E.asp

63

Citizenship and Immigration Canada. (2005). Evaluation of the Immigration Settlement and Adaptation Program (ISAP): 1.0 Introduction. (Accessed August 26, 2009): http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/evaluation/isap/intro.asp
Citizenship and Immigration Canada. (2008) Gender-based analysis of the impact of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act. Section 7: Annual Report to Parliament on Immigration. (Accessed August 25, 2009): http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/ resources/publications/annual-report2008/section7.asp Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC). (2009). Sponsoring your family. (Accessed June 26, 2009): http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/immigrate/sponsor/index.asp Cohen, M. & Maclean, H. (2003). Violence against Canadian women. Women's Health Surveillance Report: A Multidimensional Look at the Health of Canadian Women. (Accessed June 29, 2009): http://secure.cihi.ca/cihiweb/products/WHSRChap _21_e.pdf

Collins, E., Shakya, Y.B., Guruge, S., & Santos, E.J. (2008). Services for women: Access, equity, and quality. In Guruge, S. & Collins E. (Eds.), Working with Immigrant Women: Issues and Strategies for Mental Health Professionals.
Canada: Centre for Addiction and Mental Health.

Community Safety Office (CSO). (2006). What is abuse? University of Toronto.

(Accessed June 29, 2009): http://www.communitysafety.utoronto.ca/assistance/
abusive/abuseDefinition.htm

Cote, A., Kerisit, M. & Cote, M. (2001, March) Sponsorship... for better orfor worse:

The impact ofsponsorship on the equality rights of immigrant women^ Tablefeministe francophone de concertation provinciale de I'Ontario, Status of Women Canada's Policy
Research Fund.

Cottrell, B. (2008). Providing services to immigrant women in Atlantic Canada. Our Diverse Cities. Metropolis Canada. (Accessed June 17, 2009):

http://canada.metropolis.net/pdfs/Pages_from_ODC_spring08_e.pdf
CTV Toronto. (2009, April 5). Dozens rally against detention of migrant workers. CTV.ca (Accessed June 12, 2009): http://toronto.ctv.ca/servlet/an/local/CTVNews

/20090405/workers_rally_090405/20090405/?hub=TorontoNewHome
Dasgupta, S. D. (2005) Women's realities: Defining violence against women by immigration, race, and class. In Sokoloff, N.J., Pratt, C. (Eds). Domestic violence at the margins: readings on race, class, gender, and culture. Piscataway: Rutgers University Press. Dupont, I., & Sokoloff, N. (2005). Domestic violence at the intersections of race, class, gender: Challenges and contributions to understanding violence against marginalized women in diverse communities. Violence Against Women, 11 (1)
38-64.

64

Dutton, M., Orloff, L. E., & Hass, G. A. (2000). Characteristics of help-seeking behaviors, resources, and service needs of battered immigrant Latinas: Legal and

policy implications. Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law and Policy, 7, 245-305.
Engstrom, D.W., & Okamura, A. (2007). A Nation of immigrants: A call for a specialization in immigrant well-being. Journal ofEthnic & Cultural Diversity in Social Work (The Haworth Press), 16 (3/4), 103-111. Espin, O.M. (1999). Women crossing boundaries: A psychology of immigration and transformations ofsexuality. New York: Routledge. Ferraro, Kathleen. (1989). Policing battered women. Social Problems, 36 (1): 61-74.

Flynn, K. & Crawford, C. (1998). Committing 'race treason:' Battered women and mandatory arrest in Toronto's Caribbean community. In Bonnycastle, K.D. & Rigakos, G.S. (Eds.). Unsettling Truths: Battered Women, Policy, Politics, and Contemporary Research in Canada. Vancouver: Collective Press. Fournier, P. (2002). The ghettoisation of difference in Canada: 'Rape by culture' and the dangers of a 'cultural defence' in criminal law trials. Manitoba Law
Journal, 29 (1), 1-40.

George, U., & Doyle, R.. (2005). Socioeconomic integration of visible minorities
and Aboriginal peoples in Toronto. Human Resources and Skills Development Canada: Labour. (Accessed June 10, 2009): http://www.hrsdc.gc.ca/eng/lp/lo
/lswe/we/special_projects/RacismFreeInitiative/George-Doyle.shtml

Globe and Mail. (2009, July 25). Employment in recession: Immigrants. The Globe
and Mail, A12. Source: Statistics Canada.

Goggins, Kim. (2008, Spring). More than words: Health care interpreters play key role in quality care. CrossCurrents Centre for Addiction and Mental Health: (Accessed July 2 2009):http://www.camh.net/Publications/Cross_Currents/Spring_2008/
morethanwords_crcuspring08.html

Goldring, L., Berinstein, C, & Bernhard, J. (2007, December). Institutionalizing precarious immigration status in Canada. CERIS Working Paper, 61, 1-48.

Greater Boston Legal Service. (2009, January) Immigration relief for survivors of domestic violence. Part of Conference package: Immigration Relief for
Survivors of Domestic Violence. Immigration and the Law Conference, Boston Mass.,

Massachusetts Immigration and Refugee Advocacy Coalition.

65

Guruge, S. (2007). The influence ofgender, racial, social, and economic inequalities on the production of and responses to intimate partner violence in the post-migration
context. Ph.D. Dissertation, Toronto: University of Toronto.

Guruge, S., & Gastaldo, D. (2008, July-Dec). Intimate partner violence and migration: How to become part of the solution? (Editorial). Presencia - Revista de Enfermeria de Salud Mental, 4 (8). Translated to English and Revised by: Gastaldo, D. &
Gea-Sanchez, M.

Harder, Sandra. (2002, Sep 27). Gender-basedsnalysis andlRPA. Presentation at ACTEW General Meeting, Toronto. Gender-Based Analysis Unit CIC. (Accessed August 24, 2009): http://www.actew.org/projects/recent/making_connections/
Workshoplgender-basedanalysis.ppt Hyman, I., Forte, T., Du Mont, I, Romans, S., & Cohen, M. (2006). Help- seeking rates for intimate partner violence (IPV) among Canadian immigrant women. Health Care for Women International, 27, 682-694.

Ingram, EM. (2007). A comparison of help-seeking between Latino and non-Latino victims of intimate partner violence. Violence Against Women, 13 (2), 159-171.

Jimenez, M. (2004, September 11). Ottawa eyes amnesty plan for 10,000 illegal workers. Globe & Mail. (Accessed February 21, 2009): http://www.cicnews. com/2004/09/ottawa-eyes-amnesty-plan-10000-illegal-workers-09210.html

Jiwani, Y. (2001). Intersecting inequalities: Immigrant women of colour, violence and health care. Vancouver: FREDA Centre for Research on Violence against Women and Children. (Accessed April 29, 2009): http://www.harbour.sfu.ca/
freda/articles/hlth.htm

Justice Institute of British Colombia (JIBC). (2007). Empowerment of immigrant and refugee women who are victims of violence in their intimate relationships. Vancouver:
html #empowerment

the Institute. (Accessed April 29, 2009): http://www.jibc.bc.ca/cfcs/CustSol/Publications.

Kamand, S. (2009) Domestic/family violence and Australian immigration law: A guide to the law. Immigration Advice and Rights Centre Inc. Sydney, Australia. (Accessed June 1, 2009): http://www.iarc.asn.au/publications/pdfs/DVinformation
Booklet.pdf

Kelley, N., & Trebilcock, M. (2000). The making of the mosaic: A history of Canadian immigration policy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Latin American Coalition to End Violence Against Women and Children (LACEV).
(2000). No (wo)man 's land. Toronto: LACEV.

66

Latta RE & Goodman, LA. (2005). Considering the interplay of cultural context and
service provision in intimate partner violence. Violence Against Women, 11
(11), 1441-1464.

Lim, A., Lo, L., Siemiatycki, M., Doucet, M. (2005, January). Newcomer services in the

Greater Toronto Area: An exploration of the range and funding sources of settlement
services. CERIS Working Paper No. 35. (Accessed July 14, 2009): http://ceris.metropolis.netA^irtual%20Library/WKPP%20ListAVKPP2005/CWP35_LimLo-Siemiatycki_Final.pdf

Macleod, L. (1990) Isolated, alone, forgotten: The service delivery needs and realities of immigrant and refugee women who are battered. Government of
Canada.

Macleod, L., & Shin, M.Y. (1993). Like a wingless bird: A tribute to the survival and courage of women who are abused and who speak neither English nor
French. Department of Canadian Heritage. Mason, R., Hyman, I. Berman, H., Guruge, S., Kanagaratnam, P., & Manuel, L. (2008,

December). 'Violence is an international language': Tamil women's perceptions
of intimate partner violence. Violence Against Women, 14(12), 1397-1412.

Mehrotra, M. (1999, June). The social construction of wife abuse: Experiences of South Asian women in the United States. Violence Against Women, 5 (6), 619640.

Menjivar, C, & Salcido, O. (2002). Immigrant women and domestic violence: Common experiences in different countries. Gender and Society, 16, (6), 898-920. Miedema, B., & Wachholz, S. (1998). A complex web: Access to justice for abused immigrant women in New Brunswick. Policy Research, Status of
Women Canada.

Naryan, U. (1995). "Male-order" brides: Immigrant women, domestic violence, and
immigration law. Hypatia, 10, 104-119.

National Centre on Domestic and Sexual Violence (U.S.). (2009). Immigrant power and control wheel. Adapted from Power & Control Wheel, Domestic Abuse Intervention Project, Duluth, Minnesota. (Accessed August 24, 2009):
http://www.ncdsv.org/images/Immigrant%20P&C%20wheel%20NO%20SHADING%20

-%20NCDSV-ICE_updated2009.pdf

National Clearinghouse on Family Violence. (2008). Canada's treatment programs for men who abuse their partners. Government of Canada

67

National Network to End Violence against Immigrant Women (NNEVIM). (2008, Dec 16). Fact sheet and guidance: Filingfees andfee waivers. Part of Conference Package: Immigration Relief for Survivors of Domestic Violence. Immigration and the Law Conference, Boston Mass., Jan 2009, Massachusetts Immigration and
Refugee Advocacy Coalition.

No One is Illegal. (2009a). Access without fear: Don't Ask Don't Tell. No One is Illegal Toronto (Accessed August 26, 2009): http://toronto.nooneisillegal.org/dadt No One is Illegal. (2009b). Detention and deportation. No One is Illegal Vancouver (Accessed March 28, 2009): http://noii-van.resist.ca/?page_id=98

No One Is Illegal. (2008, Oct 2). Shelter sanctuary status. No One is Illegal Toronto. (Accessed June 8, 2009): http://toronto.nooneisillegal.org/taxonomy/term/ll

Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants (OCASI). (2007). Understanding a Family Class Sponsorship Breakdown : Information for Sponsored Family Members. Funded by Citizenship and Immigration Canada. (Accessed June 9, 2009): http://www.settlement.org/downloads/SponsorshipBreakdown _Family_EN.pdf
Odhiambo-Abuya, E. (2003, May). The pain of love: Spousal immigration and domestic violence in Australia--A Regime in Chaos? Pacific Rim Law & Policy
Journal, 12, 673.

Ontario, Government of. (2007). Domestic violence court (DVC) program. Ministry of the Attorney General. (Accessed July 14, 2009): http://www.attorneygeneral. jus.gov.on.ca/english/about/vw/dvc.asp
Pan, A., Daley, S., Rivera, L. M., Williams, K., Lingle, D., & Reznik, V. (2006). Understanding the role of culture in domestic violence: The Ahimsa Project for Safe Families. Journal ofImmigrant and Minority Health, 8 (1), 35-43.

Raj, A. & Silverman, J. (2002). Violence against immigrant women: The roles of culture, context, and legal immigrant status on intimate partner violence. Violence
Against Women, 8 (3).

Rajah, V., Frye, V., Haviland, M. (2006, October). 'Aren't I a victim? Notes on identity challenges relating to police action in a mandatory arrest jurisdiction. Violence
Against Women, 12 (10), 897-916.

Reimers, E. (2007). Representations of an honor killing: Intersections of discourses
on culture, gender, equality, social class, and nationality. Feminist Media
Studies, 7(3), 1-18.

68

Ritchie, D., & Eby, K., (2007). Transcending boundaries: An international, interdisciplinary community partnership to address domestic violence. Journal
of Community Practice, 15 (1/2), 121-145.

Ritchie, A.J. (2006). Law enforcement violence against women of color. In INCITE! Women of Color Against Violence (Ed.), Color of Violence: the
INCITE! Anthology. Cambridge, Massachusetts: South End Press. Roberts, A. (2008). Ethnoracial communities take action against intimate partner

violence. CrossCurrents Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. (Accessed
April 7, 2009): http://www.camh.net/Publications/Cross_Currents/Summer_2008/

actionagainstipv_crcusummer08.html Rogan, M. (2008, December). Girl, interrupted. Toronto Life.(Accessed June 2, 2009): http://www.torontolife.com/features/girl-interrupted/ Runner, M., Yoshihama, M., & Novick, S. (2009, March). Intimate partner
violence in immigrant and refugee communities: Challenges, promising

practices and recommendations. Family Violence Prevention Fund for the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation. (Accessed June 1, 2009): http://www.rwjf.org/files/research/ipvreport20090331 .pdf
Sanchez-Hucles, J. & Dutton, M.A. (1999). The interaction between societal violence

and domestic violence: Racial and cultural factors. In Harway, M., O'Neil, J. (Eds.) What Causes Men's Violence Against Women? Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications.
Saphir, E. (2008). Trauma work with Latin American women in Canada. In Guruge, S.

& Collins E. (Eds.), Working with Immigrant Women: Issues and Strategies for

Mental Health Professionals. Canada: Centre for Addiction and Mental Health.
Saucedo, R. (2006). INS raids and how immigrant women are fighting back. In

INCITE! Women of Color Against Violence (Ed.), Color of Violence: the
INCITE! Anthology. Cambridge, Massachusetts: South End Press. Service Coalition in the South Asian Community (SCSAC). (2007). Service Coalition in the South Asian Community (home). (Accessed June 23, 2009): http://www.cassa .on.ca/SC/index.html Simbadumwe, L. (2005). The strengthening families in Canada project: Immigrant
men's research project on family violence. National Crime Prevention Strategy.

(Accessed April 27, 2009): http://www.serc.mb.ca/content/dload/immigrant
menposter/file

69

Sharma, A. (2001). Healing the wounds of domestic abuse: Improving the effectiveness of feminist therapeutic interventions with immigrant and racially visible women who have been abused. Violence Against Women, 7 (12), 1405-1428. Shirwadkar, S. (2004). Canadian domestic violence policy and Indian immigrant women.
Violence Against Women, 10 (8), 860-879.

Shetty S, & Kaguyutan J. (2002). Immigrant victims of domestic violence: Cultural challenges and available legal protections. National Electronic Network on Violence Against Women (Accessed April 21, 2009): http://new.vawnet.org/
category/Main_Doc.php?docid=3 84

Shiu-Thornton, S., Senturia, K. & Sullivan, M. (2005). 'Like a bird in a cage' Vietnamese women survivors talk about domestic violence. Journal of
Interpersonal Violence, 20, 959-976.

Sorenson, S. B. (1996). Violence against women: Examining ethnic differences and commonalties. Evaluation Review, 20 (2), 123-145. Smith, A. (2005). Looking to the future: Domestic violence, women of color, the state, and social change. In Sokoloff, N. J. & Pratt, C. (Eds), Domestic violence at the margins: readings on race, class, gender, and culture. Piscataway: Rutgers University Press. Smith, E. (2004). Nowhere to turn: Responding to partner violence against immigrant and visible minority women. Ottawa: Canadian Council on Social Development. (Accessed April 7 2009): http://www.ccsd.ca/pubs/2004/nowhere/
Sorenson, S.B., Upchurch, D.M. & Shen, H. (1996). Violence and injury in marital srguments: Risk patterns and gender differences. American Journal ofPublic
Health, 86, 35-40.

Statistics Canada. (2001). Profile of languages in Canada, 2001 Census. (Accessed June 4, 2009): http://wwwl2.statcan.ca/english/censusO 1/products/analytic/companion
/lang/canada. cfm

Statistics Canada. (2004). Who's religious? Report by Clark, W. & Schellenberg, G. (Accessed June 23, 2009): http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/ll-008-x/2006001/9181eng.htm

Statistics Canada. (2006). Immigration in Canada: A portrait of theforeign-born population, 2006 Census. (Accessed March 20, 2009):

http://wwwl2.statcan.ca/english/censusO6/analysis/immcit/asia.cfm
Statistics Canada. (2007a). Population by knowledge of official language, by census metropolitan area, 2006 Census. (Accessed June 4, 2009): http://www40.
statcan.gc.ca/101/cstOl/demo 16-eng.htm

70

Statistics Canada. (2007b). Population by knowledge of official language, by province and territory, 2006 Census. (Accessed June 4, 2009):
http://www40.statcan.gc.ca/101/cstO 1/demo 15-eng.htm Statistics Canada. (2007c). Population by mother tongue, by province and territory, 2006

Census. (Accessed June 4, 2009): http://www40.statcan. gc.ca/101/cstO 1/demo 1 laeng. htm?sdi=mother%20tongue Statistics Canada. (2008). Family violence in Canada: A statistical profile. Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics. (Accessed June 3, 2009): http://www.statcan. gc.ca/pub/85224-x/85-224-x2008000-eng.pdf

Statistics Canada. (2009). Earnings differences between immigrants and the Canadianborn- The role of literacy skills. (Accessed July 22, 2009): http://www.statcan.
gc.ca/pub/81-004-x/2008005/article/10798-eng.htm Status of Women Canada. (2004). Fact sheet: Statistics on violence against women in

Canada. (Accessed March 20, 2009): http://www.octevaw-cocvff.ca/files/ SWC_ Fact_Sheet_04.pdf Supriya, K.E. (2002). Shame and recovery: Mapping identity in an Asian women's
shelter. New York: Peter Lang Publishing, Inc.

UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). (2009) Singh v. Minister of
Employment and Immigration. Canada: Supreme Court, 4 April 1985. UNHCR

Refworld. (Accessed August 26, 2009): http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/
category,LEGAL,,,GUY,470a4a6dd,0.html

Varcoe, C. (2001). Abuse obscured: An ethnographic account of emergency nursing in relation to violence against women. Canadian Journal ofNursing
Research, 32 (4), 95-115.

Wachholz, S., & Miedema, B. (2000). Risk, fear, harm: Immigrant women's perceptions of the 'policing solution' to woman abuse. Crime, Law & Social Change, 34, 301-317.
Weinsheimer, R.L., Schermer, C.R., Malcoe, L.H., Balduf, L.M., & Bloomfield, L.A. (2005,

January). Severe intimate partner violence and alcohol use among female trauma patients.
Journal of Trauma-Injury Infection & Critical Care, 58 (1), 22-29.

West., Carolyn M. (2005). Domestic violence in ethnically and racially diverse families: The 'political gag order' has been lifted. In Sokoloff, N.J., Pratt, C. (Eds.), Domestic violence at the margins: readings on race, class, gender, and
culture. Piscataway: Rutgers University Press.

71

Whitaker, D.J., Baker, C.K., Pratt, C, Reed, E., Suri, S., Pavlos, C, Nagy, B. J., & Silverman, J. (2007). A network model for providing culturally competent services for intimate partner violence and sexual violence. Violence Against
Women, 13 (2), 190-209.

Williams, O., & Becker, L. (1994). Domestic partner abuse treatment programs and cultural competence: The results of a national survey. Violence and Victims 9,
(3), 287-295.

Wood, Jennifer K. (2005). In whose name? Crime victim policy and the punishing power of protection. National Women's Studies Association Journal, 17(3): 1-17. Wortley, S. (1999). A northern taboo: Research on race, crime, and criminal justice in Canada. Canadian Journal of Criminology, 41. Yoshihama, M. (2008, July). Literature on intimate partner violence in immigrant and refugee communities: Review and recommendations. Family Violence Fund Report for the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. (Accessed June 1, 2009): http://www.rwjf.org/illes/research/ipvreport20090331 .pdf Yoshihama, M. (1999) Domestic violence against women of. Japanese descent in Los Angeles: Two methods of estimating prevalence. Violence Against Women, 5 (8),
869-897.

211 Toronto. (2009). A directory of over 20,000 community, social, health and government services. Findhelp Information Services (Accessed June 18, 2009): http://www.21 ltoronto.ca/index.jsp

72


