Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2012

Multicultural Sexuality: Immigrant Seniors' Attitudes Towards Sexuality Post Settlement
Zoe Alyssa Hawkins
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Other Feminist, Gender, and Sexuality Studies Commons, and the Social Work Commons Recommended Citation
Hawkins, Zoe Alyssa, "Multicultural Sexuality: Immigrant Seniors' Attitudes Towards Sexuality Post Settlement" (2012). Theses and dissertations. Paper 712.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

 

MULTICULTURAL SEXUALITY: IMMIGRANT SENIORS' ATTITUDES TOWARDS SEXUALITY POST  SETTLEMENT  by Zoe Alyssa Hawkins, Honors BA, Laurentian University, 2009
 

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts in the Program of Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2012

© Zoe Alyssa Hawkins 2012   
   

AUTHOR'S   DECLARATION  

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.

Zoe Alyssa Hawkins

ii   

ABSTRACT  

MULTICULTURAL SEXUALITY: IMMIGRANT SENIORS' ATTITUDES TOWARDS SEXUALITY POST  SETTLEMENT  Zoe Alyssa Hawkins Master of Arts, 2012 Immigration and Settlement Studies Ryerson University ABSTRACT     This comprehensive literature review serves as an exploratory overview of previous research  conducted on senior sexuality and the effect on immigrant seniors' sexuality of settlement in  Canada. Content analysis was used to systematically uncover similarities and differences among  the various sources. The findings show that sexuality and aging are important emerging issues,   that healthcare professionals and other care providers need to become more informed about  this area and to take a more active role to converse with senior clients about healthy sexuality.  Additionally, some cultures and religions, regardless of time of settlement, may be more  conservative than Canadian born seniors, with the cautionary note that these cultural  differences are not representative of members of immigrant senior populations generally.     Key words: immigrant, sexuality, sex, senior, settlement        
iii   

 
DEDICATION  

  My Major Research Paper is dedicated to my parents for their constant and unwavering  support.  I would also like to thank my best friend for always listening to me through the  frustrations and the triumphs. Finally, I would like to thank my supervisors for their extensive  guidance and advice. Without them, this wouldn't be possible.                                  

iv   

 
TABLE   OF   CONTENTS  

Introduction: Setting the Context......................................................................................................1  Methodology.....................................................................................................................................9  Review of Literature.........................................................................................................................11  Analysis of Literature..........................................................................................................................21  Discussion.............................................................................................................................................27  Conclusion.............................................................................................................................................32  References.........................................................................................................................................36               
 

           

v   

INTRODUCTION:   SETTING   THE   CONTEXT  

Immigrant senior sexuality is an issue that has previously been ignored and purported as being  unimportant. Differences among recent immigrant seniors and longterm immigrant seniors in  regards to their perceptions, ideologies, and experiences may depend on time of arrival in  Canada and their settlement experience. The cultural invisibility of issues relating to sexuality  among all groups of seniors, immigrant or not, is gradually lifting. However, what remains to be  explored is how cultural factors have influenced attitudes towards sexuality in immigrant senior  populations. The settlement experience may or may not alter values and ideals towards  sexuality particularly regarding cultural stigma associated with sexuality.  Does length of time in  Canada or a new country precipitate a change in cultural values and attitudes to sexuality? Very  little research has been conducted on the topic of multicultural sexuality, specifically on the  impact of the settlement experience and assimilation into the new cultural community. The  definition of sexuality is broad and can mean "looking good, dressing up, feeling pampered,  holding hands, cuddling and flirting. It can also include romance, companionship, relationships,  sensuality and intimacy, as well as sex, sexual identity and orientation" (Lum et al, 2009).  This  major research paper (MRP) however concentrates on one dimension of sexuality, namely sex,  since most literature available up until now has focused on this aspect. In order to understand  this topic within the context of sexuality and aging, I will outline several concrete reasons as to  why it is important.     Canada's cultural and demographic landscape is changing, and quickly. After the Second 

World War, there was an unprecedented increase in fertility rates. This group of baby boomers 

1   

is now at the age of retirement and has altered the demographic makeup of Canada and the  world. In addition, a decrease in current fertility rates and an increase in life expectancy have  led to a population that is older than at any point in reported history. In fact, Statistics Canada  reported that between the years 1996 and 2001, the population grew from 1.5 million to 3.9  million among those aged 65 and older. Population projections show that by the year 2036, this  age group will increase to 9.8 million (Statistics Canada, July 19, 2011). The baby boomers have  had an overwhelming influence on society and culture. Their ideals, values, goals and  aspirations have shaped Canada, and will continue to do so as they retire. As they age, this  group will shape thinking on a variety of issues, including attitudes to sex. The sixties culture  that permeated the Canadian landscape, as created by the baby boomers, will be carried  forward into the "golden years." Moses Znaimer, creator of Zoomer magazine, focuses primarily  on the "zoomer" generation and how "zoomers" (boomers with zip) will define Canada's  culture of older adults, including sexuality. His website and magazine target "zoomers" as  revolutionary figures who are reshaping and redefining the lifestyles of older people and  successfully so. This reshaping redefining is far reaching, as it may now extend to immigrant  populations as well.     Older adults are challenging preexisting myths, policies and practices that surround 

sexuality and aging. For example, there is a growing recognition among health and social care  providers, as well as older adults themselves (Gott and Hinchliff, 2003), that healthy aging  incorporates a multitude of factors, not just the absence of disease. Mental, physical and social  wellbeing is at the core of aging well, all of which in turn, creates feelings of self worth and a  high quality of life. Health Canada on its website on "Seniors and Aging ­ Sexual Activity" cites a 
2   

report on an extensive Canadian survey on Sexuality. The report found that "a large majority of  people at age 65 said that sex was important. While one quarter of respondents reported that  they had not been sexually active the year before the survey, a majority of those between 65  and 74 considered themselves sexually active. Although the amount of sexual activity generally  declines with age, sexual interest and ability can remain fairly constant" (Leger Marketing,  2001). Health Canada underscores a key point: "Sexual activity is a natural and important part  of a healthy lifestyle, no matter what your age" (Health Canada, 2006). Recent studies suggest  that physicians and other primary care providers can no longer assume that older people are 

FAST FACTS 1  
 

*60% of men and 48% of women aged 60+ believe that sexual activity is a critical part of a  good relationship 2  *52% of men and 52% of women aged 60+ say that sex remains important to them as they  age 2  *69% of men and 55% of women aged 60+ feel that people can still have a sexual  relationship even if not married 2  * 98% of men and 94% of women aged 60+ feel that sex is NOT only for younger people 2  *44% of men and 18% of women between the ages of 55 to 59 actively date 3  *13% of men and 2% of women aged 75+ actively date 3  *In 2006, people over 50+ accounted for 14% of all positive HIV test reports. This is almost  double the rate reported in 19851998 4 
1 Lum et al (2009) e news Issue 20 Spring www.crncc.ca  2 Montenegro, X.P. (2005). Sexuality at midlife and beyond: 2004 update of attitudes and behaviors.  Washington, D.C.: AARP.  3Connidis, L. (2001). Family ties and aging. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  4 Public Health Agency of Canada. (2007). HIV/AIDS Epi updates November 2007. Ottawa: Author. 

3   

asexual and need to take the initiative in asking questions to older patients about their sexual  health as part of an overall checkup.  Gott (2009) talked about the increased rates of STI's  among older people in her presentation titled Sexuality, Sexual Health and Ageing. Her key  point was that doctors and healthcare providers do not deal with the issue of safe sex for  seniors the same way as for younger people because of stereotypical assumptions. Healthcare  providers interviewed in Gott's research said they presume that older people are in  monogamous, heterosexual relationships where a discussion on safe sex is not an issue.  Alternatively, primary care providers assume that older people are not interested in, or, are not  sexually active. Healthcare providers also expressed a fear of jeopardizing the sanctity of the  patientdoctor relationship if the topic of safe sex were broached (Gott, 2009). From a public  health standpoint alone, when primary care providers take for granted that older people are  asexual, they may miss rising incidences of STIs. More importantly, if healthcare providers do  not initiate a dialogue on sexuality among their older clients and patients, they are not  attending to the wellbeing of the whole patient.     Watters and Boyd suggest, "Retraining or initial training of nurses, physicians and 

mental health professionals" (2009, 313). If healthcare providers communicate their negative  attitudes in believing that sexuality is for the young and inappropriate for older populations or  are hesitant to ask about client sexual activity, a reaction of equal reluctance to raise the  concerns will be the result.      Michael Bauer (2009) in a presentation about older adults and sexuality broaches 

similar problems that currently exist in longterm care facilities. In his opinion, the dominant 

4   

problem is a lack of discussion on the topic which is concurrent with other findings presented in  this paper. The attitudes, lack of education and lack of skill perpetuates a lack of understanding  that sex is normal for older adults. Additionally, when there is a possibility of discussing sex,  providers often do not have the appropriate skills to respond.  He adds that personal morals  and values play a role in providers feeling uncomfortable with residents' sexuality. Bauer also  says that oversensitivity to seniors' sex contributes negatively to a potential discourse. He also  mentions environmental surroundings as well as familial reservations as factors which prevent  a more positive setting for older people to express their sexuality (Bauer, 2009).     There is increasing discourse about patient centered care, where providers put 

individuals at the centre. Included in this conversation is the idea that overall well being  includes, for some older people, healthy sexuality.  As previously mentioned, sexuality can be  defined in part as affection, companionship, feeling good and wanting to be pampered, among  other things.     Lastly, changes in policy and practice in longterm care facilities offers further evidence 

in the importance of recognizing and addressing issues surrounding sexuality. Longterm care  facilities have implemented policies surrounding the issues of privacy in accordance with the  new LongTerm Care Homes Act, 2007 which was proclaimed on July 1, 2010. Under this  legislation, the Residents' Bill of Rights clarified rights that had previously been included and  added 8 new rights (Advocacy Centre for the Elderly, 2010).  For example, the Bill makes clear  that: 

5   

·

Every resident has the right to form friendships and relationships and to participate in  the life of the longterm care home; 

· ·

Every resident has the right to have his or her lifestyle and choices respected;  Every resident has the right to meet privately with his or her spouse or another person  in a room that assures privacy;  

·

Every resident has the right to share a room with another resident according to their  mutual wishes, if appropriate accommodation is available (Advocacy Centre for the  Elderly, 2010). 

These rights will be discussed in more detail in the discussion section of this paper.     What does this topic have to do with immigrant seniors? Aside from aging, Canada's 

population is becoming more ethnically and culturally diverse. In 2006, Census Canada reported  that there were over 200 ethnic groups in Canada, and in 2001, 19.4% of new immigrants in  Canada were 65 years old and over at the time of their arrival. Immigrant seniors have varying  life experiences when compared to Canadian born seniors, including but not restricted to work,  language acquisition, rural or urban settlement and whether the senior has recently settled  meaning that there is less time to save for retirement and a decreased likelihood to be eligible  for Canadian public pension plans (Statistics Canada, July 17, 2011). A considerable proportion  of seniors are immigrants; however, most are longterm, having immigrated to Canada before  1981. Seniors represent a very small proportion of immigrants into Canada every year and the 

6   

countries of origin are changing which affects the characteristics of those aged 65+. Are  sexuality issues important also for older immigrants?     Changing demographics (both aging and increasingly diverse population) make a study 

like this informative to improving settlement services and the lives of recently arrived  immigrant seniors and longestablished immigrant seniors. Preexisting infrastructures, such as  health care, longterm care organizations/facilities and settlement services may need to  recognize sexuality issues which are often an unspoken dimension of older immigrant  populations' wellbeing across languages, cultures, religions, and levels of income.     Statistics Canada (2009) outlines four different stages of immigration into Canada. The 

first is before 1976; the top three countries of origin were Western Europe (63%), Eastern  Europe (16%) and Latin America (5%). Between 1976 and 1985; the top three countries of origin  were Western Europe (22%), East Asia (21%) and Latin America (13%). Between 1986 and 1995;  the top three countries of origin were East Asia (31%), South Asia (18%) and Southeast Asia  (12%). And finally, between 1996 and 2006; the top three countries of origin were East Asia  (27%), South Asia (22%) and Eastern Europe (14%). These statistics are critical to this particular  study because understanding where immigrant seniors come from culturally can potentially  inform values, ideals and customs pertaining to sexuality. The dominant religions from these  countries of origin are Catholicism, Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, and Taoism.  Although one cannot assume the religiosity of immigrants, nonetheless, one can ask whether  different cultural and religious backgrounds and values of immigrants to Canada have  implications for public health services and programs like healthy sexuality.  

7   

 

This Major Research Paper will focus primarily on the attitudes towards sexuality among 

immigrant seniors. What are the sexuality attitudes among immigrant seniors prior to  settlement? Is it possible to discern the effects of Canadian culture on definitions and attitudes  of sexuality among immigrant seniors?  How has being in Canada altered thinking and  perceptions towards healthy sexuality into the later years of one's life? 

8   

 

METHODOLOGY  

This Major Research Project (MRP) relied primarily on secondary sources. I systematically  conducted a review of the secondary literature including scholarly writing, journal articles (such  as International Migration, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, Canadian Journal of Human  Sexuality, Ethnicity and Health, Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health, Gender and History,  Culture, Health and Sexuality, International Migration Review, Contemporary Sexuality, Studies  in Gender and Sexuality, and Culture Dynamics) in  databases such as: Academic Search  Premier, EBSCO Host, Proquest Research Library, Sociological Abstracts and Social Services  Abstracts). I also examined research reports and the "grey" literature including government  documents (Citizenship and Immigration Canada, Human Development Reports).  For statistics  on population trends in immigrant senior initial arrival, as well as dominant immigrant groups in  the Greater Toronto Area and North America I relied mainly on Statistics Canada data. In order  to address cultural, generational, ethno racial and age related concerns regarding the  relationships of immigrant seniors living in Canada, I used the following key search words:  sexuality, immigrants, senior, elderly, cultural, multicultural, diversity, Toronto, North America,  generational, attitudes, perceptions, relationships, and older adults.  For the purposes of  analysis upon saturation of the literature, I conducted a content analysis, which examines the  notes taken from the extensive literature review to formulate similarities and differences  among all the varying sources. I then compared similarities and differences within the literature  to analyze and interpret meanings.  

9   

 

It is important to note key limitations to my methodology. For instance, there are few 

studies on older people and sexuality and fewer still that are comparative. I relied on secondary  sources and therefore, gleaned sensitive information on attitudes towards older people's  sexuality from studies that were constructed for a different purpose. Often, studies make  general statements about the cultural and religious beliefs of immigrant groups that cannot  easily be transposed to all members of an immigrant group. Furthermore, members of a group  may or may not behave in the ways that a culture dictates, contrary to ethnic/cultural  determinism. Finally, the literature on this topic more often than not focuses on sex, making  difficult conclusions about broader sexuality issues. For example, attitudes to sexuality meaning  "companionship" and "looking good" may differ from a desire for sexual intercourse. Given  these limitations, this MRP focuses on sex and is highly exploratory, opening a dialogue in an  understudied and complex research area.

10   

 

REVIEW   OF   LITERATURE  

I will begin the literature review discussing the challenges associated with migration when  examining views towards sexuality looking at specific ethnic groups. I will then progress to the  sexual aspects of older age, how gender, family and marriage affect attitudes. I will end by  discussing sexuality education within a diverse society and the implications for healthcare  providers.     Watters and Boyd believe that the symbolism of sexual normalcy and appropriate 

attitudes towards sexuality for each individual is formed primarily from education, cultural  tradition, familial tradition as well as psychological components ( 2009). The authors maintain  that a person's sexual experience is highly personal and individualized and that identity of self is  "interwoven with sexual identity" (Watters and Boyd, 308). How we see ourselves as human  entities is created by many things, but among this, is sexuality. Watters and Boyd write:  "...being able to remain sexually active often indicates greater self worth, prevents social  disengagement and avoids depression" (Watters and Boyd, 308); they add that continuing  sexual love can foster a sense of intimacy that has the distinct possibility of furthering overall  wellbeing. It cannot be denied that changes occur with aging, but Watters and Boyd argue that  aging does not necessarily mean that the importance of sexuality to one's wellbeing  disappears. In fact, "the expression of sexual needs is not only important at any age but  contributes to the ultimate definition of an individual as a valuable and respected human  being" (Watters and Boyd, 2009, 308). The belief that sexuality belongs to youth and that older 
11   

people are asexual is reinforced by language, media and social relationships. According to  Watters and Boyd, cultural attitudes often dictate how a society views older people and often,  the predominant cultural view about older people and sexuality is negative. Consequently,  older adults, immigrant or not, may internalize this cultural message and see themselves as  their culture portrays them.     Tied to this idea is research conducted by Nader in Sweden. The author asked whether 

immigrants from Iran had changed their attitudes towards sexuality since immigrating. The  article looked at how cultural differences could affect sexuality and partner choice. Nader found  that the Iranian attitudes and views towards sexuality were shaped by Swedish culture more so  than the country of origin. According to Nader "traditional  authoritarian patriarchal sexual  relationship among Iranian migrants in Sweden is giving way to more egalitarian relationships  and a relatively strong tendency towards a similarity of views between the sexes regarding  sexuality" (2003, 684). This study prompts questions as to whether North American immigrants'  views on sexuality also changes in a similar direction during settlement.   The importance of examining specific ethnic groups as it pertains to immigration and  sexuality cannot be overemphasized. The following article looks at a group of Chinese elderly in  China. Since China was the second largest source country of immigrants in 2006, studying the  sexual attitudes of seniors in China may help inform the attitudes of Chinese seniors in Canada,  on the cautionary note that this cannot be generalized. Guan (2004) investigated sexuality  among rural Chinese elderly, focusing on sexual attitudes, interests, and activities within  spousal relationships. The study confirms the idea that aging itself abolishes neither the need 

12   

nor interest in sexual activity. Even though the majority considered sexual life to be normal and  good for health, significant numbers of study participants considered sex unsuitable for older  people: over one third of the participants considered sex for the elderly as abnormal, and close  to onethird said it was not good for health. Guan also found that among the Chinese elderly,  sexuality was primarily associated with intercourse and reproduction, while more general  sexual needs were deemed unimportant.    Taking into account that China has the largest population growth in those over the age 

of 65, studying healthy sexuality among older people is important. Guan discusses three frames  of thought that have affected the traditional norms and cultural expectations of Chinese  elderly, which have previously suppressed sexuality; Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism. The  Confucian belief is that sexuality is only sexual intercourse between married people and for the  purposes of producing an heir (Guan, 2004, 105). The Taoist believes that selfcontrol and  internal circulation are necessary and that sex is harmful and dangerous to one's health. The  Buddhist way of thinking is that in order to achieve "nirvana," one must give up worldly  pleasures and be free from desires (Guan, 2004, 105). Perhaps in order to fully understand  Chinese thoughts on elderly sexuality, one must look into these historical and cultural  traditions. Guan writes that avoiding discussing sex and not participating in regular sexual  behavior/activity helped to preserve one's image and selfrespect. For older people, feelings of  derision, denial and despair are instigated through discrimination and a lack of information.  Guan concludes that, "by viewing sex as a natural physiological function, realizing its general  effect on the quality of life for the elderly, and facing the fact that a decrease of sexual interest  and activity has much to do with social and cultural rejection, we are moving toward a 
13   

progressive direction to really care for elderly, respect their full lives, and install their basic  entitlement" (Guan, 125).     It needs to be mentioned that it is impossible to generalize to a whole population of 

immigrant Chinese older people based on one study. Additionally, we do not know the religion,  if any, of Chinese immigrants. The study at very least raises the question as to whether sexuality  is deemed to be a human need for older Chinese rural people and whether this is the general  belief among most Canadians too.     Although Guan's study focused on older Chinese adults, Meston et al.'s study is relevant 

as it discusses Asian students' knowledge about sexuality. Meston et al. measured how length  of residency affected variations in knowledge about sexuality among nonAsian and Asian  Canadians. Additionally, the authors compared Canadianborn Asians with Asian immigrants.  The findings supported the idea that there is a cultural explanation for conservatism among  Asians. Canadianborn Asians did not differ significantly from Asians who had immigrated  before 1987 but Canadianborn Asians did differ from Asians who had immigrated after 1987.  Meston et al. writes that "information on sexuality has previously shown to influence attitudes  toward sexuality" into more liberal thinking (1996, 178), and that ethnicity affects attitudes on  masturbation, multiple sexual partners, premarital sex, sex roles and oral sex. Asians who  immigrated after 1987 are considerably more conservative than nonAsians in their attitudes  and knowledge towards sexuality. An additional cultural explanation would be in the findings  on gender differences. Males were more "negative than females in their attitudes toward 

14   

homosexuality and females were more conservative than males on all the remaining attitude  questions" (Meston et al., 1996, 181).   Wang et al. (2008) found a relationship between sexual satisfaction and "liberal sexual  attitudes, intimacy, sexual knowledge, and education among women 50+" (2008, 444).  Additionally, psychosocial, socioeconomic, religious, ethnic and cultural factors play a role  regarding the beliefs, values and attitudes towards sexuality among older people (Wang et al.,  2008, 444). Lastly, Wang discusses past studies conducted in Singapore and similar Asian  countries that found that physiological, cultural, social and lifestyle factors influence the sex life  of older people, as in the West (2008). The Global Study of Sexual Attitudes and Behaviors  (GSSAB) surveyed 26,000 middle aged and older adults in 29 countries and found that "sexual  difficulties are relatively common among mature adults worldwide and are more associated  with physical health and ageing in men and women" (Wang et al., 2008, 448). The GSSAB also  found that ethnic, cultural, socio economic, religious and psychosocial factors are determinants  for sexual beliefs, attitudes and behavior among older populations worldwide.    When discussing gender differences towards sexuality among immigrants, Hojat et al. 

(2000) conducted a questionnaire with Iranian adolescents in the United States and found that  Iranian male immigrants viewed premarital sex, marriage and family from a traditional stance  deeply rooted in culture. However, the Iranian female immigrant attitude was more similar to  American society on the same issues. Traditional Iranian culture places the family as most  important in bringing people together, and family is stronger than all the other social  relationships. When men and women were asked if sex education should be taught in school, 

15   

most respondents disagreed. When asked whether sexual intercourse before marriage was  wrong, most agreed. When asked if sexual intercourse before marriage was acceptable for boys  but not girls, most agreed. The preceding examples perhaps highlight the impact of the cultural,  religious and traditional customs and values on the type of knowledge that Iranian immigrant  adolescents shared. Hojat et al. postulate that a possible reason for this discrepancy between  the sexes is the "heavy restrictions and social pressure imposed on women in traditional Iranian  culture" (2000, 429). It can be tentatively and cautiously suggested that Iranian immigrants,  whether in the United States or in Canada may also hold traditional cultural views when  thinking about sexuality. It is however not possible to make general statements about the  attitudes of immigrant older Iranians based on this particular study.  However, it may well be  possible to compare Guan's findings on rural Chinese older adults with that of the Iranian  adolescents and their conservative views on sexuality. There are certain commonalities that  exist within conservative cultures regardless of geography or cultural background. For example,  Papaharitou et al. (2008) found that more men than women were interested in sex among 60 90 year old married couples in Greece. One of the reasons mentioned for this difference was  "conservative cultural norms leading to suppressed sexual feelings and norms" for women but  not for men (Papaharitou et al., 2008, 198).   Trudel et al. (2000) conducted a study in Finland and found that attitudes towards  sexuality became more conservative with age. Approximately 50 Finnish men and women  between 70 to 79 years of age were asked a series of questions regarding their sexuality. Only  20% said that sexuality was natural and healthy in older adults and almost half said that older  adults do not have a need for sex. However, they did not generally cite religious beliefs to 
16   

support their viewpoints. It appears that older people themselves subscribe to the belief that  expressing their sexuality is not "normal." Langer (2009) writes that JudeoChristian values have  been a powerful role in the "repression of sexual thought and conduct and have provided heavy  burdens of guilt and shame" (2009, 755).     The final section of this literature review will look at sexuality education among older 

adults, as well as implications for healthcare providers. Walker and Ephross (1999) focused on  the importance of staff in longterm care facilities being aware of the sexual needs and sexual  concerns of residents. Sexuality was defined as "intercourse, masturbation, oral sex, sexual  conversation, hearing loving words, kissing and hugging" (Walker and Ephross, 1999, 89).  Walker et al., found that "...older men and women were interested, active and satisfied with a  variety of sexual activities and that declines in sexual activity were more likely to be related to  health than age" (89). According to Walker and Ephross, older adults lacked adequate  information on issues around sexuality and that this lack of information fostered inappropriate  fears and distress (1999). What knowledge and attitude did exist however was often negative  especially regarding the sexual behaviors of other elderly individuals. It should be mentioned  that the study focused predominately on Caucasian older people, with only one African American older person and one American Indigenous person.   Langer (2009) found that the sociocultural context in which one is raised, as well as the  cultural stereotypes, misconceptions and humor about older sexuality, can and does affect the  older adults' attitudes towards sexuality itself.  Society, experience, family, friends, media,  religion, law and government influence "sexuality, gender roles and sexual behaviors" (Langer, 

17   

2009, 755). Guidelines and taboos perpetuated through generations only negatively affect older  people to sexually express themselves. For this reason, Langer writes that all professionals need  to take into account cultural values of clients and populations so as to not impose current  expectations regarding sex and sexuality, especially when working with individuals who may  not wish or be capable of unlearning their cultural attitudes toward sexuality (2009). As other  research in the literature suggests, the "current cohorts of older adults grew up during a period  when sexual behavior was not discussed, when encouragement of sexual feelings was  suppressed, and when instruction in sex education was minimal" (Langer, 2009, 755).     Walker et al. proposed a threepoint plan for staff in dealing with sexuality in longterm 

care facilities. The first point is to make widely available medical knowledge and other factual  information relating to sexuality for older people. The second point is to implement a positive  outlook toward sexuality and aging and to educate staff that sexual behavior among older  people varies just as it does for younger people. The third point is that appropriate staff  responses to sexuality among older people must take diverse religious and cultural norms and  beliefs into account (Walker and Ephross, 1999, 90). Walker and Ephross's study points to the  shortcomings among staff in recognizing and addressing sexuality issues even among  mainstream older people.      Concurrent with Walker and Ephross, and Meadus, is Allen et al. (2008) who discussed 

the satisfaction of a healthy sexuality as being intertwined with a high quality of life and health.  Additionally, Allen et al. found that very few older adults spoke with their health care  professional about matters relating to sexuality (2008). "Older adults and their physicians may 

18   

be unwilling to initiate discussions about sexuality due to sex and age differences; moreover,  negative societal attitudes about older women's sexuality may be particularly limiting" (Allen et  al., 2008, 238). In their discussion on the lack of openness in longterm care facilities, the  authors mention that this is the case specifically among staff, and reiterate the importance of  training healthcare providers on issues relating to sexuality and that "...autonomous sexual  expression should not be actively discouraged" (2008, 244).     According to Ward and McLean Taylor (1991), "Educators can provide useful sexuality 

education to students from minority and foreign cultures, but they must first learn from those  students how different cultures view sexuality" (Ward and McLean Taylor, 1991, 62).  Many  programs in the United States offer only programs which are ethnocentric and culturally biased  and most do not take into account sexual orientation.  Appropriate sex role behavior is highly  based on culture and many programs in the United States offer sexuality education from a  white, middle class perspective. Ward and McLean Taylor advises that programs should  recognize what is culturally permitted. Taking into account the current research conducted on  multicultural sexuality among immigrant seniors in their relationships, one may cautiously  propose that culture and ethnicity greatly affect the attitudes and knowledge of immigrants  towards sexuality, especially within the context of family. Family appears to be a strong unit  among immigrants. Therefore, the attitudes they immigrated with may be the attitudes that  remain strong within their newly adopted country. However, as noted in the studies cited  above, some (perhaps younger) immigrants also tend to adopt the views of the host country. As  well, it is necessary to consider that family may also be an important unit for nonimmigrants.   

19   

 

Finally, this MRP turns to the role of education on sexuality. In this regard, Diane Richard 

discusses the increase in sexuality expression among older adults. She highlights that touching  and companionship are important aspects to one's quality of life" (2001, 5). The problem,  claims the author, is not a supposed decline in interest in sexual activity among older adults but  "simply fewer available partners" (2001, 6). On the positive side, Richard talks about the  increased attention being paid to senior sexuality and uses the following example to solidify her  point: "...this new awareness about senior sexuality has also brought greater political and  media attention. For instance, the state of New York financed a video, sent this year to all 677  New York nursing homes, educating aides on the rights of sexual expression for elderly patients,  even those with dementia" (2001, 4). The state of New York is leading the way in being  proactive in this movement to recognize the rights and needs of older adults.    

20   

 

ANALYSIS   OF   LITERATURE  

This section analyzes the literature through content analysis to uncover similarities and  differences among themes in the various studies. To begin, there were a plethora of common  words found in the varying sources: ethnocentric, culturally diverse, values, customs, language  barriers, religion, ethnic minority, marriage, family, social networks, attitude, knowledge,  sexuality, service providers, and religion, to name just a few. Some of the literature used these  words for similar purposes in order to portray the information. Other articles had different  stances and found different results using the same words.     To examine the content, I will first look at the similarities in the literature. Hojat et al. 

discussed family as the most important social network; that marriage was the only route to  sexual activity; that culture provided a sense of identity; and that sexual attitudes and  knowledge were determined by cultural norms, gender roles, ethnicity, and religious beliefs.  This was also found to be true in Meston et al.'s findings where length of residency, ethnicity,  and culture affected sexual attitudes, knowledge and preconceived opinions. The authors also  found that immigrants were consistently more conservative than native born individuals.   Additionally, Hendrickx et al. postulated that ethnic minorities were far less informed about  sexuality than were members of the dominant culture/society.  Many immigrants are  bombarded with sexual values/ideals that contradict their original culture/religion which is  concurrent with cultural misinformation regarding sexuality. Interestingly enough, Guan felt  that Chinese culture looked at sexuality as means of reproduction, suppressed sexual needs and 
21   

denied other forms of sexual expression. Guan also found that the sexual and cultural  expectations of the elderly significantly and perhaps negatively influenced the attitudes of  Chinese elderly toward sexuality. Similarly, Trudel et al. found that attitudes towards sexuality  became more conservative with age and that religion played a pivotal role in the inability to  express sexuality or even to discuss sexuality issues with a partner, healthcare provider or  family member.  However, he found that the elderly are at a higher risk of feeling vulnerable  due to the dominant society and their views on elderly sexuality. Trudel et al. also suggested  that seniors are the carriers of culture, religion, and customs, which has the potential to  negatively affect relationships when a discourse is centered on sexuality, specifically with  children or grandchildren.  Similarly, Walker and Ephross reported that the participants in his  study felt sexual decline had more to do with health than aging. They also found that the  seniors in the study lacked knowledge and information on sex and consequently, what  information they had was often incorrect. Ethnic sameness was strongly emphasized among  this particular group of seniors and this presented an attitude that was more generational than  anything else. This was found to be true in other sources as well (Walker and Ephross, 1999).  Much of the literature reviewed was critical of medical professionals who mostly ignored  sexuality issues among older people and were reluctant to initiate discussions about healthy  sexuality within a dominant culture, let alone, in immigrant cultures.      Depending on the year the study was conducted, and the journal in which the study was 

published, differences were found in the literature. Some articles wrote that seniors have no  desire for sexuality. Some articles relied on quantitative research, implementing surveys or  questionnaires (how the questions were posed is important).  Additionally, some of the above 
22   

articles focused primarily on one specific culture, which limited the results of the study. The  articles I found published in the early 2000s talked about the changes in attitude among older  adults and practitioners alike regarding the topic of sexuality, but other articles, in the same  years, found the opposite. One possible explanation is that the purposes of the studies were  instrumentally different.  What then are the similarities among themes in the literature? The  following chart visually illustrates the theme similarities found in the varying sources used in  this MRP.    CHART 1  Recurrent Themes in the Literature   
Theme 1  Older adults  maintain  interest     Theme 2  Older adults  not interested  Theme 3  Cultural  stigma  Theme 4  Religious  connotations  Theme 5  Healthcare  providers  (positive)    Theme 6  Healthcare  providers  (negative)   

 

  Hojat et al.  Papaharitou  et al.  

  Guan 

Gott & Hinchliff  Guan  Gott  Richard 

Ward and  Walker and  McLean Taylor  Ephross  Gott  

Gott & Hinchliff  Hendrickx et  al.  Meston et al.    Nader   

Hojat et al 

Meadus 

Watters & Boyd 

Watters & Boyd               

Trudel et al.       

Bailey       

Trudel et al.  Watters & Boyd  Bailey   Bauer 

23   

 

Not surprisingly, the highest proportion of sources had a theme either relating to cultural  stigma associated with sexuality or the reluctance of providers to initiate discussions around  sex with potentially negative consequences. Several sources emphasized the interest of many  seniors towards expressing their sexuality. Fewer sources discussed prohibitions against sexual  expression among adults, and seniors within the context of religious principles. Although these  results cannot be generalized, they suggest that gradual changes seem to be occurring perhaps  also among older people and in the senior services sector. What this necessitates however is a  continued need for research on the topic of senior sexuality. As can be seen, few studies have  been conducted on senior sexuality, let alone multicultural sexuality. Nonetheless, more  information around sexuality and aging is important for the appropriate delivery of services to  immigrant seniors. This second chart emphasizes the themes by providing quotes from the  various sources.             

24   

  CHART 2  Examples of Quotes to Illustrate Themes 

1.Older Adults maintain interest 

"... a large majority of people at age 65 said that sex was  important. While one quarter of respondents reported  that they had not been sexually active the year before  the survey, a majority of those between 65 and 74  considered themselves sexually active. Although the  amount of sexual activity generally declines with age,  sexual interest and ability can remain fairly constant"  (Leger Marketing, 2001).    

2. Older adults not interested 

" Sexual difficulties are relatively common among  mature adults worldwide and are more associated with  physical health and ageing in men and women" (Wang,  2008, 448)  "Religion shapes sexual values with sacred law that  articulates a range of acceptable sexual behaviors and  practices" (Langer, 2009, 755)  "...our study showed that significantly more men than  women have sexual desire and engage in sexual  activities. Several explanations may account for that  difference: ...conservative cultural norms leading to  suppressed sexual feelings and norms" (Papaharitou et  al., 2008, 198)  "...autonomous sexual expression should not be actively  discouraged" (Allen et al., 2008, 244)  " Older adults and their physicians may be unwilling to  initiate discussions about sexuality due to sex and age  differences; moreover, negative societal attitudes about  older women's sexuality may be particularly limiting"  (Allen et al., 2008, 238) 

3. Religious connotations 

4. Cultural stigma 

5. Healthcare providers (positive) 

6. Healthcare providers (negative) 

25   

The following will explain the importance of the quotes presented in Chart 2. The first theme is  illustrated by Leger Marketing (2001) to demonstrate that older people may well sustain an  interest in sexuality as a component of healthy aging. The second theme, illustrated by Wang,  expresses the idea that the supposed lack of sexual interest among older adults has less to do  with interest and more to do with physical capability. The third theme, illustrated by Langer,  represents the force of religious ideas on adults when making informed choices regarding  sexuality and additionally, suggesting that those adults who are seniors now may have  difficulties letting go of preexisting religious proscriptions around sexuality. The fourth theme,  by Papaharitou et al. demonstrates the strength of cultural norms on sexual decision making,  values and beliefs, and is specifically pertinent because of Canada's multicultural population.  The fifth theme, aptly illustrated by Allen et al., demonstrates the importance of sexual  expression/exploration among older adults, which is slowly being recognized by healthcare  providers. Lastly, the sixth theme shows the reluctance of many healthcare providers to discuss  matters of a sexual nature with clients and that specifically, women may be viewed differently  than men. It needs to be mentioned that this can also be the case for immigrant women, where  language barriers, cultural standards (of origin) and gender issues exist.  

26   

 

DISCUSSION  

Ceris Metropolis reports that "seniors are the most powerless, least influential and most  `forgotten' segment of the ethnic population "(n.a, 2009). A Ceris Metropolis study (n.a, 2009)  writes that "[immigrant seniors] exist as an isolated minority within each ethnocultural  community, depending heavily on younger relatives for financial, social and psychological  support." What does this mean for multicultural sexuality? How does this affect the dynamics  of the relationships among immigrant seniors post settlement? There is some discrepancy  between Canadianborn seniors and immigrant seniors, which additionally needs to be taken  into account when medical professionals, gerontologists or settlement services are engaging in  discourse and creating "action plans" for both newly arrived and longterm immigrant seniors.  What are healthcare providers currently doing to address the issues of sexuality among senior  and immigrant senior groups?     Longterm care (LTC) facilities are beginning to recognize sexuality as part of the life of 

older adults and recognizing the right to privacy. In this regard, some LTC facilities have  developed policies regarding sexuality. There are three types of longterm care facilities in  Ontario (Nursing Homes, Municipal Homes and Charitable Homes) and each has its own  corresponding law; each law then has a Bill of Rights. As previously mentioned,  changes to the  Residents' Bill of Rights were instituted to ensure that longterm care facilities are homes for  the residents who dwell in them. The Ontario Residents' Bill of Rights, which governs all of  Ontario's longterm care facilities, states that individuals cannot preconsent to sex but are 
27   

assured legally to privacy with persons of their choice without interference. Family members  are also not allowed to decide what consenting residents can and cannot do by way of sexual  expression (Meadus, 2010). The individual is the only person who can make that decision.      Among the LGBT community, there were concerns that were taken to the Ontario 

Human Rights Commission regarding allegations in some facilities of heterosexism and  homophobia. LGBT older people often rely on facilities providing care because they are more  likely than heterosexual older people to be single and have no children (ACE, 2010). Older LGBT  people fear discrimination which will affect their overall wellbeing if healthcare providers do  not recognize and affirm gay, lesbian, bisexual and transsexual identities within facilities.  The  Best Practice Approach to Intimacy and Sexuality outlines three relatively positive issues that  need to be addressed: 1) awareness of relationships; 2) the ability to avoid exploitation; and, 3)  awareness of potential risks (Wright, 2008).      How do LTC facilities assess specific behaviours, assess educational opportunities for 

residents about sexuality, train staff and react to sexual activity between residents? How do  healthcare providers navigate this tricky road? Duty of Care for healthcare professionals  dictates that "the hospital may in some cases have a duty to establish procedures to prevent  patients from injuring either themselves or someone else, and to protect vulnerable patients  from being harmed by others" (Picard and Robertson, 2007). Do LTC homes need to stop  residents from sexual activities on the grounds of harm?  When does sexuality become a legal  issue? What if older people demonstrate that they are interested in exploring and expressing  their sexuality? The implication is that healthcare providers and longterm care facility staff 

28   

have to know where resident autonomy ends and where legal responsibilities begin when it  comes to residents engaging in sexual expression. Furthermore, even though healthcare  professionals may affirm residents' right to sexual expression, they also recognize the many  challenges posed by cultural values, personal beliefs and their own potentially inadequate  training that may result in conflicts among team members providing care.  Assessing sexual  behavior and relationships must take place within the context of the law, family belief system  and practice standards. For example, when considering the sexual relationship or sexual  expression of a resident at a longterm care facility, the following must be addressed: clinical  assessment and ethics, staff standards of practice, values and beliefs and education, family  values and beliefs and comfort level and with regards to the law, the Health Care Consent Act  and the Criminal Code (Bailey, 2006). Several sources discussed in this paper reinforced the idea  that personal belief, moral codes and cultural attitudes surrounding sexuality among providers  may conflict with professional duties, making it difficult for many residents in long term care  (Bailey, 2006; Bauer, 2009; Gott, 2009). Longterm care facilities need to develop a policy that is  standardized and fair in its management and implementation.      Where this relates to the immigrant experience is in the emerging field of ethno 

geriatrics. Gradual changes have been made in longterm care facilities to foster culturally  competent staff to provide an environment that is free from discrimination. It is generally  recognized that cultural beliefs and practices influence individual behavior regarding health. By  the same token, cultural norms also influence the attitudes of healthcare providers and hence,  patienthealthcare provider relationships. Thus, training for healthcare providers should include  selfeducation on what is culturally appropriate and an acknowledgement of the importance of 
29   

ethnicity. If possible, longterm care facilities should implement medical interpreters if language  is an issue. However, using family members as interpreters may not be optimal especially if  discussing issues surrounding sexuality. Additionally, the level of acculturation with the  dominant culture is important to consider (McBride, 2010). Many past studies on aging and  sexuality have used participants who were mainly Caucasian, heterosexual, educated and  healthy, thereby creating limitations and biases when considering older adult populations with  varying cultural and educational backgrounds, mixed sexual orientations and complex health  problems (Zeiss & KaslGodley, 19). Zeiss and KaslGodley (2001) also mention that there are  crosscultural variations in changes in sexual desire, but say that "little is known about how  socio cultural or ethnic factors influence older adults' sexual attitudes and activity" (Zeiss and  KaslGodley, 2001, 20).     Several of the sources researched discussed religion among immigrant seniors. The 

implication of the studies cited suggests that religious values may affect relationship dynamics  in immigrant families (Chinese, Iranian). One interpretation is that immigrant seniors,  regardless of ethnicity, religion, culture may have a little difficulties accepting more overt and  seemingly liberal sexuality in Canada as compared to more restrictive expressions in their  countries of origin. Another interpretation is that immigrant seniors may maintain the religious  beliefs, cultural values, norms and customs of their country of origin.  As a result, they may  adapt to Canadian culture, values and norms on issues other than sexuality. This is evident  when looking at large metropolis cities with the varying ethnic and cultural enclaves. By this  interpretation, immigration and settlement may have little impact on ideas around sexuality.  The story may be different however for those immigrant seniors who came from Europe. The 
30   

religious beliefs of Europe are similar to those of North America and the openness in which  sexuality is addressed is also similar. Additionally, European immigrants have been in Canada  longer, have experienced settlement and have potentially adjusted to, or were a part of, the  sexuality evolution within Canadian culture. Canadian culture has changed, and continues to  change dramatically with each wave of immigrants.     Baby boomers have the potential to make a positive difference on issues relating to 

sexuality. They continue to influence the economy, societal attitudes and the healthcare  system. In fact, in 2009 those baby boomers aged 4564 comprised 40.4% of the working  population the highest from all age categories (www.statcan.gc.ca). What this means is that if  baby boomers make a point of voicing their concerns regarding senior sexuality, they will likely  succeed in receiving positive attention from healthcare providers and LTC facilities to establish  new programs and services directed specifically towards senior sexuality. As evidence, there is a  growing industry oriented to senior sexuality including suddenlysenior.com, seniors4seniors.ca,  seniorsite.com. Various regions of Toronto have specific centers and sites available for seniors  offering a multitude of services. Meetup. Com and Linkedin.com provide opportunities for  seniors to meet other seniors in a casual setting. To give another example, St. Paul's  L'Amoreaux, a Community Service Agency providing community services and housing to older  adults in Scarborough, Ontario (www.splc.ca), was the site of the first Speed Dating for Seniors  event in Canada in April 2009.   

31   

 

CONCLUSION  

What are the influences of Canadian culture on definitions and attitudes of sexuality among  immigrant seniors?  Canadian culture may potentially moderate strong religious and cultural  beliefs which many immigrant children, adults and seniors hold. The stronger the religious  affiliation, and double standards (e.g., regarding gender), the less likely an open discourse on all  aspects of sexuality will occur. For many immigrants, family is the dominant social network.  Regardless of the host society's views about sexuality, immigrant older people may hold on to  the beliefs and attitudes towards sexuality which they brought with them. Thus, Canadian  culture can both affect and not affect attitudes on sexuality. Definitions of sexuality also are  heavily dependent on a person's country of origin and the dominant culture of that country. Of  course, it is important to point of that "Canadian" culture is by no means homogenous  regarding attitudes toward sexuality, making this topic very complex and this MRP highly  exploratory.      How has this MRP been informative? The literature shows that seniors and senior 

immigrants, as part of the Canadian community, are interested in their sexuality even into the  later stages of their life. Healthcare professionals need to take a more active role and a  sensitive approach to conversing with senior clients about issues relating to sexuality. Although  immigrants from some cultures and religions may be more conservative in their attitudes and  normative behaviours towards sexuality, it is difficult to ascertain whether this is in fact the 

32   

case, given that one cannot generalize from the cultural beliefs of a nation to the beliefs of  individuals.   Ideas about aging and sexuality are transforming and older people themselves are at the  cutting edge of this transformation. Allen et al. (2008) among others suggests a change in  theory, practice and attitudes to recognize older adults' sexuality as part of healthy aging. The  role of the mass media cannot be underestimated. As Moses Znaimer demonstrates, the media  can effectively shift the general population's attitudes of older adults being frail and asexual, to  one of "zoomers" with zip, vim, vigor and sexuality. Additionally, The Public Health Agency of  Canada created and adopted in 2008, Canadian Guidelines for Sexual Health Education. The  new guidelines are to "assist professionals concerned with the development and  implementation of new and effective programs, services, and interventions that reinforce  behaviors that support sexual health and personal wellbeing" (Public Health Agency of Canada,  2008, 7). Included in this are guidelines for those professionals working with seniors.     Due to the lack of research on this topic, future considerations are many. Currently, 

there are extensive knowledge and research gaps. This MRP suggests the following areas for  continued research.   1. Tracking the training for health care providers across the continuum of care (physicians,  nurses, social workers, personal support workers, etc.) to examine whether sexuality is  embedded in routine assessments and the degree to which such assessments consider the  linguistic, religious and cultural diversity of the Canadian population.  

33   

2. Tracking and evaluating how longterm care facilities in different jurisdictions across Canada  are implementing policies surroundings issues of privacy and the extent to which privacy  includes expression of sexuality.   3. Tracking the extent to which community agencies that provide supportive services, cultural  centers, and organizations that provide settlement services also provide information and  supports for healthy sexuality and aging (e.g., information of safe sex for older people in diverse  languages).   4. Regular surveys among older adults, including immigrant seniors, of their attitudes towards  healthy sexuality and its relationship to holistic health.    5. Tracking images and messages in the mainstream media to map changes in how older  people's sexuality is generally portrayed.   6. Mapping the impact of the media on the general population's attitude to older people's  sexuality.   7. Creating, tracking and evaluating appropriate training and guidelines for care providers as it  pertains to older adults with disabilities, dementia, Alzheimer's etc., in the context of sexuality  and consent.   8. Track the changing demographics of care providers as a much more ethnically diverse group  and how this affects clients and residents, specifically as it relates to differences in religion,  culture and language.  

34   

9. Conduct further studies on the multicultural provision of care and how this affects clients and  residents.   10. Conduct further studies on the immigrant senior LGBT community, focusing specifically on  sexual orientation and the effects of this on both immigrant client/residents and care providers.   Because people are living longer, and because Canada is a multicultural community, and  because older people increasingly define healthy sexuality as an integral part of healthy aging,  healthcare providers, longterm care facilities and society generally must turn to policy  initiatives to affirm and enable healthy sexuality among all seniors including immigrant seniors,  where undoubtedly the issues may be complicated by religious and cultural backgrounds.   Professionals in the community need to take into account the varying ethnicities and cultures  that now contribute to Canada's landscape and recognize culturally sensitive practices which  are both mutually comfortable and productive. It is hoped that this Major Research Paper is a  step in the direction of continuing research on multicultural sexuality.  

35   

 
REFERENCES  
 

Advocacy Centre for the Elderly. (2010). Every Resident: Bill of Rights for Long Term Care  Facilities. Retrieved on October 15 from www.ace.com   Allen, R.S., Petro, K.N., & Phillips, L.L. (2008). Factors influencing young adults' attitudes and  knowledge of late life sexuality among older women. Aging And mental health, 13, 2: 238245.   Bailey, J. (2006). Considerations Regarding the Needs of Long Term Care Residents for Intimate  Relationships and Sexual Activity. Center for Practical Bioethics, 110.   Bauer, M. (2009). Older people and sexuality in the institutional setting: penalized pleasure?  Retrieved on November 10, 2011 from www.crncc.ca  Guan, J. (2004). Correlates of Spouse relationship with sexual attitude, interest, and activity  among Chinese Elderly. Sexuality and Culture, 8,1: 104131.  Gott, M. (2009). Sexuality, Sexual Health and Aging. Retrieved on November 10, 2011 from  www.crncc.ca  Gott, M., & Hinchliff, S. (2003). How important is sex in later life? The views of older people.  Age and Aging, 56 (8), 16171628.  Health Canada. 1999. Canada's Seniors. Division of Aging and Seniors.   Hendrickx, K., Lodewijckx., E., Van Royen, P., & Denekens, J. (2001). Sexual Behaviour of second  generation Moroccan Immigrants balancing between traditional attitudes and safe sex. Patient  Education and Counseling, 47: 8994.  Hojat, M., Shapurian, R., Foroughi, D., Nayerahmadi, H., Farzaneh, M., Shafieyan, M., & Parsi,  M. (2000). Gender differences in traditional attitudes towards marriage and the family: An  empirical study of Iranian Immigrants in the United States. Journal of Family Issues, 21, 4: 419 434.   Langer, N. (2009). Late life love and intimacy. Educational Gerontology, 35: 752764.   Leger Marketing, Canadian Male Sexual Health Council and Pfizer Canada. 2001 Canadian  Sexual Health Survey, June 2001.   Lum, J.M. (2009). ENews: Volume 20. The Canadian research network for care in the  community. www.crncc.ca  
36   

Lum, J. M. et al. (2009). Keep on Rockin': Sexuality and Aging. In Focus: Fact sheet. The  Canadian research network for care in the community. Retrieved on October 29, 2010 from  www.crncc.ca  Lum, J.M. et al. (2009). In Focus: Fact Sheet. Diversity: Ethnoracial Issues in Home and  Community Care. The Canadian research network for care in the community. Retrieved on  September 07, 2011 from www.ryerson.ca/crncc/knowledge/factsheets/index.html.    McBride, M. (2010). Ethnogeriatrics and cultural competence for nursing practice. Retrieved on  October 17, 2011 from ConsultGeriRN.org  Meadus, J.E. (2010). Every Resident: Bill of Rights For People who Live in LongTerm Care Homes  in Ontario. Residents' Bill of Rights under the longterm care homes act 2007. Advocacy Centre  for the Elderly.   Meston, C.M., Trapnell, P.D., & Gorzalka, B.B. (1996). Ethnic and Gender differences in  sexuality: variations in sexual behavior between Asian and nonAsian University students.  Archives of Sexual Behaviour, 1, 3372.  Minister of Health. (2008). Canadian Guidelines for Sexual Health Education. Public Health  Agency of Canada, 162.  https://mail.ryerson.ca/attach/PHAC%20Canadian%20Guidelines%20for%20Sexual%20Health% 20Education.pdf  Nader, A. (2003). Migration challenges views on sexuality. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 26 (4), 684 706.   Papaharitou, S., Nakopoulou, E., Kirana, P., Giaglis, G., Moraitou, M., & Hatzichristou, D. (2008).  Factors associated with sexuality in later life: An exploratory study in a group of Greek married  older adults. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 46: 191201.   Picard, E., & Roberston, G. (2007). Legal Liability of Doctors and Hospitals in Canada. Toronto:  Thomson Carswell.   Richard, D. (2002). Senior sexuality: sex educators identify new niche in the silver set.  Contemporary Sexuality, 36, 9: 37.   Richard, D. (2001). With age comes wisdomwith wisdom, new lessons. Contemporary  Sexuality, 35, 3: 36.   Statistics Canada. (2009, 2011). Statistics Canada. statcan.gc.ca. 

37   

Trudel, G., Turgeon, L., & Piche, L. (2000). Marital and sexual aspects of old age. Sexual and  Relationship Therapy, 15, 4: 126.   Walker, B., & Ephross, P.H. (1999). Knowledge and Attitudes toward sexuality of a group of  elderly. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 31, 1: 85107.   Wang, T., Lu, C., Chen, I., & Yu, S. (2008). Sexual knowledge, attitudes and activity of older  people in Taipei, Taiwan. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17: 443450.   Ward, J.V., & McLean Taylor, J. (1991). Sexuality education in a multicultural society.  Contemporary IssuesSexuality Education: 6265.  Watters, Y., & Boyd, T.V. (2009). Sexuality in later life: opportunity for reflections for healthcare  providers. Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 24, 34: 307315.   Wright, M.D. Supporting Sexual Health and Intimacy in Care Facilities: Guidelines for supporting  Adults Living in LTC facilities and Group Homes in British Columbia, Canada. January 2008, 126.   Zeiss, A.M., & KaslGodley, J. (2001). Sexuality in older adults relationships. Intimacy and Aging:  1825.   (n.a.). CerisMetropolis. Retrieved on July 15, 2011 from www.cerismetropolis.com.   (n.a.). St. Paul's L'Amoreaux Centre. www.splc.ca     
   

 
       

38   

 

39   


