Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Skills and strategies used to manage aggression and conflict with children in residential settings
Tina Kroll
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Child Psychology Commons Recommended Citation
Kroll, Tina, "Skills and strategies used to manage aggression and conflict with children in residential settings" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 526.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

SKILLS AND STRATEGIES USED TO MANAGE AGGRESSION
AND CONFLICT WITH CHILDREN IN RESIDENTIAL SETTINGS
by

Tina Kroll

Bachelor of Arts, Child and Youth Care, Ryerson University, 2004

A major research paper

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts
in the Program of

Early Childhood Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009

©Tina Kroll 2009

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY OF

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this major research paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the

Signature

u

TIT

'uoisssiSSb

aip. jo soioqo psjaodaj sq; in SA"Bjd uopBonpa ^Cite jrajoi reqM suiuuapp
puB sSupiss |Bi}U9pis9j unpiM. noiAwpq 9Aiss3J[ggB sSbubui oj sj35[joy^ tpnoj^ pire

pasn suopuaAjajui aip auiiirexa oj si sis^bub siqj jo asodmd aqx '^^3 dnojQ ui uo pasnooj j^qj j(pnjs b uiojj BjBp jo sis^jbub yCrepuooss b si Kpnjs si
·smooo

uoiss3j§8b pire pi^uoo yCjrep aqj 9§bubui oj sSupas [Bijuapissi m aAipnpojd sjb

asaqj jaqjaqM guiuiouspp ui si 98u3[|Bqo aq; j3A9Avoq q^noX ptre usjp^iqo ui juasajd sapuspusj sqj 3SB3J33P him jBqj s31§9;bj;s pire sjip[s juaraajduii oj ^irejjoduii si y ·sapuspuaj 3aiss3j§§b q;iM qjnoX pire usjpjiqo 3ui§bubui

qin°A P11^ PIN3 J° ssiSsjbjjs pire sni5[s pasn Kpuanbaij jsoui aqj suiurexs oj psau
SuijBOipui sSui^ss iBijuapissj uiq;iAv snssi pa^oBjijjnui b juassjdsj o% unSsq SBq smoiABqaq
saisssjSSb q^iAV §ui|B3Q ·3Direq.m}sip |buoijoui9 puB sanssi jBmoiABqaq 'sjapjosip pooqp^iqo apnpui qoiqM. sraa^qoid snouss sjoiii ssajppB o; papuajui sjb

soNtixxas iviiNtaaisan mi NanaiiHD hum lorMNto j a\tv ox aasii saioaxvHXS qmv siiess

Acknowledgements

would never have become a reality:

I am so very fortunate to have many people in life who have supported me through this journey, even when it has sometimes appeared never-ending. Without the following people my dream

Dr. Carol Stuart - thank you so much for encouraging me to embark on this journey and for hanging in way longer than expected while showing me that I was capable of what often seemed impossible. Your patience and constant availability helped me achieve my goal - your support and guidance will always be remembered... Dr. David Day - for agreeing to participate and help make this all possible - your passion and

perspectives are exemplified in your writing...

My children - Tyler, Sara and Gabriel - you tried so very hard to understand I needed just one more minute -1 only hope I can give them all back to you and that I haven't missed too much...
My Dearest Rudy - without your support and encouragement, this journey would have NEVER
become more than j ust a dream...

My parents - Diana and Wally - for reminding me every day how proud you are of my efforts.. .and additional thanks to my mother for understanding the never-ending need for me to have all those 'alone' days and then making it possible ... My sister Candace - for always knowing exactly when it was time to go somewhere with your niece and nephews so I could have quiet time, probably saving them from me...

My forever friend Julie - always available through my tears and ongoing rants - thank you for being a part of all the stages of my life and never giving up on me...
Dear friend Liz - always supportive, always checking in - it's finally time for the "not all about
me" party!

Friends, colleagues, fellow grad students, Lisa Pena-Sabanal and Gurjeet 'Geena' Dhillon - we have been through it all - you could both relate to what always felt just like baby steps - thank you for your constant encouragement and ongoing support...
Fellow grad student Michelle Bloom - thank you for helping me to get back on track and for
introducing me to 'The View'...

Dear friend and colleague Bill Carty - for providing peace and serenity exactly when it was needed and for trusting me enough to provide me with seemingly endless opportunities...
Sue, Corrie, Dianne and Calvin - wonderful neighbours and even better friends - thank you for your ongoing encouragement and being there to celebrate with me the beginning and the end...

IV

Dedication

This piece of writing is dedicated to my three most beautiful treasures

and the man who was a part of creating them...
Dearly loved and greatly missed, my best friend Eric

My initial journey began with you
You taught me how to appreciate all of life's wonders

Always reminding me not to second guess my actions I will always hold you close in the light of the sun and the moon where I know you are watching...

TABLE OF CONTENTS Author's Declaration Abstract ijj v

Acknowledgements
Dedication

vii
}x

List of Tables
List of Figures

xiii
xv

List of Appendices
CHAPTER I

xvii

Literature Review

2

Experiences of Children and Youth in Residential Settings
Child and Youth Work with Children who are Aggressive
Behaviour

2
4
5

Attitudes and Perceptions of Child and Youth Workers in Residential Settings toward Aggressive Skills and Strategies for Managing Conflict amongst Children in Residential Settings
How Training Programs Enhance the Educated Child and Youth Worker's Ability to Manage Physical Aggression amongst Children/Youth in Residential Settings
CHAPTER II

6 9
16 16
17

Research Design Sampling
Recruitment

Data Collection Instrumentation Data Analysis

18 18 20

Ethical Considerations
CHAPTER III

22

Research Results

24

Strategies and Interventions used to Manage Conflict in Residential Settings Specific Techniques used to Manage Aggressive Behaviour
Use of Child and Youth Worker Practice Guidelines when Managing Bullying

24 26
27

Techniques Used to Improve and Manage Socio-emotional Health and Well-being
Specific Techniques used to Build Healthy, Trusting Relationships
vi

28
30

Child and Youth Worker's Involvement in Facilitating and Encouraging Peer Relationships. 31
Types of Interventions and Treatment Models used in Client Plan of Care
CHAPTER IV

33

Discussion and Recommendations Limitations of the Study
Suggestions for Further Research Conclusion
APPENDIX A - Survey Questions Chosen for Secondary Analysis APPENDIX B - Consent Form

35 40
42 44
47 49

APPENDIX C - Raw Data

52

References

54

vn

List of Tables

Table 1 - Top Five Skills and Strategies Implemented in Residential Settings

25

vin

List of Figures

Figure 1 - Specific Techniques used to Manage Aggressive Behaviour Figure 2 - Do CYW s follow Practice Guidelines on How to Manage Bullying Figure 3 - Specific Techniques used to Build Healthy, Trusting Relationships Figure 4 - Specific Techniques used to Improve and Manage Social Emotional
Health and Well-being

27 28 30

31

Figure 5 - CYW' s Involvement in Facilitating and Encouraging Peer Relationships Figure 6 - Interventions or Treatment Models Incorporated into Plans of Care

32 34

IX

List of Appendices

APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B. APPENDIX C.

Survey Questions Chosen for Secondary Analysis
Consent Form Raw Data

46 49 52

SKILLS AND STRATEGIES USED TO MANAGE AGGRESSION AND CONFLICT WITH CHILDREN IN RESIDENTIAL SETTINGS

CHAPTER I

When children and youth cannot live with their parents and require out of home care the ideal is to have them live in a family setting, based on the assumption that their own family environment is not able to meet their needs. However, sometimes the nature of the problems and
the child's behaviour are so severe that a more intrusive intervention is required. Residential

settings are intended to address more serious problems which include childhood disorders,

behavioural issues and emotional disturbance. Difficult behaviours have begun to represent a
multifaceted issue within residential settings indicating the need to examine the most frequently used skills and strategies of Child and Youth Workers (CYW) when managing children and youth with aggressive tendencies. Much of the literature related to interventions for aggression

focuses on cognitive-behavioural approaches (Knorth, Klomp, Van den Bergh, & Noom, 2007)
which deal with improving social skills and building relationships. Different treatment approaches are frequently used to deal with the issues that are essential in managing aggression and include peer issues, conflict resolution, socio-emotional health and well being, and the child's ability to build healthy and trusting relationships. It is important to implement skills and

strategies that will reduce aggressive tendencies (Wong, 2006) however the challenge is in

determining whether the approaches.recommended as evidence-based practices are productive

for the children in residential settings where CYW's need to manage the daily conflict and
aggression that occurs.

The purpose of this study is to examine the interventions used by CYW's to manage aggressive behavior within residential settings and determine what role if any education plays in
the reported choice of the strategies they use.

The central question of this study is "What are the most frequently reported skills and strategies used by CYW's to manage aggressive behavior and conflict with children placed in

residential settings?" The subsidiary question of this study is "What is the role of education in
the reported choice of the strategies used by the CYWs?"
Literature Review

Preventative measures used to manage children's aggressive behaviours have been

continually developed and implemented in residential settings across the country. Policies governing these strategies have been under a significant amount of examination to determine

their effectiveness (Bhattacharjee, 2003). The purpose of this section is to review the literature that discusses the skills and strategies used by CYW's to manage aggression and conflict of
children and youth towards staff and peers in Residential settings. Literature that describes the role of education and training has also been included though the relation between child and youth
care education and its affect on practice or client outcomes remains unclear (Stuart & Sanders,

2008). Previous studies describing the experience of children and youth within residential

settings are also examined. The limited research on effective skills and strategies is discussed
focusing on its effectiveness in reducing aggressive tendencies.

Experiences of Children and Youth in Residential Settings In North America, there is a significant emphasis on therapeutic, for-profit treatment of young people in residential settings (Bowie, 2005). Residential settings range from minimally

invasive out of home services with limited support to a more substantial level of intervention and

assistance (Stuart & Sanders, 2008). Out of home services include foster homes, receiving homes, group homes and residential treatment centres. Foster care is designed to provide temporary care, supervision and support to children by non family members who have access to

other support services. Receiving homes are short term placements that provide care to children until long term placement is determined. Group homes are community-based, home-like settings
that provide basic care to a small number of young people (usually five to 10 persons). Residential treatment centres provide intensive treatment twenty- four hours a day and can usually serve more than 12 young people at a time (Barth, 2009, Berrick 1998, Libby, Coen,
Price, Silverman, & Orton, 2005).

CYW's need to be sensitive to the reasons children and youth leave their families and
surrounding environment (Watson, 2004). Children and youth who come into the system are

among the most vulnerable children in our society (Anglin, 2002) and should be able to

anticipate that their lives will improve, not leave them feeling that their safety and well-being is
at risk (Snow & Finlay, 1998) by their admission to a residential setting. Children and youth

who were asked about their experiences in out of home placements (Finlay, 1996) reported that it
was "dehumanizing and consistent with what one might expect in a correctional environment" (p. 15) and
further believed that "group homes were gateways to jail.. .taught kids not to care.. .don't give you a

chance to be normal" (p. 15). Addressing daily life occurrences should be the focus of residential settings whereby the adolescent can use their circumstances as a basis for development (Knorth
et al, 2007) while promoting self-understanding, resiliency, relationships and receiving support

and assistance from devoted CYW's (Fitzgerald, 1996). Anglin (2002) suggests that letting

young people make their own choices, supporting them while they learn from their mistakes, and
then providing assistance while they discover more suitable options, are crucial elements of a
well functioning residential setting. He further explains that residential care should be "an

environment that is responsive rather than reactive, influencing rather than imposing controls,

challenging by offering choices, demonstrating skill in reading young people's behaviour
accurately, and doing things with rather than to youth" (p.l 15).

The literature on out of home care focuses on foster care and residential care though we are still not certain what CYW interventions are being used to create this supportive and non-

reactive environment. We need to clearly understand aggression, aggression prevention and
management while creating supportive environments for children and youth within residential
settings.

Child and Youth Work with Children who are Aggressive Aggression can be of a social nature and expressed through name calling, social isolation,

exclusion and humiliation and transition to the more physical characteristics of hitting, kicking, threatening and swarming (Pepler, Craig, Connolly & Yuile, 2006). The most significant problem for young people in residential settings is bullying or other forms of violence from peers in the home (Barter, 2003). Aggression can be managed pro-actively or re-actively by trained CYW's through prevention or intervention within residential settings.
An environment conducive to providing treatment for emotionally disturbed children

requires effective strategies for dealing with the aggressive and challenging behavior that they

bring with them. Heron (2003) indicates that CYW's tend to react to crisis situations instead of using their skills to introduce preventative measures prior to the precipitation of crisis. Placing
troubled young children with CYW's who lack the insight required to identify the precipitating

factors of aggression is overwhelming and results in their inability to manage the behaviour. When CYW's are involved with "older and more disturbed and disruptive groups of children"
(p. 82) their odds of being involved in a crisis situation may increase.

puB 'sgiiijpBj pgugisap Axiood 'Suipunjiapun 'sguijias jBijugpisgj 9S9q; oj ugipjiqo jo gjBudoiddBui 'jno Sutjob stpTiqo b ojpireq ApjBS 01 soijbj pjiqojjBjs jugpxjjnsux,, anq

b sonpojd jBqj qjnoA puB uarpjnp sqj Aiijbss909u jou si ji "(3002 's
pxre suoijBjtnnj |BUOtsssjojd ajBudoiddB ijiiav uoijBnjxs saijbSsu b

OJ X|35[I| 3IOUI OS|B 9JB §UOTB4 qjTM 9SOTJ1 -guiUIBJl 9JBUdOiddB 9qj p9AI309J
JI 9I9A9S SB JOU SX JOBduiX 9ip 'gui^9S |BIJU9pIS9J 9XIJ UI SJTIOOO SXSUO B UOV[fa 'tptl

xo A^AD °1 A-mftn jo S9xjx|xqxssod 9tp s9SB9Joux oubu90S b ipng "(666T 'sinBpyop\[) ssposxdg
ui j^gjip jgpun usqM qjnoX jo usipjxqo qiiM gurSBSua raoij uibijsi Abui sposxda
pUB sjuaip )U3joiA AnBi^uajod sSbubxii 01 pajBdaidtm paj oqA\ s

m sj3>[joav

pub pnq3 jo suoijdaajaj puB

uxqjiA\ psjBxisuoxusp ssxouspusi 3axss9I§§b sqi sSbubxu !3}}9q ubo Asqi os sssuodssj jxsqj jo
snoxosuoo 3JB ss^A31BIU SAijBJsdxnx sx ji -oxdoj sxqj oj SuxjBpj qoiBssai jo junouiB ixisxoxjjnsm

aqj jssgSns 01 sb ip/A sb (t766l) a^ous Aq psjsidxxxoo Xptvis sqj m psxjxjuspx sanssx uoxj

pure ju9tU3§BUBXH yWAD 31XIBS 3lP ^JP^PI °J ssraniuoo (LOOZ) '"F I3
sjrn^-isiH JU909I sjora sqi jBqa §uxuub|b sx ji -p^itun si 9JttiBJ9jn sqj jo jusjxa
·ti9i|ira gqi m sinoiABqgq

9Aiss9J§§B guxgBUBin ux stj^xj Aq pgsn sgxggjBijs puB snx^s jo 9dAj 9qj jo ngqiui 9qj ux pgq
sx guraiBJj qoxqM. qjiM Aouanbgjj 9qj uo 9|qB|iBAB qaiB9S9i pxre xioxjbuuojux iBiuxuxtn si

'J9A9M0JI -90U9pgU00-J|9S UI 9SB9J0UI UB guipn|OUX 'SJUBdlOiyBd 9qj OJ }JtlS9J SJIJ9U9q 9AXlIS0d

SSJBOipUX SXHBjgOJd guiXIIBJJ ;U9XU9gBUBXU jnOIABq9q UO qOJB9S9^ ·JU9XII9gBUBUI UOISSSjggB

SUB9UI uayo qoniM. (/,66T '^o^soqs) jU9iU9gBUBUi JtioiABqaq sb oj p9JJ9j9J guxgq 9jbo jo
9JO0 9qj 99S oj 9jttiBJ9jn 9JB0 pjxqo puB 5jjo^v qitio^ p«B p]i:q3 ux uounuooun jou sx ji

the use of untrained part-time staff members..." (Snow, 1994, p. 11) which can also leave a CYW feeling vulnerable and unprepared for crisis. A lack of training and qualification for CYW's has

been responsible for the implementation of unnecessary use of physical restraint, especially
when under qualified CYW's are required to work together in teams (Day, 2000). The use of physical restraint and interventions has created a great deal of controversy
over the last decade. Before changes were made to policies, the use of physical restraint within residential settings as a "therapeutic tool" had been uncontested (Day, 2002) which could account for CYW's actions and reactions. These reactions included their involvement in physical restraints to exercise power and control even though the child or youth did not present a threat of

harm to self or others.

This could be due to a lack of knowledge relating to their inexperience,

social and emotional immaturity and their inability to identify the wide range of negative emotions (Day, 2000) experienced by children during a physical restraint. The absence of regular supervision to address the latter could also account for their actions and reactions. Openness in supervision "attempts to develop within staff a clearer and deeper understanding of

the issues involved in residential treatment" (Pazaratz, 2000, p.44) related to managing
aggressive behaviour. CYW's wanting to maintain control may promote aggressive reactions,

whereas encouraging the children and youth to make good choices may limit the incidence of
explosive behaviour (Anglin, 2002).

Skills and Strategies for Managing Conflict amongst Children in Residential Settings CYW's in Residential settings have reported that a possible barrier to effective

interventions is a lack of confidence and ability to be proactive (Stuart & Sanders, 2008). The challenge also lies in being able to determine if the implemented interventions are effective resulting in the ongoing need for research to indeed determine which treatments are being used

giora qonra ssjx---Aiggms ureiq j.usx sjbo qjnoA" puB pjnp P009,, jBq; uopou

'(Z,003 'IB J9 q^01^) 3nssI F-inoiABqgq stp no Ajpgiip sgsnooj qoBOiddB }ugunBgii
ji jn;ss9oons gq 01 Aja^i] saora osjb si sistpo ipiA\ pi]juoo ui giB o^av sjusossppB qji ·snp[s Suiajos ui9]qojd SinqoBa; a^iqM dnojg jrasd sqi jo aousngui aqi si sguijjas S

ui qjnoA saisssjSSb sqj qjiM Sui]B9P ^ a^^bjjs jsqjouy 'psABJisq jo psaosfsj Smpsj rasqj

qiiA\ sjaiimoous ipqj jo jsoui guuspisuoo (£003 '-^peg 'tzOOZ <zJl°j) drqsuoxjBpj
9Aijisod b SuidopAsp Aq sotpuid pooB jo 9|duiBX3 to Suiauxjs si sjusossppB qjiM
piyaoo

ui SAipsjjg sjoui ugAg -(K)0Z 'zJT°d) 9Tdo9d SanoA iisqj qjiA\ qoBOjddB
ws lusrasiduii Ahbiiiob sSm^ss iBi^uspissj jo o/og Ajuo 'jsasmoh "(/.i7"d) tcs

pun psjBSii 9J3A\ Asqj Aba\ sqj uodn pssBq si jps jo ssuss Jiaqj 'sisipo juboijiuSis
qjiA\

uiag jps jo ssuss b dojsAsp Asqj souis 'ipnoA

ui ]boijuo si

,, "PII0M 3lP J° lS9Jt 3lP uo ^oop110 sa^Ssu b ui
i^ss |BiiU9piS9J ui qjnoA jBqi S}S9§§ns
'sn^s Suijugjred 'snpis Suipsunoo pUB

gqj uiqjiA\ uopounjsXp snouss
9H -S9ijiAipB oiingdBjgq; puB 'gouBiflB

gmA\9iAi3jui gpnpux 9S9qx -Suiuibji ui s^xD Jsissb oj siopoipui puB sgjnpgoojd 'sgAi

sgpiAOid 9H -ugxpuqo 9§bSu9 XpAipgjjg oi s^xD ^ ps-imbisj sib wm sgqoBoiddB
joj sps npis iu9i9jjip jo jraqumu b s;s9§§ns (0003) zjB-rezBj -pgsn Supq sgiSsjBJjs puB sjjpis jo Xoboijj9 gqj ginsug puB sgqoBOiddB iigqj xa jugjsisuoo gq oj s^XD I0J £ress909u si ;i

puB qjjBgq ]buoiioui9-jbioos pUB sdiqsuotjBpi 'guiAnnq 'suoijBpj iggd |ty;ss9oons 'uoi;tips9i

'}U9inqoB#B gpnpui gsgqx -s9Aip9dsigd jugigjjip jo igquinu b uioij pgqoBoiddB gq ubo

pi]juoo §ui§bubui jBqj S9}B0ipui 3m&m}\ sqi "(frOOZ: 'ZJPJ) Annjssaoons puB Xpuonbsjg isoui

difficult" (Fewster, 2004, p.3-4) is demonstrated with every encounter during the CYW and

client relationship. Through providing direct service to these children and youth, CYW's can
engage them in a therapeutic relationship while establishing treatment goals. All interactions

within the therapeutic milieu are intended to be beneficial to the child while also encouraging
personal growth: ".. .treatment is neither magical nor mechanical--it is people interacting with
people" (Miskimins, 1990, p. 887).

Watson (2004) conducted a study that allowed for children and youth to express their

feelings relating to personal care, safety and relationships in the residential setting. CYW's stated they sometimes left children and youth to sort out the conflict on their own as long as it didn't
get out of hand. The outcome however was that the consistency of staff intervention was lacking and physical violence seemed to be the only behaviour to warrant a reaction from the CYW's
present. It was routine for staff to intervene in physical violence though children referred to it as

"slow motion intervention" (p.45) claiming that workers did eventually stop the fight though
some allowed it to continue longer then necessary.

CYW's and children have emphasized the importance of developing relationships where
young people feel they are being listened to and their views are important. CYW's have a

responsibility to listen to the experiences of children and youth and act on their recommendations

for improvement. Watson (2004) conducted focus groups with children and youth which
provided them with the opportunity to share their thoughts on the interaction between CYW and

children/youth in residential settings as well as provide recommendations on how to improve the quality of service within residential settings. All participants were very clear that CYW's need to focus on de-escalation practices and non aggressive methods of intervention. They felt that it
was important for CYW's to receive ongoing training relating to the understanding of young

8

people and why they end up in care, and further to respond in a way that makes them feel safe
and secure within their environment. These participants reported that it was the CYW's

responsibility to engage children and youth in building healthy and trusting relationships which
in turn would help them improve their social skills. This outlook demonstrates a direct

correlation to their interaction within peer groups. Children and youth need to feel a sense of
belonging and the ability to form positive friendships and relations with peers will assist in
improving their sense of self-esteem. This also speaks to their recommendation that CYW's

should develop knowledge and skills relating to bullying which will further allow them to feel
safe and protected within the residential setting. Through their recommendations it is apparent that children and youth are implying that prevention, relationships and conflict management are

critical skills that need to be acquired; not just the use of physical restraint. Responding with
understanding and respect does not necessarily prevent aggressive outbursts but will increase the probability that these emotional reactions can provide learning opportunities for children and
youth.

The Need for Education and Professional Training when Managing Physical Aggression
amongst Children/Youth in Residential Settings

Behaviour management is essential in Child and Youth Care Work. Through college/university diploma and degree programs the CYW is provided with the education

necessary to explore possible antecedents that are causing the child's behavior. The practice of
CYW can be described as providing therapeutic care for children and adolescents who encounter

difficulties in school and/or within family and peer interactions. It is not until a CYW has
become educated and developed a sense of personal safety and/or has developed into a mature

practitioner that they can truly examine their relationship with the children/youth (Phelan, 2006).
Enhancing the relationship between CYW and child will reinforce the existence of a positive

r
support network while also providing the child the ability to uncover other characteristics

including strength and resiliency, which may be otherwise masked by their aggressive, acting out behaviours. Anglin (2002) states it is a "disturbing fact that those who have the most complex and demanding role in the care and treatment of traumatized children have the least and in many
cases no specific training for the work" (p.l 13).

The literature suggests that the CYW curriculum focuses on a combination of one to one group and community work skills while lacking in the area of behaviour management and

conflict resolution training (Bowie, 2004; Corney, 2004). Skills and strategies being used within
the Child and Youth Worker profession appear to be more effective if the CYW has received appropriate education and participated in crisis intervention training (Nunno, Holden & Leidy, 2005) however Bell & Stark (2003) argued that crisis intervention programs along with other strategies used for managing behaviour do not "involve the young person in any real sense of

participation" (p.28) therefore missing out on opportunities such as debriefing and relationship
building.

Crisis intervention programs are not implemented consistently among programs and

CYW practitioners. Initial recommendations from the report of the Interministerial Steering Committee (2001) in Ontario resulted in a complete review of the provinces existing policy. The Steering Committee (2001) emphasized that "training requirements must be included in
contractual agreements either through licensing, funding contracts or accreditation" (pg.8). T. Bouchard (personal communication, June 11, 2008) verified that in compliance of the Steering

Committee recommendations, the Ministry of Child and Youth Services reviewed the existing policy and mandated that CYW's providing direct service in residential settings should be trained in one of four crisis intervention programs that had been endorsed by the Ministry.

10

IT

jsora iratp }B 9JB Agqj ugqM ugipjiqo dpq o: pUB 3aiss9j§§b oiuoogq ugipjiqo qoiqM. ui suoiibtuis

9JBTB0S9-9p pUB JUSASld 0} STJPIS pUB 9gp9JA\0U?[ 9qj UI9tp S9Alg }J -pJlUOO-JiaS UIBg9i 01 pjiqo

gqj isissb ubo XgsjBJjs sup ui pgureii sjs5[jom suxj jxio^ 'smoiABqsq 9Aiss9j§Sb sqj Suiqsraranp qgnoiqx 'SinotABqaq saisssjSSb oj sjopbj gxnjBjidpsjd sqj szragoosj oj AjijiqB sq; qji jo sjoi sqj m ssoqj sspiAOid qoiqM (131) aoptisAjsiui stspo opnsdBJsqx si (0002 'z '6861 'sn:^l) 3-m}BJ3ji| sqj urqjiAV usyo jsoui oj psxiajsi ureagoid uopuaAisiux stsuo

g> xsB]A[9a) pssti gupq 9tibxtrqo9j ogpgds 9qj oj guipioooB SJ9jjip Apo9uoo oj pgjtnbgj ssma3 jo jgqcana 9qx -p9sn gupq sx ppom guraiBJi qoxqAV uo gui
X|JU9I9JJIp p9JU9UI9|duil 9JB SJUIBXIS9I JO SU0I1U9AJ9JUI |BOTSAqj -g^qB^BAB guraiB.1} 9AISU91X9

ptiE pgjnjonjjs jsora 9qi guiABq uoi;u9Aj9jui sisu3 oijngdBjgqjL qiiAv sABp 9aij 01 oavj ihoi; S9§ubj
gmureij jo qj§u9] gqi -s|9pora 9S9qj qjTM 90U9J9jjip jo SB9IB pg^ou oavj 9ib

12 ISBp\[9a) 90ij0Bjd s|]p[S |Bqi9A puB potsAqd 'gtniuB9j |Biju9U9dx9 'suoissnosip dnojg '
9|0J 'guT|9poui 910J qgnojqj gxnuJB9t uo-spuBq sgpxAOjd s|9poui guraiBj; 9qi jo

UT SI tBnpiAipUX UB JO AJ9JBS 9qi 9J9qM SUOIlBtiaiS 9UI9I1X9 HI p9Stl 9q O\ AjUO 9IB pUB 5[SII qgtq 9q

ubo U0IJU9AJ91UI poisAqd 9gp9iMoiDiOB sppoui gtiiuiBJi 9qj jo qoBg -ppij MAO 3m UT guiurejj
puB uoriBonpg jo B9IB pgimbgi isoui 9qj si uoiju9AJ9am pUB uoiiragoo9J sisuo jBqi puBisjgpttn pUB JU9JUO0 JO 9dAl 9qj UI 1U9JSISUO0 TJB 9JB SppOUI gUTOIBJl p9SI0pU9
·iu9UiAoidiii9 H9q; jo gunraiggq 9qi jo sABp Q£ xiiqii 9qj 01 p91U9U0 9q ppOAV S99A0]dlU9 AV9U flB IBqi pUB SUIBjgOid U0I1U9AJ91UI P91SIJ 9qi JO 9U0
ui pguiBfl |Buoiss9jojd b ^q p9tiuojJ9d 9q ajuo ppoo uoi;u9AJ9jui iBois

AJISIUIJAI 9qX "gUIUIBJl U0I^U9AJ9JUI SISUO STlOlA9id AuB p9AI909J 9ABq A9qi JBqi p9Jt\SSB
ubo 11 '9JBQ qjnoA P^b pjup ui uoijBonpg ub p9Ai909J 9ABq sj9^jom 9ui| juoxf ip jou

destructive. TCI has a consistent record of reducing the number of incidents where restraint is used on children (Ulrich, 2005). If the child is unable to control the behaviour or is at risk of

injuring themselves or others, then safety becomes the immediate issue (http://safeguards-

training.net). Therapeutic techniques and interventions include the use of active listening, role
play, small group discussions and guided imagery and are demonstrated during training with CYW's to ensure they understand how to keep the child and those around them safe (Nunno,
2003). This approach builds on the CYW's therapeutic skills obtained through education and

further enhances their knowledge, and attitudes to help children and adolescents regain control
when behaving aggressively.

Crisis Prevention Intervention (CPI) training is comparable to TCI. This program also educates and trains those in the role of a CYW how to safely manage aggressive behaviours

which may include direct harm to self or others. Methods are introduced which include
strategies to resolve out of control behaviours which also empowers the acting CYW to manage

threatening or difficult situations with minimal anxiety and a high level of self-confidence
(http://www.queensu.ca). Preventing and Managing Aggressive Behaviour (PMAB) was developed as a non-

intrusive, non-threatening strategy that would allow the acting CYW to understand aggressive

behaviour and identify, prevent and manage this behaviour quickly to regain control of an
aggressive situation. This particular training program relates more to the use of physical

interventions and teaches them how to intervene physically when the child needs hands-on

assistance with regaining control of their behavior (http://www.craigwood.on.ca). Evaluation
methods have been criticized because it is unknown whether staff actually acquired and
remembered the skills being taught. Results of a study completed by Collins (1994)

12

£1

oj sgunfux jo 5isu 9qj 9ziraiuxui osjb pxnoM uoxjusAjajux puB ;uibi}S9.i jBoxsAqd jo 9sn

gqi uo s4yV\A310J Stnureij. SuxoBuo "(2002 'surepyojAL) sonooo sisuo b ugqM pB9i oj paredaid
gq pjtioav s^AD V&# uosb9i sxip. ioj si ji  sisuo siijus srp jnoqgnoup ajBiidoiddB aq
ssjnsBsui oijnadBJsqj ui SuiSbSus sn^M moiABqaq ssqinoX ptre usjpiiqo ssaippn oj pajBAtjora sjoui sq n?A\ uoisssjSSb jo siurauBd sip sziuSoosj oj ppg sip ui psurexi pire ssjSsp io Buio|dip j\\A3 b qjiM S|Bt\piA:pux ssoxp psuoxjusra A"jsnoTA3.id sy

"(6861 'snlTl) ^13A^O3JJ9 suopBtuxs sxsuo
oi A\oq uo sci\vA3 mo:511PIS PUB SuipuBjsjspun pssBsiom ub puB 'sjureiisaj jBoxsAqd jo
sb jjbjs puB U3ip|iqo oj ssunfux J9AV3J 'ps^draoo sbav SmuiBj; JsyB pssn Supq siuibjissj ]BoxsAqd
jo jsqratra JsnBras b SAjasqo pip Sutuss |Biju3ptS9"a sqj jBqj psiBJisuorasp §urareij uoii stsuo jo uoxiB;u9ia3|diaT sqj isyB suoijbztobSjo uio^ psyodsj sjom jBqi s§mpug sqj^ "(£|g "d) ltu3ip|xqo qjiM juajsisuoo sjotxi sjsm stsuo 3§bubih oj AjqiqB jpqj ui juspgxioo

9IOUI,, 9I3M oqA\ s^xD ssoqj jBqi ssjbjs (9003) ouunjst -sSuijias jBijuspissj aqi urqjiM SAipsjjs Aprej ussq 3ABq siioxjxisajsjui assqj 'sc^lAD IJI^ psiusras^duix uasq 3ABq siuBjgoid guxureij
jnoiABqsq 3J3qA\ JBqj ssjBajsaoxtisp SJUjBJSjq sqx "smoxABqaq joiiiioo jo ;no puB saxss3jSSb

joj A}f[xqB sqi 3ABq oqM usipTjqo jsSuouib jusxiiuojiaus oxjnsdBJsq^ b uib}uibiu oj SuxaVi; U3qA\ SUX^SS JBIJlISpiSSI AUB UiqjXM |BXja3SS3 3JB S3IS3JBJJS pUB SnpfS UOX1U9AJ9;UI SXSU3
·sisxjo ux 9JB A9ip ugqM inoiABqgq jBoisAqd pxre |buoxjoui9 ixgqj qjoq oj puods9J o% SuxpuBjsigpxm 9qj puB p9|qnoij 9JB oqA\ U9jp|iqo in pg^Bjdsip sanotABqgq

9qj jo ss9U9jba\b J9qjinj b qjiA\ AVA3 psjBonps gqj gpiAOid spoqpui Suxuibji 9S9qi jo tjv
·liiiBJ}S9J iBOisAqd jo 90U9sqB gqj ui uoiss9J§§b 9§bubui oi AjqxqB joj UAVotq 9JB suiBigojd jgqjo qSnoqj 9OU9pxjuoo jjbis guiSB9Joux puB S|^i5[S uoijU9A9jd SnipiAOjd
jo Aba\ Xq sjugppiii 9AXSS9J§3b ux uoipnp9J b oj pgjnquiuoo uoxju9Ai9jui sxsuo ^Bqi pgjBXisuoiugp

CYW's, children and youth (Day, 2000). A study by Titus (1989) produced recommendations

relating to the need for a review of physical restraint forms and summaries every six months,
review of the use of house logs, ensure proper follow-up and system of accountability,

immediately develop and implement a refresher course, review the staffing compliment in
residential settings and review the staff turnover rate. It would appear that these
recommendations were finally put into action during a study completed by Nunno, Holden &

Leidy (2003) which identified that accountability and follow through subsequent to crisis

intervention resulted in an increase in staff confidence, a more consistent approach to children
and youth in crisis and a significant decrease in children and youth's aggressive behaviour.
In summary, while working in residential settings, those in a CYW role encounter

aggressive behaviour and conflict from the children and youth on a regular basis. Ongoing

education and training is imperative to provide practitioners with the tools necessary to manage these behaviours. However, despite the existing research that shows "high levels of unqualified
staff (Heron & Chakrabarti, 2002) working in residential settings, residential employers

continue to hire these staff without qualifications. Use of physical restraint has resulted in the
argument that the ultimate goal must be to remove restraint and place greater emphasis on de-

escalation techniques. Where there are identified issues the young person should be supported with a more therapeutic approach to anger management (Watson, 2004).

The literature (Demasi & Boyd, 2007, Nunno et al, 2003, Titus, 1989) supports the need
to examine how often the skills taught in mandated training programs, and college/university

based pre-service education programs are actually implemented in residential settings. By doing
so, CYW's should recognize what skills and strategies to introduce when managing children with

aggressive tendencies that ultimately could lead to a pro-active rather than re-active intervention.

14

The goal of this research was to identify the skills and strategies most frequently used by

CYW's in managing aggression in residential settings and whether or not education plays a role
in their choice and implementation of each intervention.

15

r
CHAPTER II

Research Design

This study used a survey research design to examine the interventions used by CYW's to
manage aggressive behavior within residential settings and determine what role if any education

plays in the reported choice of the strategies they use. A secondary analysis of data collected
during a survey of evidence-based practice in group care settings (Stuart & Sanders, 2008) was
undertaken to address two research questions.

The central question of this study is "What are the most frequently reported skills and

strategies used by CYW's to manage aggressive behavior and conflict with children placed in
residential settings?" The subsidiary question of this study is "What is the role of education in

the reported choice of the strategies used by the CYWs?" This section describes the methodology
of the original study as well as how the secondary analysis was undertaken.
A survey on case management practices and front-line interventions in child and youth care was distributed to all residential settings in Ontario. The survey included Program

Managers and front line CYW's.

The purpose of the overall survey was to determine CYW's

contributions to evidence based practice within residential settings and to measure the frequency

of these contributions. For the purpose of this study, a secondary analysis was completed using the existing data from a sub-set of questions chosen from the original survey. The selected questions addressed the interventions being used by CYW's to prevent and manage aggression
and the role of education in the reported choice of the strategies used by the CYW's.
Sampling

The sample was defined at the program level and the researchers attempted to recruit all

of the agencies in the province who offer residential programs. The sample included Program

16

LI

aqi spjdxnoo oj txiBjgojd qoB3 xuojj s<ma3 -moj °l OM1 ipuoai o; japBsj xubsi b guxsooqo
pspnpux qoxqAV sssooid uoijnqijjsip sqj pra asajtis sqj jo sjxjsusq pxre asodind sqj urejdxs
oj i3§BUBp\[ xuBjgoj<i sqi qjiM dn psAvonqj usqj (joqjnB s:qj) jubjstssb qoiBSSSJ v 'P911!^0

3J9M sjsSbubj^ xubjSojj sqj jo uoxjBUUOjux pbjuoo puB ssiUBti aqj 'uoT;BdpmBd AoxisSb

joj uoissiuusd pajirejS jopaixa SAiinosxa sqj souo 'Aprns aqj inoqB jiBjap iaq:|Jtij apiAOid
01 sj3§bub]A[ raBjBojj sqj pBjaoo oj uoissiuiisd psjssnbai patatd sqijo isqoiBsssj s^dpuud
j ptiB suoqdspj Aq popBjxioo sbav grasps |BtjU9piS9-a qo^s jo jopsjiq SAijnosxg

·sjuspuodssj sq; jo %Qp 10
tunpj

puB U9ip|iqo oj ioojj aqj uo soxaiss psjrp pspiAOjd Aaqj uoijBJaptsuoo ojxii gui5[Bj stsAjbub

n pspnpux sjsm sjuspuodssj AVAO 3tll Auo '^P^s s^ J° ssodind sqj joj "past,
jb ajBi xutns-i (suiBjgoid 8/,i) 0/^9 b ginjusssidax sjagBxiBT/j xneigoij ^01 PTO S<A\A3
mnSuo sqj joj azxs 3|dx«BS sqx "s sjnqxijsxp o; J3pB9] xubs; b pgpsps oqM i3gBUB]AT iuBigoaj[ sqj oj pssssappB sba\

-sspusgB ^6 gmjuasajdai sxiiBigojd 39^ oj pg^Biu 3J9m sXsAjns
jpqj psra 0; Ajbsssosu suoxjusajsjxix paisjjxp uo guxsnooj jusxhjbsjj qixM puB xi3ap|xqo oj 3JB0 Jtioq jnoj-A>u9AU pspxAOJd psAaAins sguxjps jBxixrapisa-g sqx -uoxp9noo

BjBp sqj taojj pspnpxs sjsm sgmwss sjbo isjsoj 'Apnjs sxxp jo ssodind sqj 10j -oubjuo ux qjno^
puB U3ip|xqo joj sSuxjps jBX}ti3pxs3>l jo uoxjBpdod aqj xuojj psmtnqo sbav sjdraBS aqx
·sAsAjns sqj sjnqujsxp o; JspB3] hibsj b jo

soxoqo stJ9§BUB]AI xuBjgoij uo pssBq sbav jx ssxiBoaq raopuBJ joxi sbav s(i\VAD 3TPJ° sidxiiBS sqx

3S0qj XIX gUDfJOAV StyVvA3 P1^ pS^dpXJJBd JBqj SXUBjgOjd JBXJUSpiSSJ H^ JO SJ3gBUB]AI

As reported in the original report by Stuart & Sanders (2008), 78% of the eligible agencies were
recruited representing 262 Residential settings. A Tim Horton's gift certificate was included

with each survey as an incentive for completion and follow up calls were placed to Program
Managers to encourage distribution and completion of the surveys
Data Collection

Program Managers could have responsibility for multiple programs however only

responded once in representing their agency. CYW respondents were defined as anyone working

on the front-line within the setting being surveyed. Contents of the package, which included the
surveys, consent forms and follow up instructions after completion were reviewed and explained

to the Program Manager by phone and the package of survey's that h/she was responsible for
were mailed directly to the Program Manager. They were instructed to contact the principle

researcher, whose contact information was provided, if there were any questions relating to the

project. They were encouraged to complete and return the survey within two weeks of receiving
it. The research assistant followed up with each Program Manager two weeks after they received

their packages to provide them with a reminder which allowed us to maximize the response rate.
Participants were provided with a stamped addressed envelope to return the survey by mail.
Instrumentation

The original survey was a self-report questionnaire with a variety of questions relating to

the respondent and their experience with practices in residential settings. The CYW survey
consisted of three sections. As detailed in the original study by Stuart & Sanders (2008) Section one: The Organizational Context presented questions relating to the "respondent's background,

educational and front line experience" (p 22). Section two: Case Management Practices
assessed the "frequency of best practices in case management" (p.22). Section three: Identifying

18

the Interventions of CYC Practitioners "detailed the practices and interventions of front line

CYC practitioners as linked to theoretical and empirical literature" (p.22). The survey took
approximately a half hour to complete.

This researcher chose a sub set of questions from the survey that were applicable to the research questions presented in this study. One question was taken from Section One which
asked the respondent specifically about their educational background. I was interested in the

question that distinguished the CYW educated group from the non-CYW educated group. This in turn would respond to the subsidiary question in this study relating to the role of education in the
reported choice of strategies used by CYW's to manage aggressive behaviour. Section Two asked about Case Management within the residential settings. I was interested in questions that

determined the frequency of CYW's use of practice guidelines during plan of care meetings that
would address the management of aggressive behaviour. Section Three addressed techniques

that could prevent or manage incidents of aggression. I was interested in questions that were again based on the CYW's management of conflict and aggression, bullying, relationships, peer interactions between children and youth and their social-emotional health and well being.

In section three questions were grouped into categories to respond to the main question being asked "What are the most frequently reported skills and strategies used by CYW's to

manage aggressive behavior and conflict with children placed in residential settings?" In the case of relationships, there were a set of questions that described strategies for bullying but did
not deal specifically with conflict. The assumption based on the literature is that relationships

are essential for success. The questions selected also asked about what the CYW practitioners 'DID' with children and youth in the residence which, based on the literature, demonstrated

strategies used for building healthy and trusting relationships. In order to address the reported

19

choice of strategies relating to aggression, CYW's were asked to report on how they managed

conflict within the Residential setting. There were two questions highly similar to one another

which could function as a reliability assessment for the responses. In order to determine the interventions being used to assist their clients, CYW's were asked to specify if they follow
practice guidelines for how to manage bullying within their clients surrounding environment. CYW's were also asked to indicate which of the techniques they used to teach the child how to
treat other children and adults with care and respect.

These questions included an overall focus on the use of relationships, the need for socioemotional well-being, managing bullying, increasing peer interactions, developing plan of cares,

and teaching conflict management to manage aggressive behaviour and conflict with children placed in residential settings. The specific questions are identified in Appendix A. Each question
uses a four point likert scale to assess the frequency of use of the chosen technique.
Data Analysis

The responses for each returned survey were entered into an Access database, and then
exported to the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) for analysis. Concerning the

first research question relating to the strategies being used by CYW's to manage conflict and
aggression, I calculated the mean response for each selected question in section three and rank

ordered the questions to identify the most frequently used skills and strategies in the milieu. I selected the top five most frequently used skills and strategies that were reported by the CYW
respondents to identify which of these interventions are most often applied to the prevention and
management of aggression in residential settings. In addition to calculating the mean I examined

the frequency distribution of the responses to each question. The questions about interactions
with children in the Residential setting (section three) were grouped (during the survey design)

20

into six categories. These categories included techniques used to manage aggressive behaviour,

use of CYW practice guidelines when managing bullying, techniques used to teach care and respect, as well as techniques used to teach socio-emotional health and well-being. The final
categories included techniques used to build healthy, trusting relationships and CYW's
involvement in facilitating and encouraging peer relationships.

For the conflict resolution questions I calculated the percentage of responses in each of

the categories (rarely, sometimes, frequently, usually), for each question. I repeated this analysis
for each group of questions in Section three which were associated with use of relationships, the need for socio-emotional well-being, managing bullying, increasing peer interactions and
developing plan of cares. While the questions in Section three addressed moment to moment

interventions, Section two of the survey included a question about which planned techniques that
CYW's would record on the plan of care to specify the nature of intervention and treatment

methods used by everyone working with the child. A similar analysis to section three questions was conducted to determine how frequently the various intervention models that related to

management of aggression were recorded. The frequency distribution of the responses for all the selected questions in section two and in section three are presented in the results, grouped by the
overall category.

Concerning the second research question which addressed the role of education and experience in the choice of strategies within residential settings, the participants were separated
into two groups. Group one was the CYW educated group and group two was the non-CYW

educated group which included general B.A., other human service diplomas, and M.A. education
as well as those who had not completed post secondary education. I conducted a chi square test

for each question in section two and section three in order to assess whether the CYW educated

21

group vs. the non-CYW educated group implemented skills and strategies to manage aggressive behaviour with equal frequency. The initial hypotheses were:

1) The CYW educated group will more frequently report the use of specific techniques to
manage aggressive behaviour.

2) The CYW educated group will more frequently report using practice guidelines for managing the behaviour of a child being bullied within their surrounding environment.

3) The CYW educated group will more frequently report specific techniques to teach clients how to improve and manage their socio-emotional health and well-being. 4) The CYW educated group will more frequently report the use of specific techniques to
build healthy, trusting relationships with their clients.

5) The CYW educated group will more frequently report their involvement in facilitating
and encouraging peer relationships.

6) The CYW educated group will more frequently report the use of interventions or treatment models being implemented in client plan of cares.
Ethical Considerations

Participants were notified with a letter included in their survey package about the steps

taken to ensure confidentiality and who would have ownership of the resulting data and
conclusions. Each survey and consent form was coded with a label that allowed the researcher to

distinguish which program the survey was distributed to and therefore also determine through the
use of the code label which surveys had not been returned. This was required solely for the purpose of follow-up calls where necessary to increase the rate of return. The participants were

notified of this through a series of phone calls which encouraged their participation and within a letter detailing the entire research study process. Respondents completed the consent form and
returned it to the research team in a separate envelope where it was then sorted accordingly. Since the surveys were returned anonymously the threat to confidentiality was related to

the recruitment strategies used to improve the response rate for the survey. There was also an

22

ethical risk of undue pressure at the agency level though the researcher had emphasized to the
Program Manager that voluntary participation and anonymity are key principles for ensuring

accurate representation of the data. This study was approved by the Research Ethics Board at
Ryerson University. Please refer to Appendix B to view a copy of the consent form.

23

CHAPTER HI

Research Results

This section reports the results of the secondary analysis designed to answer the

following questions: "What are the most frequently used skills and strategies used by CYW's to
manage aggressive behavior and conflict with children placed in residential settings?" and

"What is the role of education in the reported choice of the strategies used by the CYWs?" The results are based on the CYW's responses to the sub set of questions selected from

the original research survey. This section presents the results in chart and text format and reports the most frequently used skills and strategies of CYW's in the residential setting based on groups of questions that represent conflict resolution, use of relationships, the need for socio-emotional
well-being, managing bullying, facilitating peer interactions and developing plan of cares. The results also report the differences between two groups of CYW's; those with CYW education and those with more general education in the implementation of these skills and strategies. Strategies and Interventions used to Manage Conflict in Residential Settings
To answer the first research question "What are the most frequently reported skills and strategies used by CYW's to manage aggressive behavior and conflict with children placed in

residential settings?" the average responses of the total group of CYW respondents to the survey questions selected were sorted from highest to lowest. Table 1 identifies the top five strategies

from all questions selected from section three, based on the mean frequency with which these
interventions are used by all participants. The intervention "talking to build relationships"
(m=3.92) was the most frequently used skill/strategy. The second most frequently used

skill/strategy was "teaching the child to care and respect through modeling healthy relationships"

24

(m=3.81) followed by acknowledging accomplishments to build relationships between CYW's
and clients.
TABLE 1

Top five skills and strategies implemented in residential settings
Descriptive
; Category

Mean

Standard V
Deviation i

f[ Talking to build relationships

Relationships

3.92

.286!

". Teach child to care and respect through
modeling

Socio-

3.81

.497

emolional wellbeing

Acknowledge accomplishments to build
relationships

Relationships

3.78

.503

Practice guidelines for residential setting
Bullying :

Bullying

3.77

.583 ^

Main focus of work is to develop caring , and supportive relationship

Socioemotional wellbeing

3.75

.560

Raw data is summarized in Appendix C for all questions used in this analysis. The results presented below are grouped into five categories and the percentage of participants who

reported frequently using that approach is described for two groups of participants: Those with
specific education in Child and Youth Care and those with more generalist education (at any
level).

25

T
Specific Techniques used to Manage Aggressive Behaviour

In order to address the reported choice of strategies relating to aggression, CYW's were

asked to report on how they deal with conflict management and manage aggressive behaviour within the Residential setting. As described in Figure 1, there were a number of specific
techniques used to achieve this. The question that asked "When peer conflict occurs in the

home, under your supervision, you..." included several choices. Of the five choices, making use
of the conflict to teach problem solving skills had the greatest number of 'frequently used'
responses. Of the CYW educated group, 66.3% reported frequently using this technique

compared to 59% of the non-CYW educated group. The option with the next highest percentage

of workers was 'stop the argument' which 47.3% of the CYW educated group reported using frequently compared to 46.8% who were non-CYW educated. Of the CYW educated group,
17.4% reported that they would frequently use roleplay compared to 14.1% who were non-CYW educated. Of the CYW educated group, 17% reported that they would 'frequently' assign a
consequence compared to 19.5% who were non-CYW educated. Finally, of the CYW educated

group, 7% reported that they would frequently 'let the children work it out themselves'

compared to 11% who were non-CYW educated. There were no significant differences between

the CYW educated group and non-CYW educated group. The hypothesis that the CYW
educated group will more frequently report the use of specific techniques to manage
aggressive behaviour is rejected.

26

120

11
19 5

17,4

If-

2?

i

 Frequently

- Usually

 Sometimes
B Rarely/Never

i

i

i

Figure 1: Specific techniques used to manage aggression

Use of Child and Youth Worker Practice Guidelines when Managing Bullying

It is important for CYW's to be supportive of the children and youth in their care. In

order to determine the interventions being used to assist their clients, CYW's were asked to specify if they follow practice guidelines for how to manage bullying within their clients

surrounding environment. As described in Figure 2, 88.7% of the CYW educated group reported that they frequently used practice guidelines to manage bullying within the residence compared to 77.2% of those who were non-CYW educated. Practice guidelines in the school were used by fewer workers, but still reported to be frequently used by 74.7% of the CYW educated respondents compared to 65% of the non-CYW educated respondents. Finally, 72.4% of the CYW educated respondents reported using practice guidelines in the community compared to 69.4% of the non-CYW educated respondents. In the residence, there was a significant difference

between the CYW educated vs. non-CYW educated respondents, / (3, n=388) =10.70,p < .013.
Similarly, in the school setting there was a significant difference between the CYW educated vs.

T
non-CYW educated respondents, / (3, n=386) =10.04, p < .018 and in the community there was
a significant difference between the CYW educated vs. non-CYW educated respondents,

/ (3, n=387) =8.70,/? < .033. The hypotheses that the CYW educated group will more
frequently report using practice guidelines for managing the behaviour of a child being
bullied within their surrounding environment is accepted.

120

100

<, 

:

80

60

.8817

'TT.S-..

'74.7-

' ).<
.- - V '- -- ·

.59.4
  '_

: Frequently
Usually
:·: sometime


\

_. \

40
i«.*

.
21.5

: v. --

'' ·"-- -

20

'"' '*
18.9

23.8
"",,-

Rarely/Never

15.8
9.7

20,1

ft.
Non CYW CYW Non CYW an CYW
School Re5id&nce

M . %
CYW
Community

CYW

Non CYW '

Figure 2: Do CYW's follow practice guidelines on how to manage bullying?

Techniques Used to Improve and Manage Socio-emotional Health and Well-being The literature demonstrates that children and youth who have the ability to be caring and
respectful of those in their surrounding environment are more successful in building healthy,

trusting relationships and subsequently dealing with their aggressive tendencies. CYW's were

asked to indicate which of the following techniques they used to teach the child how to treat
other children and adults with care and respect. All of the following techniques are reported as

being frequently used by a high percentage of respondents regardless of educational background.
As demonstrated in Figure 3, 69.4% of CYW educated respondents stated that they frequently
28

used direct instruction when teaching clients to improve and manage socio-emotional health and
well-being compared to 59.3% of non-CYW educated respondents. There was a significant

difference between the two groups in relation to providing direct instruction to improve and
manage socio-emotional health and well-being, % (3, n=374) =7.88, p < .048. The

implementation of coaching as a technique in this situation was used less but still reported to be
frequently used by 68.9% of CYW educated respondents compared to 62.8% of non-CYW educated respondents. The development of a caring and supportive relationship was reported as
being frequently used by 65.2% of the CYW educated respondents and 65% of non-CYW

educated respondents. When asked about CYW's making use of community recreational
resources to improve the behaviour and social skills of children/youth, 62.9% of the CYW educated respondents reported using this technique frequently compared to 60.1% of non-CYW educated respondents. Modeling was reported as being frequently used by 47.1% of CYW

educated respondents compared to 45% of non-CYW educated respondents. The hypothesis that
the CYW educated group will more frequently report specific techniques to teach clients how to improve and manage their socio-emotional health and well-being is accepted in
relation to one of the presented techniques.

29

I

120

]

100 4~

23.8 _

a Frequently ·
's Usually  Sometimes

CYW j
CYW

Non

8 Rarely/Never

CYW

.

i CYW
Modelling

Coaching.


Direct
instruction

Caring

Community resources

/supportive
relations

Figure 3: Specific Techniques used to improve and manage socio-emotional
health and well-being

Specific Techniques used to Build Healthy, Trusting Relationships It has been determined in the literature that the outcome of trusting relationships between

CYW's and children and youth is the ability for workers to better manage aggression and conflict in residential settings (Watson, 2004). CYW's were asked to respond to a series of
questions about the variety of activities used to build relationships with their clients. As

described in Figure 4, 95.7% of CYW educated respondents reported that they frequently used
conversations as the principal activity in building relationships between CYW's and clients

compared to 90% of non-CYW educated respondents. Acknowledging special accomplishments
were used less but still reported to be frequently used by 80.7% of the CYW educated

respondents followed very closely by 80.6% of non-CYW educated respondents. Going on

outings was reported as being frequently used by 75% of CYW educated respondents again

followed closely by 75.8% of non-CYW educated respondents. The use of restraints to build
relationships was reported as being frequently used by only 11.1% of CYW educated
30

respondents and 18.4% of non-CYW educated respondents. There were no significant differences between the CYW educated group and non-CYW educated group. The hypotheses
that the CYW educated worker will more frequently report the use of specific techniques to
build healthy, trusting relationships with their clients was rejected.

170

100

Ill
ol

-

 .

i 
r '

,. "
i
t

156 75.8.

77

/



17.3

60

v ;
6?;

u
:".

40

* *-

..;-.

 #;'

I
 

"£:,""

r. Frequently Usually
1 Sometimsc

%'
i" -

see
-20.6--

". P.are!y/Never

20

16 3

K.6

-i

:.'.','15.4

I- · 
'>:'
CYW
g

«.
CYW

il.
Nor. CYW CYW Non CYW

48

16.1

MCYW Non CYW CYW

JNon CYW

i

Non CYW

O.itings

Restraint/holding Play/recreational techniques activities

Acknowledge accomplishments.

Conversation

Figure 4: Specific techniques used to build healthy, trusting relationship

Child and Youth Worker's Involvement in Facilitating and Encouraging Peer
Relationships

It is necessary for the CYW to demonstrate appropriate skills and strategies to manage

aggressive behaviour within residential settings before they can expect to facilitate and encourage further positive relationships amongst the children and youth in their care. CYW's were asked to respond to three questions that would describe their involvement in facilitating and encouraging peer relationships. There were no significant differences based on education for these three questions. As described in Figure 5, 56.8% of CYW educated respondents stated that

31

T
they frequently used an active disruption of negative situations to facilitate and encourage peer relationships compared to 47.3% of non-CYW educated respondents. Coaching the child on how to behave in the classroom was used less but still reported to be frequently used by 39.9% of the

CYW educated respondents compared to 37% of the non-CYW educated respondents. This was closely followed by 39% of the CYW educated respondents who reported frequently using role play to encourage peer interaction compared to 31% of non-CYW educated respondents. There
were no significant differences noted in their responses discussing their involvement in facilitating and encouraging peer relationships. The hypotheses that the CYW educated group will more frequently report their involvement in facilitating and encouraging peer
relationships is rejected.

120

100 80 60 40 20 0
;a*a* 5JU*? &A-a '*/

56.8
'"..i

' j"

5f

!":.

" ·"· --24.6
24-a r.

|;^

:->

26.8

*""1'""~ *"
35.5

;.-sj

[^

!i Frequently

Usually
* Sometimes

32.2

37.3

3iiL-.3^
CYW Non CYW

.-i£
CYW

f":
Non CYW

J5f
CYW

12.9

"Js

- 6-4 -- Jj0-3- -- 6-6 -----W- Role Play
Behave in Classroom

Rarely/Never

Non CYW

Negative relations

Figure 5: CYW's involvement in facilitating and encouraging peer relationships

32

Types of Interventions and Treatment Models used in Client Plan of Care

CYW's were asked a series of questions that would specify what type of interventions or treatment models were being incorporated into their clients plan of cares. As described in Figure 6, 78.9% of CYW educated respondents stated that they frequently used de-escalation techniques to reduce harmful behaviour when implementing plan of cares compared to 69.1% of non-CYW educated respondents. Individual sessions were reported to be frequently used by 53.6% of CYW educated respondents compared to 49.5% of non-CYW educated respondents. Further described

in Figure 6, 0% of CYW educated and non-CYW educated groups reported frequently using
behavioural interventions such as planned ignoring and time outs, instead 81.8% of CYW educated respondents reported 'sometimes' using them and 77.2% of non-CYW educated respondents reported 'sometimes' using these strategies. There were no significant differences based on education reported by the CYW educated and non-CYW educated respondent. The
hypotheses that the CYW educated group will more frequently report the use of

interventions or treatment models being implemented in client plan of cares is rejected.

33

120

100

.0-

20.5
80

11.*

li.2

i,.

;

15.8
so
,

225

;;
28.6

h

'

-2Z3

78,9

- '

-

.*
- ,:,-

.

. Frequently

:



|

!*'**

I"
i.0

!':'

: ;.

^·;
24.2 24

Usually
. Sometimes

. ;

1
"

Rarely/Neve

20
U.2

38.6

38.7 "*}'?

49.7
i' . 15.8

.19.1
11 *

CYW

Non
CYW

CAV

Non
CYW

CYW

Non
CYW

Cyw

Non
CYW

CY\A.-

Non
CYW

Behavioural intervention

Attachment theory

Restraints

· De-escalst-on

individual sessions

Figure 6: Interventions or treatment models incorporated into plans of care

34

CHAPTER IV

Discussion and Recommendations

The purpose of this study was to examine the interventions used by CYW's to manage

aggressive behavior within residential settings and to determine what role if any education plays in the reported choice of the strategies they use. Overall the results of the survey indicated that
some techniques related to preventing and managing aggression were clearly preferred by the majority of the respondents, regardless of educational background. These included the use of

conversation to build relationships, acknowledging accomplishments, participating in community outings and teaching problem solving skills to manage aggression. The results also showed
significant differences associated with the type of educational preparation available to CYW's

which affected their choice of intervention and the literature suggested was imperative in the management of aggression and conflict with children and youth in residential settings. These
included teaching the child to care and respect through modeling and the use of practice guidelines to address bullying.

This section of the report will discuss the key factors and explain the results of the study
that I believe are of importance to the CYW field. The significant differences based on

educational preparation will be discussed and explained. Further discussed will be the limitations of the research and the implications for further research. The literature suggested that education was a key factor in determining the ability of the
CYW to acknowledge precipitating factors and manage the outcome of subsequent issues

(Watson, 2004). The results of this study confirmed this to be true in situations that required more than a common sense approach to the management of children's aggressive tendencies.

35

Table 1 clearly indicates that facilitating peer relationships and managing social

emotional health and well-being were clearly preferred by all respondents as methods of working with the children in residential care. These preferences were not affected by educational background. Though there was not a clear indication that there were significant differences
associated with the type of educational preparation received by the CYW's in relation to the use

of conversation to build relationships and use of restraints, teaching problem solving and conflict
management, use of de-escalation techniques, use of planned ignoring, rewards for good

behaviour and time-out techniques. The types of interventions that CYW's plan to implement are
often quite different from what is actually implemented on the floor. The National Collaboration for Youth (NCY) task force created a list of competencies which they believed every front line

worker should possess when choosing to work with children and adolescents and then confirmed that these competencies could only be attained through proper education (Astroth, Garza &
Taylor, 2004). These skills included the need to understand and apply child and adolescent development principles, communicate and develop positive relationships with children and
youth, identify potential risk factors (in a program environment) and take measures to reduce

those risks; all these skills, exclusive of the child development principle, have been presented within this study and are required when implementing previously stated interventions to manage children with aggression in residential settings. This study addressed the role of CYW specific education and the results again did not

indicate a significant difference between these two groups (CYW educated vs. non-CYW educated) relating to the reported use of physical restraint. Day, (2000) suggests that CYW's lacking appropriate training may demonstrate an inability to acknowledge the emotional crisis experienced by children during a physical restraint. Though the CYW curriculum teaches from

36

the standard training curriculum and crisis intervention training is mandated by the province, the
actual approach to each crisis situation could differ based on the CYW's understanding of how to engage with the children and youth while encouraging them to make good choices. The CYW

enrolled in a three year college program will receive additional coursework about engaging and

relating to children which supports the use of alternative strategies and improved self control.
There were no significant differences between the CYW educated and non-CYW educated group relating to conflict resolution techniques which included respondents letting the children "work it out themselves" and "assigning a consequence" (See figure 1). It is possible in

these strategies that it is left up to the children and youth to manage the aggressive behaviour
therefore the education of the worker is irrelevant. The CYW educated group would be more

likely to use conflict to actively teach problem solving and conflict management skills since
these are active interventions that are relevant to and taught in the group work curriculum. There
were no significant differences between the CYW educated group and non-CYW educated group relating to their use of outings, play and/or recreational activities, acknowledging special

accomplishments, or 1:1 sessions for building relationships. These strategies could be seen as techniques that we engage in on a daily basis where extensive education to learn them is not
required. It is a relatively easy task to hang out at the park, play a game of cards or enjoy an ice

cream however is the non-CYW educated actually engaging with the child and building relationships which will assist in managing the aggression and conflict in the residential setting? The literature suggests (Watson, 2004, Anglin, 2002) that these techniques which include engagement, developing relationships and conflict resolution require extensive training and education when addressing children and youth with aggressive tendencies. The results proved
that 78.9% of CYW educated respondents reported more frequent use of de-escalation

37

techniques to reduce harmful behaviour when implementing plan of cares compared to 69.1% of non-CYW educated respondents. Watson's (2004) study supported this idea that CYW educated

individuals are more likely to focus on de-escalation practices and non aggressive methods of
intervention compared to the unsophisticated skills often implemented by the non-CYW

educated group. The respondents in Watson's study also implied that CYW's should develop knowledge and skills relating to bullying which will further allow them to feel safe and protected within the residential setting. Furthermore, the results of this study indicated that there were
significant differences in relation to bullying and that CYW educated people more frequently
follow the necessary protocols related to bullying.

The outcome of this research study provided further support to the existing literature relating to the skills and strategies most frequently used by CYW's to manage aggression in residential settings. Many of the questions asked within the survey related to general strategies

being used to manage aggression and conflict by CYW's in the residential settings however what is important to recognize is how these strategies relate to basic training and pre-requisite skills
for conflict management.

The literature discusses the need for relationships to be present between CYW's, children

and youth before being able to achieve the maximum success in any area of the child's life (Watson, 2004). The main point of this section is that the literature recognizes the need for

relationships with children and youth and how those relationships are used in the work that
CYW's do. The results of the survey indicate that CYW's prefer to use relationship-based techniques even in the management of conflict. The results in Table 1 show that of the five most frequently used strategies, two of the five include the concept of relationships.
The literature review identified that even though attachment theory is critical in dealing with

children and youth (Pazaratz, 2000) only 3% of residential facilities are actually using it (Foltz,
38

jo souBiioduiT gq} SuijssSSns uibSb 'p9sn A"j}U9nb9Jj sba\ uoi}bsj9auoo jo asn sip }Bqj

sjuspuodssi psjBonps yYLA3-uoTi jo o/oq6 oj pajBdraoo sjuspaodssj psponps MAD J° %Z,'S6 'sdiqsuoijBpj Suxjsnjj puB AqijB9q Sqpimq ugq^ "(SI l=u) sjuspaodssj psjBonps AVA
jo %£'6S oj pgjBduioo Suraq-flaAV puB ipiBsq jbuoijouis-oioos sSbubui pxre SAOidrai oj
SupqoBsj usqM uoxpaijSTn psjip pssn Xpusnbs^ Aaqj jnqj ps;Bjs (g^|=u) sjuspuodsai

AVAD J° %V(>9 'Sxnsq-|pAV puB iptBsq |Buopoai3-opos sSbtibth pue sAOjdun oj pssn ssnbraqoaj
aqj Suotny 'pTguoo Suunp S||i5{s Suta]Os rasjqojd jo SmqoBSi sqj yoddns oj diqsuoTjBpj Suxsn

joj jo Smp|tnq diqsuoi;Bpj joj ssi^iunyoddo Suijraiq siojsjsqj jusip puB t\\A3
si uoijoBJSjut p9innt{ 'ssiSspjjs sssqj uj ·Ajjiranbs.g Suisn ps^iodaj dnoiS psjBonpa

-uou sqj jo 3J0UI qoiqM ^ssousnbssuoo SuiuStssb,, puB tiS3Apsui9qj jno jt §up[JOA\ sasad,, apnpui qoxqAV S9i§3jBj;s jgqjo gqj oj nosiJBdtaoo ui 'jBijusjod §utuib3| iisqj szirarxBra oj jusip pire yV\AD
diqsuoiiBpj b puB uoipBjgjm gjmbgj ppoM poqjgui SurqoB9i sxqx 'dnoiS pajBonpg 9q; jo %gg oj p9iBdraoo pxguoo Surmp juaip gq; qjiM
Suisn

j pg^Bonpa AVAD 9lP J° %£'99 'noijqossi pi]jiioo
pgsn A^ugnbaij i9q^o ui ;u9sajd usyo si sdiqsuoijBpj jo aragq;
sb

ajora 9q 3JOj9J3q^ \\i/a puB 'anqdpsip uasoqo jpq; o; ^uainjnrraioo pire ajjbAoj
ji] 9joui ni^ psjBonpa ^AO smooaq 0} sasooqo oqA\ auo ;Bq; SAaqaq j

sqj ^b pa§Btrera snssi ub aq Abui siqj, -mooo oj ;u9uiqoB^B joj ajbsssosu si jBqj juapissj pns

jjb;s u99A\iaq Aouajsisuoo sqj spiAOjd ;ou ssop pus J9Aoaina jjbjs qSiq in sjps9J uay:o stqx 'J99jbo
s^uo ui 9UOJS Smdda^s b Addons 9JB sqof |BijU9piS9J Xub]at -Ajoaq} jU3iiiqoBy.B Saisn 9jb qoiqM sdiqsuoi;Bpj Suiasnj; puB AqjjBsq p^mq oj XjraniJoddo aqj SmpiAOjd jou snq; 'jnoi 9AISS3J§§B JO JOJJUOO pUB J3M0d SuiOIB^B JOJ 9AIP9JJ9 pUB 5[OIT\b 3JB qOi snoijB;dBpB uo A"pj suiBjSojd ]Bijuapis9J tpnoA Aubui ;Bq} uopdranssB Xui si ;i "(f00^

T
interaction between CYW and client. Both of the aforementioned techniques had notably higher
responses amongst the CYW educated group though they were non-significant.

The non-significant results could be explained by the instrument design, which only asked basic questions detailing the practices and interventions of front line CYC practitioners.
The use of questions that were more specific to the types of interventions used could have

resulted in responses that would have supported my hypotheses. Among the CYW educated respondents 56.8% frequently chose to actively disrupt negative relationships compared to 47.3% of non-CYW educated respondents. The results further indicated that 78.9% of the CYW

educated respondents reported more frequently using de-escalation techniques to reduce harmful behaviour as a treatment model or intervention included in plans of cares compared to 69.1% of
non-CYW educated respondents. These figures again show the importance of interaction and
engagement between CYW and children and youth.

This study has further demonstrated the importance of combining overall education and professional training once the practitioner enters the Child and Youth Care field. The value of CYW specific education in managing aggressive behaviour is further supported by Day's (2000)
suggestion that education and training for CYW's on the proper use of physical restraint and

intervention would minimize the risk of injuries to CYW's, children and youth.
Limitations of the Study

Limitations to the study include the fact that it was a self-report questionnaire. As a result, this study does not assess the effectiveness of their skills and strategies, just what CYW's

believe they were using to prevent and manage aggression within the residential setting.

The

CYW's may have also been reporting based on the desire to portray themselves as effective

practitioners. There were no survey questions regarding when or where the CYW education

40

sjnqujsxp oj J9pB9j tubs; sqj gsoqo 01 p9sn J9§bw^ uibiSoij sip suoiidumssB iBqA\
si Ji -uoijEiTan] b osjb sba\ sjuspuodssj }ituo9j: 0} pssn uoipgps uiopUBi-uou 9qx

sjunoooB 9}b.hioobui SuipiAOid giojgjraqi pssn Smsq sSBtiSxre^ aqj pus Suraq uorjsanb sq; jo SuipuBjsjapxm jusiajjip b 3ABq Xbui jtrapuodssi sqj siqa oj uopxppB iq psAoidras jBqj xuBjSojd JBjnoriiBd sqj jo Aqdoso|xqd sqi uo Sra^xodsj jo spxpq puB aoxjoBid
{BtipXAxpax jxsqj uo Suxyodsj sism sjuspuodssi sqj jx .respun si li ssnBOsq sjBtipXAipui oj sSuxpuij

sssqi 3zi|BJ3U3§ 01 ajnogjxp sq ppoA\ y '%Qp sbm sjbj innjaj jauoxjxioBjd ueisao gqj pu^

%0 PBll sisqjo 3|iqA\ s4^^3 uxojg sibj tiinisj %00I B PBlI sureiSoid iBtipiAiptii saxos uoiibjxuixi
b osp sba\ suiBjSojd aou puB S|BnpiAipui uo pssnooj sxsA|Bub AJBpuooas sxqj aBqj jobj

'(PZ'$) «-I0XI3 JO UlSiBIU o/og B pUB 90U3piJUO0 o/ogg qjlAV OUBJU
sqi ui suiBjgojd 9JB0 dnojS ;u9S9jdsj: oj u95[bj aq pjnoqs sips9i 9qj 'qSxq sbav sjbj ssuodssj gqj puB suiBiSoid 9jbo dnoiS jo uopB|ndod yeioi gqj pgpnpui quibij gui|dxires sqi souis J9A3Avoq 'pssn 3J3A\ ssnbxuqosi 8uxjduiBS A^ij[iqBqojd-uou ssnBOsq sjpssi aq^ szijb-isusS o^ A4i|iqB aqj

sjiuiq,, ASojopoqisui sqi '(8003) saspUBS ~$ irenjs Aq Apnis qojBSSSJ |bux§uo sqi xod sy
Xpnjs jbuxSuo sqj jo sxsa"jbub

XiBpU009S B UIJOJJ9d 0} J9qOJB9S9J Siqj SuiAVOHB 9J0J9J9qi 'BJBp 9qj JO SISA|BUB 9jqBjd900B UB qiXAV. gnrajuoo oj sn p9A\ojjB qoiq/A %ig p9Ai909J puB 9jbj ranjgj %z$ b psjinbsi A^Ains 9qx
·sj951ioa\ 9qi Ks\ u9J[Bij:spun Suxuxbjj

1U9ui9§bubui moiABqgq jo soxjp9ds 9qj jnoqB ^sb jou pip A9Ajms 9qj 9ouis 'Suiuibjj puB uoxjBonp9 u93A\j9q 90U9J9jjip 9qi qsitiSuiisxp AjiBsp jou S9op os|B Apn;s 9qx "s;jns9J 9qj Suipunojuoo
J|B 9IB UOXJBnpBjg 90UIS 9UIX1 JO qi§U9l pUB 'jU9UlAo|dui3 JO 9dA> !90U9IJ9dX9 9J0J9J9qj '

surveys. There was also the possibility of bias if the Program Managers did not follow through

with the instructions and distributed the surveys on their own. There was a chance of a response set because the survey was not constructed with reverse
order questions. This could misconstrue the validity of responses due to the participant's

tendency to agree with every question in a series rather than carefully thinking through the
answer to each question (Neuman, 2006).

The secondary analysis method was beneficial in this study because data was readily

available of the data and there was a correlation between the research objectives (Kiecolt &
Nathan, 1985). It was also useful to exclusively examine the areas relating to my research
questions concerning the frequency of the skills and strategies' being used by CYW's to manage aggression and the subsequent role of education in the reported strategies.
Suggestions for Further Research

This study has added to the limited amount of research conducted on the skills and strategies' being used in residential settings by CYW's to manage conflict and aggression amongst children and youth. However the likelihood of children's aggressive tendencies being

reduced is dependent on the successful implementation of behavioural interventions, not
necessarily how frequently a technique is applied. The key factor seems to be that only when

these skills and strategies are implemented within settings where the focus is meeting the needs of the children; and the CYW's have a thorough understanding of the aggression and conflict
demonstrated by children and youth will there be a more positive and successful outcome. The results have identified the skills and strategies most frequently used by CYW's to
manage aggression and conflict in the residential setting. What remains a question however are

the outcomes relating to the children and youth's behaviours? Are these skills and strategies

42

"AJBSS909U SI OUBJUO HI JtlOIABqgq 9AISS9J§§B JO 1U9UJ9§BUBUI
gqa ui gouBOijraSis ipsip puB stMA3 Aq pgsn ssiSsjejjs puB sflp[s pgjiraurajduii jo uoiiBiojdxg
iBqj jssSSns osjb pjnoM. j "JB9p jou si jnoiABqgq s(qjnoA pire ugjpjnp gqj jo suiooino sq;

guiureij sqj jaqjsqM 'jsasavoh "A^nba m psurejj sq ppoo uoisssjojd sqi jo sjsqrasra \\u
uiBJ§oid pszipjBpctBjs b jo uoi|Biu3ui3|duii sqj joj pSMOUB ptiB p9jBn|BA3 usaq s^q suoijBruts sisuo Suunp qjnoX pire uaipjiqo jo spssu sqj paui oj A^qiqB Jisqj oj uoijipps ui sureiSoad

S

aVM<I/I<I3 P116 JuauraSmreui ptyuo^ jo ssanaAipsjjs aqx -p3unm3;9p sq os^b ppoo
saisssjSSb s(qjnoA pas uaip^iqo oj ssuodsaj jnsqj ui 9|oj b sX^^d snp jaq;aqA\ paB s4yy^3 jo

SutoSuo joj psau sqx 's<MAD paousuadxam puB paoususdxs qjoq no uoisssjSSb scu9ip]iqo
jo pBdtai am sssssb ppoo sasaodssi urepso jo

aqj Suisssssb Xq qoJB9S3J aq; o; pa;nqu;aoo (800Z 's
sisuo Snunp pooisjspxm si
Moq jo sisuo ui

Si/AAD 3Ili V^ocp psjuaumoop si apr[ 'q^noX pan
uoiju9AJ3jin pire (000Z 'S9SO]A[) sgraoojno
9iB

9|qissod

oj

jo AVA3 b J° S9ijniqisnods9J puB
si 9J9qj }9A" (6961 'uypiVQ ig XgjjBq 'spiABa) ]boijuo si

sgquosgp jBqj qojB9S9J

iqjIM p9JU9UI9|duiI §UI9q X]JU9S9jd S9I§9JBJ1S pUB SJJ
si

SS9U9AIJ09JJ9

o;

ui qjnoA puB usjpnqo joj saiuoojno sqj jo SuipuBjsjspun jbs]o b 9ABq Aaqj oq ^

aasoqo

Smjusraaiduii iraqA\ ssutppinS soipsjd jssq Supnpojjui s,
uiqjiM sisBq jusjsisuoo b uo Sumnooo ssiSsjbjjs qons jo uoijBju9ui9|duii gqj s\ ^,9Ai

Conclusion

After 20 years of experience in the CYW field, many of those years as a front-line practitioner with a CYW diploma, I was very interested in the role of education relating to the

chosen strategies of CYW's for managing aggression in the residential setting. It became
apparent to me after I obtained my B.A. (CYC) and transitioned out of residential care into

private practice where I was consulting with residential programs, that the relationships between

the CYW, children and youth in residential settings often appear to be very superficial. The
CYW reacts to aggression with a need to simply control the undesirable behaviour without taking the time to discover the underlying issues that may be present. I believe it is necessary to

be more insightful and understanding of the issues that arise for children and youth when they
are removed from their homes and then placed in residential settings.

This research study has allowed me to increase my understanding of the literature and become more critical in terms of my professional thinking. More importantly, through my
research I have discovered the need to show the connection between the CYW educated group

and positive children and youth outcomes. The CYW may be the child and youth's first
encounter with a healthy relationship and without question should therefore be a positive one.

As stated earlier in this paper, children and youth who come into the system are among the most

vulnerable children in our society (Anglin, 2002) and should be able to anticipate that their lives will improve, not leave them feeling that their safety and well-being is at risk (Snow & Finlay,
1998) by their admission to a residential setting.

The practitioner responses demonstrated that education and training plays a significant role in the implementation of appropriate interventions to manage aggression in residential settings. I would like to believe that all practitioners are conducting high-quality child and youth

44

care however the literature (Watson, 2004) provides children's statements which contradict this

belief. This should demonstrate to the field of CYW the importance of being able to measure the effectiveness of the skills and strategies being used to manage aggression with children and youth in the front line position of residential settings. Further, is the need for ongoing education

and training to provide CYW's with the skills necessary to feel empowered and to provide the
best possible service to the young people they are responsible for.

45

APPENDIX A

Survey Questions Chosen for Secondary Analysis
Section 1 - The Organizational Context

4.

Do you have a CYW diploma?

Yes

D

No

D

Section 3 - Identifying the Interventions of CYC Practitioners

These questions were grouped together according to the hypotheses statements:
4 - Frequently 3-Usually 2- Sometimes 1- Rarely/Never

1) 44.

Managing Aggressive Behaviour
4

When peer conflict occurs in the home, under your supervision, (Record the appropriate number beside the
activity)
You:

3

2

1

Stop the argument?

4
*±

3
J

2
2 4m

1
1

A

Make use of the conflict to teach problem solving skills?
Let the children work it out themselves? Use role play to teach the children how to cope? Assign a consequence?

A

2
O J.
n

1
i

4
A

A

1
X

2

1

2) Practice Guidelines on How to Manage Bullying
4.
When a child in the home is bullied (physically or emotionally threatened) by another child w the
community, CYW's follow practice guidelines for how
to manage this. 4

3

2

1

10.

When a child in the home is bullied (physically or emotionally threatened) by another child in the home,
CYWs follow practice guidelines for how to manage this. When a child in the home is bullied (physically or

4

3

2

1

64.

4

3

2

1

emotionally threatened) by another child in the school,
CYW's follow practice guidelines for how to manage this.

3) Improve and Manage Social Emotional Health and Well-being
51.
You use the following techniques in order to teach the child to treat other children and adults with care and
4 3 2
1

respect? (Record the appropriate number beside the
activity) through modeling?

coaching?

46

direct instruction?

CYWs make use of community recreational resources to

4

3

2

1

73.

improve the behaviour and social skills of
children/youth.

80.

CYWs have designated one-on-one time with a child(ren) to model good quality social relationships

4

3

2

1

4) Build Healthy, Trusting Relationships
39.
Which of the following activities do you use to build a relationship: (Record the appropriate number beside the activity) Taking the child on outings? Having conversations with the child? Using restraint or holding techniques? 4 4 4 4 4
4

4

3 3 3
3

2 2

1 1

2 2 2

1
1 1 1
1

3

Play and/or recreational activities? Acknowledging special accomplishments?

3 3

2
2

5)
45.

Facilitating and Encouraging Peer Relationships
4 3 2
1

CYWs coach the child on how to act in the classroom so as to be accepted by his/her peers and the school authority figures? CYWs actively disrupt negative peer relationships within the home as a therapeutic strategy? CYWs use role play to teach children how to interact with peers.

65.

4

3

2

1

76.

4

3

2

1

Section 2 - Case Management Practices 4 - Frequently 3-UsuaIly 2- Sometimes 1- Rarely/Never

6) Interventions or treatment models incorporated into plans of care
17

You and/or the other CYWs in the program incorporate these interventions or treatment models in your plans of care:

A

Individual sessions with the child If yes, specify what model or approach you used (for example cognitive behavioural therapy, relationship oriented psychotherapy, SNAP)

4

3

2

1

D

Behavioural programs or interventions to deal with
behaviour problems

4

3

2

1

47

If yes, describe some of the techniques you used (for
example, planned ignoring, rewards for good behaviour,
time out)
I

Applying attachment theory to build secure relationship between the child and the current
caregivers

4

3

2

1

If yes, describe some of the techniques used
L

Use of restraints
For what purpose and what model

4

3

2

1

M

De-escalation techniques to reduce potential for harmful for behaviour Please describe any other treatment approach or intervention that you use which is not on this list

4

3

2

1

48

APPENDIX B

Ryerson University

Consent Agreement for Child and Youth Care Practitioners

Study Title:

"Child and Youth Care Practitioners Contributions to Evidence-based
Practice in Group Care"

You are being asked to participate in a research study. Before you give your consent to be a volunteer, it is important that you read the following information and ask as many questions as necessary to be sure you understand what you will be asked to do.
Investigators

Carol Stuart, Ph.D, School of Child and Youth Care, Ryerson University Larry Saunders, Ph.D, Ontario Association of Residences Treating Youth (OARTY) Maria Gurevich, Ph.D. Psychology, Ryerson University Robert Fulton, MSW, Ontario Association of Residences Treating Youth (OARTY) Tina Kroll, CYW, B.A.C.Y.C., MAECS (in progress), Child and Youth Care, Ryerson University, Research Assistant.
Purpose of the Study

The survey you are being asked to complete is designed to collect information about what Child and Youth Care practitioners do within their work in residential care settings. The researchers
are hoping to identify those practices that are linked to evidence-based practice/treatment and leading to positive outcomes for clients within the residential care system. The survey is being distributed in two formats to all group care settings in the province within

the child welfare, children's mental health, and private sector. The first format is for program
managers and one per group care setting will complete the survey. The second format is for CYC practitioners and your program manager has selected you as one of 3-4 representatives from your group home or residential setting.
Description of the Study

The survey can be completed at your place or work or at home and returned in the stamped envelop provided. We expect it will require about 1 hour of your time. A sub-group of participants will be invited to attend a symposium to review the results. You may be invited at a
latter time to participate in this.

The survey you will be completing will include questions which require you to check off the statement that most closely applies to you/your work, questions that require a yes or no answer, and questions where you will rate your position/ knowledge based on a scale of four possible responses (ie/ strongly disagree, disagree, neutral, agree, strongly agree). You will be completing the survey based on your knowledge about the roles and responsibilities of yourself and others in your position within the group care facility you work at. Please focus on your specific setting and your "typical" work as a child and youth care practitioner.
What is Experimental in the Study

This is not an experimental study rather it is an exploratory study.

49

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PHOPEBTY OF

Risks or Discomforts

The only risk associated with participation in this process is the stress related to taking the time to understand the questions and fill out the survey. Some people may find this to resemble a "testing" situation, which may bring some discomfort. If this is the case, please let the researchers know so that accommodations can be made for you to feel more comfortable.
Benefits of the Study

The contributions of this work to the field of Child and Youth Care will be significant. To date, little research has been done which inquires about group care settings regarding EBP/T's. Thus far there is little information about the contributions made by CYC practitioners in their daily interactions with children and youth in group care environments towards positive outcomes for the clients. Similarly, no "evidence" exists that supports the importance of the daily interactions between practitioners and the child/youth in residential settings. This study would begin the process of creating this evidence by identifying the practices of agencies and of Child and Youth Care practitioners in these settings and linking them to those practices and treatments which are supported by an evidence base.
Alternative Methods of Treatments N/A Confidentiality

The survey does NOT ask you to provide any personal or identifying information about yourself or your workplace. Survey data will be collected anonymously and therefore ensure the confidentiality of the results for you, the participant and for your group care setting. The program manager who gave you the survey knows who you are but you are not under any obligation to provide him/her with a copy of the survey or to complete the survey when he/she is present.
Your participation in the study is entirely voluntary. Your consent form will be stored separately

from the data that you provide and the only reason that we are collecting your specific information is so that we can follow up and provide you with the results of the study. Only the researchers listed above will have access to the data you provide in your survey responses and the raw data will be destroyed upon completion of the project. Aggregate data will be kept for a 5 year period and used for publications and conference presentations. Results will only be reported according to the sector that your facility is in (i.e. children's mental health, child welfare, and private sector). There will be no reporting of results by individual facility or agency.
Costs and/or Compensation for Participation We are offering a Tim Horton's certificate as a thank you for participating in the study. You

have already received this certificate and you may use it regardless of whether you complete the
survey or not. We thank you for considering participation and we hope that you will complete the survey and mail it back. Compensation for Injury

It is unlikely that participation in this project will result in harm to participants. If any complications arise, we will assist you in obtaining appropriate attention. If you need treatment or hospitalization as a result of being in this study, you are responsible for payment of the cost
50

for that care. If you have insurance, you may bill your insurance company. You will have to pay any costs not covered by your insurance. Ryerson University will not pay for any care, lost
wages, or provide other financial compensation.
Voluntary Nature of Participation

Participation in this study is voluntary. Your choice of whether or not to participate will not
influence your future relations with Ryerson University, OARTY, OACAS, CMHO or

Bartimaeus Inc. (partners in the project). If you decide to participate, you are free to withdraw your consent and to stop your participation at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which you are allowed. At any particular point in the study, you may refuse to answer any
particular question or stop participation altogether. Questions about the Study

If you have any questions about the research, please ask. If you have questions later about the
research, you may contact: Carol Stuart, Ph.D. Lead Investigator Director and Associate Professor

School of Child and Youth Care
Ryerson University 350 Victoria St.
Toronto, Ont. M5B 2K3

Phone 416-979-5000 ext 6203
Agreement

Your signature below indicates that you have read the information in this agreement and have

had a chance to ask any questions you have about the study. Your signature also indicates that
you agree to be in the study and have been told that you can change your mind and withdraw

your consent to participate at any time. You should keep a copy of this agreement. You have been told that by signing this consent agreement you are not giving up any of your
legal rights.

Name of Participant (please print)

Signature of Participant

Date

Contact information: Complete only if you are interested in receiving the results of the study or participating in the symposium at a later date.
Phone: Email: Address:

51

Appendix C - Raw Data
1) Managing Aggressive Behaviour

44.

When peer conflict occurs in the home, under your supervision you:
Frequently
Usually

Sometimes Rarely/Never

Total

Stop the argument?

181

120
112
72

76
24 250 159

8 8
27 74

385
384 384

Make use of the conflict to teach problem
solving skills? Let the children work it out themselves? Use role play to teach the children how to
cope?

240
35 60 70

90

383
382

Assign a consequence?

98

193

21

2) Practice Guidelines on How to Manage Bullying
Frequently Usually

Sometimes Rarely/Never

Total

4.

When a child in the home is bullied

(physically or emotionally threatened) by another child in the community, CYW's follow practice guidelines for how to
manage this.
254

83

26

24

387

10.

When a child in the home is bullied (physically or emotionally threatened) by
another child in the home, CYW's follow practice guidelines for how to manage this. When a child in the home is bullied
321

50

10

7

388

64.

(physically or emotionally threatened) by another child in the school, CYW's follow
practice guidelines for how to manage this.

269

81

27

9

386

3) Improve and Manage Social Emotional Health and Well-being
Frequently Usually Sometimes Rarely/Never Total

51.

You use the following techniques in order to teach the child to treat other children and

adults with care and respect? (Record the appropriate number beside the activity)
through modeling?
coaching?

318
247 240

48 96

8

3 3 10
12

377

30
29 43

376
374

direct instruction?
CYWs make use of community recreational resources to improve the behaviour and social skills of children/youth.

95
95

73.

239

389

80.

CYWs have designated one-on-one time
with a child(ren) to model good quality social 219 90
64 15 388

relationships

52

4)
39.

Build Healthy, Trusting Relationships

Which of the following activities do you use to build a relationship:
Frequently Taking the child on outings? 288 360 56 281 Usually 59 Sometimes Rarely/Never 26 2
62

Total
382

9 0
232

Having conversations with the child?
Using restraint or holding techniques? Play and/or recreational activities?

26
26
67

388 376
385 387

18
7

19

Acknowledging special accomplishments?

316

61

3

5) Facilitating and Encouraging Peer Relationships

45.

CYWs coach the child on how to act in the classroom so as to be accepted by his/her
147 120 89
27

383

peers and the school authority figures?

65.

CYWs actively disrupt negative peer
relationships within the home as a

199

134

45

6

384

therapeutic strategy?

76.

CYWs use role play to teach children how to

interact with peers.

137

95

125

33

390

Section 2 - Case Management Practices

6)

Interventions or treatment models incorporated into plans of care

Frequently 17.

Usually

Sometimes

Rarely/Neveir

Total

You and/or the other CYWs in the program incorporate these interventions or treatment models in your plans of care: Individual sessions with the
child Behavioural programs or interventions to deal with
behaviour problems 257 77 20

A

192

90

50

41

373

D

18

372

I

Applying attachment theory to build secure relationship

between the child and the
current caregivers

74

70

77

140

362

L

Use of restraints De-escalation techniques to

63

42

94

173

372

M

reduce potential for harmful for
behaviour

269

64

20

12

365

53

References

Anglin J. (2002) Responding to Pain and Pain-Based Behaviour. Child and Youth Services,
24(1), 107-121.

Astroth, K., Garza, P. & Taylor, B. (2004) Getting Down to Business: Defining Competencies
for Entry-level Youth Workers. New Directions for Youth Development, 104, 25-37.

Barter, C. (2003). Young People in Residential Care Talk about Peer Violence. Scottish Journal
ofResidential Care, 2(2), 39-50.

Barth, R., Greeson, J., Zlotnik, S. & Chintapalli, L. (2009) Evidence-based Practice for Youth in Supervised Out-of-Home Care: A Framework for Development, Definition, and
Evaluation. Journal ofEvidence - Based Social Work, 6(2), 147-175.

Bell, L & Stark, C. (2001) Measuring Competence in Physical Restraint Skills in Residential Child Care, Social Work Research Findings No. 21, The Scottish Office.
Berrick, J., (1998) When Children Cannot Remain Home: Foster Family Care and Kinship Care.
The Future of Children, 8 (1), 72-87.

Bhattacharjee, K. (2003). The Ontario Safe Schools Act: School Discipline and Discrimination. Ontario Human Rights Commission. Retrieved from
http://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/resources/discussionconsultation/SafeSchoolsConsultRepENG/
pdf from on February 12, 2008.

Bowie, V. (2005). Youthwork Education: A View from Down Under. Child and Youth Care
Forum, 34 (4), 279-302.

Collins, J. (1994). Nurses' Attitudes towards Aggressive Behaviour, Following Attendance at 'The Prevention and Management of Aggressive Behaviour Programme', Journal of
Advanced Nursing. 20, 117-131.

Craigwood Treatment Centre. Retrieved from
on February 12,2008.

http://www.craigwood.on.ca/training/pmab.htm

Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. London: Sage Publications.

Creswell, J. W. (2005). Educational research: Planning, conducting and evaluating quantitative
and qualitative research. New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.

Davids, A., Laffey, J. & Cardin, P. (1969). Intellectual and Personality Factors in Effective Child
Care Workers. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 39(1). 68-76

54

Day, D. (2000). A review of the literature on restraints and seclusion with children and youth: Toward the development of a perspective in practice. Intersectoral/Interministerial Steering Committee on Behaviour Management Interventionsfor Children and Youth in Residential and Hospital Settings: Toronto, Ontario

Day, D. (2002). Examining the Therapeutic Utility of Restraints and Seclusion with Children and Youth: The Role of Theory and Research in Practice. American Journal ofOrthopsychiatry,
72(2), 266-278.

Demasi, M., & Boyd, D. (2007). Behaviour support and management: Coordinated standards for children's systems of care. Committee on Restraint and Crisis Intervention Techniques. Dillman, D. A. (2000). Mail and internet surveys: The tailored design method. New York: J.
Wiley.

Fewster, G. (2004). Editorial, Relational Child & Youth Care Practice, 17(3), 3-4.

Finlay, J. (1996). Crossover kids: Care to custody. Office of Child and Family Service
Advocacy, 1-22.

Fitzgerald, M. (1996). On-the-spot Counselling with Residential Youth: Opportunities for Therapeutic Intervention. Journal of Child and Youth Care, 10(4), 9-17.
Foltz., R. (2004). The Efficacy of Residential Treatment: An Overview of the Evidence. Residential Treatmentfor Children and Youth, 22(2), 1-17.
Heron, G. &. Chakrabarti, M.(2002). Examining the Perceptions and Attitudes of Staff Working in Community Based Children's Homes. Qualitative Social Work, 1 (3), 341-358. Heron, G. & Chakrabarti, M. (2003). Exploring the Perceptions of Staff Towards Children and Young People Living in Community-Based Children's Homes. Journal ofSocial Work, 3
(1), 81-98.

Intersectoral/Interministerial Steering Committee. (2001). Behavioural management interventions for children and youth in residential and hospital settings. Toronto. Kiecolt, J. & Nathan, L. (1985). Secondary Analysis of Survey Data. Quantitative Applications
in the Social Sciences, 53(12).

Knorth, E., Klomp, M, Van den Bergh, P., Noom, M., (2007). Aggressive Adolescents inResidential Care: A Selective Review of Treatment Requirement and Models. Adolescence, 42(167), 462-485.
Libby, A. M., Coen, A.S., Price, D.A., Silverman, K., & Orton, H.D. (2005). Inside the Black Box: What Constitutes a Day in a Residential Treatment Centre? Journal ofSocial Welfare, 14, 176-183.

55

McAdams, C. (1999). A Conceptual Framework for Understanding Client Violence. Child and
Youth Care Forum, 28 (5), 307-338.

McAdams, C. (2002). Trends in the Occurence of Reactive and Proactive Aggression Among Children and Adolescents: Implications for Preparation and Practice in Child and Youth
Care. Child and Youth Care Forum, 31 (2), 89-109.

Miskimins, R. (1990). A Theoretical Model for the Practice of Residential Treatment.
Adolescence, Winter; 25(100), 867-890.

Moses, T. (2000). Why People Choose to be Residential Child Care Workers, Child & Youth
Care Forum, 29(2), 113-126.

Myeroff, R., Mertlich, G., & Gross, J. (1999). Comparative Effectiveness of Holding Therapy with Aggressive Children. Child Psychiatry and Human Development, 29(4), 303-313.
Neuman, W. L. (2006). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches (6th
ed.). Boston: Pearson Education Inc.

Nunno, M. H., Holden, M. & Leidy, B. (2003). Evaluating and Monitoring the Impact of a Crisis Intervention System on a Residential Child Care Facility. Children and Youth Services
Review. 25 (4), 295-315. Nunno, M. H., Holden, M. & Tollar, A. (2006). Learning from Tragedy: A Survey of Child and

Adolescent Restraint Fatalities. Child Abuse & Neglect, 30, 1333-1342. Pazaratz, D. (2000), Training Youth Workers in Residential Treatment, Residential Treatment
for Child and Youth, 18(1), 44.

Pepler, D., Craig, W., Connolly, J. & Yuile, A. (2006). A Developmental Perspective on
Bullying, Aggressive Behaviour, 32(4), 376-384.

Phelan, J. (2006). Child and Youth Care Education: The Creation of Articulate Practitioners. Child and Youth Care Forum, 34 (5), 347-355.
Queens University. Retrieved on February 12'2008 from http://www.queensu.ca/security/nonviolent.html

Punch, K. (2000). Developing effective research proposals. London: Sage Publications.
Safeguards-Training. Retrieved on June 2, 2008 from http://safeguards-

training.net/Courses/Detail.aspx?id=10

Shostack, A. L. (1997). Group homes for teenagers: A practical guide. Washington, DC: Child Welfare League of America.

56

Sourander, A., Ellila, H., Valimaki, M., & Piha, J. (2002). Use of Holding, Restraints, Seclusion and Time-out in Child and Adolescent Psychiatric In-patient Treatment. European Child

and Adolescent Psychiatry, 11(4), 162-167. Snow, K. (1994). "Aggression: Just Part of the Job?" The Psychological Impact of Aggression on Child and Youth Workers. Journal of Child and Youth Care, 9 (4), 11-30.
Snow, K., & Finlay, J. (1998). Voices from within: Youth speak out. Toronto: Office of the Child and Family Service Advocacy. Queen's Printer for Ontario.

Stock, B. (1988). One Child Care Worker's Approach to Resistance in Adolescents. Journal of Child and Youth Care, 3 (4), 37-43.
Stuart C, & Sanders, L. (2008). Child and Youth Care Practitioners Contributions to Evidencebased Practice in Group Care. Toronto: Ryerson University

Titus, R. (1989). Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Training at Kinark Child and Family Services: Assessing it's Impact. Journal of Child and Youth Care, 4 (3), 61-70. Ulrich, C. (2005). A Crisis-Prevention Program for Residential Child Care, Human Ecology,
32(2). 13.

Waterhouse, R. (2000) Lost in care: Report on the tribunal of inquiry into the abuse of children

in care in the former county council areas of Gwynedd and Clwyd since 1974. London:
Stationery Office.

Watson, D. (2004). Let's Face It!: Young People Tell Us How It Is. Scottish Journal of Residential Care, 5(1), 47-59. Wong, S. E. (1999). Treatment of Antisocial Behaviour in Adolescent Inpatients: Behavioural

Changes and Client Satisfaction. Research in Social Work Practice, 9(1), 25-44.
Wong, S.E. (2006). Assessment of Behavior Management and Behavioral Interventions in State Child Welfare Facilities, Residential Treatment of Children & Youth, 23(3-4), 105-117.

57


