Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Gendered ESL : accommodating immigrant women's cultural diversity in ESL classes
Jennifer Kathleen Landsborough
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Race and Ethnicity Commons Recommended Citation
Landsborough, Jennifer Kathleen, "Gendered ESL : accommodating immigrant women's cultural diversity in ESL classes" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 528.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

GENDERED ESL: ACCOMMODATING IMMIGRANT WOMEN'S CULTURAL
DIVERSITY IN ESL CLASSES

by

Jennifer Kathleen Landsborough, BA, University of Western Ontario, 2008

A Major Research Paper
presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts

in the Program of Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009

© Jennifer Landsborough 2009

PROPERTY OF RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the
purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

GENDERED ESL: ACCOMMODATING IMMIGRANT WOMEN'S CULTURAL
DIVERSITY IN ESL CLASSES Jennifer Kathleen Landsborough

Master of Arts, 2009 Immigration and Settlement Studies Ryerson University
ABSTRACT

Research indicates that immigrant women have lower levels of English than men in English-

speaking regions including Canada. In Canada, Language Instruction for Newcomers to Canada (LINC) is a government-funded language program which assists immigrants in improving their language levels. However, immigrant women face a number of barriers to accessing this
program. These barriers suggest that LINC does not successfully accommodate immigrant

women's diverse gender-based roles. This study examines the barriers that exist including the barriers reported by four Spanish-speaking female immigrants. With the help of LINC key informants, this study suggests that the LINC Home Study program, a distance study program,
may assist women who are unable to use the in-class LINC course to improve their English
language level.

Key words:

Immigrant, women, barrier, LINC, ESL, language

in

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to acknowledge the four women who contributed to this research by sharing their personal experiences, as well as the many women whose experiences are less known to me but whose struggles in learning English served as inspiration for this research.

As well, I would like to thank my fellow Immigration and Settlement Studies cohort, who contributed greatly in the conceptualization of this research paper.

Finally, I would like to acknowledge the assistance of Adam Williams, my future husband, who aided not only with the logistics of researching and writing this Major Research Paper, but also with patience, understanding and emotional support through the last number of months.

IV

Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Defining the Research I. Introduction 1 1

II. Thesis statement
III. Objectives IV. Organization of research paper ,

1
2 3

V. Defining the terms
VI. Theoretical considerations a. Conceptualizing gender

3
4 5

b. Gender roles in Canadian families
c. Diverse cultural gender roles d. Latin American gender roles and divisions

6
7 8

e. Barriers in adult education
VII. Positionality VIII. Research process and methods a. Literature review

10
11 11 11

b. Interview process c. Process of analysis
Chapter 2: Literature Review

12 16
18

I. Gender and English language level
II. The value of knowing English

18
19

III. Overview of the LINC program a. Objectives of and barriers to LINC
b. Situational barriers in ESL classes c. Women in the LINC program d. Summary of literature on LINC and connection to gender roles IV. LINC Home Study - a more accommodating solution? a. Effectiveness of online language learning Chapter 3: Research Findings and Discussion, by Source

20 22
22 23 25 27 28 30

I. LINC employees
a. LINC teacher b. LINC language assessors c. LINC Home Study employees

30
30 31 34

II. Participant interviews a. Veronica
b. Elena c. Cecilia d. Daniela

36 36
37 39 40

III. Participant questionnaires.....
a. Class attendance b. LINC Home Study Chapter 4: Final Discussion and Conclusion I. Gender role accommodation II. Main objectives

41
41 44 48 48 51

III. Directions for future research

52

IV. Policy recommendations V. Conclusion Appendix 1: Interview Questions for LINC Employees LINC Home Study employees
LINC teacher LINC language assessor

52 53 1 1
1 1

Appendix 2: Interview Questions with Hispanic Participants
Appendix 3: Questionnaire

2
3

References

4

VI

Chapter 1: Defining the Research

/. Introduction
In reviewing literature on second language acquisition and immigrant language levels, I noticed a trend of immigrant women having lower second language levels than immigrant men. Upon
further investigation, I realized a common reason for this was that many women have family

obligations or cultural expectations that keep them at home. On the other hand, having low English levels can limit women from accessing much-needed resources: some may be unable to use community services or they may experience isolation, but more significantly, some women
may be unable to protest possible violation of their rights. Angered by the possibility of immigrant women having their rights violated and by the linguistic limitations in trying to contest these violations, I set out to understand the government of Canada's initiatives for these women, mainly the Language Instruction for Newcomers to Canada (LINC) program, a

classroom-style English language program. I also examined LINC's distance study program, LINC Home Study, as a possible alternative for immigrant women who are unable to use
classroom-style LINC courses.

//. Thesis statement
The findings in this research suggest that the classroom-style LINC program does not
successfully accommodate the diverse gender roles among newcomer women, as revealed by the barriers these women face in using this program, such as needing childcare (Kilbride et al. 2008,

33). Alternately, the LINC Home Study program may be able to accommodate these roles to a much higher degree, which would enable women who would not otherwise attend these classes

r
to benefit from the LINC program. Although the extent to which women are able to benefit from the LINC Home Study program is unknown, it appears that Home Study would be a viable
option for some women who are unable to attend LINC classes.

///. Objectives
To assist me in revealing the matters presented in the thesis statement, I have developed the
following three objectives: 1. To reveal the barriers experienced by some newcomer women in accessing LINC classes

and how these barriers relate to diverse gender roles. Identifying the barriers that

immigrant women face in accessing LINC from a feminist perspective may reveal the
particular areas in which the LINC program falls short in accommodating these women's
diverse gender-based roles.

2.

To bring to light the experiences of four women whose situations have not been accommodated by the LINC program and who are therefore currently not benefiting from LINC classes. This research examines the personal testimonies of four non-Englishspeaking women as a primary source to understand the barriers directly from their

perspectives. By learning of their diverse backgrounds, life situations and personal awareness and opinions of LINC, we can attempt to understand the reasons why they are not using LINC to improve their English language skills and thus the areas that could be
better accommodated within the LINC program.

3.

To identify the LINC Home Study program as a possible method of reducing the barriers
within LINC classes and of enabling the women who face these barriers to study English. The LINC Home Study program is considered for its relevancy as a possible alternative to the classroom LINC program because it already exists as a viable option and because

the flexibility of the program may allow greater accommodation to gender or culturerelated responsibilities or roles than does the classroom LINC program.

IV. Organization of research paper
In this research paper, Chapter 1 explains the background to the research: how it was conducted,
who was consulted, my research goals, and the theory behind the research. Next, Chapter 2

reviews the literature: why learning English is important for immigrants, current government initiatives, and barriers to the LINC program, including those which concern women. I propose
LINC Home Study as a possible solution for women who face barriers in using the LINC program. Then, Chapter 3 reveals my research findings and discussions broken down by source. Finally, Chapter 4 is a general discussion in relation to my thesis statement as well as a
conclusion.

V. Defining the terms
Before discussing the theory behind the research, it may be beneficial to define some of the
common terms and acronyms used in the literature review and research. First, Language

Instruction for Newcomers to Canada (LINC) is a government-sponsored language program

intended for newcomers to Canada (CIC 2004, 1.0). Within this research, the term newcomer
refers to an immigrant who is a permanent resident but who has not obtained Canadian

citizenship, as this is an eligibility requirement for LINC (Kilbride et al. 2008, 4). Citizenship
and Immigration Canada (CIC) is the federal department responsible for immigration and settlement and which funds the LINC program. The Canadian Language Benchmarks Assessment (CLBA) is a standardized system to rate language level and is used as the basis of LINC class levels. The term gender roles refers to the responsibilities that may be expected of

individuals according to their gender and are based on variables like culture, situation and
socioeconomic class (Narayan 1997; Popenoe 1996).

VI. Theoretical considerations
Certain theories and trends may assist in understanding the literature and the findings in the
present research. It may seem obvious that a research paper based on improving newcomer women's access to language classes would use a feminist theory, because feminist theories are focused on the liberation of women. However, much of feminist theory within North America,

which is categorized as Western Feminism, is criticized for its focus on white, middle-class
women, and for overlooking the struggles of poor and/or racialized women (Narayan 1997). Further, in North American and European cultures there is a tendency to see poorer or colonized

cultures as inferior (Bannerji 1995, 47). This can be especially common within an immigration
context, where one prevailing culture and many secondary immigrant cultures exist within one
society.

To avoid overlooking the struggles of racialized or poor women, I turn to the theory of

Third World Feminism. Third World Feminists argue that gender cannot be examined without
considering other parts of identity, such as class and race (Bannerji 1995, 49). Important to this

theory is the idea of multiculturalism, which accepts and promotes the existence of different cultures within one society (Bannerji 1995). Third World Feminist Herr (2004) wrote that Western Feminists often object to the idea of multiculturalism, believing it to diminish women's
struggles. She argues that multiculturalism is in fact beneficial to immigrant women because it brings attention to issues present in diverse cultures (74). Multiculturalism is not only significant because it reveals specific cultural issues, but also because it combats ideas of cultural superiority and inferiority. In the Canadian context, multiculturalism is also supported federally

by the Multiculturalism Act (1988), which endeavours to ensure equal opportunity to all people,
regardless of origin or culture (CIC 2008).

Given these theoretical considerations, in this research I adopt several foundations from
the Third World Feminist Theory:

1.

All cultures need to be considered equally. Especially within a Canadian multiculturalist
context, one culture cannot be considered superior to another (CIC 2008, Herr 2004),
regardless of the particular group's relative share of power.

2.

Culture or gender cannot be examined in isolation. Intersections with class and ethnicity
must be considered as well (Bannerji 1995).

3.

Immigrant women may suffer from gender role-related and settlement-related issues that are different from those faced by Canadian-born women (Bannerji 1995).

a. Conceptualizing gender

The notion of gender is much more complex than the biological differences between men and
women. According to Kelly (2005), gender accounts for significant disparities in economic,

political, and ideological spheres within society. The way that a culture conceptualizes gender results in gender-based variation across several categories; economic differences, such as

culturally-defined labour roles and paid versus unpaid labour; political differences, regarding
power/authority distribution and access to services; and ideological differences, including appropriate roles for men and women (347-348). Because gender divisions are culturally and socially constructed, people from diverse cultures may have varying political, economic and
ideological ideals.

Further, the specific roles assigned to particular genders can vary within classes, cultures
and personal situations. Unique family situations or life events may require individuals to stray
from class or culturally-defined gender roles.

In summary, there may be a very wide range of gender roles represented among Canadian

immigrants. Because Canada's Multiculturalism Act endeavours to ensure equal opportunity for
all people, regardless of cultural origin (CIC 2008), government-sponsored language programs

have an obligation to accommodate these diverse gender roles, so that all immigrants have equal
opportunity to use these programs.

b. Gender roles in Canadian families

The ideal of a "traditional nuclear family" has been prevalent in North America from the early eighteenth century until the 1960s (Popenoe 1996). Even today, the commonly-held ideological
concept of family involves the role of men as providers and women as caregivers of children

(Kelly 2005, 348). Perhaps in reflection of this, within the Canadian workforce men are usually the primary earners within heterosexual families or partnerships. This is also reflected in men's and women's wages. After Drolet (2002) controlled for different characteristics like work experience and education, he found that on average women earn 82 to 89.5 percent of men's
average hourly wages, a difference which does not seem to be based on any variant except

gender (13). On the other hand, even though the idea of the nuclear family may be an ideal for
many, in reality family structures are very diverse, including cohabiting couples, childless

couples, children from different partners, and separated, divorced or homosexual couples. The extent to which families are able to retain certain gender-based roles or divisions of labour can depend largely on socioeconomic class. Upper and middle classes are often much

more able to uphold the North American ideals (of father-provider and women-caregiver) than
are lower classes (Kelly 2005, 348).

c. Diverse cultural gender roles
For immigrants, cultural background or personal situations may ascribe gender roles that are
different from commonly-held ideals in Canada; therefore, immigrants may not have the same beliefs regarding gender divisions as many Canadian-born residents. For example, it can be argued that work within the home, which is largely accomplished by women in North America (West and Zimmerman, 1987, 160-161), is often devalued in North American society. This is probably influenced by ideals of capitalism, which places a higher value on remunerated work in comparison with non-remunerated work. However, this is not necessarily the case in certain

cultures, or in immigrant households within Canada, where people may view unpaid and paid
labour more equally (Pallis 1980, 50-51). As a result, in some cultures women may work
primarily within the home, and immigrant women from these cultures may be less willing to

work outside of the home than are Canadian-born residents. It is critical to discern the distinction between Canadian-based and non-Canadian-based

ideologies of gender role divisions, because Canadian-based ideologies might not necessarily
apply to people from other cultures. Specifically in this research, it is important to be aware that the idea that immigrant women should attend educational classes in the community is culturally-

biased. To illustrate this, it may be natural for a Canadian-born woman to work and learn outside
of the home, but for women from other cultures, the primary learning and/or working may be

completed within the home or with family. Therefore it may be difficult or unattainable for
immigrant women to attend community-based language classes.

It could be suggested that some of the barriers to accessing language classes may contribute to oppressing or silencing women and that attending community-based language

classes may help them overcome these problems. However, some women may never be able to
attend these classes: they may be primary caregivers of their children or not have access to

adequate transportation and never have the opportunity to attend language classes. Increasing
accessibility to English language courses through other means may assist women to learn English who may not have the opportunity otherwise. Therefore, rather than perpetuating

oppression, making English classes more accessible through other means would likely help
empower women to overcome barriers through learning English.

d. Latin American gender roles and divisions
As immigrants from Latin America were consulted for a significant portion of this research paper, it may be helpful to review some of the gender-related cultural trends within Latin America. Because a large number of countries and cultures exist within Latin America, a wide range of gender roles and responsibilities may exist within these different cultures. However, scholars have observed some general similarities across Latin American cultures with regards to

male and female roles, especially the prevalence of patriarchy. Within the ideology of patriarchy,
the role of women is to take care of the household and children, and they are encouraged to be

dependent, virtuous, and submissive to their husbands and to their families. The role of men
includes being the head of authority within the family, as well as the principal income earner. Men are encouraged to be powerful, authoritative and independent (De Los Rios 2007; ComasDiaz 1987). Both Bavolek (1997) and Popenoe (1996) also observe these characteristics in several Latin American cultures. Additionally, in Latin American cultures, families are highly

valued social units (De Los Rios 2007, 115-116). Thus childbearing is an essential part of women's responsibilities (Flores et al, 1998, 76).
In an immigration context, some people may change their beliefs or practices because of

necessity or due to influence from their new country. For example, many immigrant women who

are visible minorities in the United States have paid employment out of necessity, even though they may not have been employed outside of the home before immigration (Hondagneu-Sotelo and Avila 1997, 551). However, in Latin American cultures, many people view paid employment
as contrary to a mother's responsibilities of taking care of children and the household

(Hondagneu-Sotelo and Avila 1997, 551). As well, many Latin American women hold on to the ideal of taking care of their children as their primary role while their male partners earn income for the family (Hondagneu-Sotelo and Avila 1997, 551). Further, it is not generally culturally acceptable for a Latin American woman to rely on another person to fulfill these responsibilities, such as using paid daycare or relying on family members to be babysitters. As a result, female Latin American immigrants in Canada and in the USA may have to fulfill high expectations of being wage earners and the primary caregivers of children, and some mothers believe that they have fallen short in their responsibilities (Bernhard
etal. 2005, 5).

Patriarchy appears in other ways among Latin American immigrants. Popenoe (1996) observes among US immigrants from Cuba and Mexico that women generally place a high value

on marriage and motherhood, whereas men value authority and the ability to provide (350). De
Los Rios (2007) agrees with the prevalence of patriarchy among US immigrants from Latin America, although she also observes that in some cases, immigrant women are able to challenge their gender roles within the United States (115-116).

From these scholars' observations, it can safely be assumed that many Canadian
immigrants from Latin America conform to patriarchal characteristics, especially women as the

primary caregiver of children and men as the primary income earner, although it is likely that in some cases, women also work outside of the home. These cultural characteristics, although they are general, may affect these women's ability to attend language classes. First of all, if women's primary responsibilities are carried out within the household, and they spend little time in an
English-speaking community, it is possible that both the women and their spouses will not see a

need for the women to learn English. In some cases, women may desire to learn English, but if their husband (as the head of authority) does not share this desire, they may not end up attending a language class. As well, mothers may have the primary responsibility of taking care of their
children. It may be impossible for them to attend class while they have young children, either because of conflicts related to having children (needing childcare, not having sufficient transit),

or because of conflicts related to cultural childcare responsibilities (such as not consenting to
others taking care of their children). Further, home responsibilities may inhibit the time and energy that the women are able to dedicate to studying or to attending class.
1

e. Barriers in adult education

In an examination of adult learning, Cross (1981) wrote that there are three different categories of barriers to attending classes: dispositional, institutional, and situational. Dispositional barriers involve learners' attitudes and emotions towards attending class, such as refusing to attend because they dislike the teacher or the teaching method. Institutional barriers are difficulties that are caused by the institution that funds or that runs the classes, such as a learner not being able to
attend classes because of his or her immigration status. Situational barriers are caused by factors in a person's life at a particular point in time, like a need for child-minding and transportation.

10

Much current research focuses on situational barriers. Institutional barriers (such as the inability of Canadian citizens to use LINC classes) are also common within the literature. However, because situational barriers are more closely connected with gender roles, the present research
will focus on situational barriers.

VII. Positionality
Third World Feminists are generally women who write from Third World or developing nations,
or who belong to immigrant ethnic groups. As a white female raised in Canada, I belong to

neither of these groups, and I may unknowingly make assumptions that are not in line with a Third World Feminist viewpoint. Further, there may be other consequences of my ethnicity that
may distort findings, such as if participants are not able or not willing to be completely

forthcoming due to reasons stemming from my race, language or culture, or if I misinterpret their
responses due to cultural or other reasons.

VIII. Research process and methods

a. Literature review

To begin the research process, I conducted a review of the literature, primarily of Englishlanguage scholarly journals over the past fifteen years. Because very little research examined barriers to newcomer women learning English, I explored a range of topics. Generally these

topics consisted of immigrant language acquisition including gender differences; language
instruction and adult learning including barriers; and computer-assisted language learning. I examined these areas to see what barriers exist for women within language classes and if computer-assisted language learning was a viable alternative. Because several of these areas
were under-researched, I also reviewed research published within the past twenty years that

11

specifically examined immigrant women's language acquisition and barriers to participation in
ESL classes. The literature reviewed was primarily conducted in Canada, the United States and

Australia. I conducted my search across various disciplines, including sociology, linguistics, education and economics, thereby encompassing a wide variety of perspectives.
Further, I consulted the most recently available Canadian government documents such as census reports and government-funded evaluations of the LINC program. I also examined a few

articles conducted by Canadian non-governmental organizations. Finally, because research on
the LINC program is limited, I consulted several websites of immigrant-serving agencies in

Toronto to understand practices within the LINC program.

b. Interview process
Primary research within this research paper consisted of two sets of interviews. For the first set, I consulted five LINC employees in southern Ontario: one LINC teacher, two Home Study
employees and two language assessors (Appendix 1). I initiated communication with the LINC

teacher and with the language assessors through personal contact and with the Home Study employees through the Home Study website (Centre for Education and Training n. d.). For the LINC teacher, I inquired about class attendance difficulties for women. I asked the LINC Home Study employees about the purpose, the benefits and the beneficiaries of the LINC Home Study program. The Home Study employees held different positions within the Home Study program and contributed their individual expertise within the interview. I interviewed the language assessors to understand the extent of LINC Home Study promotion and the criteria for referral. One of the language assessors worked in an urban centre outside of Toronto; all of the other
LINC employees worked in the Greater Toronto Area. I focused on the Greater Toronto Area

(GTA) because a large proportion of immigrants settle in this area; 43 percent of immigrants

12

who entered Canada in the 1990s lived in Toronto in 2001 (Statistics Canada 2002). Therefore, the responses gathered from interviews in Toronto would likely be representative of a larger
number of Canadian immigrants. On the other hand, I interviewed one language assessor outside
of the GTA to see if assessment practices and Home Study referrals and promotion were

conducted differently in a non-immigrant hub, where Home Study may be more necessary
because of fewer available services.

Despite the extensive experience of LINC employees, there are limitations to the data

they are able to provide. They are experienced with newcomers who have been able to access the LINC or Home Study programs, or, in the case of the language assessors, newcomers who have at least made contact with a centre to begin English language training. These employees do not have contact with women who have been unable to access the programs and who are unable to connect with an assessment centre. The number of women who are in this category is unknown.
However, their difficulties are most significant, as they are not able to use the language training
programs that are offered.

Therefore, in this research paper I also interviewed four Spanish-speaking newcomer

women who were not taking formal language classes. The purpose of interviewing participants
was to expose some of the barriers experienced by women who do not use ESL classes and to see if they were similar as those reported in other literature.

1 chose to consult Spanish-speaking newcomers from Latin America for several reasons.
Foremost, because I consulted participants who were not currently using English language

classes, they may be limited in their knowledge of English; therefore they must have the option of being interviewed in their first language. Because I speak Spanish, I chose to interview Spanish-speakers from Latin America. Also, I wanted a group that was sizeable; large enough

13

that information about language programs could spread through word-of-mouth. Spanishspeaking immigrants from Latin American are a fairly large group in Canada; in 2006, Colombia was the tenth most prominent source country for new immigrants to Canada (Statistics Canada
2007) and Spanish was the fourth most common mother tongue of foreign-born Canadians not including English or French (Statistics Canada 2008). Immigrants from many nations speak Spanish, including from Mexico, Cuba, Colombia,

and Argentina, and even within these national groups there may be divisions of ethnicity, class and race. Each individual group has its unique immigration history to Canada. The goal of choosing Spanish speakers from different countries is to capture some of the diversity that is
present in the range of newcomers to Canada.

These participants were invited through posters and word of mouth at several immigrant
service agencies in the GTA, as well as an immigrant service agency in an urban centre outside

of Toronto. Again, 1 selected Toronto as a source because it receives a large portion of Canada's immigrants (Statistics Canada 2002); therefore, using participants from Toronto should result in
findings that are representative of more Canadian immigrants than a smaller city. However, I also invited participants through a immigrant-serving agency in an urban area outside of Toronto,

to see if any significant barriers were exposed that did not affect the participants in Toronto, such
as transportation issues, as the particular urban area does not have a rapid, centralized

transportation system like Toronto's subway system. All of the service agencies involved in this
study offer services in Spanish and are easily accessible by public transit: in Toronto, they are

within ten minutes walking from a subway stop or on a bus route which intersected with the
subway; in the urban area outside of Toronto, the service agency is downtown and on several
main bus routes.

14

Three of the four participants were from Toronto. They were born in Colombia, Panama
or Argentina. Among them, there were a wide variety of family situations; all were mothers, yet one's children were adults, another's children were in school and two had babies or young children. As well, two of these women were living alone and two were living with partners. The participants were also of different ages: two were between thirty and thirty-nine, one was

between forty and forty-nine, and one was over fifty. Again, the purpose of selecting participants with varied ages and family structures was to allow for greater diversity in the findings.
Interviews consisted of about fifteen minutes of oral questions (Appendix 2) and five

minutes of a written questionnaire (Appendix 3). The purpose of these interviews and
questionnaires was to understand the stories and lived experiences of these participants, who face

challenges using the LINC program. For the oral section, there were a possible fifteen questions, depending on the participants' past experiences (I discarded several questions if they did not
apply to the participants' individual situations). I first asked about their background, including their country of origin, their length of time living in Canada, and their family and work

situations. Next, I inquired about their use of English and their opinions toward learning English, as well as their past experiences: if they had learned English through a course before, if they
enjoyed it, in which country it was conducted, and if it was the LINC program. Finally, I asked if

they are aware of the LINC Home Study program, gave them information if they desired it, and
asked if they thought they might use the Home Study program.

The short questionnaire consisted of two questions: why the participants were not using a classroom English course and what concerns they had about using the Home Study program.
From a list of reasons for each question, they were asked to rate the extent to which each reason

affected them based on a scale of one to five; one representing a reason that did not affect them

15

r
and five representing a reason that was very significant to them. One participant had used the
Home Study course in the past, so for the final question on the questionnaire she responded regarding why she was no longer taking the course. The specific reasons I listed on these two questions originated from common situational barriers that emerged from the literature. This

included having to take care of children and not having access to transportation (Kilbride et al.
2008, 33; CIC 2004, 3.0; McArthur 1998; Armstrong 1996, Hayes 1989), not knowing about English classes (Kilbride et al 2008, 32; McArthur 1998) and timing and scheduling difficulties including employment (Kilbride et al. 2008, 33-35; Hayes 1989). I also included the dispositional barriers of "dislike of learning method" and "lack of family support" in the event that my participants experienced no situational barriers in accessing English language classes.

c. Process of analysis
Once 1 conducted the interviews, I transcribed them in the original language. For the L1NC employees, I analyzed the data that provided further information regarding the issues presented in thesis statement (such as barriers for women attending LINC classes and extent to which the Home Study method made it easier for women to learn English through LINC).

After transcribing the participants' interviews, I compiled the responses to the
questionnaires. To respond to the first question of the questionnaire, the participants were instructed to use a scale of one to five. To analyze these responses, I classified each response as either "not significant" (for responses of 1 or 2) or "significant/very significant" (for responses of 3-5). Once these were tallied, I examined the reasons which were rated as "significant/very significant" by at least one participant. Within the interview transcriptions, I colour-coded data
that related to each reason, as well as noted any other possible barriers to class attendance. In

16

addition, I noted areas of each transcript that revealed the participant's desire to learn English, as
it may have changed the findings if they had little or no desire to learn English. The second question inquired what would concern participants about taking the LINC

Home Study course. Because each participant's situation is different, 1 analyzed these findings separately. I examined each of their responses and compared them with their responses to the
final two interview questions, which asked about their knowledge of and thoughts about using the Home Study program. In the analysis and final report, I changed the names of these women to protect their identities. After analyzing the participants' responses, I compared the data gathered from the LINC employees and from the participants and examined the data in relation

to my thesis.

17

Chapter 2: Literature Review

/. Gender and English language level
Though few Canadian studies have examined gender differences in immigrant language acquisition, existing studies reveal that females generally have a lower level of communicative competence in the second language than males (Boyd 1992; Beiser and Hou 2000). Boyd (1992) reveals that, based on the 1986 Canadian census, 7.2 percent of foreign-born women compared to 3.7 percent of foreign-born men did not have conversational ability in English or French.

Similarly, 1980 census data in the USA reveals that 8.5 percent of foreign-bora women
compared to 6 percent of foreign-born men were not able to speak English, suggesting that women's lower second language level is not a uniquely Canadian occurrence. In a more contemporary study, Beiser and Hou (2000) examined South Asians' language levels after ten years in Canada. They discovered that women have overall lower English levels and are less likely to learn English than men. Several scholars have attempted to understand why immigrant women have lower levels

of English than men. Rather than a definitive correlation between low English level and any
particular factor, they have found a wide range of correlating factors. For example, using the Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants to Australia, Chiswick et al. (2004) revealed that for both genders there are correlations between levels of language proficiency and exposure to English

before arrival, educational level, age at immigration, economic incentives, immigration category, primary language of spouse, presence of a community with a similar ethnicity or language and
the presence of friends and family in Canada before immigration. Several of these categories can have strong connections to culturally-based gender divisions. For example, women from cultures

where fewer women work outside of the home, such as Latin American cultures, would tend to have lower exposure to English, lower education levels, and a higher likelihood to arrive under
spousal applications rather than as primary applicants. Similarly, because on average women earn lower hourly wages than men in Canada (Drolet 2002, 13), for immigrant women,

improving their English would tend to be met with less financial return than for immigrant men.
Therefore they may not see a great importance in improving their English levels. In short, there
seems to be a distinction between individual genders and level of English proficiency and

through scholars have not found a single clear reason behind it, correlations suggest that gender
roles contribute to this distinction.

//. The value of knowing English
It is very difficult to participate in a society in which one cannot communicate in the dominant language. This is especially true regarding participation in the labour market. According to a
report by Statistics Canada (2003), employed immigrants who were able to speak English well were more likely not only to have a higher-paying job than those who had a lower level of English, but they were also more likely to have a higher-skilled job within the area where they

were trained. Similarly, in Gonzales' (2000) study on immigrants to the United States, the participants who reported high oral skills earned an average of 16 percent more than those who
reported low oral skills. It should be noted, however, that it is difficult to produce unbiased

statistics on language level and economic factors, because most data sources regarding language level (including the Canadian census, which is principally used in Canadian studies regarding language skills) rely on immigrants' self-perceived level of language, which is subjective, rather
than a standardized language rating.

19

It could be argued that some women are able to carry on their lives in Canada without knowing English because they spend most of their time within the household. As we will see
later, it is true that some women carry out many of their responsibilities within the household.

However, even women who spend all their time within their household often need English in order to function well within Canada; immigrants with a low level of English have difficulty navigating the healthcare system and using other services, and women who spend most of their time within their homes may need to use these services (Breton 1999, 16). In addition, many people need support networks. Some women are not part of a close-knit ethnic community and without English proficiency, it may be impossible for them to develop a much-needed support network in Canada. Further, after several years of being in Canada, mothers with low levels of English may face challenges communicating with their children. Especially when the children were born in Canada or enter at a young age, they can acquire English very quickly and can have

trouble retaining their first language. As a result, these children may have some difficulty
communicating with their mothers, who may not acquire English as quickly (Breton 1999, 16).
Lastly, immigrant women who spend much of their time within the home would need to know English if they are in a situation of abuse, a medical emergency, if they separate from their

,

partner, or if they need to find employment. Thus, knowing English is necessary for many immigrant women to function in Canada, regardless of how much of their time is spent within
the home.

///. Overview of the LINC program
As a department of the federal government, Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) funds the LINC program as its principal method of assisting newcomers to learn English.
According to the 2001 Canadian census, 60 percent of immigrants reported using language

20

classes to improve their English. This number excludes Quebec, where French rather than English is the primary language of instruction for newcomers to Quebec (Statistics Canada 2001, Figure 5.2). This statistic suggests that English classes are widely understood by immigrants to
be beneficial.

The LINC program started in 1992 and offers part-time and full-time language classes free of charge to newcomer immigrants and refugees. These classes are available in a multitude of locations throughout the GTA (Toronto District School Board n.d. and The YMCA n.d.). Canadian citizens as well as refugee claimants are ineligible for LINC classes. Many locations that offer the LINC program also provide child-minding services and transportation vouchers

(Minister of Public Works 2003; Toronto District School Board n.d.) The class levels correspond
with a standard of levels called the Canadian Language Benchmarks (CLBA), which range on a scale of one to twelve. The LINC program is intended for learners with intermediate or beginner
levels of English. Those with higher levels are directed towards the Enhanced Language Training (ELT) program, which is also government-funded and offers more advanced vocation-specific
language training to newcomers.

Unfortunately, few scholars have examined the effectiveness of language classes at

improving adults' language skills. A possible reason for this is that second-language scholars
widely disagree on the best teaching method, and teachers vary in their teaching styles (DrydenPeterson 2007, 3). Success of language classes could differ significantly depending on teaching

methods. However, Gonzalez (2000) finds that among immigrants in the United States, participants who completed English as a Second Language (ESL) courses had a higher level of English comprehension, writing, reading and speaking than those who did not complete ESL
courses.

21

a. Objectives of and barriers to LINC
According to CIC (2004), the goals of LINC are as follows:

The program aims to facilitate the social, cultural and economic integration of
immigrants and refugees in Canada by providing language instruction in either English or French, as well as information that helps newcomers to become oriented to the Canadian way of life. (1.0)

As well, "the program endeavours to train the same proportion of women and men as is reflected
in the local immigrant population." (CIC 2004, 1.0)

In an evaluation of LINC program published online by CIC, it is estimated that 20 percent of newcomers are involved in the LINC program. Within this evaluation, certain CIC employees and service providers indicate that the difficulties hindering other newcomers from participating include illness, distance (especially in smaller communities), and finances (generally employment conflicting with class attendance or success). However, these key informants from CIC note that the major barriers to using LINC classes are: lack of transportation, need for child-minding, and assistance for individuals with disabilities. They also
believe that CIC has effectively addressed these barriers (CIC 2004, 3.0).

b. Situational barriers in ESL classes In the present research, I will examine situational barriers, which relate to factors in a person's life and to gender roles, as opposed to institutional or dispositional barriers. Very little research on situational barriers to ESL classes has been published since the 1990s. Even in the 1990s, most studies examined adult education generally rather than ESL classes specifically. However, Hayes (1989), Armstrong (1996) and McArthur (1998) examined situational barriers to adult ESL classes. First, Hayes (1989) examined barriers among low-literate Hispanic participants in the USA. The situational barriers mentioned were associated with cost, employment, lack of

22

transportation, and time restraints. Similarly, Armstrong (1996) studied ESL literacy learners in the USA. Most of her participants were unemployed, so situational barriers regarding
employment (such as class schedule conflicting with work schedule) were not significant in her study. The most prevalent situational barrier mentioned was the need to take care of children and

elderly family members. As well, McArthur's (1998) article was based on a United States
national survey conducted between 1994 and 1995. Of the twelve million adults who cited a language other than English as their main home language, three million reported being interested

in taking ESL classes but having not done so in the last twelve months. Of these, 59 percent reported that they were not informed about the classes. Of the remaining adults, 40 percent stated
that they did not have enough time to take classes, 26 percent reported that the cost prevented them from attending, and 23 percent reported that the lack of childcare or transportation was a

significant barrier to attending classes.

c. Women in the LINC program
The 2004 LINC evaluation notes that gender divisions can prevent certain women from attending LINC classes:

Gender barriers exist for some newcomers; in some cultures, educating women is
not seen as necessary or women are not allowed to attend classes with men. This

may in some cases limit the participation of women in LINC. (CIC 2004, 3.0)
This is the only mention of gender-specific barriers in the evaluation. Though it may be true that

cultural reasons may inhibit some women from learning English in a classroom, this quote
appears to ignore CIC's responsibility to accommodate diverse gender roles. Canada's

Multiculturalism Act has as its purpose to promote different cultures and eliminate culturallybased disadvantage (CIC 2008), and as a department of the federal government, CIC must also

23

follow this federal Act and change policies and programming to better accommodate different
gender role divisions and reduce these culturally-defined gender barriers.

Little scholarly research has been published on the specific barriers experienced by women in accessing ESL classes. However, Kilbride et al. conducted a significant contribution to this research in 2008. The study focused on female immigrants learning English in Toronto, using interviews with newcomers and service providers as well as newcomer focus groups. The situational barriers in ESL classes that are mentioned in Hayes' (1989), Armstrong's (1996) and

McArthur's (1998) articles, including financial issues, need for child-minding and transportation, lack of information and scheduling conflicts, appear in Kilbride et al.'s findings. Most
importantly, all of Kilbride et o/.'s (2008, 32) key informants mentioned that financial issues make it difficult for female immigrants to become proficient in English. Although LINC classes are offered free of charge, women are still affected by difficult economic situations. Some

require employment as soon as possible after arrival, which decreases their time and energy to
attend LINC classes. Similarly, child-minding and transportation can be barriers to women attending LINC.

The child-minding offered during LINC classes is only available to children of certain ages: according to the Toronto District School Board (n.d.), children need to be between the ages of 18 months and six years. Therefore, anyone who has very young children must use alternate forms of childcare in order to use LINC classes. In addition, key informants in Kilbride et al.'s study indicate that there are not enough spaces available in LINC child-minding to accommodate the need (Kilbride et al. 2008, 33). Alternately, some immigrant mothers may not be accustomed or
may not approve of other people taking care of their children, so these mothers may not be able to attend language classes while their children are not in school.

24

Lack of transportation can also create challenges for newcomers wishing to attend language classes. Even if transportation is fully funded, classes can be too far away or too difficult for students to access. These difficulties can be compounded if the learners have very limited knowledge of English or have small children (33). Learning to use a transportation system could be very challenging if one is unable to request help, and traveling with small children could be logistically difficult or dangerous. Beyond the original major barriers cited by the CIC LINC evaluation (2004), lack of information or lack of time could also discourage women from attending LINC classes. Many of Kilbride et a/.'s participants mention challenges in finding out about government-sponsored LINC classes, and key informants mention a lack of funding for outreach (32). As well, both participants and key informants discussed a need for greater diversity in the hours that classes
were offered (35). In sum, CIC recognizes that lack of child-minding and transportation are among the most

common barriers for newcomers wanting to use the LINC program. However, the study's key informants, who are CIC employees, feel that these barriers have been effectively addressed (CIC 2004, 3.0). According to Kilbride et a/.'s (2008) working paper, not only have these not
been fully addressed, but also the additional barriers of financial obstacles, lack of information,

and class scheduling have not been successfully dealt with. These barriers are not uncommon, as they are reflected in Hayes' (1989), Armstrong's (1996) and McArthur's (1998) research on ESL classes in the United States.

d. Summary of literature on LINC and connection to gender roles
The barriers experienced by immigrant women may be strongly connected to their gender role.

Before examining this connection, however, it is important to recall that immigrant women may

25

face certain issues which are different from those of Canadian-born women (Bannerji 1995), and
immigrants are likely to have different definitions of gender roles than those held by many Canadian-born (Pallis 1980, 50-51). Therefore, whereas it is completely normal for Canadian-

born women to work and/or attend classes outside of the home, it may not be accepted for immigrant women to do one or both of these. Even if attending classes is accepted, other aspects
of their gender role may inhibit them from accessing LINC classes. Many of the more significant situational barriers are connected to gender roles, including transportation, child-minding, and scheduling. Not only is transportation difficult for those with

limited English levels, but women whose roles are carried out primarily within the home may not be comfortable using public transit, especially if they have small children (Kilbride 2008, 33).
Additionally, many immigrant mothers, including those from Latin American countries, may be primary caregivers of their children. Policy makers within the LINC program have tried

to alleviate this barrier by funding child-minding in some centres. Nonetheless, the centres that do offer child-minding services have a limited number of spaces (Kilbride et al. 2008, 33). As
well, this service cannot accommodate all situations. In Latin American cultures specifically, parents or children may be uncomfortable leaving the child with a stranger, because they may not

be accustomed to this practice, or because it may be culturally unacceptable to allow other
people to take care of one's children. Finally, women who work outside of the home may have difficulty attending LINC

classes because of scheduling conflicts (Kilbride et al. 2008, 35), or they may not have the
energy or the time to commit to LINC classes on a regular basis. This may be related to gender roles, but it could also be related to economic class. To illustrate, women who are accustomed to

a culture where women generally carry out their responsibilities within the home (culturally-

26

LZ

/([UIBU1 3JB S3(0J J9pU9§ 3S0qAV U9UK)A\ "UIOOJSSBp B III jqStiBJ S3SJn00 UBqj J3JJ9q S9[0J

oijpads ajBpomuioooB oj ajqB si umiSojd /Cpnjg 9oiO]-[ aqj 'aanprujs sji uo pasBq 'j

·sasjnoo moojssBp 3MI1 3W °i aRBim gj^ oqM sjauiooMsu SuijBpouiiuoooB ui Xpnjs
jo ssaoons aq; uo papnpuoo uaaq seq sjep o; qojBasaj XjaBjoqos ou '3§p9[A\ou>[ /(iu ox (p *u Suiurejj^ puB uoijBonpg joj 9Jju33) ·sjuama.nnb

oijpads psui puB 3MIT JOJ sjuauisjmbaj sqj nUTO lsnui sjuspnjs '/Cpnjg siuoh Joj 3[qi§ij9 aq ox "SJopmjsui 3M11 paijijenb Rs\ jq§n^ si pus (g '8003 sis/Cjbuv jsmoj) uibjSojcI
aqj sb 9OIBS aqj si ^pn;§ amoH joj uin[noujno aqx -("p 'u Suiurejx Pub uoi;Bonpg joj b qijM uoijesjsauoo auoqdajaj /Lppsm v puB 'Suipjooaj auquo '(sjuaprns jaqjo q;iA\) j^qo aoioA pire jxa; 'saspaaxa suquo apnjoui S[BU3}bui SuituBaq 'pujajuj paads -qgiq pire jsjnduioo b oj sssoob ssjmbaj 'pssn ^[uoaiuioo aaoui qonui si qoiqM 'poqpui suijuo aqX usqoBa; b qiiAV suoijbsjsauoo auoqd a"[}[99m puB 'ssdB; 3jj3ssbo/sq3 's^ooq Suisn jqSnBj si

poqpui jBuoijipBj; aqx "poqpui auijuo ub jo poqpui jBuoi;ipBJj b qSnoiqj siuoq jjsqj ui qsijgug

SJ3UJB91 savoijb jBqj uiBJ§ojd 3MI13lfl J° vvd si uiBjgoad Apnjs suioh 3KI19ltX

v - <(pnis 3lu0HDMI1 'AI
sassBjo 3NO ssaooB oj 3[qBim 3jb 'suioq sqj jo spisjno jo uiqjiM >jjom Xaqj jaqpqM /Cubui /Cpu3nbasuo3 "ssjoj japua§ uisyao o; ajBpouiuioooB jou op Xaqj sb 'juspgjnsui

3jb s9jnsB9ui asaq; (£00Z s^oAV siRiy jo J3jsiui]Aj) sjaqonoA uoijByodsuBJj puB saoiAjas
Suipuiuj-p^iqo suios apnpui sjaiJJBq asaq; jBquioo oj sjjojja qSnoqx 'S9[oj jgpusS oj papauuoo

9jb 3MI1 Sufsn uauxoM Xq paoususdxs sjsujBq [Buoi;Btij[s uouiujoo aqi jo Xubui 'jjoqs u[
sassBp pua^B o\ XSjsua jo suii; qgnoua 9ABq

oj uiaqj joj jjnogjip ji §ui}reiu snqj '(sioj japuaS pauijap-ssBp) Xjiuibj sqj joj spiAOjd oj qSnous UJB3 oj ajqB jou 3jb sjsujJBd jpqj ji siuoq sqj jo apisjno >[jom oj paau a"bui (sjoj japuaS pauijap

carried out inside the home, who are primary caregivers of their children, or who work outside the home, can learn English in their own time and at their own pace through the Home Study program. According to a Home Study evaluation commissioned by CIC, in recent years 74 percent of Home Study students were women, compared to 67 percent in class (Power Analysis 2008, ii). This Home Study evaluation surveyed a number of current and potential Home Study
students. One common reason for students to use the Home Study course rather than the

classroom course was that LINC classes were mainly offered on a full-time basis, and it was

impossible for some students to attend full-time classes while they were working. Additionally,
when Home Study students were asked if they would tell other newcomers about the program, 98 percent of students responded positively (Power Analysis 2008, 23).

a. Effectiveness of online language learning
A question that still begs to be asked is whether Home Study is as effective as LINC in-class courses. In CIC's evaluation of LINC, distance learning is described as "less costly, but not a
good substitute for face-to-face learning," (CIC 2004, 3.0). Given the lack of research conducted

on Home Study, it is impossible to know whether this program is as effective as the LINC inclass program. However, many scholars (such as Blake and Delforge 2006; Cummings 2004; Williams et al. 2003) have examined other online learning courses and have found that they can be an effective style of teaching and learning. One way to examine if online courses are as effective as in-class courses is by examining a course that is taught in both methods using similar curricula. Blake and Delforge (2006) examined a first-year Spanish course taught at the University of California. Though the courses did not use the same curriculum, they both granted a first-year Spanish university credit to

28

successful students. The authors found that the online students have similar scores as the classroom students on the same grammar test, as well as similar or slightly better scores on writing tests. However, this research did not compare scores on oral or listening tests. Alternately, Cummings (2004) was an English-as-a-foreign-language teacher at a

university in Japan. After having difficulty with encouraging student participation in class, she began to conduct her course online instead of in the classroom. She found that the students'
attitudes changed when using the online method; students became more willing to participate and

to use English and their writing improved significantly. In comparison with similar classes she had taught in a classroom, the students studying online communicated more, shared more about
themselves, and asked more questions of the professor. Students also mentioned that the course
successfully facilitated communication with native speakers and with the instructor.

As well, in Williams et al. (2003), a Utah school board created a computer-assisted literacy program for ESL speakers. According to the study, this program assisted adults in improving English reading and speaking skills, enabled them to obtain better employment, and
enabled them to assist their children with homework.

In summary, research conducted by Blake and Delforge (2006), Cummings (2004), and Williams et al. (2003) suggest that online classes may be effective learning tools and equally effective as in-class courses.

29

Chapter 3: Research Findings and Discussion, by Source

/. LINC employees
The five LINC employees provided greater background information as well as practical knowledge about the LINC and LINC Home Study programs.

a. LINC teacher

Findings

The LINC teacher has several years of experience teaching LINC. Her classes, which are held at a women's community centre, have around 80 or 90 percent women. Her centre offers
transportation vouchers and child-minding for its LINC students. Regarding students with poor

attendance levels, she states that there are a number of reasons that students miss classes and it is difficult to ascertain the precise reasons for it.
However, she observes a difference between men and women in her classes. Men

typically excel compared to the women. She attributes this to home responsibilities: many women have substantial responsibilities at home and do not have a chance to study English,
whereas men generally have fewer responsibilities in the home and therefore have more time to dedicate to studying English.

Discussion

If home responsibilities impede enough women to an extent that it creates a trend within the classroom, it can be assumed that there are many more women who are unable to attend classes at all because of these responsibilities. Although this idea is an assumption drawn from this key

30

informant's experiences and opinions, it will be confirmed within the experiences of the
participants in this study.

This teacher reports about 80 or 90 percent of her students are women. This percentage is
likely not representative of other LINC classes because hers are taught at a women's community

centre. This agency would likely have more women than many other agencies because this centre
specifically caters to women, offering child-minding and transportation vouchers for its LINC students. Not every centre is able to offer these services (Minister of Public Works 2003). On average about 67 percent of the students in LINC classes are female (Power Analysis 2008, ii).

b. LINC language assessors

Findings

As noted earlier, two language assessors were interviewed: one worked in Toronto; the other worked outside this city. The findings from these interviews were quite similar. To have their language assessed, newcomers go to an assessment centre where the language assessors rate their language skills using the Canadian Language Benchmarks Assessment (CLBA) system of assessment, and then refer them to a LINC language class corresponding to their level. When asked about barriers to class attendance, both assessors commented at length on the difficulties that mothers experience in attending class while they are raising children. More specifically, the Toronto-based assessor stated that women with young children face many

challenges to regular class attendance, especially those with time restraints. For example, women
whose children attend kindergarten half-days have difficulty finding classes that accommodate their schedule. The other language assessor pointed out that LINC child-minding often has a waiting list. In addition, a mother with several children will have to wait longer for child-

31

minding than mothers with only one child. Beyond logistical constraints, the Toronto-based
assessor also remarked that, in some cases, women might have family obligations that may make consistent class attendance difficult. Transportation was also an issue outside of Toronto; for some students, LINC classes at their level were not offered close to their place of residence. Language assessors refer clients to Home Study based on a criteria set by the program.

The language assessor outside of Toronto stated that the most common reasons for referral to this
program were work conflicts and childcare responsibilities.

General flexibility was a major advantage of the Home Study program according to both

language assessors. One language assessor also stated that Home Study was available to a wider
region of people; even those who lived outside of a city could use the program. Alternately, both
assessors mentioned the lack of personal contact with other students as a disadvantage to the
Home Study program.

Regarding how to make the LINC in-class program more accessible, one language
assessor emphasized the need for more child-minding spaces, stating that even though child-

minding spaces have increased in recent years, there is still insufficient space in the program,
resulting in long wait times.

Neither language assessor believed that going to an assessment centre would be a barrier

for students who want to use the LINC Home Study course. The assessment centres try to be very flexible to students' needs, even offering assessment after hours and in alternate locations.
Promotion of the Home Study program is quite extensive according to both assessors. In Toronto, outreach is conducted through printed materials and personal visits to organizations that serve high proportions of immigrants. However, this assessor also noted that LINC Home Study has only recently been offered in the Toronto area. According to the other assessor, outreach in

32

her city conducted in a similar manner, although this language assessor remarked that most of their current Home Study clients have been referred by friends or family members.

Discussion

Both LINC assessors commented at length about the difficulties for mothers in attending LINC classes and raising children, including scheduling challenges, lack of child-minding spaces and

restrictions in the child-minding program. This confirms Kilbride et al. (2008) and CIC's LINC
evaluation (CIC 2004, 3) that a need for childcare is a significant barrier to attending LINC classes. The assessor outside of Toronto also mentioned the barrier of transportation, which the

LINC evaluation deemed a "major barrier" (CIC 2004, 3.0). This may be less of an issue in
Toronto, where there are so many LINC classes offered that transportation is probably less of a barrier than it would be in other smaller cities or rural areas across Canada. The need for childcare and transportation could be gender-related barriers. Certain women may not be accustomed to taking public transit, their culture may discourage them from traveling outside of the home alone, or if they have a vehicle, their spouses may be the primary

income earner and may use the car to travel to work. Regarding childcare, some women are the
primary caregivers of their children and therefore a waiting list or a lack of child-minding offered near their place of residence may be a barrier to accessing language classes. On the other hand, some women may not be comfortable allowing someone outside of the family take care of their children, as would be required in the LINC child-minding service. Alternately, the barriers of lack of childcare or transportation may not always be caused by gender. As the Third World Feminist theory states, culture and gender must also be examined in connection to

33

socioeconomic class. Some women may not be able to use transportation or obtain childcare not
for cultural reasons but for financial reasons, such as being unable to afford these services.

c. LINC Home Study employees

Findings

The two LINC Home Study employees drew from their extensive experience to provide more
thorough information regarding this program. Home Study was created to address the need for

English language instruction in rural areas. Its growth is attributed to its ability to address other areas of need, including needs of women who are unable to use classroom courses.
Approximately 75 percent of students in the Home Study program are women. According to one

of the Home Study Employees, "Due to family care, a lot of women are unable to attend regular LINC classes even with the child-minding services. Therefore LINC Home Study is an option for them." Currently 950 students across Ontario are enrolled in the program.
Compared to in-class courses, Home Study benefits students by offering a large amount

of flexibility. Students can use the Home Study program in their own time and at their own pace.
Between these factors as well as one-on-one phone calls with teachers, the program is individualized based on student need. When asked about the effectiveness of Home Study as a method of learning English, the

key informants referred to an evaluation about Home Study that was funded by CIC. This evaluation found that even though students spend more time studying English in a classroom

than through Home Study, the overall progress, satisfaction, and effectiveness was the same
between the LINC and Home Study programs when given the same time commitment.

34

Another point that the Home Study employees mentioned in this interview is that through one-on-one telephone conversations, some teachers are able to offer advice to assist students
with settlement needs.

Discussion

From the information provided by Home Study employees, it is clear that Home Study is more able to accommodate diverse gender roles than the in-class LINC program. First of all, one of the Home Study employees believes that the high percentage of women in the program (75 percent)

is due to women's family responsibilities, which make it easier for them to use the Home Study
program than to attend classes. Along with this, Home Study enables students to study English when it is most convenient and at the pace that suits them, which is one of the key advantages to the program according to the language assessors. Thus, women with a large amount of
responsibilities or who work long hours are able to adjust their studying according to their

schedules, allowing for as much or as little time to study English as best suits them. Additionally,
women who have varying schedules, such as those with small children, can adjust their schedules accordingly: if a child is sick one day, his or her mother can postpone studying to a later date.

Further, one-on-one conversations allow the teacher to address certain settlement needs, which brings the service of settlement counseling to women who may not otherwise receive this
type of assistance. Though this is not a linguistic need, or even part of the Home Study

curriculum, it reveals how the individualization of the Home Study program enables greater
accommodation of individual gender roles than classroom courses.

Overall, the Home Study program appears to accommodate certain women's roles better than the classroom LINC program. However, the Home Study employees also mention that students of Home Study do not tend to spend as much time studying as students of LINC spend

35

in class. Although it may be rightly assumed that this is due to the amount of time and energy needed to complete certain home responsibilities, it also indicates that Home Study students may be learning less than classroom students. This suggests that Home Study program may not be a good replacement for people who are already using L1NC classes; however, it is likely a very good alternative to meet the needs of language learners that are not otherwise able to access
LINC classes.

//. Participant interviews

a. Veronica1
Background

Veronica is from Argentina and has two young children. In Canada, she does not live with a partner or with any other family member, as her family still lives in Argentina. Aside from several visits between Argentina and Canada, she has been in Canada for about nine years. She is
not currently working outside of the home.

Attitude toward learning English

Veronica feels limited by her knowledge of English, which she mainly uses outside of her home, like when she goes shopping or runs errands. In general, Veronica thinks that classes are a good way to learn English, although she points out that she believes an individual's learning experience is often dependent on the teacher or on class dynamics. She has not taken an English

course either in Argentina or in Canada. Since she arrived in Canada, she has not attended

As mentioned previously, names of participants have been changed to protect their identities.

36

language classes for a number of reasons: her elder child was ill for several years; following that,
she gave birth to her second child, who is too young to qualify for LINC child-minding.

Knowledge of LINC

Aware of the different LINC classes available, Veronica plans on starting a LINC class in a few
months, when her younger child is old enough for child-minding. Though Veronica has not used

a traditional-style language class, she has used the LINC Home Study course. She found it
difficult to use this course, especially in taking care of her children while studying. One

significant challenge was conversing with her teacher over the phone, especially when her children made noise or started crying. She did not feel that she learned very much from the
program and she stopped using it.

b. Elena

Background

Originally from Colombia, Elena has been in Canada for five years. Before arriving in Canada, she spent several years in the United States, followed by a year in a medium-sized Canadian city

before moving to Toronto. She and her husband have a baby, while the rest of her family lives in Colombia. She does not work outside of the home. She is able to drive but her husband usually drives their vehicle to work, so she uses public transit when she is unable to use their vehicle.

Attitude toward English When she arrived in Canada, Elena felt very limited by her level of English, but she has learned enough since then that she does not feel so limited. In her current situation, she does not have much opportunity to speak English, because she spends a lot of time at home with her child.

37

However, she speaks English when she goes shopping, to the library and around the community. Her husband supports her learning English, but at this time it is more important for them that Elena stay at home and take care of their baby. She emphasized that this was only temporary, as
their child is so young.

Elena believes that classroom courses are a good way to learn English because the teachers help students learn various English skills like speaking and reading. She attended an English class in the United States, but she was only able to study for six months before she needed to start working. Because it was an intense course, she found it very difficult. In the Canadian city where she lived before coming to Toronto, Elena had taken an ESL course
(although it was not a LINC course). She did not feel like she learned much in this course, but

she appreciated that it was a short distance from her home. She left this course because she moved to Toronto and had a baby. She says, "Lo que pasa es que yo dejaba estudiar y trabajar cuando tuve [my child]." "What happened is that I stopped studying and working when I had
[my child]".

Knowledge of LINC

Elena only recently learned about LINC, although she has been taking French classes in a settlement centre for some time. She is hoping to take a LINC course in the future, when her
child is older and she can take advantage of child-minding services. As well, Elena did not know about Home Study before the interview. After hearing about

the program, she mentioned that she might not have a lot of time for Home Study right now, because she is busy with her baby. On the other hand, she appreciated knowing about the
program, because she thought that she might be able to study a little bit at the present time, and attend a course in a class at a later date, when she is able to use the child-minding service.

38

c. Cecilia

Background

Unlike the other participants, Cecilia lives in a city outside of Toronto. Originally from

Colombia, she spent two years in the United States before immigrating to Canada. She lives with
her two school-age children as well as her partner. She does not work outside of the house and she drives a vehicle.

Attitude toward English

Cecilia's husband supports her in learning English and she uses English whenever she can. However, she often feels limited communicating in English. In her home, "Desafortunadamente
se hablan espanol." "Unfortunately, we speak Spanish." Believing that courses are a good method of learning English, Cecilia used several

different courses in the past to improve her English language skills. While she was in Colombia,
she used a course to learn English via a CD that she listened to while sleeping. She felt that she

learned a lot through this method. In the United States, Cecilia was only able to study English for six months, which she enjoyed despite its short duration.
Knowledge of LINC

Soon after she moved to Canada, Cecilia took a LINC course for several months, which helped improve her English. She stopped taking this class because her children were on summer vacation. While she takes care of her children, she is continuing to learn on her own through books and videos from the local library. She was unaware of Home Study before the interview, but she thinks the program would be a great opportunity for her to improve her English. She

39

expressed some uncertainty about conversing with a teacher over the telephone, because "Que es
mas diffcil entender por telefono." "It's more difficult to understand [someone] over the phone."

d. Daniela

Background

Daniela is a Panamanian woman whose children are grown up and living independently. She lived in several different Latin American countries before arriving in Canada, where she has

been for approximately fourteen years. She currently lives without a partner or other family
members, but she is working as a live-in caregiver. In the house where she is working, she only speaks Spanish. She uses public transit when she needs to travel.

Attitude toward English

Daniela feels very limited because of her English level. She rarely speaks English, except for a few words when necessary. As well, she did not take any English classes before coming to
Canada. Daniela wishes to learn more English because she wants to be able to communicate

better and she believes that classroom courses are a good way to accomplish this. On the other hand, she has experienced much difficulty in her attempts to learn English this way. Different jobs have required her to relocate frequently, which made it impossible for her to complete a full
course. In addition, she faces challenges in focusing and studying. Her current efforts to improve

her English include listening to spoken English around her and independent book-based study.

Knowledge of LINC

At one point, Daniela was using the LINC program, which she felt she learned a lot from, but she

had to leave the class when she relocated for work. She is aware of where LINC classes are

40

offered near her current place of residence. However, she did not know about the Home Study

program before the interview. She does not think this program would benefit her for a number of
reasons, including that she has difficulty learning, she moves frequently, and most significantly, she does not have easy access to a telephone. She would not be able to use a telephone on a

consistent basis or for long periods of time as required by the Home Study program.

///. Participant questionnaires

a. Class attendance

Findings

Based on the first question of the questionnaire, the reasons that the four participants noted to be significant in not taking a classroom-based English language course are displayed below.

Reasons for not taking English in a classroom

Not a good way to learn English

 Significant or

Can't use public transportation
No personal transportation

\ery significant
D Not significant

Work conflicts Inconvenient class scheduling
Family does not support Need to take care of children No nearby location Unknown location of class Not enough time Dislike learning style
4

Among the participants, the most prevalent reasons for not taking an English language class are: inconvenient class scheduling, needing to take care of children, and not enough time. Three of

41

four participants note these as significant barriers. Next, two of four participants mention that a
lack of personal transportation and not knowing class location are significant barriers to using an English language class. Work and no nearby class location are significant barriers for only one person respectively. None of the participants think that a classroom style is not a good way of learning English, nor do they think that a dislike of classroom-style learning is a significant barrier to them taking an English class. Also, none of the participants are deterred by a lack of

family support. Although none of the participants are unable to use public transportation, it
should be noted that two feel that a lack of personal transportation is a significant barrier in using

language classes. As well, one participant wrote on her questionnaire that she is unable to take
classes because she relocates frequently for work.

Discussion

All of the participants who have young children note a need for childcare as a major barrier to attendance to LINC classes; thus it is the most significant barrier mentioned in this research. The LINC language assessors and the Home Study employees concur, as they also mention lack of childcare as a significant barrier to class attendance. The literature, including the LINC evaluation (CIC 2004, 3.0) and Kilbride et al. (2008) reflects this as well. Armstrong (1996)

found the same need among ESL literacy learners in the USA, and McArthur (1998) discovered
a similar need in a USA national survey. The need for childcare may be even more significant for

these Latin American women than for immigrant women from other cultures. This is because taking care of children is a very significant part of women's gender roles in Latin American cultures (De Los Rios, 2007), and some of these women are unable to share this responsibility
with their husbands or others (Bernhard et al 2005, 5).

42

The issue of "inconvenient class scheduling" is recognized as a significant barrier by
three of the four participants. However, the Toronto-based language assessor states that over 700

classes are offered across Toronto, and about half of these are part-time, which includes evenings
and weekends. Not including the response of the non-Toronto participant, the barrier at hand is therefore probably more accurately defined as "not having enough time", which I assume to be
correct because the same people noted both issues as barriers.

Timing and scheduling difficulties are barriers recognized by Kilbride et al. (2008, 3335) and Hayes (1989). Similarly, the issue of not having sufficient time to attend class is noted

by the LINC teacher, who attributes women's reduced success in the LINC classroom (compared
to men) to their home responsibilities. In Latin American cultures, taking care of the household is generally the woman's responsibility. Thus, women may not have sufficient time to both take care of the household and attend class, especially if they also have to take care of children. Further, because women's roles are carried out within the household, either they or their
partner may not see a need for the woman to attend class, or believe that there is no need for the

woman to know English. These opinions may particularly be true in Latin American cultures,

where paid employment is often viewed as contradictory to fulfilling a woman's home and child
responsibilities (Hondagneu-Sotelo and Avila 1997, 551). However, these beliefs are not likely held by the two women with partners in this study, because both women mention that they desire
to learn English and that their partner supports them in this. Next, two participants noted "no personal transportation" as a significant barrier to class

attendance; however, none of the participants mentioned that they were unable to use public transportation. The fact that transportation remains a barrier could be due to their home location; they may not live close to transit. To support this, the language assessor outside of Toronto

43

mentioned that transportation could be an obstacle to class attendance. Similarly, in the LINC evaluation (CIC 2004, 3.0) as well as in research conducted by Kilbride et al. (2008) in Toronto, Hayes (1989) and McArthur (1998) in the United States, lack of transportation is noted as a
major barrier.

Work-related conflicts were only significant to Daniela, as she was the only participant with remunerated employment. This was perhaps the most important barrier for Daniela: not only was she unable to attend class consistently because of changing work locations, she was
also unable to use the Home Study program. In US-based research, where there is usually a charge for ESL classes, work-related conflicts are found to be barriers to class attendance (Hayes 1989; McArthur 1998), but in Canada, LINC is government-funded. The fact that work-related conflicts are still a barrier for

Daniela shows that even though LINC classes are free, some women's employment responsibilities can hinder their ability to attend classes. This is confirmed in Kilbride et a/.'s
(2008) research on female language learners in Toronto.

As well, none of the participants have concerns with classroom-based learning as a method of learning, and none of them disliked this method enough for it to be a barrier to attendance. This corresponds with the LINC Home Study evaluation, which found that most
people in the study preferred to learn English in a classroom (Power Analysis 2008, 30).

b. LINC Home Study

Findings Elena had several concerns about using Home Study, especially regarding taking care of her baby. Most of the points that were listed in the interview concerned her, except that she

44

·uopdo poog b gq p[noM A"pnis suioh jeqi sjBgddB ji 'en^D puB Bug[g joj -uoijBnjis s.ubiuoav
01 guipjoooB jugjgjjip gjB Aprils auiOH guipjBggj sjiredioijiBd gqj uiojj sSutpuij
uoissnasiQ

·gsjnoo gqj guisn dojs oj jgq SuipBsj Kqgjgqj '§uiA"pn;s 3[iqM U9jp[iqo jsq jo

§ui>ibj ui XnBiosdsa 'gsnoq J9q pimcre suoipmjsip Xubiu ooj 9J9M gjgqj punoj gqs S9SU0dS9J M3IAJ9JUI J9H -9SJnOO 9qj JOJ XSJ9U9 qgtlOU9 guIABq JOU pUB 9UI0q JB S9lJIJiqiSU0dS9J
PUB SUOlJOBJJSip XUBUI OO; gU[ABq p9pn|0U[ S9gU9[[BqO JUBOljmglS J3H -9SJI100 Siqj gupfBl

gguoj ou sbav gqs A"qA\ suosBaj gqj guijou Xq uoijsgnb gqj pgji9AvsuB gqs 'gsjnoo Xpnj§ 9ixioh 9qj
ui jgq uj9ouoo Abui iBqj suosb9j guipjBggj uoijsgnb aqj §uu9msub jo pB9jsui '
qj p9sn psq boiuoj9a 'siuBdioi^iB ·guiiuB9[ Xqnoijjip sBq puB

9qs sb agq joj ^jom ;ou jqgiui Xpn;s 9uioh ;sqj p9uoi;u9ui osjb gqs -ujgouoo

SBAV SS900B 9U0qd9[9J JO >[OBI B ;Bqj P9UU1JU00 9qS 'M9IAJ9;Ul 9qj UI -9UOqd9I9} B 9ABq iou pip gqs 9snB09q uiBJ§ojd Xpnjs 9uioh 9qi 9sn oj 9[qBun sbm gqs jBq; gjiBuuoijsgnb jgq uo
9J0JM osjb gqs ugq pgujgouoo gjiBuuoijsgnb gqi uo suigji gqj jo jsoui jBqi pgjBoipui gqs -umigoid
9qj 9sn oj gjqBun gq ppoAV gqs urepgo Xjjibj si BpiuBa 'puBq igqjo gqj uo

·sogpiA puB S3[ooq qgnojqi X^ugpugdgpui sgipnjs Xpsg^iB gqs 'qsqSug ui guoqd gqi uo >pjgds
Hn0lJJ!P 3q abui }i ;Bq; sijuiqj gqs qgnoq^v 'uiBigoad siqj Suisn ui sujgouoo A\gj SBq gqs ;Bqj

gjiBuuoijsgnb jgn 'Xpnjs suioh jnoqB gjjsBfsnqpg XjgA si Bqpg3 'A"[gsjgAU03

·guipuiui-p[iqa joj qgnoug pjo si p[iqo jgq gouo sgssB[o 3MI1 pusWB pjnoo puB
si gqs ugqAV Xpnjs guiOH qSnojq; umo agq uo qsijgug Apms oj gjqB gq ;qg;tu gqs }Bqj

s[ggj gqs 'pjiqo gunoA" jgq q;iM Ksnq XjgA si gqs qgnoqj[y -p3JS3l mw$ 9genguB[ jgq gmABq jnoqB
pgiugouoo jou sbav gqs puB uavo agq uo luegj o; XjijiqB jgq guipjBggj ujgguoo gjjjij pgssgjdxg

The flexibility of the program allows it to accommodate their personal situations. For Cecilia,
who already had attended LINC classes and who intends to return in the future, the ability to

continue with the same curriculum on her own through Home Study would be of great benefit. She could use the program while her children are at home during the summer, then return to LINC classes when her children return to school. Similarly, Elena could use the Home Study
program when she has time during her child's infancy. Both Cecilia and Elena are unable to attend LINC classes largely because they are

primary caregivers of their children, a responsibility that is likely affected by Latin American cultures, in which women are often the primary caregivers of children (De Los Rios 2007).
However, the Home Study program would accommodate their situation by allowing them to learn English at home. This confirms the Home Study employees' and language assessors'

comments on the flexibility of the Home Study program being extremely beneficial to students. Alternately, Daniela's situation would not be sufficiently accommodated by Home Study.
Her employment situation does not allow her enough flexibility even to study LINC at home.

Unless she was able to obtain consistent employment with more telephone access, it is unlikely that Daniela would benefit from Home Study. Veronica had already used the Home Study program and experienced too many
distractions at her home to benefit very much, leading her to stop using this program. It appears

that her responsibilities, to take care of children and the home, is actually inhibiting her from learning English, because she is unable to use LINC or the Home Study program. According to a

language assessor, this is uncommon. Instead, many people make good progress and "Everybody
who is doing it loves it." Despite this, the fact that Veronica's responsibilities inhibit or prevent her from using LINC and Home Study suggests that other women may also be inhibited from

46

using these programs due to their gender role, especially in Latin American cultures where
women often have the primary responsibility of taking care of children and the household (De
Los Rios 2007).

47

Chapter 4: Final Discussion and Conclusion

/. Gender role accommodation
The findings of the current study regarding LINC class attendance are largely in accordance with the findings in the literature. This literature and research reveals the significant barriers to language classes, which include, most importantly, a need for child-minding, not having enough
time, lack of transportation and work conflicts, which can all be linked to the women's gender roles and responsibilities. The women in this study who have children are the primary caregivers: a responsibility

often assigned to women within Latin American cultures (De Los Rios, 2007). The women
confirm that this responsibility hinders their ability to attend LINC classes. Both of the women

with babies discuss a future desire to attend language classes when the children are old enough for LINC child-minding. This appears to contradict Bernhard et a/.'s (2005, 5) suggestion that it is culturally unacceptable for Latin American women to allow others to fulfill their childcare duties, however it is possible that the women in the present study may see the social or emotional
cost of not fulfilling their responsibilities as less significant than the ability to use English. Similarly, not having enough time can be associated with many home responsibilities, including childcare. Both the Home Study employees and the LINC teacher discuss these

responsibilities as being challenges for women in attending language class. These responsibilities may be strongly associated with culture. Many women in Latin American cultures highly value
the family, and they are largely responsible for taking care of children and the household (De

Los Rios, 2007). It is likely that culturally-defined child and household responsibilities interfere with the ability of the women in this study to access LINC classes.

48

A lack of transportation can also be caused by gender role: husbands or male partners, who work outside of the home, may take the vehicle to work. This may be caused by the man's
responsibility as primary income earner, as is common in many Latin American cultures (Hondagneu-Sotelo and Avila 1997). Alternately, work conflicts can occur when a woman's role

is to gain remunerated employment and it hinders her ability to attend English classes. On the other hand, the major barriers to class attendance are not always due to a woman's gender role or responsibilities. As the Third World Feminist theory states, culture and gender
must be considered alongside socioeconomic class and race.

Socioeconomic class is related to a woman's role. For many of these participants, they
are able to stay at home and work within the house, but for some women, due to their socioeconomic class, it may be necessary for them to work outside of the house even though they may not be accustomed to it. For example, in the present study, Daniela may need to work because no one is currently supporting her financially, even though she may have worked within the home when her children were young. In her situation today, her employment makes it

difficult for her to benefit from LINC or the Home Study program. Therefore, it is possible that because of her economic status, she is essentially trapped in her situation: wanting to learn
English, but being unable to because of inconsistent employment, while relying on employment to provide for her needs.

As well, some of these women may have more opportunity if they were of higher socioeconomic classes: they may be able to send their children to daycare or have a personal tutor teach them English within their home. This could result in fewer barriers, thereby enabling
them to access English language classes.

49

SYERSQM UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY OF

Race is not as severe of an issue for the participants in the present study as others, because they do not belong to a particularly racialized group in Canada. However, it is possible that the fact that they are newcomers may disadvantage them to some opportunities within
Canada, thereby intensifying some of the barriers that they already experience.

Overall, gender roles are significant to the barriers women experience in accessing language classes. On the other hand, other aspects of identity, like class and race, may also
contribute to these barriers.

The barriers to LINC classes, which are revealed in the present study and other literature, expose the need for an alternative form of delivery of language courses for women who are not
able to access LINC classes. LINC Home Study may be a good alternative for several reasons; most importantly, Home Study is less likely to interfere with childcare or household

responsibilities. This is especially beneficial to women who are primary earegivers to children or who have extensive household responsibilities, which is true for many Latin American women
(De Los Rios 2007). The flexibility of Home Study allows students to study basically whenever

and wherever it is convenient to them. Similarly, women who work outside of the home can study whenever it best suits their schedules. It is also true that the Home Study program is not suitable for everyone; in the present
study, one participant had used Home Study and had experienced difficulty taking care of her children while studying or while speaking with her teacher on the phone. More research needs to

be conducted regarding the extent of situations that can be accommodated by the Home Study program; however, it can be assumed that some of the women who are not currently able to access LINC classes would be able to benefit from Home Study.

50

//. Main objectives
At the beginning of this research paper, I developed a number of objectives that I wanted to

fulfill in order to successfully reveal the matters discussed in the thesis statement. As a reminder,
these objectives were: 1. To reveal the barriers experienced by some newcomer women in accessing LINC classes and how these barriers relate to diverse gender roles. 2. To bring to light the experiences of four women whose situations have not been

accommodated by the LINC program and who are therefore currently not benefiting from
LINC classes.

3.

To identify the LINC Home Study program as a possible method of reducing these barriers and of enabling women to study English who face barriers in using the
classroom-based LINC course.

The following is how these objectives have been reached, in my opinion. A review of the

literature revealed the wide range of barriers that inhibit women from using ESL classes. The
present research revealed that among these barriers, a lack of childcare, not having enough time,

a lack of personal transportation, and work conflicts are significant to the four women interviewed in this study, preventing them from accessing LINC classes. The most significant of these appears to be a need for childcare, which is connected to women's gender roles because
women are often the primary caregivers to their children.

Alternately, the LINC Home Study program may better accommodate diverse gender roles. Some of the women interviewed in this study believed Home Study to be a good option for them, because it would reduce the barriers that were preventing them from using LINC classes. As well, LINC employees also emphasized the possibility of this program to assist women who

51

were not benefiting from in-class LINC, especially because the program's flexibility allows
women to fit learning English to their schedules and situations.

///. Directions forfuture research
More research needs to be conducted on the Home Study program and other distance study

language courses, especially on their ability to benefit immigrants who are not able to access inclass courses. The present research suggests that distance study would be an excellent alternative for some immigrants, especially for women who have extensive gender-related responsibilities
such as taking care of children, other duties within the home, or working outside of the home.
Furthermore, the delivery of other services for immigrants should be examined,

especially by consulting the immigrants who are not able to use such services. The present research suggests that the "one size fits all" format of service delivery; that is, delivering services

through only one medium, does not accommodate all situations. As a result, it appears that immigrants do not have equal opportunity regarding accessing services, which contradicts the
Canadian Multiculturalism Act, which states that people in Canada must have equal opportunity,
regardless of culture or origin (CIC 2008).

TV. Policy recommendations
Based on the findings offered by key informants in this research paper, along with the findings within the literature, I offer several policy recommendations to enable more Canadian immigrant
women to benefit from English language programs.

Most importantly, the needs of immigrants who are not able to access English language classes must be addressed. The Home Study program and other distance English courses need to be expanded so that immigrants who are currently unable to access language classes may have

52

greater opportunity to increase their levels of English. As well, although the Home Study
program already has a comprehensive outreach plan, as outlined by the language assessors in this study, some women still may not know about this program. Home Study, along with other distance English language courses should be promoted in different languages, as well as to

immigrant-serving agencies, so that a newcomer who uses any service can be made aware of
these programs. Next, although many immigrants would greatly benefit from distance studies courses, some would receive greater benefit from LINC classroom-style courses. The barriers that they

currently experience may be alleviated by a few programming changes. First of all, there needs to be more space available in the LINC child-minding program. Because the most significant

barrier noted by the key informants in this study is a need for childcare, more spaces in the childminding program will alleviate this barrier.

Along the same lines, transportation vouchers should be made available for all LINC students in all centres where LINC is offered, so that newcomers who need these vouchers are
able to access LINC classes in the area which is most convenient for them. Through these policy changes, more women may be able to benefit from the LINC English language programs, both distance study and classroom study, which may enable them to
obtain higher levels of English fluency.

V. Conclusion
The present study reveals some of the barriers women face in accessing the in-class LINC
program, and suggests that the classroom LINC program may not benefit some immigrants. More research needs to be conducted in order to understand the best method of overcoming these

barriers. More generally, it appears that it would be beneficial for immigrant services to be

53

provided through different mediums so that a wider range of cultures and situations may be
accommodated. In the present study, information regarding Home Study suggests that distance studies may be an effective way to accommodate women who are unable to use classroom-style English language courses, especially women who have extensive gender-related responsibilities,

so that they have the opportunity to use government-funded assistance to improve their English
to language levels.

54

Appendix 1: Interview Questions for LINC Employees
LINC Home Study employees
1. 2. What are your positions with LINC Home Study? Why was the Home Study course developed?
take LINC courses in-class?

3. Do you know approximately how many people take Home Study compared to those who
4. What are the advantages and disadvantages of Home Study courses verses classroom
LINC courses?

5. Do you think that Home Study is just as effective as LINC classes in learning or
improving English?

6. Can you suggest any changes that could be made in order to enable more women to use
Home Study?

LINC teacher
1. What work do you do with LINC?

2. What is the percentage of women compared to men in your classes? 3. Does your workplace offer childcare or transportation tokens for students?

4. What are some common difficulties that students mention in regards to attending LINC
classes?

5.

Do you think that certain women are not able to attend LINC classes? What are the
reasons behind this?

6. What would you change so that the LINC program was more accessible to women?

LINC language assessor
1.

What work do you do with LINC?

2.

Do you know of any common difficulties that students mention in regards to attending
classes?

3.
4. 5.

Who do you recommend Home Study to? What are the criteria for deciding who will take Home Study? Do you know of any advantages and disadvantages of Home Study courses verses
classroom courses?

6.

Do you think that the fact that potential students need to be assessed at a settlement agency is a deterrent to those using Home Study? (Some students may prefer Home Study because they have difficulty attending a class and therefore may have difficulty
going to an assessment centre)

7.

Do you think there is any way to make the LINC program more accessible to all women?

Appendix 2: Interview Questions with Hispanic Participants
(Translated from Spanish)

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.

In which country did you spend most of your life? How long have you been in Canada? Do you have a spouse or partner that lives with you in Canada? Do you have children or other family members living with you? Do you work outside the home? b) If yes, do you use English in your workplace? Do you ever feel limited because of your level of English? How often do you use English? In what situations do you use English? Why do you want to learn more English?

10. Does your family support you in learning English? How?

11. Do you think classes are good way to raise your level of English? Why/why not? 12. Do you often travel outside of your neighbourhood without another adult? 13. Did you take any English course before arriving in Canada?
a. b. Were they in-class or online or self-study? Did you like them? Why/why not?

14. Did you take classes in Canada? Was it LINC?

a.
b. c.

(If you have - for #14, or #13 if only it applies), Did you learn a lot from it?
What problems did you encounter? Why did you stop taking this class? ,

15. (If not taken English in Canada) Have you heard of language classes in Canada? a. b. Have you heard of LINC? (If yes) Do you know where LINC is offered? Can you tell me why you do not currently take classes in Canada?
(If yes) Have you heard of LINC Home Study?

16. Have you heard about courses where you can learn English at home? (If yes) Have you used this program? (If no) Why not? (If no, I explained the program) 17. (For those who have not used course) If you had known about this program before, would
you have used it?

a. b.

What would have made it more likely for you to use this program?

Would you like information on where to go to use this program?

Appendix 3: Questionnaire
(Translated from Spanish) On a scale of 1 to 5, rate the reasons you aren't taking an English course in a classroom setting.

Use 1 for a reason that does not affect you and 5 for reason that is very significant to you. 
D

I don't like the courses taught in a classroom
I don't have enough time


  

1 don't know where classes are held
Classes are not offered in a nearby location I have to take care of my children My family or my spouse doesn't support me going to class


D

Classes are not offered at a convenient time
I have to work


D

I don't have transportation
I don't know how to use public transit (TTC)

D

I don't think taking a class is a good way to learn English

If there are any other reasons why you are not taking an English course in a classroom setting,
write them here:

If you were thinking about using the LINC Home Study program, which of the following would be concerns for you? Use a scale of 1 to 5: 1 is for 'not a concern' and 5 is for 'a very large
concern'.

 

I'm not sure I have enough time I'm not sure I would like to study at home



There might be too many distractions at home


D D D 

I might have too many responsibilities at home
I'm not sure I can learn from books, CDs or the internet It might be difficult to do on my own I might not have enough energy for the course I am unable to go to an assessment centre



I might not have my language skills assessed because it might be stressful or difficult

If you would have other concerns, please list them below:

References
Armstrong, Nancy Elizabeth. (1996). A model of participation for low-literate adults from diverse populations in literacy programs. (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Connecticut, 1996). Retrieved February 23, 2009, from Dissertations & Theses: Full Text database.
(Publication No. AAT 9707834).

Bannerji, Himani. (1995). Thinking Through: Essays on Feminism, Marxism and Anti-Racism.
Toronto: Women's Press.

Bavolek, Stephen. (Ed.). (1997). Multicultural Parenting: Educational Guide. Park City, UT:
Family Development Resources, Inc.

Beiser, Morton, and Feng Hou. (2000). Gender differences in language acquisition and employment consequences among Southeast Asian refugees in Canada. Canadian Public Policy, 26(3), 311-330. Retrieved November 13, 2008, from Research Library database.
(Document ID: 62073314).

Bernhard, Judith, Patricia Landolt and Luin Goldring. (2005). Transnational, Multilocal Motherhood: Experiences of Separation and Reunification among Latin American Families in Canada. CERIS Working Paper No. 40. Toronto: Joint Centre of Excellent for Research on Immigration and Settlement (CERIS).

Blake, Robert and Ann Marie Delforge. (2006). "Online Language Learning: The Case of
Spanish Without Walls." In The Art of Teaching Spanish. Sallaberry and Lafford, Ed. Washington: Georgetown University Press. 127-147.

Boyd, Monica. (1992). Gender Issues in Immigration and Language Fluency, in Immigration, Language and Ethnicity. Barry Chiswick, ed. Washington: American Enterprise Institute.
305-372.

Breton, Margot. (1999). The Relevance of the Structural Approach to Group Work with

Immigrant and Refugee Women. Social Work With Groups. 22(2/3), 11. Retrieved Feb

24, 2009 from <http://www.haworthpress.com>
Centre for Education and Training. "LINC Home Study." Accessed 26 February 2009.

<http://www.tcet.com/linchomestudy/>
Chiswick, Barry R; Yew Liang Lee and Paul W. Miller. (2004). Immigrants' Language Skills:

The Australian Experience in a Longitudinal Survey. The International Migration
Review, 38(2), 611-654. Retrieved November 5, 2008, from Research Library database. (Document ID: 734716001).

Citizenship and Immigration Canada. (2004). "Evaluation of the Language Instruction for
Newcomers to Canada (LINC) Program." Final Report. Evaluation and Performance Measurement Unit: Priorities, Planning and Research Branch. Accessed 25 February

2009. <http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/evaluation/linc/index.asp> Citizenship and Immigration Canada. (2008). "Canadian Multiculturalism." Accessed 31 July 2009. <http://www.cic.gc.ca/multi/inclusv-eng.asp>
Comas-Diaz, Lillian. (1987). Feminist therapy with Hispanic/Latina women: Myth or reality?
Women and Therapy, 6(4), 39-61.

Cross, K. Patricia. (1981). Adults as learners. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Cummings, Martha Clark. (2004). "Because We Are Shy and Fear Mistaking": Computer Mediated Communication with EFL Writers. Journal ofBasic Writing, 23(2), 23-48. Retrieved February 13, 2009, from Research Library database. (Document
ID: 796002841).

De Los Rios, Carolina. (2007). Gender and identity in a community of working class Latina

mothers. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, United States -- Maryland. Retrieved September 4, 2009, from Dissertations & Theses: Full Text. (Publication No. AAT 3286449). Drolet, Marie. (2002). New Evidence on Gender Pay Differentials: Does measurement matter? Canadian Public Policy, 28(1), 1-16. Retrieved July 31, 2009, from <http://www.jstor.org/stable/3552156>
Dryden-Peterson, Sarah. (2007). Adult English Language Instruction in the United States:

Determining Need and Investing Wisely/Securing the Future. U.S. Immigrant Integration Policy, A Reader. Harvard Educational Review. Cambridge: 77(4) 515-521. Fernandez Kelly, Maria Patricia. (2005). Delicate Transactions. In Gender Through the Prism of Difference. 3rd ed. Zinn et al, ed. New York: Oxford University Press. 347-355. Flores, Elena, Stephen L. Eyre, and Susan G Millstein. (1998). Sociocultural beliefs related to sex among Mexican American adolescents. Hispanic Journal ofBehavioral Sciences,
20(1), 60-82. doi:l0.1177/07399863980201004.

Gonzalez, Arturo. (2000). The acquisition and labor market value of four English skills: New evidence from Nals. Contemporary Economic Policy, 18(3), 259-269. Retrieved
November 5, 2008, from ABI/INFORM Global database. (Document ID: 55730731).

Hayes, Ceciliabeth. (1989). Hispanic Adults and ESL Programs: Barriers to Participation. Tesol
Quarterly. 23(1). Accessed 24 February 2009 from <http://dzibanche.biblos.uqroo.mx/

hemeroteca/tesol_quartely/l 967_2002jfulltext/Vol_23_l .pdf#page=48> Herr, Ranjoo Seodu. (2004, Jan). A Third World Feminist Defense of Multiculturalism. Social
Theory & Practice, 30(1), 73-103. Hondagneu-Sotelo, Pierette and Ernestine Avila. (1997). '"I'm Here, But I'm There': The Meanings of Latina Transnational Motherhood." Gender & Society, 11(5), 548-571.

doi:10J 177/089124397011005003 Kilbride, Kenise Murphy, Vappu Tyskka, Mehrunnisa Ali and Rachel Berman. (2008). Reclaiming Voice: Challenges and Opportunities for Immigrant Women Learning English. CERIS Working Paper Series. No. 72. Accessed 21 August 21, 2009 <http://ceris.metropolis.net/Virtual%20Library/WKPP%20List/WKPP2008/CWP72.pdf> McArthur, Edith. (1998). Adult Participation in English-as-a-Second Language (ESL) Classes,
Washington, D.C., National Center for Education Statistics.

Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada. (2003). "Welcome to Canada: What you should know: Language training." Accessed 24 February 2009.

<http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/welcome/wel-22e.asp>
Narayan, Uma. (1997). Contesting Cultures. In Dislocating Cultures. New York: Routledge. 139.

Pallis, Michael, tr. (1980). The 'Wages for Housework Trap. In Slaves ofSlaves: The Challenge ofLatin American Women. London: Zed Press. 49-58.

Popenoe, David. (1996). Modern Marriage: Revising the Cultural Script. In The Gendered Society Reader. (2008). Kimmel and Aronson, ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
185-201.

Power Analysis. (2008). Analysis of Current and Potential Home Study Clients. Komoka, Ontario: Power Analysis.

Raffaelli, Marcela and Lenna L. Ontai. (2004). Gender Socialization in Latino/a Families:
Results From Two Retrospective Studies. Sex Roles, 50(5/6), 287-299. Retrieved September 4, 2009, from Research Library. (Document ID: 581756221).

Statistics Canada. (2001). "Figure 5.2. Method of learning English for immigrants outside of
Quebec, 2001," Longitudinal Study of Immigrants to Canada. Accessed Feb 24 2009.

<http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-614-x/2005001/figures/4079114-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2002). "Distribution of 1990s' immigrants relative to distribution of total population, Canada and census metropolitan areas, 2001." Accessed 21 August 2009.

<http ://www 12 .statcan.ca/english/censusO 1 /products/analytic/companion/etoimm/canada.
cfm#three_largest_urban_centres>

Statistics Canada. (2003, Sept 4). The Daily. Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants to Canada. Accessed 2 August 2009. <http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/030904/dq030904aeng.htm>

Statistics Canada. (2007). "World: Place of birth of recent immigrants to Canada, 2006." Source:
2006 Census of Canada. Accessed 2 August 2009. <http://wwwl2.statcan.gc.ca/censusrecensement/2006/as-sa/97-557/maps-cartes/world/World_RecentImmig_ec.pdf> Statistics Canada. (2008). "Census Snapshot: Immigration to Canada: a Portrait of the ForeignBorn Population, 2006 Census." 2006 Census to Canada. Accessed 2 August 2, 2009. <http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/ll-008-x/2008001/article/10556-eng.htmS3> The YMCA of Greater Toronto. "Want to Learn English?" Toronto. Accessed 21 August 2009. <http://www.ymcatoronto.org/en/newcomers/you-arrived/language/index.html> Toronto District School Board. Language Instruction for Newcomers to Canada (LINC) FAQ.
Accessed 24 February 2009.

<http://www.tdsb.on.ca/site/ViewItem.asp7siteidH 18&menuid=418&pageid=326>
West, Candace and Don Zimmerman. (2005). Doing Gender. In Gender Through the Prism of

Difference. 3rd ed. Zinn et al, ed. New York: Oxford University Press. 147-164.
Williams, Scott, Cheryl Empey and Hector Mendiola. (2003). Engaging non-English speaking parents through computers. Journal ofFamily and Consumer Sciences, 95(1), 63. Retrieved February 23, 2009, from Research Library database. (Document
ID: 281153971).

