Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2010

The photographic negative as a historical object : an analysis of the Henryk Ross Lód ghetto collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario
Lindsay M. Bolanos
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Other Languages, Societies, and Cultures Commons Recommended Citation
Bolanos, Lindsay M., "The photographic negative as a historical object : an analysis of the Henryk Ross Lód ghetto collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario" (2010). Theses and dissertations. Paper 994.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

THE PHOTOGRAPHIC NEGATIVE AS A HISTORICAL OBJECT: AN ANALYSIS OF THE HENRYK ROSS LÓD GHETTO COLLECTION AT THE ART GALLERY OF ONTARIO

by

Lindsay M. Bolanos Honours Bachelor of Fine Arts in Photography Studies, Ryerson University, 2005

A Thesis Presented to Ryerson University and Art Gallery of Ontario in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2010 © Lindsay M. Bolanos 2010

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purposes of scholarly research.

___________________________________________

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

___________________________________________

ii

ABSTRACT The Photographic Negative as a Historical Object: An Analysis of the Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario Master of Arts 2010 Lindsay M. Bolanos Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University

The Photographic Negative as a Historical Object: An Analysis of the Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario examines the photographic negative, with specific attention to the negative as a historical document. Through an analysis of Jewish photographer Henryk Ross photographic archive, this discussion considers the negative as a historical object by addressing the production, use, dissemination and preservation of the negative using select samples from the 3,000 35mm gelatin silver negatives in the collection, along with Ross 1960s publication Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód), and Martin Parr and Timothy Prus 2004 Lód Ghetto Album. By acknowledging the use value of the negative, this thesis focuses on the unique qualities of the photographic negative as a research tool, bringing forth new components to the history of this rare collection.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the many people who have offered guidance and support throughout the course of this thesis endeavour. I began this venture with the Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection with dedication and determination to somehow understand and learn from this remarkable photographer and his body of work. I hope that through this thesis, I will shed new light on this rare compilation of photographic documents that represent a dark period in the history of humanity, and that I might add another piece to the ,,history of this collection. To my thesis advisor, Thierry Gervais, who has helped me to understand what it means to research, the importance of continuing to move further and delve deeper into my research, as well as to take a step back and look at the bigger picture. From learning to observe, question and reassess, you have encouraged me through each step of this process, and for that I am thankful. To the faculty members at Ryerson University, including David Harris, Dr. Chris Evans, Marta Braun, Robert Burley, and Sophie Hackett, you have all been a part of this process, and I thank each of you for your assistance. Also, to Maia-Mari Sutnik, my second reader, and the reason the Henryk Ross materials reside at the Art Gallery of Ontario, I thank you for the chance to study this collection. Lastly, I would like to thank my husband, Rafael, for pushing me to go further, for never doubting my abilities, and for your unwavering support.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS

List of Illustrations ...................................................................................................................... vi Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 1 Literature Survey ......................................................................................................................... 6 Henryk Ross and the Lód Ghetto .............................................................................................. 6 The Photographic Print ............................................................................................................. 9 The Photographic Negative ..................................................................................................... 11 Conclusion ............................................................................................................................... 13 The Photographic Negative as a Source of Information ........................................................ 15 Cellulose Nitrate Issues ............................................................................................................ 15 The Work Process through the Photographic Negative .......................................................... 23 Inside the Image ......................................................................................................................... 28 The Negative Strip .................................................................................................................... 28 The Reorganization of the Single Frame ................................................................................. 33 The Dissemination of Ross' Images .......................................................................................... 39 Rereading Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód).................................................................................... 39 Rereading Lód Ghetto Album ................................................................................................ 46 Making History Possible: Preservation of the Lód Ghetto Collection ................................ 59 Conclusion .................................................................................................................................. 64 Appendix ..................................................................................................................................... 67 Flammable Cabinet Storage Proposal for the Henryk Ross Collection Re-Housing Initiative ............................................................................................................... 67 Ontario Fire Protection and Prevention Act ........................................................................... 68 National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 40 ................................................................... 73 Product Data Sheets ................................................................................................................ 78 Product Data and Price Comparison ...................................................................................... 81 Bibliography ............................................................................................................................... 82

v

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS All photographic negatives were taken by Henryk Ross, and are from the Lód Ghetto Collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario. Figures Page 1. "Negative Sheet Number 17", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 24.0 x 30.5 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 17, Frame 489", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negative in acetate sheet, 3.4 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 17, Frame 495", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negative in acetate sheet, 4.1 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 17, Frame 500", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negative in acetate sheet, 3.4 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 3", 1940-1944, 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 24.0 x 30.5 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 3, Frames 80-84", 1940-1944 , gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 21.0 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 3, Frames 80-84", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 21.0 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 3, Frames 80-82", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 10.5 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 2", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 24.0 x 30.5 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 2", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 24.0 x 30.5 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 2, Frame 32", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negative in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 3.4 x 3.4 cm. 19

2.

20

3.

20

4.

21

5.

24

6.

29

7.

29

8.

30

9.

34

10.

35

11.

36

vi

12.

"Negative Sheet Number 2, Frame 48", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negative in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 3.4 x 3.4 cm. Page 28 from Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód, 196?, 31.5 x 22.6 cm. Pages 28 and 29 from Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód), 196?, 62.5 x 22.6 cm. Detail of page 28 from Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód), 196?, 9.2 x 8.2 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 9, Frame 22", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negative in acetate sheet, 3.4 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 9, Frame 22", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negative in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 3.4 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 9, Continuted", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 11.0 x 13.8 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 43, Frames 471-476", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 23.2 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 43, Frames 471-476", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 23.2 x 3.4 cm. Page 66 from Lód Ghetto Album, 2004, 20.9 x 23.4 cm. Page 133 from Lód Ghetto Album, 2004, 20.9 x 23.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 24, Frames 23065-1070", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 22.5 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 24, Frames 23065-1070", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 22.5 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 29, Frames 22907-911", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 20.3 x 3.4 cm.

36

13.

42

14.

42

15.

43

16.

43

17.

43

18.

44

19.

50

20.

50

21. 22. 23.

52 52 53

24.

53

25.

54

vii

26.

"Negative Sheet Number 29, Frames 22907-911", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 20.3 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 10, Frames 299-301", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 24.0 x 3.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 10, Frames 299-301", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, digitally inverted to positive image, 24.0 x 3.4 cm. Page 29 from Lód Ghetto Album, 2004, 20.9 x 23.4 cm. Pages 114-114 from Lód Ghetto Album, 2004,41.8 x 23.4 cm. "Negative Sheet Number 5", 1940-1944, gelatin silver photographic negatives in acetate sheet, 24.0 x 30.5 cm.

54

27.

56

28.

56

29. 30. 31.

57 57 60

Tables 1. Deterioration Stages of Nitrate Film Negatives 18

viii

INTRODUCTION

The Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection is a unique compilation of mementos and tokens amassed by Jewish photographer Henryk Ross (1910-1991), between 1940 and 1944.1 Within Ross archive, collected administration documents, personal notes, posters and souvenirs intermingle among the photographic evidence documented by Ross during the time in which he was sequestered within the confines of the Jewish ghetto at Lód, Poland. As a photographer commissioned by the Jewish Administration, the governing body within the ghetto walls, Ross had the opportunity to photograph required subject matter ­ documentation of administrators, workers, and buildings of the ghetto ­ but at the time also captured moments of everyday life as experienced by the ghetto inhabitants.

Upon notice of the ghettos liquidation, Ross buried his collection within the boundaries of the ghetto in 1944, in hopes of preserving "a historical record of ... martyrdom" for the Jewish people.2 These documents were unearthed by Ross when he returned to Lód in March 1945. With over 3,000 surviving 35mm negatives in this collection documenting everyday life within the ghetto, these negatives represent historical documents that survived the Holocaust. The collection of Ross materials was first acquired in 1997 by the Archive of Modern Conflict in London, England, and in 2007 became a part of the photographic holdings at the Art Gallery of Ontario.

1

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), cover. Ibid., 27.

2

1

The information presented to the public regarding the events of the Holocaust can be found in history books, with photographs of concentration camps and the written accounts of survivors, and viewers have become accustomed to these forms of information depicting violence and devastation. While images such as these do exist within the Ross collection, photographic representations of daily life and routine existence also provide another element, bringing a more complete representation of ghetto life, realized through both the public and private photographic records created by Ross.

Negatives from the Lód Ghetto collection were chosen for study in this thesis due to their untapped capacity as a historical object. While other materials within the collection have been researched, the negatives are the primary documents, the source of all print reproductions, which underwent the act of survival to convey Ross photographic narrative. As such, they have been selected to analyze the difference between the information presented on a negative, versus its print counterpart, as well as explore the past, present and future of such original documents within a photographic collection.

The negative component from Ross collection was produced on 11 different brands or types of film. The subject matter captured on the negatives reveal aspects of everyday life within the ghetto including official photographs as requested by the administration, juxtaposed with Ross personal photographic documentation of occupations, living conditions, items, documents, destruction, aerial views, transportation, group images, weddings, celebrations and children. Through an examination of the negatives, representations of devastation and destruction can be found alongside images of beauty, love and intimate peaceful moments. Henryk Ross

2

photographs reveal another side of ghetto life, and as such, are important representations of this period in history.

The dissemination of photographs from the Ross collection have been published in the form of positive images produced from the original negatives. From the first distribution of images in his 1960s book titled Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód), Ross published his images forming a narrative of death and destruction. The 2004 publication Lód Ghetto Album by Martin Parr, Timothy Weber, and Timothy Prus, presents a more encompassing depiction of the collections photographic material. While these publications present Ross imagery, they reveal a partial narrative of the photographers work methodology and the narratives he generated through the act of photographing.

Although issues associated with understanding the negative arise, such as its inverted tonal values and small size, fundamental information can be obtained from the negative as a historical object. Ross work methodology and the sequence in which he captured images tell a story of moments witnessed and the impact they made on this photographer. The negative can also impart information regarding materials available, deterioration issued faced during their survival, and concern for future preservation and conservation of a unique body of work. To examine these issues, negative samples from the Ross collection will be selected to demonstrate the ability to use a negative as a research tool to understand the photographic process from the moment the image is captured, its capacity to be shaped into narratives, as well as its future as a historical object.

3

In order to comprehend the scope of the negative component, the body of work was assessed to determine materials present, recorded information found on the negatives, and areas of study for the thesis that would analyze the negatives to recognize the complexities of this collection. Since this collection is too large to study in full for the time frame of this endeavor, individual negative frames, negative strips of two to six frames, and full negative sheets were chosen after an examination of the collection had been completed. Each sample was specifically selected to appropriately illustrate the issues that will be addressed in the analysis as a direct example to represent the entire collection.

To specifically determine what can be learned from these documents, the following analysis sections will be explored: the production elements of Ross negatives, discussing the negatives as objects through an assessment of the materials and deterioration issues; and the post-production use of the source negatives, analyzing negative strips and the images recorded within individual frames, as well as an examination of Ross cataloguing methods. Following the study of the object component of the negative collection, the thesis will explore the dissemination of images through an analysis of Ross 1960s publication, Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód), and the later presentation of images in Lód Ghetto Album created by editors Martin Parr and Timothy Prus in 2004. Through a comparison of the negatives and the book publications, this section will focus on the layers of shaped narratives based upon original documents, citing how the reading and understanding of the source materials can be interpreted through post-production efforts. The final area of discussion will address the future of the negative collection, observing the current storage

4

conditions as well as recommendations for the conservation and preservation of this rare collection.

As a historical document, the negative can be recognized as a primary source for researchers, scholars and collecting institutions. The ability to understand and use a negative as a historical object in which information can be gathered is an area of research which has been underdeveloped. This thesis intends to acknowledge the use value of the negative to complement previous research regarding Ross and his use of photography to document ghetto life, bringing forth new components to the history of this unique photographic collection.

5

LITERATURE SURVEY

Research for this literature survey has been conducted, with specific attention to the question of what information can be learned from the negative as a historical document. Past research analyzing Ross print collection has been conducted; however, the negative collection has not independently been researched or studied. The discussion of previous research will be presented in three distinct topics ­ first, sources that have examined Henryk Ross and the Lód Ghetto; second, literature pertaining to the use of photographs as historical sources; and third, sources that discuss the negative as a physical object. While theoretical analyses regarding the use of Holocaust imagery to understand memory, feeling and trauma were researched, this literature survey will focus on material relevant to a historical analysis of the Ross negative collection. 3

Henryk Ross and the Lód Ghetto To gain historical insight and establish context regarding Henryk Ross and the creation of his photographic collection, sources outlining the characteristics and circumstances faced in Lód Ghetto provided background information. Lucjan Dobroszyckis 1984 book titled The Chronicle of the Lód Ghetto, 1941-1944, set the standard for producing a historical survey of the ghetto during its existence, using records and archives to piece together a chronologically3

Ulrich Baer, Spectral Evidence: The Photography of Trauma (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002); Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Hill and Wang, 1980); Michael Bernard-Donals, Forgetful Memory: Representation and Remembrance in the Wake of the Holocaust (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2009); Lawrence L. Langer, Holocaust Testimonies: The Ruins of Memory (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991); Andrea Liss, Trespassing Through Shadows: Memory, Photography, and the Holocaust (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998); Susan Sontag, On Photography (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1978); Susan Sontag, Regarding the Pain of Others (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003).

6

based analysis. This lead to subsequent book publications including Lód Ghetto: Inside a Community Under Siege by Alan Adelson, Robert Lapides, and Marek Web in 1989, Isaiah Trunks Lód Ghetto: A History in 2006 and most recently Ghettostadt: Lód and the Making of a Nazi City by Gordon J. Horowitz in 2008. Each of these publications present the detailed evolution of ghetto life based upon salvaged government documents from the ghetto and personal accounts, describing the creation of the confined quarters, the ruling hierarchy of the Jewish Administration, the hardships faced by the inhabitants of this labour facility, and the final deportation of its community.

Extending from this overall depiction of the ghetto, further literature provided Ross biographical information as well as the context in which Ross photographed his images. In Janina Struks Photographing the Holocaust: Interpretations of the Evidence (2004), the author recounts essential biographical information to understand Ross as a photographer and an inhabitant of the ghetto. Struk explains that Ross had been a photojournalist before the war and upon entering the ghetto was selected by the Jewish Administrations Statistics Department to photograph every inhabitant in the ghetto for their identity cards, as well as portraits of officials, documents of buildings, neighbourhoods and workers, and images of the deceased. 4 Additional details surrounding the secret documentation carried out by Ross, is found in Anna EilenbergEibeshitzs Preserved Evidence, Ghetto Lód (1998), a collection of testimonies from those who endured the struggles firsthand within Lód Ghetto. In one account, artist Sarah FajtlowiczGliksman describes the formation of a resistance group of photographers in the Statistics

4

Janina Struk, Photographing the Holocaust: Interpretations of the Evidence (New York: I.B. Tauris, 2004), 86­87.

7

Department to document all aspects of the ghetto.5 Those authorized to carry a camera, such as Ross, could freely roam the ghetto without question. Alan Adelson, in his essay titled "The Photographs and Photographers" from Diary of D. Sierakowiak: Five Notebooks From the Lód Ghetto (1996), states that Ross was provided with film, chemicals and paper to document ghetto industry, but also independently recorded the lives within the community.6

Sources which present Ross photographic work included Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód) (196?) and Lód Ghetto Album (2004) by Martin Parr, Timothy Weber, and Timothy Prus. Ross recovered his negatives upon returning to Lód in 1945, and in the 1960s, created a book of photographs with typed captions presenting life in Lód Ghetto through images of starvation, death and destruction. It was in 1997 when Ross son made the collection available to the Archive of Modern Conflict in London, England, that the negatives and prints became part of another private collection. As the first publication to completely address this photographers entire body of work, authors Timothy Prus, curator at the Archive of Modern Conflict, and photographer/collector/curator Martin Parr created a publication that provides a fresh, independent look at Ross ghetto photographs. Here, not only images of devastation were included, which had been shown in previous publications, but also photographs documenting happier moments, revealing the many aspects of life in the ghetto. Particular examples from Ross several thousand negatives were reproduced in this book; however, Timothy Weber, historian and author of the books textual component, states, "most of

5

Anna Eilenberg-Eibeshitz, Preserved Evidence, Ghetto Lodz (Haifa: H. Eibeshitz Institute for Holocaust Studies, 1998), 341­342.
6

Alan Adelson, "The Photographs and Photographers", in Diary of D. Sierakowiak: Five Notebooks From the Lód Ghetto (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), 269.

8

the negatives are yet to be printed as individual photographs, and there is still much to learn from them".7

With each publication examined in this section of research, life within Lód Ghetto and the driving force behind the photographic documentation of Henryk Ross was revealed. Although photographic prints produced from Ross negatives have been made available through print and exhibition,8 the images were published independently as positives, neglecting the negatives themselves as significant historical objects.

The Photographic Print In general, the use of photographic prints as research tools has remained a rare occurrence in the field of historical research. In History and Its Images: Art and the Interpretation of the Past, Francis Haskell addresses the use of imagery to understand history, further commenting on the introduction of photography and its role as a historical tool. Haskell states, "Photographs are the popular historicism of our era; they confer nothing less than our reality"9 but also notes that over time, "serious historians showed themselves to be increasingly

7

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 9.

8

Photographic prints from the Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection were presented to the public in an exhibition at Les Rencontres dArles photography festival in 2004, and were on display during the course of the festival from July 8 until September 19, 2004. This was the first opportunity for public viewing of the private imagery contained within the collection, and the first exhibition of images displayed as large, framed print reproductions. Images from the negative collection were selected by Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, editors for the 2004 publication, Lód Ghetto Album.
9

Francis Haskell, History and Its Images: Art and the Interpretation of the Past (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993), 4.

9

reluctant to use the evidence offered by art or artefacts when trying to interpret the past."10 Barbie Zelizer, in Holocaust Photography, Then and Now (1999) and Remembering to Forget: Holocaust Memory through the Camera's Eye (1998), further discusses this notion that photography is a "powerful interpretive tool" 11 with an "aura of realism that could convey the ,,appropriate truth about atrocity."12 Holocaust imagery, like that produced by Ross, was displayed in the 2001 exhibition by Clément Chéroux titled Mémoire des camps: Photographies des camps de concentration et d'extermination nazis, 1933-1999. This photographic exhibition presented Holocaust images for the first time as historical documents. Through the presentation of such images and written text in the exhibition catalogue, Chéroux addresses the significant loss of historical value associated with such prints.13 He cites examples that reveal the inaccurate use of photographic imagery as documentation, through misleading or incorrect captions. By restoring use value and legitimacy to these photographic documents, respect and accuracy is restored to photographs as historical research documents.

While Chéroux discusses the use of photographic prints as historical resources, the connection to photographic negatives as historical objects has not been addressed. Negatives are complicated objects to interpret and display, due to their inverted values and small size, and as such they have not extensively been researched as a medium for documentation. What

10

Francis Haskell, History and Its Images: Art and the Interpretation of the Past (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993), 2, 3.
11

Barbie Zelizer, Remembering to Forget: Holocaust Memory through the Camera's Eye (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 6.
12

Barbie Zelizer. "Holocaust Photography, Then and Now", in Picturing the Past: Media, History, and Photography, ed. Bonnie Brennen and Hanno Hardt (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1999).
13

Clément Chéroux. Mémoire des camps: Photographies des camps de concentration et d'extermination nazis, 1933-1999 (Paris: Marval, 2001).

10

knowledge can be gained from the negative as an original source for historians and researchers has not thoroughly been examined, and as such, photographic negatives have only been appreciated as a technical process resulting in the photographic print.

The Photographic Negative The third avenue of research addressed literature pertaining to the negative as a historical object. Often viewed as technical explanations of an invented process, major photography history texts, such as Michel Frizots A New History of Photography (1998), recount the evolution of the photographic negative through Talbots invention of the paper negative, Frederick Scott Archers collodion advancements, the rise of gelatin silver and roll film, and finally the success of the 35mm camera.14 Each of these accounts provide historical context for the photographic materials that comprise the negative component of the Ross collection.

In addition to this larger historical perspective, Maria Fernanda Valverdes Photographic Negatives: Nature and Evolution of Processes (2005) explains the technical progression of the gelatin silver negative and various substrate compositions. By examining Ross negative strips, particular image frames reveal signs of deterioration and image degradation including emulsion damage and staining, most likely due to the environmental factors they faced while residing underground in wooden barrels. To understand such deterioration issues that provide information about the life of the negative, several additional references discussing preservation issues of the gelatin silver negative were examined. These included Bertrand Lavédrines A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections (2003) and Photographs of the Past:
14

Michel Frizot, ed., A New History of Photography (Köln: Könemann, 1998). 91, 233, 238.

11

Process and Preservation (2009), as well as Mary Lynn Ritzenthalers Photographs: Archival Care and Management (2006).

In the 11th issue of Études Photographiques, published in 2002, François Chevals essay "Lépreuve du musée" addresses photographys place within an art institution, noting a print has a use value within an institution as an object which can be exhibited and showcased, whereas the negative falls into the darkness of a undecided status.15 As the negative is much smaller in size, has inversed tonal ranges and must be lit from behind in order to view the image, the logistics of a negatives use value for exhibition purposes is much more complex, and therefore is not given high importance among a collection of photographic prints.

Using the negative as an object from which information can be acquired is a form of research that has long been neglected.16 Ilsen About and Clément Chéroux address the failure by historians to use photographic objects when conducting research, in their article, "Lhistoire par la photographie" in the 10th issue of Études Photographiques (2002). The authors state that the negative is the primary source, representing a raw image not cropped, untouched and therefore much closer to what might have been observed by the photographer.17 In analyzing the

photographic process, one can define the negative as a matrix, a term defined by MerriamWebster Dictionary as "something within or from which something else originates, develops, or

15

François Cheval, "Lépreuve du musée," Études Photographiques 11 (May 2002): 4­43.

16

According to Janet Lehr, a New York photography dealer, "the field is under-researched". John Loengard, Celebrating the Negative (New York: Arcade Publishing, 1994), 6.
17

Ilsen About and Clément Chéroux, "Lhistoire par la photographie", Études Photographiques, 10 (November 2001), http://etudesphotographiques.revues.org/index261.html (accessed November 8, 2009).

12

takes form."18 Subsequent prints produced from a negative that might undergo such alterations could change the original reading captured on the negative. Through this understanding, the negative is the initial object created, and as such is a relevant document that through study can bring further comprehension to a particular history, in this case, the history of Ross Lód Ghetto collection.

Conclusion In general, photography is regarded as a means of documentation, and that photographic prints represent historical documents, but it appears as though the negative has been relegated to the status of only an important step in the photography process. There are viewing issues that render the photographic negative more difficult to interpret, where it is much easier to view and analyze a print made from such negatives. As previously mentioned, printed negatives can undergo cropping, retouching, or alterations which would obscure the original raw information recorded on the negative. With that said, the negative is a specific document representing a moment in time as it occurred, free of any later alterations in the printing process.

The negative as a historical document reveals a history in which one can piece together a photographers view based on his work methodology and the subject matter represented on a negative strip. Loengard describes negatives as just tools with no value,19 but it is apparent that they retain historical information, and are just as much a historical document as a print made

18

Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, s.v. "Matrix," http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/matrix (accessed February 11, 2010).
19

John Leongard, Celebrating the Negative (New York: Arcade Publishing, 1994), 5.

13

from them, perhaps a more accurate representation of the moment they record. This thesis analysis will focus on the ability of this collection of negatives to bring new elements to the history of Henryk Ross.

14

THE PHOTOGRAPHIC NEGATIVE AS A SOURCE OF INFORMATION Cellulose Nitrate Issues

After creating an inventory of the negative component of the collection, it was determined that the photographic negatives were produced on 11 different brands or types of film: Agfa Isopan F, Agfa Isopan ISS, Agfa Isopan Ultra, Agfa Isochrom F, Alfa, Hauff, Kodak AG Plus X Panchro, Mimosa, Opta, Perutz, and Voigtländer. When the collection was acquired by the Art Gallery of Ontario, the institution had been notified by the Archive of Modern Conflict that the film materials were cellulose acetate based, however, the time period in which these negatives were produced coincides with the final years in which cellulose nitrate film was produced, and gradually replaced by the more stable cellulose acetate film.

Cellulose nitrate, a flexible film base, was introduced in 1889 as a lightweight and resilient substitute for glass plates.20 This plastic alternative had one major drawback, as it was highly flammable, and was the cause of many disastrous fires. 21 Nitrate based films were banned in the 1950s, and replaced with a more stable, fire-retardant cellulose acetate option.22 Over time, it became apparent within film collections that cellulose nitrate had a tendency to decompose and

20

Bertrand Lavédrine, A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections, ed. Jean-Paul Gandolfo, Sibylle Monod, and Getty Conservation Institute, trans. Sharon Grevet (Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2003), 17.
21

Based upon the foundation of cellulose plastics composed of carbon, oxygen and hydrogen, the nitro group (ONO2) when attached to the cellulose molecule produces flexible cellulose nitrate. The "flammabi lity of cellulose nitrate film is a consequence of the fact that oxygen from the nitro side group (ONO 2) is readily available to sustain combustion." James M. Reilly, Peter Z. Adelstein, and Douglas W. Nishimura, Preservation of Safety Film: Final Report to The Office of Preservation, National Endowment for The Humanities (Rochester, NY: Image Permanence Institute, Rochester Institute of Technology, 1991), 5­6.
22

In acetate film bases, the acetate group, CH3COO-, or related structure is bonded to the D-glucose rings of the cellulose polymer. Francis A. Carey, Organic Chemistry, 7th Edition (Toronto: McGraw-Hill, 2008).

15

release nitric acid, creating an autocatalytic chemical reaction which accelerated the deterioration of the materials until the negative was completely destroyed.23

To determine the type and stability of the materials which comprise the Ross negative collection, burn tests were conducted on January 20, 2010, with Katharine Whitman, Conservator of Photographs at the Art Gallery of Ontario. Samples of film, approximately 1.0 x 5.0 mm, were cut from the edges of the chosen film strips representing the 11 different film types. Within a ventilated environment, the specimens were placed in contact with a direct flame, and the rate of combustion was observed. Indication of film type can be identified due to the rate in which the specimen burns ­ rapid burning is identified as cellulose nitrate, where cellulose acetate fragments "stop burning when the flame goes out."24 Ten out of eleven samples burned rapidly when in contact with the flame, and as a result were deemed to be composed of cellulose nitrate.25 When in contact with the flame source, the Alfa sample stopped burning when the flame went out, approximately half way down the length of the sample, and as a result was identified as a cellulose acetate film base. The conclusions derived from the flame test impact the stability and longevity of the negative collection, and initiatives to preserve and conserve these historical documents will further be addressed later in this analysis.

23

Maria Fernanda Valverde, Photographic Negatives: Nature and Evolution of Processes (Rochester, N.Y.: Advanced Residency Program in Photograph Conservation, 2005), 21.
24

Bertrand Lavédrine, A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections, ed. Jean-Paul Gandolfo, Sibylle Monod, and Getty Conservation Institute, trans. Sharon Grevet (Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2003), 18.
25

As per the results of the burn test conducted January 20, 2010, the following film samples were identified as cellulose nitrate: Agfa Isopan F, Agfa Isopan ISS, Agfa Isopan Ultra, Agfa Isochrom F, Hauff, Kodak AG Plus X Panchro, Mimosa, Opta, Perutz, and Voigtländer.

16

Based upon the findings from the burn test analysis, the time frame in which this collection of negatives can be researched is extremely sensitive. As explained, cellulose nitrate can easily and quickly deteriorate until the film base is completely destroyed, and with it the subject matter documented within the emulsion. As a result, it is important to analyze the recorded materials before the collections components sustain further degradation. This thesis analysis is a window of opportunity to study not only the materials within the collection, but the subject matter recorded on them, before this collection disappears.

Cellulose nitrate negatives are subject to particular forms of degradation based upon the chemical components of the films substrate.26 Due to its chemical instability, nitrate negatives can undergo various stages of degradation based upon variances in temperature and relative humidity within the storage environment. Silver image and nitrate decay, binder degradation and mould are all deterioration issues faced by nitrate negatives. 27 The progressive stages of deterioration are irreversible, and can be categorized into six phases:

26

Chemical instability in cellulose nitrate film is impacted by the nitro side groups attached to the cellulose molecule. Hydrolysis, "separation by water" where "nitro groups ...becom[e] detached" from the cellulose molecule releases NO2 into "the body of the film base" and occurs as a result of increased moisture content within the storage environment, dependent upon temperature and humidity. James M. Reilly, Peter Z. Adelstein, and Douglas W. Nishimura, Preservation of Safety Film: Final Report to The Office of Preservation, National Endowment for The Humanities (Rochester, NY: Image Permanence Institute, Rochester Institute of Technology, 1991), 13. Peter Z Adelstein, IPI Media Storage Quick Reference, 2nd Edition (Rochester, N.Y.: Image Permanence Institute, 2009), 3.
27

17

Table 1: Deterioration Stages of Nitrate Film Negatives Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Stage 5 Stage 6 No deterioration Film support turns yellow and the image shows signs of silver mirroring Film becomes sticky and gives off a strong odor of nitric acid Film becomes amber in color and the image begins to fade Film is soft and can adhere to adjacent negatives or enclosures Film turns into a brown acid powder

Source: Maria Fernanda Valverde, Photographic Negatives: Nature and Evolution of Processes (Rochester, N.Y.: Advanced Residency Program in Photograph Conservation, 2005), 21.

Although the negatives within the Ross collection remain within the Stage 1 and 2 categories, the instability and time sensitive nature of cellulose nitrate negatives require close observation and maintenance to ensure their longevity. The negatives within the collection reveal other signs of deterioration faced by the materials during their lifespan. By examining a particular sample from the Ross collection, the deterioration issues present in the sample negatives can assist in comprehending deterioration factors faced by the entire negative collection, as well as understand the storage conditions, providing background context into the survival and existence of these rare objects.

Negative Sheet 17 from the collection displays a variety of negative frames on three different types of cellulose nitrate film: Agfa Isopan F, Agfa Isopan Ultra and Perutz (Figure 1). The ten individual negative strips display varying signs of deterioration. The first strip reveals evidence of exposure to heat, as shown by the brown staining along the top edge in three different areas (Figure 2). These burn marks are consistent with roll storage, where the negatives were wound and stored in roll form. The brown markings appear exactly the same in the three areas, where a particular area of the roll was exposed to a heat source. Vertical areas of missing photographic information are also present within the first four frames of this strip. This lack of

18

Figure 1. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 17", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

19

image detail can also be attributed to the existence of the negatives in roll form, but during development instead of storage. The absence of developed detail is usually explained by uneven development during processing, where the film did not come in complete contact with the chemical developer.
Figure 2. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 17, Frame 489", detail of burn marks and improper processing, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

The second negative strip within this sheet is a prime example of deterioration caused by water damage

(Figure 3). This type of damage results in missing photographic emulsion, as the water has dissolved the gelatin in this localized degradation. Water also causes gelatin to swell, where it can become attached to other negative strips, and the emulsion can tear away.28 The removal of emulsion results in concentrated areas which do not contain photographic information, as seen at the end of negative frame 495. The fourth strip, which is only one negative frame labelled 498, reveals signs of improper processing. In this instance, the film
Figure 3. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 17, Frame 495", detail of water damage, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

was wound too tightly during processing, and the chemicals did not come in contact with the entire film surface. As a result the center of the exposed image is processed, while the outer areas remain undeveloped.
28

Southeast Asia-Pacific Audio Visual Archive Association, Film Preservation Handbook, http://www.pia.gov.ph/seapavaa/FilmPreservationHandbook/Home.htm (accessed May 23, 2010).

20

The sixth and eighth negative strips reveal signs of brittleness and tearing along the outer edges (Figure 4). Here, sprocket holes and edges have been tattered due to a lack of moisture content in the film base, resulting in a brittle sample subjected to breakage.29 Brittleness is a noted sign of
Figure 4. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 17, Frame 500", detail of sprocket hole tearing, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

deterioration in cellulose nitrate films when stored in a dry environment.30 The absence of moisture content within the film base structure results in an increase in flammability, and

the instability of the samples become a danger to the surrounding materials.

The deterioration samples selected for this section of the analysis display various signs of degradation prevalent on several different brands of cellulose nitrate film, which are indicative of the deterioration issues present in the entire negative collection. As previously mentioned, the negative collection was buried underground upon notice of the ghettos liquidation in 1944. Some of these signs of deterioration can most likely be linked to the period in which the images were buried in wooden barrels from 1944 until 1945, where the conditions in which they resided would have contributed to the degradation noted. When the contents were retrieved in 1945, they had spent a period of one year in conditions which produced variances in temperature, moisture and pollutants, contributing to chemical, mechanical and biological decay.

29

Southeast Asia-Pacific Audio Visual Archive Association, Film Preservation Handbook, http://www.pia.gov.ph/seapavaa/FilmPreservationHandbook/Home.htm (accessed May 23, 2010).
30

Bertrand Lavédrine, A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections, ed. Jean-Paul Gandolfo, Sibylle Monod, and Getty Conservation Institute, trans. Sharon Grevet (Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2003), 17.

21

The analysis of production materials and deterioration issues identified within the Ross negative collection present the importance of time and the degradation limits associated with this body of work. The significance of this collection is directly proportionate to the lack of time remaining to study these original objects before they become indistinguishable.

22

The Work Process through the Photographic Negative

In addition to an analysis of the materials used to produce the negatives, individual negative strips were examined to identify visible technical indicators that would assist in explaining Ross artifacts through exposure and processing. Samples were chosen to best illustrate the production, use, dissemination and preservation issues associated with the negative collection. A strip of negatives assists in the explanation of these themes by illustrating the topic discussed through a small series of images, instead of one single frame. Negative Sheet 3 from the Ross collection has been selected, and presents an assortment of negative strips displaying the materials available to Ross during the time in which he recorded the Lód Ghetto images (Figure 5). In this sample, there are four different cellulose nitrate film brands housed within the one sleeve: Agfa Isopan F, Agfa Isopan ISS, Kodak AG Plus X Panchro, and Perutz.

The first strip of negatives, recorded on Isopan F film, reveals a set of three frames that are overexposed, and underdeveloped. As a result, the recorded information is difficult to distinguish. The second strip, containing two image frames on Kodak AG Plus X Panchro, are also overexposed, and display uneven development by a dark, vertical area through the left frame. The next two negative strips, also documented on Kodak AG Plus X Panchro, are more properly exposed, and the information recorded can easily be distinguished. Signs of uneven development can be identified on the last frame of the third strip, as evidenced by a dark vertical region through the image. Overdeveloped areas around the sprocket holes can be seen on the second, third and fourth frames of the fourth negative strip. The fifth and sixth strips are recorded on Agfa Isopan F film, and reveal variances in exposure and development. The fifth strip

23

Figure 5. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 3", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

24

maintains even exposure and development, while the first two frames of the sixth strip are overexposed, and the remaining three frames are underexposed. Variances in the width between exposures can also be observed, particularly on the fifth strip, revealing a deficiency in the winding mechanism of the camera used to record these images, as a complete advancement of the winding mechanism would present a larger space between frames, while a smaller space would be the result of an incomplete winding motion. The final negative strip is recorded on Perutz film, and is overexposed and underdeveloped, resulting in very dense negative information.

Overall, this negative sheet presents a variety of film brands and types used, as well as variances in exposure and developing results. The changes in film brands can be considered irregular among practicing photographers. Most photographers determine a brand of film that is technically best suited to their form of photographing; however, Ross documented his images on 11 different types of film. All of the brands noted are German manufactured except Americanmade Kodak, an unexpected brand of film to be found within a German occupied territory, but the photographers within the ghetto were only been able to use the supplies that became available at the time. According to Ross, "photographic materials were smuggled to me in exchange for bread," revealing why a photographer within the ghetto would have access to black market materials, in order to have enough supplies to create his own private documents.31

As a practicing news photographer before the formation of the Lód Ghetto, Ross would have been knowledgeable in basic photographic techniques. As noted on one of Ross

31

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 27.

25

identification cards, found within his archive of photographs and documents, his profession is listed as "foto-reporterem."32 Ross established career as a photographic reporter or photojournalist provided the opportunity to learn the trade through practical experience, supporting his technical abilities as a photographer; therefore the varied quality of the exposed negatives can be linked to the haste associated with his covert photographic methods.

The images documented within Negative Sheet 3 reveal exposure differences resulting from the inability to adapt to various lighting conditions and film speeds. This conclusion is illustrated in the fifth strip of negatives. The first frames are images that would be considered private images, those not requested by the Jewish Administration, but documented by Ross as a record of life in the ghetto. In these instances, he may not have been able to quickly change camera settings to compensate for the lighting conditions present. The final three frames of the strip, images that portray hospital staff, represent requested images by the Administration, and as a result, Ross would have had sufficient time to ensure he documented the image with a properly exposed negative. As a news photographer, Ross was "comfortable with organizing and photographing groups of people."33 His technical knowledge of photography supports his ability to capture a properly exposed negative with good composition based upon his previous experiences as a professional photographer, as evidenced through the hospital staff portraits.

The issues with developing result from improper development times or insufficient chemicals that were available to the photographer. The photographers within the Statistics
32

This identification card, stating Ross occupation, can be found within the Ross collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario.
33

Janina Struk, Photographing the Holocaust: Interpretations of the Evidence (New York: I.B. Tauris, 2004), 86.

26

Department had use of darkroom facilities to develop and print requested images. 34 The inconsistency in development and processing of the negatives can be attributed to oversaturated or diluted chemicals, irregularity in processing procedures (loading of the film base onto developing equipment) or processing times.35 Although Ross was a practicing photojournalist before his time in the ghetto,36 the secretive manner in which he worked resulted in the need to rush his process, in order to keep his own images from public knowledge.

The examination of individual negative strip samples assists in comprehending the production of these historical objects on a much greater scale. An assessment of the materials, exposure and processing elements describe the manner in which the images were recorded, the work methodology adopted by the photographer, and the subversive practices implemented to ensure such rare documents survived. Due to the circumstances in which the images were created, Ross methodology may have impacted the quality of the image recorded, but these photographically documented details provide insight into the creation of this distinctive body of work.

34

Alan Adelson, "The Photographs and Photographers", in Diary of D. Sierakowiak: Five Notebooks From the Lód Ghetto (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), 269.
35

Michael W. Davidson and The Florida State University. Molecular Expressions: Black and White Film Processing Errors (Florida: The Florida State University, 2004) http://micro.magnet.fsu.edu/primer/photomicrography/bwprocessingerrors.html (accessed May 23, 2010).
36

Ross was a sports photographer for a Warsaw newspaper before the onset of the Second World War. Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 11; Janina Struk, Photographing the Holocaust: Interpretations of the Evidence (New York: I.B. Tauris, 2004), 86.

27

INSIDE THE IMAGE The Negative Strip

An analysis of the production elements documented in Ross negative collection reveals not only the photographers work methodology in creating photographic records through the act of photographing, but also provides insight into the editing, sequencing and cataloguing of this photographers collection. To first examine Ross photographing techniques, the images recorded within a single strip of negatives can assist in the identification of the photographers methods of documenting. It has been noted in previous publications regarding the photographic work of Ross that while performing his required acts as a photographer within the Statistics Department for the Jewish Administration, the photographer secretly documented daily life within the ghetto for his own records.37 These private images, more personal in nature, contrast with the requested images from the Jewish Administration, and by closely analyzing each frame within a sequential strip of negatives, it can be determined how Ross captured these distinct images.

The selected sample strip from Negative Sheet 3, contains five frames labelled 80-84, captured on Agfa Isopan F cellulose nitrate film (Figures 6 and 7). This strip reveals five images which document daily life at the Lód ghetto hospital, located at 36 Lagiewnick Street.

37

Alan Adelson, "The Photographs and Photographers", in Diary of D. Sierakowiak: Five Notebooks From the Lód Ghetto (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996); Anna Eilenberg-Eibeshitz, Preserved Evidence, Ghetto Lodz (Haifa: H. Eibeshitz Institute for Holocaust Studies, 1998); Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004); Henryk Ross and Aleksander Klugman. Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' [The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód] (Tel-Aviv S. Kibel: [196-?]); Janina Struk, Photographing the Holocaust: Interpretations of the Evidence (New York: I.B. Tauris, 2004).

28

Figure 6. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 3, Frames 80-84", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

Figure 7. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 3, Frames 80-84," digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

29

Photographers under the direction of the Jewish Administration were requested to document buildings and workers within the ghetto community, to showcase the hard work its inhabitants produced, and the manner in which the ghetto maintained itself as a functioning society. The images provided evidence of the efficient operation of Lód Ghetto to German authorities, to maintain the existence of this labour facility. Photographic documentation found within this strip of negatives reveals the type of photographs recorded by the ghettos photographers to meet the demands of the authority.

In the first frame of the selected strip, workers are tending to the ghetto hospital garden ­ a typical image commissioned by the Jewish Administration to illustrate the work and care taken to attend to this facility. The third, fourth and fifth frames document a medical procedure hospital performed staff, by

again
Figure 8. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 3, Frames 80-82", detail, digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

highlighting the work of these employees that would

serve as documentary evidence for the Jewish Administration of the essential services executed by ghetto inhabitants (Figure 8). In contrast, the second frame, labelled 81, reveals a different perspective on life at the ghetto hospital by depicting a scarecrow found within the hospital gardens. This negative presents a more focused representation of the hospital garden, centering on a handmade scarecrow standing alone in the open space. The wooden structure is dressed with an old, tattered hat and coat, outstretched over the horizontal beam. Upon this coat, the Jewish

30

star has been stitched on the right breast. This humble figure, constructed by the Jewish workers within the ghetto, is a simple reminder of the treatment and isolation of the ghetto inhabitants. The image of the scarecrow shows a personal image captured by Ross, a record of how all things Jewish were treated. The contrast in subject matter reveals the juxtaposition between the scarecrow image and the hospital workers ­ the difference between Ross private and public images.

In determining the sequential order of the public and private images recorded on this strip, it appears as though the Jewish Administration may have tried to regulate the type of photographic documentation recorded; however, they did not monitor the rolls of film and their content. If this inspection procedure had taken place, the administrators would have witnessed the secret documentation performed by Ross, and most likely his photographic privileges would have been revoked, and ultimately, he could have been executed for his betrayal to the Jewish Administration and the German regime.38

This selected sample of photographic negatives reveals the methodology and documentation practices of Henryk Ross during his time in the ghetto and his service to the Jewish Administration. Under the direction of the ghetto administrators, Ross was ordered to capture a particular type of photographic evidence as source documentation to reveal the essential services and outstanding work produced within this labour facility. Juxtaposed with these evidential views, Ross took the risk of recording all aspects of daily life, not just those that depicted hardworking ghetto inhabitants. He was in control of his negatives and the content he

38

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 27.

31

recorded, as the Jewish Administration was not aware of his secret documentation, and as a result, Ross was ultimately able to bury and preserve his personal images.

32

The Reorganization of the Single Frame

Based upon the photographing methods adopted by Ross ­ capturing publicly requested imagery for the Jewish Administration alongside private documentation of Jewish life as a personal record ­ an examination of the post-production editing and cataloguing methods undertaken by the photographer will further assist in the reading and comprehension of this negative collection.

In 1987, Ross set out to catalogue his collection of negatives, and in turn cut, sequenced and numbered individual frames within catalogued negative sleeves.39 According to Ross, "The negatives I made I have put in order, catalogued, and provided explanations. These descriptions I was able to make with the help of my wife Stefania ... It is forty-two years since the Lód Ghetto was liquidated so there may be some small inaccuracies in the chronology."40 Within the collection, some negative sleeves contain one complete roll of film, while most contain several different film types and various subject matter.

The selected sample for analysis, Negative Sheet 2, contains a variety of negative frames depicting various subjects (Figures 9 and 10). In this one negative sheet, 17 individual strips are present, ranging from single negative frames, to strips containing five negative frames. These single frames comprise the first samples in this negative sheet, with a total of nine individual frames recording images of ghetto postage stamps. These frames document the administrators of

39

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 27. Ibid., 27.

40

33

Figure 9. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 2", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

34

Figure 10. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 2", digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

35

the ghetto, with portraits of the Jewish Administrator, Chaim Rumkowski. The next set of three negative frames, labeled 3133, document the remnants of a Jewish synagogue after it was destroyed under German rule (Figure 11). The following strip, containing five frames labeled 44-47B, depicts coal

transportation, including images of workers and administrators
Figure 11. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 2, Frame 32", detail of synagogue, digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

responsible for this process. The strip of four frames labeled 48-51, documents deportation from the ghetto (Figure 12). In these images, inhabitants in the ghetto have packed their

belongings and are headed to the train for deportation. Another representation of deportation is also documented in the single negative frame labeled 43, as well as the strip of five negative frames labeled 52-56. Contrasting in subject matter, the strip of three frames labeled 59-61 documents images of Henryk Ross wedding to his wife Stefania. The final strip, labeled 57-58, reveals two images of people aboard a form of transportation, possibly an automobile or railroad car.
Figure 12. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 2, Frame 48", detail of deportations, digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

By examining the subject matter documented on the individual negative frames contained within this one sheet, it appears as though Ross has completed extensive editing, cataloguing, grouping and sequencing. The combination of subjects represented in this sheet leads to Ross creation of a visual narrative through individual images, rather than the narrative created in a sequential roll of film. By combining small pieces of various stories ­ administrators,

36

destruction, transportation, and celebrations ­ Ross has created mini-narratives of various events, separating them from the other images captured at their time of exposure. Due to this editing, it is difficult to piece together the actual sequence in which images where photographed, and the methodology in which he used during the act of photographing.

From this regrouping of images prepared at a later date, it can be noted that the original arrangement of negatives did not present the narrative which Ross remembered. As a result, he has separated the images to report the event as he saw fit. According to Ross, "I was anticipating the total destruction of Polish Jewry. I wanted to leave a historical record of our martyrdom."41 Ross has selected and combined images of like subject matter to illustrate the martyrdom of the Jewish people. The shaped narrative as seen through the arrangement created by Ross represents small accounts of events, people, places and items within the ghetto, illustrating a larger representation of ghetto life based upon his memory of the oppression and discrimination of the Jewish people.

The idea of presenting information through editing and sequencing can be traced to Ross roots as a photojournalist, and his ability to edit the images to tell a story. The negatives as originally captured did not characterize the details as Ross remembered, and as stated in his own words, he has put them into a particular order with explanations and descriptions as not only remembered by himself, but also contributions provided by his wife based on her memory of the events witnessed. Ross also admits that "there may be some small inaccuracies in the chronology" within his catalogue of negatives, however, the chronology of many of the

41

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 27.

37

catalogued images can not be verified due to their rearrangement and the inability to reconstruct the events as they actually occurred by rebuilding a roll of negative frames.42

The editing and sequencing created within the negative collection can be defined as a process of recording versus chronicling knowledge. Ross recorded life in the ghetto as he witnessed through the lens of the camera, but later reshaped the recorded material into an order that made sense to him. The later cataloguing efforts instituted by Ross affect the understanding of documented events based upon his vision, rather than interpreting the original sequence of events depicting life as it happened.

42

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 27.

38

THE DISSEMINATION OF ROSS' IMAGES Rereading Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód)

In addition to the chronological arrangement formed by Ross through the act of sequencing and cataloguing the negative collection, the notion of using photographic images to develop a narrative through dissemination is also present in Ross 1960s b ook publication, Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód). The images selected for this book reflect a record of martyrdom for the Jewish people as determined by Ross, depicted through a series of sequenced photographs representing the death and destruction witnessed within the walls of Lód Ghetto. Examination of the photographic content in this publication presents a different account when compared to the narrative created through his sequenced negatives.

A photobook incorporates photographs and often text to present a specific subject or theme. According to Martin Parr and Gerry Badger, in their publication titled The Photobook: A History, "a group of photographs is brought together between covers, each image placed so as to resonate with its fellows as the pages are turned, making the collective meaning more important than the images individual meanings."43 In the case of Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz', Ross is not only photographer but also the author, assembling page layouts and sequences to represent his personal view of the documented imagery. Following World War II, those involved in the conflict deemed "the first task of photography was ... to provide visual evidence of the Holocaust ... In this way photography and the photobook bore powerful and irrefutable

43

Martin Parr and Gerry Badger, The Photobook: A History, volume 1 (London; New York: Phaidon, 2004), 7.

39

witness to what had happened in Nazi-occupied countries, informing a shocked, almost disbelieving, world."44 Based upon the idea of a photobook as a witness to events, Ross selectively compiled his imagery to form a narrative that would present the atrocities of life in the ghetto for observers of the outside world. After the wars end, accounts of events that occurred during Hitlers rule were presented through the histories of survivors and witnesses, and became the accepted views of the Holocaust and the Nazi regime. Ross book publication is yet another form of dissemination that represented these accepted views, choosing images of devastation to convey this interpretation of history. Following the acknowledged representation of the time, and with his original premise in mind, Ross could present his record of martyrdom for the Jewish people as he had intended, by selecting images to best illustrate these ideas through a visual narrative.

Ross Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' is a slim, 84-page publication bound in a simple black cover with pressed silver lettering. The book, reading back to front, begins with a title page and front matter, as well as an introduction written in six different languages, revealing the attempt to present this publication for international audiences, that all might understand the photographic records and documents provided within the book. Following this text, begins the sequencing of images with accompanying captions, also provided in six languages. The 165 black and white photographs included within the publication are presented as single images on a page, or combined with other images to create a double page layout. Some are presented with white borders surrounding the images, while others are formed into montage compositions to illustrate a particular subject through many photographic examples, such as work duties, starvation or deportation.
44

Martin Parr and Gerry Badger, The Photobook: A History, volume 1 (London; New York: Phaidon, 2004), 188.

40

To examine the narrative depicted in Ross 1960s publication, a sample image and its corresponding layout within the book have been selected for analysis (Figure 13). This image, found on page 28 in the lower left corner, depicts a young boy lying on a street sidewalk, clutching a door in his left hand.45 The boy appears to be weak from starvation. Due to the tight cropping, he is seen on the sidewalk by himself, faced with suffering and left for dead. In greater context within the publication, this selected image resides on a two-page spread with five other images, each depicting suffering through hunger and starvation, accompanied by the caption, "People drained of their last strength" (Figure 14). 46

Upon closer examination, the selected image of the boy appears cropped to a square format, when the image was captured on a 35mm negative, with an aspect ratio of 3:2 (Figure 15). In this case, the image recorded on the negative would be rectangular, providing additional information of the boys surroundings. The negative for this image can be found within Negative Sheet 9, a single negative frame cut from its original arrangement within a complete strip (Figures 16 and 17). This negative reveals a great deal of added context regarding the situation in which the image was captured. In the left foreground, another boy is present, standing and looking at the photographer. The top right background also reveals another witness, only visible by the cropped body captured in the image.

This entire scene creates a very different understanding of the scenario in which the image was captured. The boy lying on the street in hunger was not alone, left to perish on the

45

Henryk Ross and Aleksander Klugman. Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' [The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód] (Tel-Aviv S. Kibel: [196-?]), 28.
46

Ibid., 27.

41

Figure 13. Henryk Ross, page 28 from Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód), Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

Figure 14. Henryk Ross, pages 28 and 29 from Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód), Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

42

Figure 15. Henryk Ross, detail of page 28 from Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' (The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód), Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

Figure 16. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 9, Frame 22", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

Figure 17. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 9, Frame 22," digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

43

sidewalk. Instead, others were present and witness to this act, resulting in a more dramatic image. The full frame image reveals details of life in the ghetto, where inhabitants within the ghetto walls were forced to live with the people around them dying. The blank expression on the face of the boy in the foreground reveals the normalcy of this element of daily life, where neighbours succumbed to their starvation and weakness, perishing in the streets among the living that went about performing their required duties. By cropping the image to include only the fallen boy, Ross has shaped the reading of the image to evoke emotional attachment from the viewer.

As

previously

mentioned,

the

negative which documents this image resides in a negative sheet labeled Sheet 9. While a complete sheet of negatives identified as Sheet 9 exists, this single negative along with two other negative
Figure 18. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 9, Continued", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

strips have been placed in a second sheet, also labeled Sheet 9 (Figure 18). The only

negative in the first row within the sheet is the negative of the boy. It has been cut from other negative frames, separated from other images of similar subject matter, or the chronological events that occurred before and after this image was captured. The separation of this negative from others suggests the image was deemed important by Ross as a stand-alone photograph,

44

presenting a symbolic representation of ghetto life through this single image. By segregating the negative, Ross has raised the status and importance of the image represented, realizing the significance and iconic quality of the recorded document.

In accordance with Ross photojournalism experience, and his desire to produce a separate narrative rather than adhering to the chronological documents originally captured on a roll of film, it appears as though the full frame image of the boy did not adhere to the type of account Ross was trying to achieve through his photographs. As a result, he organized a layout of photographs that when situated on the same page, proposed a sequence of lonely victims suffering from starvation and death. Additional editing techniques such as cropping assisted in reinforcing this theme in which he was trying to transmit, within the larger context of the "record of martyrdom" narrative produced within this book publication.

45

Rereading Lód Ghetto Album

A second book publication also addresses the photographic works of Henryk Ross during his time in Lód Ghetto. Created in 2004 by the Archive of Modern Conflict, Lód Ghetto Album, contains images from the Ross collection selected by Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, a foreward by Robert Jan Van Pelt, and text by Thomas Weber.47 This publication is the first to completely address this photographers entire body of work, providing an independent look at Ross ghetto photographs.

As opposed to the creation of a photobook with the photographer as author, Lód Ghetto Album contains images chosen and compiled by editors. Based upon found imagery created by another artist, this publication deals with presenting a body of work by a then deceased photographer, and shedding new light upon the documented subject matter.48 According to Parr and Badger in The Photobook: A History, "the authors task is not one of creating the photographs, but of selection and ordering, giving a new and potent voice to the material of others, especially when the original voice has become muted by time or neglect."49 Ross photographic archive received no immediate recognition after the end of the Second World War, and has only recently been viewed by the general public. In order to present the materials from the collection, the idea of reorganization and ,,revisionism was adapted by the editors to better reveal the complexities of this historical period.

47

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004).

48

Henryk Ross died in Israel, in 1991. Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), cover.
49

Martin Parr and Gerry Badger, The Photobook: A History, volume 1 (London; New York: Phaidon, 2004), 8.

46

In this 160-page publication, editors Parr and Prus have presented Ross photographic work through book format. The hardcover volume presents text written by Thomas Weber outlining the history of the Ross collection, and the circumstances under which the collection came to exist, as well as outlining the scope and concept behind the presentation of images. Following this text is the plate section titled "The Photographs", including 120 images separated into two subsections, "Public" and "Private". The first set of black and white reproductions represent public images, not unlike those published in Ross 1960s book. After these images are the private representations, the first opportunity for viewers to see this contrasting component of the Ross collection. The layouts within each section depict full-frame reproductions of selected photographs, one to a page surrounded with white borders or enlarged to stretch across the books gutter and fill a double page spread. Captions for the images are also provided, cited from Ross original catalogue if available, or where required, suitable descriptions provided by Thomas Weber.50

The task set forth by the editors of this recent publication involved examining the photographic content of the collection to "encourage alternative readings of ghetto society and its leadership, class system and solidarity in the face of violence."51 Through their selection of images, Parr and Prus have created the first attempt to better understand this complex body of work through the process of editing the collections contents into a book publication. To do this, the editors have chosen examples of Ross work and divided them into two distinct categories. According to the editors, "the ,,public section features photographs that Ross released during his

50

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 27. Ibid., 9.

51

47

lifetime, along with previously unpublished photographs that are similar to or from the same sequences as those released by Ross." The second portion comprised of private images, are those that depict the happier moments of life within the ghetto have had not been previously published.52 With these defined parts, editors Parr and Prus have categorized Ross images into two distinct groups.

The separation of public and private images can be observed when analyzing the photographic content of the Ross collection; however, this book publication does not address the entire collection. Due to the constraints of the book format, a method of photographic dissemination which cannot encompass the entire 3,000 negatives, the editors were required to create a selection of photographs for publication that would best represent the collection. In doing so, Parr and Prus have created another form of narrative based upon these chosen images. In Ross 1960s publication, the photographer created a book using photographs to present a narrative of death and devastation experienced by the Jewish people within Lód Ghetto. Parr and Prus, on the other hand, have attempted to produce a book that encompasses a broader view of life in the ghetto, by presenting both private and public imagery. This idea is acknowledged by Matthias Tronqual, a historian of Holocaust photographic representations, who through his review of this publication, recognizes the editors attempt to show a more complex reality of life in the ghetto, and the capacity of these images to examine a particular period in history. 53 The underlying theme is perhaps not as restricted as that created by Ross in the 1960s publication, but

52

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 27.

53

Tronqual, Matthias. "Chris BOOT (éd.), Lód Ghetto Album, texte de Thomas Weber et Robert Jan van Pelt, Londres, Archive of Modern Conflict, 2004, 157 p.," Études Photographiques, 17 (November 2005), http://etudesphotographiques.revues.org/index767.html (accessed May 27, 2010).

48

their selection has limited the images published to reveal the story that the editors deemed important.

By separating Ross photographic work into two distinct sections ­ public and private ­ editors Parr and Prus have instituted a strong editorial decision, influencing the interpretation of the work. Each exists as a stand-alone portion, never amalgamating content from either part. As such, the reader or viewer of this publication recognizes the photographs as two distinct bodies of work. As revealed in earlier analyses within this thesis discussion, Ross was photographing both public and private imagery at the same time. Individual negative strips illustrate this fact within sequential negative frames.

The act of photographing public and private images simultaneously can be illustrated through the analysis of a negative strip sample from Negative Sheet 43 (Figures 19 and 20). In a strip of six negative frames, labelled 471 to 476, images depicting public and private events are revealed. The first four frames document a large group photograph of men, most likely officials within the ghetto as deduced by their uniform and identifying arm band. The fifth frame records an individual portrait of a young girl standing alone, while the sixth frame captures the posed image of a man in uniform (the same as those worn in the group photograph), along with a woman and young boy. Based upon this strip and others within the collection like it, the act of recording photographs from these two distinct categories occurred simultaneously. By separating the images into independent groupings, the editors gave the readers the impression that through the production of Ross photographic images and the realities of life within the ghetto, the private and public images were two individual bodies of work.

49

Figure 19. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 43, Frames 471-476", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

Figure 20. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 43, Frames 471-476," digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

50

To continue the examination of this book, an analysis of additional images published leads one to question the division of images into two categories. On page 66 of Lód Ghetto Album, an image captioned "Management of the hospital kitchen" reveals a posed group photograph of men and women employed at the hospital at 36 Lagiewnick Street (Figure 21).54 People documented in this portrait are facing the camera, making eye contact with the photographer, and in several cases smiling while the picture was recorded. This photographed is placed in the "Public" section of the book, while another similar image resides on page 133, in the "Private" category (Figure 22). In this image, captioned "Telephone exchange workers in the ghetto," the photographer documents three women and two men employed in the telephone office, posing again for a group portrait.55 The subjects in this photograph are also facing the camera, and in most cases smiling at the photographer. The recorded content of these two images are very similar in nature, yet they have been separated into two contrasting categories.

In order to explain why these images were placed into their respective sections, an examination of the negative strips on which they were recorded reveals further context into the type of imagery documented before and after the selected photographs. In the case of the image on page 66, the original negative can be found on Negative Sheet 24, labeled 1069 (Figures 23 and 24). The four frames recorded before the image document men and women signing papers, probably an official image of significant events or personalities within the ghetto, while the image frame after negative 1069 is a second exposure of the same scenario of posed hospital kitchen management. Each of the images recorded on this strip documents what could typically

54

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 66. Ibid., 133.

55

51

Figure 21. Henryk Ross, page 66 from Lód Ghetto Album.

Figure 22. Henryk Ross, page 133 from Lód Ghetto Album.

52

Figure 23. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 24, Frames 23065-1070", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

Figure 24. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 24, Frames 23065-1070," digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

53

Figure 25. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 29, Frames 22907-911", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

Figure 26. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 29, Frames 22907-911," digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

54

be categorized as public photographs, and as such, seem appropriately placed within the "Public" section.

The photographic image published on page 133 is found within a strip of negatives from Negative Sheet 29, labeled 909 (Figures 25 and 26). The first three frames within this strip document the telephone exchange workers, first the two men alone, and then the entire group of men and women. The images appear official in nature, recording the workers within this department on the ghetto. The final two images on the strip capture a group of young men and women, possibly friends, posing outdoor in an amiable and sociable setting. These final two images on the strip represent private images, contrasting the other more official photographs on this strip. The dissimilarity in the recorded images on this strip poses the question as to how the editors deemed each of the published photographs to be either public or private. Perhaps their editing decisions were impacted by the images recorded before and after the selected photograph, and the two categories are not as distinct as one might understand from the publication.

The ability to separate Ross photographs into two sections is an act of editing that even the photographer could not completely address through his post-production cataloguing efforts. Through an examination of Negative Sheet 10, two images published in Lód Ghetto Album, in both categories, can be found not only on the same negative page, but in the same row within the sheet. Negative 302, found on page 29 and captioned as "The ,,Aryan street ­ Zigerska ­ cuts the ghetto in two," captures a wooden bridge structure above a ghetto street, linking one side of the ghetto to the other (Figures 27- 29).56 Two frames to the right of 302 is the negative labeled 300,

56

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 29.

55

Figure 27. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 10, Frames 299-301", Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

Figure 28. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 10, Frames 299-301," digitally inverted to positive image, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

56

Figure 29. Henryk Ross, page 29 from Lód Ghetto Album.

Figure 30. Henryk Ross, pages 114-115 from Lód Ghetto Album.

57

found on page 114-115 of the book with the description, "This wooden bridge at Koscielny Square (Church Square) crossing Zigerska, the ,,Aryan street that cut through the ghetto ­ identified as likely to have been photographed from the building of the Statistics Department of the Jewish Council, Rosss employers," showing two women looking out into the ghetto (Figures 27-28, 30).57 The women in this photograph appear posed, as Ross captures a private portrait of them, within a public space. While Ross understood the difference in subject matter recorded in these images ­ one being a document of the structure, and the other a portrait of two women ­ he still chose to group them together, perhaps because they recorded the same area of the ghetto, and could be linked by their subject matter. Separating Ross imagery into two distinct categories can assist in understanding the body of work, but the intricacies associated with this division can be as complex as the subject matter he recorded.

This more recent and independent analysis of Ross collection by Parr and Prus presents a more encompassing examination of the body of work created by Ross, but it also produces another layer of narrative associated with the interpretation of photographic imagery. The editors of this publication should be commended for their work, as the first to present a publication addressing the vast content of photographic imagery within the collection, and have made an attempt to help the public understand the complexities of the subject matter recorded. While this publication format of Ross photographs has led to further awareness of this rare collection, studying the negatives as historical documents in conjunction with the published images further assists in grasping the appreciation of this collections historical relevance.

57

Martin Parr and Timothy Prus, eds., Lód Ghetto Album (London: Boot, 2004), 115.

58

MAKING HISTORY POSSIBLE: PRESERVATION OF THE LÓD GHETTO COLLECTION It can be said that the Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto negative collection is a significant body of work, and as such, should be maintained and preserved to ensure its longevity. Currently, the negative collection resides in three linen-covered clamshell boxes, with most of the negatives in their original acetate sleeves. Based upon the burn test results and the instability of nitrate based film, issues of deterioration and degradation must be quickly addressed to conserve these original documents.

To represent the materials found within the negative collection, Negative Sheet 5 presents a sample which contains various negative specimens with varying degrees of deterioration (Figure 31). Within this negative sheet, four different film types are found: Isopan F, Isopan ISS, Opta, and Kodak AG Plus X Panchro. While all are cellulose nitrate based, their rate of deterioration differs. Upon completion of controlled burn tests to identify nitrate substrates, it was determined that the Opta sample (the third negative strip in the sheet, outlined in red) had burned the most quickly when in contact with the flame.58 Due to the extremely flammable nature of this single strip of negatives, the other negative samples within this sheet (as well as the rest of the collection) are subject to damage if the Opta sample were to come into contact with a flame, or unpredictably combust. As a result, specific measures must be implemented in order to preserve all of the original negative samples, apart from the other paper components of this collection.

58

This observation was determined during the burn tests conducted January 20, 2010 with the Art Gallery of Ontarios Conservator of Photographs, Katharine Whitman.

59

Figure 31. Henryk Ross, "Negative Sheet Number 5", red box highlighting Opta film sample, Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, Art Gallery of Ontario.

60

Due to the specific deterioration characteristics associated with cellulose nitrate film, detailed precautions should be acknowledged and implemented for safe storage practices. Nitric acid produced by degrading negative bases can cause harm to neighbouring objects in the collection. Therefore, cellulose nitrate film should be separated and removed from the collection, and stored in an independent, sealed area.59 Archival practices advise that nitrate negatives be housed in archival acid-free paper enclosures, as they act as a humidity buffer, allow for the escape of gas build-up that may occur over time as the object deteriorates, and can assist in neutralizing external pollutants.60 In addition to re-housing the individual negatives in paper enclosures, the entire collection should undergo a complete reconfiguration of the storage environment. The deterioration of nitrate film can be accelerated by elevated levels of temperature and humidity, and as such need to be monitored very closely. Chemical reactions are accelerated by an increase in temperature, so cold storage is highly recommended as a long term housing option. Maximum values of 2°C and 20-30% relative humidity are ideal conditions in which to store nitrate negative collections.61 The collections contents should be contained in an archival box, sealed within a archival polyester storage bag, and housed in a frost-free freezer.62 Placing the Ross negative collection within a cold storage environment would ultimately impact the availability of the collections contents for research, but would sustain the existence of these original historical documents.

59

Tony Knapp and Diane Vogt-OConnor, "Caring for Cellulose Nitrate Film", in Conserve O Gram August 2004 Number 14/8 (NPS Museum Management Program, 2004), 2.
60

Bertrand Lavédrine, A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections, ed. Jean-Paul Gandolfo, Sibylle Monod, and Getty Conservation Institute, trans. Sharon Grevet (Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2003), 54.
61

Ibid., 96.

62

Tony Knapp and Diane Vogt-OConnor, "Caring for Cellulose Nitrate Film", in Conserve O Gram August 2004 Number 14/8 (NPS Museum Management Program, 2004), 2.

61

At this time, frozen storage is not an option at the Art Gallery of Ontario. Although it is currently deemed a future endeavour for the conservation of photographic objects, the reality of this storage option lies within future funding for the collecting institution. Due to the immediacy of re-housing and storage for the Ross collection, alternative options have been proposed. To ensure the safety and prolonged existence of this unique collection, a flammable storage proposal has been submitted to the Art Gallery of Ontarios director, photography curator and conservator. This proposal outlines the appropriate fire codes existing within the province of Ontario as outlined in the Office of the Ontario Fire Marshal fire code under the Ontario Fire Protection and Prevention Act, and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 40: Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film (see Appendix: Ontario Fire Protection and Prevention Act and Appendix: National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 40).63 These regulations outline construction specifics for fireproof storage cabinets, and three possible cabinets have been determined which meet the noted specifications (see Appendix: Product Data Sheets). By instituting flammable storage cabinets, along with re-housing the collection in appropriate archival paper enclosures, the negative portion of the collection can be properly cared for to assist in the survival of these historical objects.

A re-housing initiative for the Ross negative collection proposes certain logistical issues regarding the documentation of original notations recorded by the photographer on the objects themselves. The negative sleeves all contain hand-written labels and identifiers associated with each roll of film and subsequent image frame. The markings found on the original negative
63

Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services, Office of the Fire Marshal, Fire Code (2007 Edition), Ontario Regulation 213/07, May 25, 2007, http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/source/regs/english/2007/elaws_src_regs_r07213_e.htm (accessed April 14, 2010); National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 40: Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film, 2001.

62

sleeves are fundamental in understanding the cataloguing of Ross images, along with the sequencing of frames within the sleeve. Each of these areas must be accounted for in order to maintain this source information. Written and photographic documentation should be observed before re-housing plans proceed, ideally electronically scanning each object for digital reference. Digitizing this collection is a large endeavour, but will assist in allowing further study of the collections contents if strict storage procedures are implemented in the future.

The Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto negative collection is a rare compilation of photographic evidence from a crucial period in the history of humanity. It is remarkable that the collections contents have maintained their existence over the past 65-70 years, including the tremendous salvage effort early in their survival. These facts should not be disregarded when looking to the future preservation of this collection. The historical documents recorded on film have only been available for study in the past decade, where scholars and researchers could have access to this unique collection. To ensure future exploration and critical analysis of these recorded documents, conservation plans must be observed in order to maintain and preserve Ross historical objects for future generations.

63

CONCLUSION

Through an analysis of the Henryk Ross Lód Ghetto Collection, the reassessment of this compilation of artifacts has provided new insight into Ross as a photographer and editor, as well as shed light on the historical value of his photographic negatives. By closely examining not only the physical materials which comprise the collection, but the subject matter documented on individual negative strips, Ross photographic processes reveal the working conditions overcome to create a collection, the methodology employed by the photographer to capture his images, and the narrative in which he shaped the photographs to relay the story of the Lód inhabitants. Ross Lód Ghetto Collection holds a wealth of historical information through photographic evidence, and the understanding and interpretation of these documents depends on who approaches the materials and how they are analyzed. Although this thesis only examines a particular portion of the Lód Ghetto Collection, its aim is to aid in understanding the importance of the negative as a historical document and a source for research.

The complexities associated with researching the negative ­ its small scale, inverted tonalities, and difficulty to display ­ present a body of work that without interpretation, remains irrelevant. The negatives require analysis and examination to present a history of the collection. This particular collection holds a great deal of importance within the history of humanity, but also provides a rich history of the photographic document. These are the histories that this thesis has attempted to explain.

64

To study the collection, samples were selected to best represent the elements outlined in the analysis portion of this paper. While many other examples exist within the collection, those chosen were made as relevant as possible to the areas of discussion. The analysis aimed to understand the negative as a historical document which one could use as a research tool to appreciate and comprehend a particular body of work. This thesis has only scratched the surface of this intricate collection, leaving a great deal of knowledge left to be discovered. Through the use of digital technologies, individual negative frames and strips could be pieced together to create a full roll of images separated during Ross cataloguing endeavours. Although extensive digitization could not be completed for this thesis, further work with such techniques could allow for deeper investigation into the work methodologies adopted by the photographer.

By considering the many elements of the Ross collection and studying the production, use, dissemination and preservation of these materials, the expansion of information gained can only assist in deeming the importance of a body of work such as this. Through the many layers in which Ross images have been viewed, analyzed and interpreted, one can trace each version or reading of the photographic image to its source negative. By comparing the original negative with a later translation of the image, the layers of narratives can be explored, adding components to the history of the collection. It is through this examination of original content and comparison to later reproductions that Ross can be identified as a photographer and editor, and that the editing process can shape an interpretation of a body of work.

Each step of this thesis has aimed to highlight the relevance of the photographic negative as a primary source within a scholarly research field. The negative can reveal defining

65

information of a collections beginnings, uses and future. Ross intended to assemble a collection of photographic objects which would be a record of the Jewish people, and the experiences they endured. The negatives he buried in 1944 have survived almost 70 years, and continue to relay the events documented decades earlier. The future of this collection is one coupled with elements of uncertainty, but the importance of this collection is sure. By incorporating the photographic negative as a historical object and research document into the analysis of Henryk Ross photographs, another chapter can be added to the history of this collection.

66

APPENDIX

Flammable Cabinet Storage Proposal for the Henryk Ross Collection Re-Housing Initiative

The following documents contain purchasing information for the flammable storage cabinet proposal regarding the re-housing initiative of the Henryk Ross Collection. Based upon nitrate negative storage regulations, as researched and obtained through the Ontario Fire Marshalls Office fire code under the Ontario Fire Protection and Prevention Act, and the National Fire Protection (NFPA) 40: Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film, flammable storage cabinet options have been determined which meet these strict regulations. Cabinet options from three different manufacturers have been compiled, documenting size and pricing for various options. The first manufacturer, Herbert Williams Fire Equipment Ltd., is a Canadian company based in Scarborough. The pricing options for this company have been acquired directly from the head office sales department, rather than a third party distributor. Purchases from Herbert Williams will be delivered by the company, with a delivery charge of $60.00 CAD. The second and third manufacturers are Eagle Manufacturing Company, based in West Virginia, and Justrite Manufacturing, from Illinois. Cabinets from both of these companies can be purchased through two distributors. The first, Acklands Grainger, has locations across the Greater Toronto Area, while the second, Cole Palmer, is an American company with Canadian distribution from Montreal. Comparison pricing for both types of cabinets have been provided from both distribution companies. All cost figures are accurate as of May 4, 2010. This proposal contains technical information from each of the manufacturing companies regarding the details of their products. Following this documentation, a spreadsheet containing comparison pricing in Canadian dollars has been compiled for each of the three manufacturers. These prices do not include tax or shipping costs.

67

Ontario Fire Protection and Prevention Act

Source: Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services, Office of the Fire Marshal, Fire Code (2007 Edition), Ontario Regulation 213/07, May 25, 2007, http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/source/regs/english/2007/elaws_src_regs_r07213_e.htm.

68

Source: Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services, Office of the Fire Marshal, Fire Code (2007 Edition), Ontario Regulation 213/07, May 25, 2007, http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/source/regs/english/2007/elaws_src_regs_r07213_e.htm.

69

Source: Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services, Office of the Fire Marshal, Fire Code (2007 Edition), Ontario Regulation 213/07, May 25, 2007, http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/source/regs/english/2007/elaws_src_regs_r07213_e.htm.

70

Source: Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services, Office of the Fire Marshal, Fire Code (2007 Edition), Ontario Regulation 213/07, May 25, 2007, http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/source/regs/english/2007/elaws_src_regs_r07213_e.htm.

71

Source: Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services, Office of the Fire Marshal, Fire Code (2007 Edition), Ontario Regulation 213/07, May 25, 2007, http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/source/regs/english/2007/elaws_src_regs_r07213_e.htm.

72

National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 40

Source: National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 40: Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film, 2001.

73

Source: National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 40: Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film, 2001.

74

Source: National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 40: Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film, 2001.

75

Source: National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 40: Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film, 2001.

76

Source: National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 40: Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film, 2001.

77

Product Data Sheets

Source: Herbert Williams Fire Equipment, Ltd. http://www.herbertwilliams.com/.

78

Source: Eagle Manufacturing Company. http://www.eagle-mfg.com/.

79

Source: Justrite Mfg. Co., L.L.C. http://www.justritemfg.com/.

80

Product Data and Price Comparison

All cost figures are accurate as of May 4, 2010.
Herbert Williams Code HWF30M HWF45M HWF60M HWS1843 HWF3434 Herbert Williams Price $580.00 $705.00 $790.00 $55.00 $65.00

Product Herbert Williams

Size (HxWxD in inches) 44 x 19 x 45 44 x 19 x 66 35 x 35 x 63 Extra Shelf for FM30 & FM45 Extra Shelf for FM60

Shelves 1 2 2 1 1

Product Eagle

Justrite Sure Grip

Size (HxWxD in inches) 44x43x18 65x43x18 65x31¼x31¼ Extra Shelf (for two smaller cabinets) Extra Shelf (for larger cabinet) 44 x 43 x 18 2 Door, Manual Close 44 x 43 x 18 2 Door, Self-Close 35 x 36 x 24 2 Door, Manual Close 65 x 43 x 18 2 Door, Manual Close 65 x 43 x 18 2 Door, Self-Close 65 x 34 x 34 2 Door, Manual Close 65 x 34 x 34 2 Door, Self-Close Extra Shelf for 43" W Extra Shelf for 36" W Extra Shelf for 34" W

Shelves 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 1 1 1

AcklandsGrainger Code EGL1932 EGL1947 EGL1962 EGL1915 EGL1911 JRT893000 JRT893020 JRT893300 JRT894500 JRT894520 JRT896000 JRT896020 JRT29937 JRT29942 JRT29944

AcklandsGrainger Price (CDN) $1,249.24 $1,463.95 $1,834.82 $72.36 $144.81 $917.91 $1,040.61 $1,276.74 $1,116.64 $1,249.12 $1,358.76 $1,476.97 $48.52 $97.04 $69.05

Cole Palmer Code R-09418-65 R-09418-70 R-09418-92 R-09418-60 R-09418-61 CV-81790-44 CV-81790-45 CV-81790-41 CV-81790-36 CV-81790-42 CV-81790-37 CV-81790-46 CV-81790-48

Cole Palmer Price (CDN includes import fees) $1,099.48 $1,312.85 $1,479.77 $77.82 $119.24 $953.88 $935.06 $1,154.70 $1,236.28 $1,368.07 $1,443.35 $45.81 $100.41

81

BIBLIOGRAPHY About, Ilsen, and Clément Chéroux. "Lhistoire par la photographie." Études Photographiques, no. 10 (November 2001). http://etudesphotographiques.revues.org/index261.html (accessed November 8, 2009). Adams, Ansel. The Negative. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1988. Adelson, Alan. "The Photographs and Photographers." In Diary of D. Sierakowiak: Five Notebooks From the Lód Ghetto, 269-271. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996. Adelson, Alan, Robert Lapides, and Marek Web, eds. Lód Ghetto: Inside a Community Under Siege. New York, N.Y.: Viking, 1989. Adelstein, Peter Z. IPI Media Storage Quick Reference, 2nd Edition. Rochester, N.Y.: Image Permanence Institute, 2009. Agfa-Gevaert Group. "History". Agfa-Gevaert Group. http://www.agfa.com/en/gs/about_us/history/index.jsp (accessed October 14, 2009). Alvarez, Lizette. "A labyrinth of emotions from the Lód ghetto," International Herald Tribune, Jan 18, 2005. Baer, Ulrich. Spectral Evidence: The Photography of Trauma. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002. Barthes, Roland. Camera Lucida:Reflections on Photography, trans. Richard Howard. New York: Hill and Wang, 1980. Bernard-Donals, Michael. Forgetful Memory: Representation and Remembrance in the Wake of the Holocaust. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2009. Brothers, Caroline. War and Photography: A Cultural History. New York: Routledge, 1997. Carey, Francis A. Organic Chemistry, 7th Edition. Toronto: McGraw-Hill, 2008. Chéroux, Clément. Mémoire des camps: Photographies des camps de concentration et d'extermination nazis, 1933-1999. Paris: Marval, 2001. Cheval, François. "Lépreuve du musée." Études Photographiques, no.11 (May 2002). http://etudesphotographiques.revues.org/index269.html (accessed October 31, 2009).

82

Davidson, Michael W. and The Florida State University. Molecular Expressions: Black and White Film Processing Errors. Florida: The Florida State University, 2004, http://micro.magnet.fsu.edu/primer/photomicrography/bwprocessingerrors.html (accessed May 23, 2010). Diserens, Charles. Handbuch der Photographie: Optik, Band I. Translated by H. Roeder. Bern, Switzerland: Verlag Hallwag Bern, 1940. Dobroszycki, Lucjan, ed. The Chronicle of the Lód Ghetto, 1941-1944. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1984. Eilenbergb-Eibeshitz, Anna. Preserved Evidence, Ghetto Lodz. Haifa: H. Eibeshitz Institute for Holocaust Studies, 1998. Frizot, Michel, ed. A New History of Photography. Köln: Könemann, 1998. Golden, Reuel, ed. Photojournalism, 1855 to the Present: Editor's Choice. New York: Abbeville Press, 2006. Grossman, Mendel. Mendel Grossman ­ With a Camera in the Ghetto, Edited by Zvi Szner and Alexander Sened. New York: Schocken Books, 1977. Haskell, Francis. History and Its Images: Art and the Interpretation of the Past. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993. Horwitz, Gordon J. Ghettostadt: Lód and the Making of a Nazi City. Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2008. Kinkaid, James C. Press Photography. Boston: American Photographic Publishing Co., 1936. Knapp, Tony and Diane Vogt-OConnor. "Caring for Cellulose Nitrate Film", Conserve O Gram August 2004 Number 14/8. NPS Museum Management Program, 2004. Kramer, Klaus. "Nitratfilme identifizieren und aussondern." http://www.klauskramer.de/nitrofilm/nitratfilm_top_04-09.html (accessed January 10, 2010). Langer, Lawrence L. Holocaust Testimonies: The Ruins of Memory. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991. Lavédrine, Bertrand. A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections. Edited by Jean-Paul Gandolfo, Sibylle Monod, and Getty Conservation Institute. Translated by Sharon Grevet. Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2003. ---. Photographs of the Past: Process and Preservation. Translated by John McElhone. Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2009.

83

Levin, Judith and Daniel Uziel. "Ordinary Men, Extraordinary Photos". Translated by Naftali Greenwood. Yad Vashem. http://www1.yadvashem.org/about_HOLocaust/studies/ordinary/levein_uziel_full.html (accessed January 5, 2010) Lilensztein, Anne. "The ,,Final Solution." In A New History of Photography, ed. Michel Frizot, 600. Köln: Könemann, 1998. Liss, Andrea. Trespassing Through Shadows: Memory, Photography, and the Holocaust. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998. Loengard, John. Celebrating the Negative. New York: Arcade Publishing, 1994. Mees, C.E. Kenneth. From Dry Plates to Ektachrome Film: A Story of Photographic Research. New York: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, 1961. Meidinger, W. "Die Theoretischen Grundlagen Der Photographischen Prozesse." In Handbuch der Wissenchaftlichen und Angewandten Photographie, Band V. Edited by Alfred Hay and M. v. Rohr. Wien, Austria: Verlang Von Julius Springer, 1932. Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online. s.v. "Matrix." http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/matrix (accessed February 11, 2010). Merté, W., R. Richter and M. v. Rohr. "Das Photographische Objektiv." In Handbuch der Wissenchaftlichen und Angewandten Photographie, Band I. Edited by Alfred Hay and M. v. Rohr. Wien, Austria: Verlang Von Julius Springer, 1932. Milton, Sybil. "Images of the Holocaust ­ Part 1", Holocaust and Genocide Studies, Vol. 1, No. 1, (1986). ---. "Images of the Holocaust ­ Part II", Holocaust and Genocide Studies, Vol. 1, No. 2, (1986). ---. "The Camera As Weapon: Documentary Photography and The Holocaust". Museum of Tolerance Online Multimedia Learning Center. http://motlc.wiesenthal.com/site/pp.asp?c=gvKVLcMVIuG&b=394975 (accessed January 5, 2010). Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services, Office of the Fire Marshal, Fire Code (2007 Edition), Ontario Regulation 213/07, May 25, 2007, http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/source/regs/english/2007/elaws_src_regs_r07213_e.htm (accessed April 14, 2010). National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 40: Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film, 2001.

84

Parr, Martin, and Gerry Badger. The Photobook: A History, volume 1. London; New York: Phaidon, 2004. Parr, Martin, and Timothy Prus, eds. Lód Ghetto Album. London: Boot, 2004. Pearce, Susan M., ed. Interpreting Objects and Collections. New York: Routledge, 1994. Price, Jack. News Pictures. New York: Round Table Press Inc., 1937. Pritschow, Karl. "Die Photographische Kamera und irh Zubehör." In Handbuch der Wissenschaftlichen und Angewandten Photographie, Band II. Edited by Alfred Hay. Wien, Austria: Verlag Von Julius Springer, 1931. Reilly, James M., Peter Z. Adelstein, and Douglas W. Nishimura. Preservation of Safety Film: Final Report to The Office of Preservation, National Endowment for The Humanities. Rochester, NY: Image Permanence Institute, Rochester Institute of Technology, 1991. Reilly, Julie A. "Celluloid Objects: Their Chemistry and Preservation", Journal of the American Institute for Conservation, Vol. 30, No. 2. (1991): 145-162. Ritzenthaler, Mary Lynn. Photographs: Archival Care and Management, ed. Diane VogtO'Connor and Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2006. Ross, Henryk and Aleksander Klugman. Darkam ha-a¸Æaronah shel Yehude Lodz' [The Last Journey of the Jews of Lód] . Tel-Aviv S. Kibel: [196-?]. Selwitz, Charles. "Cellulose Nitrate in Conservation." In Research in Conservation. Los Angeles: The Getty Conservation Institute, 1988. ScreenSound Australia National Screen and Sound Archive. "Film Preservation Handbook." http://www.seapavaa.org/FilmPreservationHandbook/Home.htm (accessed January 15, 2010). Sontag, Susan. On Photography. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1978. ---. Regarding the Pain of Others. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003. Southeast Asia-Pacific Audio Visual Archive Association. Film Preservation Handbook. http://www.pia.gov.ph/seapavaa/FilmPreservationHandbook/Home.htm (accessed May 23, 2010). Struk, Janina. Photographing the Holocaust: Interpretations of the Evidence. New York: I.B. Tauris, 2004. Stryker, Roy E. "Documentary Photography". The Complete Photographer, no. 4, issue 21 (1942).

85

Tronqual, Matthias. "Chris BOOT (éd.), Lód Ghetto Album, texte de Thomas Weber et Robert Jan van Pelt, Londres, Archive of Modern Conflict, 2004, 157 p." Études Photographiques, no. 17 (November 2005). http://etudesphotographiques.revues.org/index767.html (accessed May 27, 2010). Trunk, Isaiah. Lód Ghetto: A History. Edited by Robert Moses Shapiro and United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 2006. Valverde, Maria Fernanda. Photographic Negatives: Nature and Evolution of Processes. Rochester, N.Y.: Advanced Residency Program in Photograph Conservation, 2005. Web, Marek. The Documents of the Lód Ghetto: An Inventory of the Nachman Zonabend Collection. New York: YIVO Institutite for Jewish Research, 1988. Weber, Thomas. "Culture and Thought: Reliving the Horror; Henryk Ross's Photos Captured Daily Life in the Lodz Ghetto", Asian Wall Street Journal, January 28, 2005. ---. "Reliving a Horror to Decipher an Enigma", Wall Street Journal, January 21, 2005. Zelizer, Barbie. "Holocuast Photography, Then and Now", Picturing the Past: Media, History, and Photography. Edited by Bonnie Brennen and Hanno Hardt. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1999. ---. Remembering to Forget: Holocaust Memory through the Camera's Eye. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998. ---. "The Voice of the Visual in Memory", Framing Public Memory. Edited by Kendall R. Phillips. Tuscaloosa, AL: The University of Alabama Press, 2004. Zonabend, N. The Truth About the Saving of the Lód Ghetto Archive. Stockholm: N. Zonabend, 1991.

86

