Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2012

Extreme Branding: Examining Brand Devotion of Fashion Companies by Customers Using Social Media
Caroline Czajkowski
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Advertising and Promotion Management Commons, and the Fashion Business Commons Recommended Citation
Czajkowski, Caroline, "Extreme Branding: Examining Brand Devotion of Fashion Companies by Customers Using Social Media" (2012). Theses and dissertations. Paper 929.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

     
EXTREME  BRANDING:  EXAMINING  BRAND  DEVOTION  OF  FASHION  COMPANIES  BY   CUSTOMERS  USING  SOCIAL  MEDIA            by      Caroline  Czajkowski   Bachelor  of  Arts  Communications  (Honours),  University  of  Ottawa,  2009         A  Major  Research  Paper      presented  to  Ryerson  University         in  partial  fulfillment  of  the        requirements  for  the  degree  of      Master  of  Arts      in  the  Program  of      Fashion            Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada      ©  Caroline  Czajkowski  2012  

Author's  declaration  page      I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the   thesis,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.   I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  to  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research   I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  by  photocopying  or   by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.   I  understand  that  my  thesis  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.        

ii  

Abstract      Extreme  Branding:  Examining  Brand  Devotion  of  Fashion  Companies  by  Customers   Using  Social  Media   Master  of  Arts  in  Fashion,  2012   Caroline  Czajkowski   Fashion   Ryerson  University      This  paper  looks  at  how  social  media  is  used  as  part  of  company  branding  to   encourage  customer  loyalty.  The  research  presents  a  case  study  of  lululemon  and  its   Facebook  page  and  customer  product  review  page  to  illustrate  the  importance  of   social  media,  using  content  analysis  to  interpret  the  data  gathered.  The  case  study   shows  evidence  that  a  brand  community  exists  on  lululemon's  Facebook  page,   illustrating  the  importance  of  social  media  to  customers.  The  paper  concludes  that   because  customers  have  a  high  level  of  involvement  in  social  media,  companies   would  benefit  from  maintaining  a  high  level  of  involvement  in  that  same  media.  The   paper  suggests  that  further  research  could  determine  whether  the  involvement  of   companies  via  social  media  does  affect  their  level  of  loyalty.           

iii  

Acknowledgements      Thank  you  to  those  who  helped  me  with  my  research  and  in  writing  my  paper  by   editing,  commenting,  going  through  pages  of  data,  and  offering  guidance  and   support  when  I  needed  it.      My  advisor,  Dr.  Tasha  Lewis   and  second  reader  Joseph  Medaglia      Family  and  Friends   Liliana  Czajkowska   Romuald  Czajkowski        

iv  

Table  of  Contents      Introduction   Literature  Review   Methodology   Findings   Discussion   Conclusion   Limitations   Works  Cited      List  of  Tables   Table  1  ­  Customer  Facebook  Posts  and   Product  Reviews   Table  2  ­  Number  of  Customer  Posts   Table  3  ­  Customer  Posts  and  lululemon   Responses   Table  4  ­  Facebook  Posts  and  lululemon   Responses   Table  5  ­  Types  of  Comments   Table  6  ­  Types  of  Questions   Table  7  ­  lululemon  Response  Rate  to   Customer  Facebook  Posts   Table  8  ­  lululemon  Posts   Table  9  ­  Customer  Responses  to   lululemon  Posts   Table  10  ­  lululemon  Responses  to   Customer  Facebook  Posts  and   Product  Reviews   Table  11  ­  lululemon  Responses  to   Customer  Facebook  Posts  and   Product  Reviews   Table  12  ­  Women's  Product  Reviews   Breakdown   Table  13  ­  Men's  Product  Reviews   Breakdown   Table  14  ­  Women's  Product  Reviews   Table  15  ­  Men's  Product  Reviews   Table  16  ­  Women's  Product  Reviews   Table  17  ­  Men's  Product  Reviews   Table  18  ­  Examples  of  Women's   Product  Reviews   Table  19  ­  Examples  of  Men's  Product   Reviews      v  

page  1   page  5   page  16   page  22   page  38   page  57   page  59   page  60      page  23   page  23   page  24   page  24   page  25   page  25   page  26   page  27   page  28   page  28   page  29   page  30   page  31   page  32   page  33   page  34   page  35   page  36   page  37  

List  of  Appendices   Appendix  A  ­  Working  list  of  questions   for  lululemon  interview  ­   manager   Appendix  B  ­  List  of  working  questions   for  lululemon  interview  ­  web   team  employees   Appendix  C  ­  Consent  form  ­  manager   Appendix  D  ­  Consent  form  ­  web  team   employees        

page  65   page  67   page  68   page  71  

vi  

Introduction      Brand   logos   and   images   are   the   most   visible   aspects   of   the   retail   world.  

Having   a   brand   that   stands   out   among   the   rest   is   one   of   the   keys   to   success.   The   same  idea  applies  in  apparel  retail,  where  companies  want  to  be  easily  recognized   by   customers.   Many   customers   have   brands   they   prefer,   and   in   some   cases   this   preference  can  turn  into  a  fierce  devotion.  Those  loyal  consumers  are  repeat  buyers,   constantly  purchasing  new  items  from  the  company.  They  are  vocal  about  their  love   for   the   brand   and   will   defend   the   brand   and   their   devotion   to   it.   These   customers   will   sometimes   form   online   communities   in   which   they   discuss   the   brand   and   its   products,   ask   questions,   and   offer   advice   and   answers.   This   paper   explores   the   phenomenon  of  this  devotion  through  the  case  study  of  lululemon  athletica,  a   brand   experiencing   this   trend,   and   examines   this   company's   use   of   social   media   to   encourage  and  maintain  a  brand-devoted  community.      Lululemon  began  as  a  yoga  apparel  company.  Its  first  store  opened  in  1998  in  

Vancouver,  Canada,  and  from  there  the  company's  popularity  exploded.  Lululemon   now  has  stores  in  Canada,  the  United  States,  Australia,  and  Hong  Kong  ("about  us").   In   2011   lululemon   had   122   stores   in   North   America   and   the   company's   revenue   reached   CAD$212.3   million   (Taylor).   While   these   numbers   show   the   financial   success   of   the   company,   this   study   aims   to   look   behind   the   numbers   and   learn   from   the  customers--those  who  are  propelling  lululemon's  success.  From  the  gym  to  the   street,   from   yoga   to   grocery   shopping,   lululemon   has   expanded   its   line   of   apparel.   What  started  as  yoga  wear,  targeting  a  niche  yoga  market,  has  become  sports  wear   and   casual   wear,   with   a   growing   number   of   women   spending   increasing   amounts   of  

1  

money   on   lululemon   products   (Urstadt).   Lululemon's   increasing   popularity   is   in   large  part  due  to  its  customers  and  rising  sales,  and  the  company  seems  to  be  aware   of   the   importance   of   its   customers'   experience   in   its   stores:   customer   service   appears   to   entice   the   clients,   making   them   feel   more   comfortable.   For   example,   customers   are   referred   to   as   "guests"   (Nelson)   and   the   customer   service   centre   is   referred   to   as   a   Guest   Education   Centre   (GEC)   ("contact   us").   When   customers   are   trying   on   clothes   in   the   fitting   rooms,   employees   write   their   name   on   the   door   so   that   they   can   address   them   directly,   making   the   experience   more   personal.   The   popularity   of   the   company's   products   is   visible   on   the   streets   of   Canadian   and   American   cities,   with   many   customers   wearing   the   fitness   apparel   as   casual   wear   (Urstadt;  Walker,  "Marketing  Pose").  While  Lululemon's  customers  believe  that  the   product  is  high-quality  yoga  wear  that  is  superior  to  its  competitors,  they  also  enjoy   how  stylish  the  items  are  and  the  image  they  portray  when  wearing  the  brand:  that   is,  of  people  who  are  into  yoga  and  a  healthy  lifestyle  (Urstadt).        Accompanying   lululemon's   presence   on   the   streets   is   the   company's  

popularity   online.   The   clothing   company   hosts   warehouse   sales   that   have   hours- long  line-ups  to  get  in,  there  seems  to  be  a  growing  demand  for  their  products,  and   there   are   blogs   are   dedicated   to   the   company      ("lululemon   addict";   Urstadt).   Customers   of   lululemon   are   so   loyal   that   they   fervently   promote   and   defend   the   brand  online.  As  of  September  2011,  lululemon's  Facebook  page  had  over  300,000   people   who   "like"   them   ("lululemon   athletica").   In   comparison,   competing   Canadian   fitness  apparel  company  Lole  has  just  over  4,300  "likes"  on  Facebook  (Reuters;  "Lole   Women  on  Facebook";  Lole  Women).  Gap  Inc.--another  competitor  with  their  new  

2  

line   of   athletic   wear,   Athleta   ("Athleta")--has   just   over   37,000   "likes"   on   their   Facebook   page   ("Athleta   Clothing").   These   numbers   show   how   large   lululemon's   online  community  is  compared  to  some  of  its  closest  competitors.  This  paper's  case   study   of   lululemon   will   explore   what   creates   a   strong   customer   devotion   to   a   brand--specifically,   how   social   media   is   used   to   create   an   online   community   for   brand-devoted  customers  to  foster  this  zeal.        Observations  of  lululemon's  growing  consumer  popularity  led  to  this  study's  

first  research  question,  approached  from  the  perspective  of  the  consumer:   How  do   customers   create   loyal   followings   around   a   certain   brand   using   social   media?   This   research   focuses   on   social   media   because   lululemon's   Facebook   page   seems   to   have   evidence   of   a   brand   community,   with   customers   discussing   products   and   answering   each   other's   questions.   To   find   an   answer   to   the   research   question,   this   study   will   look   at   lululemon's   online   community,   focusing   on   the   customer   reviews   on   its   website   and   on   its   Facebook   page,   to   find   the   answers   to   the   following   sub- questions:     i)   Do   customers   assemble   around   a   brand   due   to   the   level   of   customer   service   received   in   the   online   community?   A   quick   glance   at   lululemon's   Facebook   page   reveals   that   the   company   responds   to   customer   posts,   suggesting  an  affirmative  answer.   ii)  Do  customers  assemble  around  a  brand  because  of  the  brand's  popularity?   Is  there  a  crowd  effect  occurring?  Is  there  conspicuous  labelling  with  brand   or  logo  visibility  that  customers  want  to  display?    

3  

iii)  Do  customers  assemble  around  a  brand  because  of  a  perceived  or  actual   quality   or   functionality   of   the   product?   Looking   at   whether   customers   are   discussing  lululemon's  product  quality  online  may  reveal  an  answer.     iv)  Do  the  customers  feel  involved  in  the  brand?  Does  this  increase  customer   loyalty?      The   second   research   question   looks   at   branding   via   social   media   from   the  

company's   perspective:   What   role,   if   any,   does   the   company   play   in   encouraging   extremely   loyal   customer   behaviour   via   social   media?   To   find   the   answer   to   this   question,  we  will  look  at  the  following  sub-questions:     i)   What   is   the   company's   level   of   involvement   in   maintaining   an   online   community?   The   company's   frequency   in   posting   on   Facebook   and   responding   to   customers   on   both   Facebook   and   on   their   own   site   to   the   customer  product  reviews  may  provide  insight  to  the  answer.     ii)   What   kind   of   customer   service,   if   any,   does   the   company   offer,   and   is   it   promoted  to  the  online  community?  What  policies  do  they  offer  in  terms  of   customer  service  (return,  warranty,  repair,  alterations,  etc.)?       iii)   Does   the   company   try   to   involve   customers   in   the   brand   image?   If   so,   how?     Looking  at  the  types  of  responses  lululemon  gives  its  customers  may  help  to  answer   these  last  two  questions.        

4  

Literature  Review         An   abundance   of   literature   can   be   found   on   the   topics   of   branding   and   brand   loyalty,   such   as   articles   by   Kevin   Keller,   Pamela   Alreck,   and   Robert   Settle.   Rather   than   looking   at   the   traditional   ideas   that   marketing   and   business   schools   of   thought   hold  about  branding,  such  as  fashion  marketing  that  is  "focused  on  the  styles"  of  the   garments   and   "on   their   quality   and   newness"   (Manlow,   86),   for   this   study   it   seemed   better   suited   to   focus   on   more   non-traditional   forms   of   branding,   such   as   emotional   branding  and  social  media  as  a  form  of  branding.  Lululemon's  success  is  increasing   without   the   aid   of   traditional   means   of   advertising;   therefore,   looking   at   non- traditional   forms   of   branding   may   be   helpful   in   better   understanding   how   its   customer   base   is   growing.   This   includes   examinations   of   branding   based   on   emotions,   brand   communities   and   social   media,   and   what   is   being   said   about   lululemon  in  news  articles  and  magazines.   While  discussions  of  fashion  branding  can  be  found  in  the  research  available   on   the   topic   of   branding,   there   is   very   little   mention   of   lululemon.   This   could   be   due   in  part  to  the  fact  that  the  brand  is  relatively  young:  no  research  has  been  done  on  it   yet.   One   book   that   does   mention   lululemon   is   Bridget   Brennan's   Why   She   Buys.   Brennan  discusses  some  of  the  selling  aspects  that  have  made  lululemon  successful   with  women--who  make  up  the  majority  of  the  company's  target  market  (Brennan   257-261).   An   article   in   New   York   Magazine   discusses   lululemon's   popularity   in   terms  of  sales,  using  anecdotes  about  how  much  money  some  women  spend  in  one   trip   and   how   much   an   older   lululemon   item   sells   for   on  eBay   (Urstadt).   Rob   Walker   writes  about  lululemon's  rising  popularity  and  its  expansion  beyond  yoga  gear,  and  

5  

mentions  a  few  things  lululemon  has  met  criticism  over  (Walker  "Marketing  Pose").   It   has   been   claimed,   for   example,   that   a   certain   lululemon   garment   would   "release   marine   amino   acids,   minerals   and   vitamins   into   the   skin   upon   contact   with   moisture";  this  was  later  proven  to  be  false  (Lazarus).  Also  discussed  in  the  media   was   Christine   Day's   challenge   as   CEO   to   increase   the   number   of   stores   and   company's   success   while   staying   true   to   the   company's   culture   and   avoiding   the   feeling   of   a   chain   store   (Lazarus).      The   company   culture   is   reflected   in   its   manifesto,   which   can   be   found   on   its   website   and   includes   such   sayings   as,   "Do   one   thing   a   day   that   scares   you,"   "Friends   are   more   important   than   money,"   and   "The   world   is   changing   at   such   a   rapid   rate   that   waiting   to   implement   changes   will   leave   you   2   steps  behind.  Do  it  now,  do  it  now,  do  it  now!"  ("our  manifesto").  Some  articles  have   compared  the  company's  customer  following  to  a  cult,  stating  that  "a  cult  following   is   the   most   coveted   accessory   in   retail,"   and   these   articles   also   discuss   how   the   company  has  managed  to  create  such  a  devoted  group  of  customers  without  using   any   traditional   advertising   (Sacks   and   Berlin   94).   Others   have   pointed   to   lululemon's   offer   of   free   clothing   to   local   yoga   instructors   in   exchange   for   product   feedback   (Shiffman).   When   these   various   elements   are   put   together,   it   becomes   easier   to   begin   to   visualize   lululemon's   branding   method.   It   seems   that   non- traditional   branding   and   marketing   is   gaining   popularity   in   today's   competitive   markets.   Rob   Walker   provides   a   straightfoward   definition   of   branding:   it   is   the   "process   of   attaching   an   idea   to   a   product"   (Walker  Buying  In   8).   The   author   then   writes,   "if   a   product   is   successfully   tied   to   an   idea,   branding   persuades   people--

6  

whether   they   admit   it   to   pollsters   or   even   fully   understand   it   themselves--to   consume  the  idea  by  consuming  the  product"  (Walker,   Buying  In  8).  Walker's  book   Buying  In:  The  Secret  Dialogue  Between  What  We  Buy  and  Who  We  Are  examines  the   marketing   behind   some   of   the   more   successful   brands   and   their   campaigns,   and   looks   at   why   consumers   purchase   certain   products.   Moving   forward   in   more   non- traditional   ideas   of   branding,   Kevin   Clark   writes   about   brand   loyalty   with   a   new   term,  "Brandscendence."  The  author  describes  this  as  "a  brand  that  exceeds;  a  brand   that   is   superior   or   supreme   over   time"   (Clark   xvi).   In   his   book,   Clark   writes   about   what   makes   an   enduring   brand   and   what   gives   it   the   quality   that   makes   it   "brandscendence."   Walker's   and   Clark's   works   help   move   branding   beyond   its   traditional   definitions   to   encompass   the   newer   ideas   that   companies   have   been   using  to  find  success.  In  general,  most  companies  want  their  brands  to  be  enduring   and   want   their   customers   to   buy   into   the   brand   lifestyle.   One   way   that   companies   have  been  attracting  lifelong  customers  is  through  the  use  of  emotions.   Neil  Duffy  and  Jo  Hooper  write  about  the  new  form  of  branding  as  "passion   branding,"  and  they  discuss  how  to  create  it  in  their  book  of  the  same  name.  In  the   authors'   words,   "passion   branding   is   about   harnessing   the   power   of   people's   passion  to  build  strong  brands  and  drive  the  bottom  line"  (Duffy  &  Hooper  2).  They   discuss  the  fact  that  consumers  do  not  just  want  a  product  these  days,  they  want  a   whole  experience  to  go  with  it  (Duffy  &  Hooper  6).  The  authors  write  how  passion   branding   can   be   used   to   build   brand   loyalty,   which   can   result   in   "influencing   purchase  behaviour"  (Duffy  &  Hooper  38).  Passion  branding  is  more  of  an  act  that   marketers   and   branding   managers   can   engage   in   to   create   passion   in   their  

7  

consumers.  But  there  are  also  passion  brands.  Kate  Newlin  writes  about  what  makes   a   brand   a   passion   brand,   which   is   "one   with   which   we   have   a   relationship   more   powerful   than   those   we   have   with   many   human   beings"   (Newlin   18).   She   writes   how   "a   passion   brand   is   a   brand   you   form   such   a   personal   attachment   to   that   it   becomes  an  indelible  aspect  of  your  identity,  even  when  no  one  is  looking,"  and  how   the   relationship   a   person   has   with   that   brand   can   lead   them   to   re-evaluate   their   relationships   with   others   (Newlin   18).   This   type   of   attachment,   where   consumers   are  intimately  tied  to  their  preferred  brands,  can  be  seen  as  brand  love.     Some   studies   have   in   fact   looked   into   these   kinds   of   attachments.   Barbara   Carroll  and  Aaron  Ahuvia  define  brand  love  "as  the  degree  of  passionate  emotional   attachment  a  satisfied  consumer  has  for  a  particular  trade  name"  (Carroll  &  Ahuvia   81).   They   show   that   "brand   love   is   a   meaningful   mode   of   consumer   satisfaction   that   is   linked   to   desirable   post-consumption   behaviour"   (Carroll   &   Ahuvia   86).   Marc   Gobé's   book   Emotional   Branding   is   about   how   consumers   can   attach   emotion   to   products,  and  how  emotional  aspects  can  be  used  to  set  a  company's  products  apart   from  others  and  to  attract  customers  and  retain  customers'  loyalty.  In  discussing  the   fact  that  products  have  emotional  aspects,  the  author  writes,  "by  emotional,  I  mean   how   a   brand   engages   consumers   on   the   level   of   the   sense   and   emotions;   how   a   brand  comes  to  life  for  people  and  forges  a  deeper,  lasting  connection"  (Gobé  xviii).   Consumers  can  make  emotional  attachments  to  brands,  sometimes  even  forming  a   type  of  relationship  with  them.     A   recent   study   by   Hye-Young   Kim   and   Yoo   Jin   Kwon   from   2011   looks   at   whether  the  relationships  college  students  in  the  United  States  form  with  brands  are  

8  

similar   to   those   formed   among   humans.   They   write   in   their   findings   that   while   students'  relationships  with  brands  are  not  the  same  as  those  they  have  with  other   humans,  "they  may  behave  with  retailer  brands  as  if  they  have  a  relationship  with   them"  (Kim  &  Kwon  78).  If  customers  are  forming  relationships  with  their  brands,  it   is  easy  to  see  how  that  would  affect  brand  loyalty.  The  authors  found  that  students   who   classified   their   relationships   to   brands   as   "soulmates"   do,   in   fact,   simulate   "single-brand,  exclusive  loyalty"  (Kim  &  Kwon  78).     Just  as  customers  can  form  relationships  with  brands,  companies  understand   the   need   to   form   relationships   with   their   customers.   Many   companies   have   some   form  of  customer  relationship  management  in  place  to  keep  their  customers  happy.   Customer  relationship  management  encompasses  how  companies  create,  maintain,   and   strengthen   relationships   with   their   customers   (Vence   12).   Customer   relationship   management   may   be   a   contributing   factor   to   why   customers   are   so   devoted   to   certain   brands.   More   and   more   companies   understand   that   keeping   customers   happy   and   satisfied   is   part   of   the   key   to   success.   An   article   by   Kevin   Keller   discusses   various   ways   to   manage   brand   equity   and   customers   in   a   "multichannel,   multimedia   retail   environment"   (Keller   58).   In   the   article,   Keller   mentions  the  "customer-based  brand  equity  model,"  which  states  that  the  "power  of   a  brand  lies  in  what  customers  have  learned,  felt,  seen,  and  heard  about  the  brand  as   a   result   of   their   experiences   over   time,"   and   that   to   create   a   strong   brand,   "marketers   must   ensure   that   customers   have   the   right   type   of   experiences   with   their   products   and   services"   (Keller   60).   This   model   can   be   seen   as   a   type   of   customer   relationship   management,   where   it   is   essential   to   keep   the   customer  

9  

satisfied  with  the  brand.  Pamela  Alreck  and  Robert  Settle  provide  guidelines  on  how   to  attract  and  keep  customers  that  are  also  based  on  the  idea  of  building  a  "durable   relationship   between   a   specific   brand   and   a   particular   customer   group"   (Alreck   and   Settle  130).     While   companies   do   what   they   can   to   manage   and   shape   the   relationships   customers  make  with  their  brands,  customers  can  also  form  relationships  with  each   other.  These  types  of  relationships  can  start  with  a  small  group  of  people  and  grow   into   a   larger   community   that   can   be   labeled   a   "brand   community."   Extensive   literature  can  be  found  on  communities  in  general,  and  more  specifically  on  brand   communities.  One  such  study  places  the  emphasis  on  the  customer,  stating  that  the   community   exists   and   revolves   around   the   customer   experience   rather   than   the   brand   (McAlexander,   Schouten,   and   Koenig   39).   Another   study   focuses   on   communities   that   form   around   a   brand.   Albert   Muniz,   Jr.   and   Thomas   O'Guinn   discuss   the   idea   of   a   brand   community   in   which   the   community   members   come   together  because  of  the  brand  they  share  in  common.  The  authors  describe  a  brand   community   as   "a   specialized,   non-geographically   bound   community,   based   on   a   structured   set   of   social   relationships   among   admirers   of   a   brand.   It   is   specialized   because   at   its   center   is   a   branded   good   or   service"   (Muniz,   Jr.   and   O'Guinn   412).   Muniz,  Jr.  and  O'Guinn  found  that  brand  communities  had  "three  essential  markers   of  community,"  including  "consciousness  of  kind,"  "rituals  and  traditions,  and  "moral   responsibility"  (Muniz,  Jr.  and  O'Guinn  418-424).  What  is  interesting  to  note  is  the   authors'   observation   that   "brand   communities   carry   out   important   functions   on   behalf   of   the   brand,   such   as   sharing   information,   perpetuating   the   history   and  

10  

culture  of  the  brand,  and  providing  assistance"  (Muniz,  Jr.  and  O'Guinn  427).  These   last   examples   are   the   types   of   activities   that   can   be   seen   on   lululemon's   Facebook   page,   with   users   answering   questions   that   others   post   and   sharing   information   about   sales   or   where   to   find   hard-to-find   items.   It   is   possible   to   speculate,   then,   that   lululemon  customers  who  use  its  Facebook  page  have  formed  a  brand  community.   This  may  also  mark  the  beginnings  of  a  brand  community  wherein  users  of  the  page   create   their   own   rituals   and   traditions   and   form   a   moral   responsibility   to   one   another  and  to  the  brand.     Brand  communities  are  abundant  on  the  Internet,  especially  in  social  media.   The   term   social   media   encompasses   some   of   the   many   ways   people   connect   with   each   other   on   the   Internet,   such   as   Facebook,   Twitter,   and   Google+.   One   study   defines  social  media  as  "a  broad  range  of  online  platforms,  such  as  social  networking   sites,   brand-sponsored   virtual   worlds,   open   virtual   worlds,   video   and   photo   communities,  and  social  news"  (Petrescu  and  Korgaonkar  212).  The  same  study  also   specifies  that  social  media  is  focused  on  the  social  aspect,  such  as  "communication,   information   sharing,   keeping   in   touch   with   friends,   and   finding   new   friends"   (Petrescu   and   Korgaonkar   212).   Blogs   are   one   example   of   social   media   (Akar   and   Topçu  36).     There  are  several  blogs  dedicated  to  lululemon  and  its  products,  and  a  Google   search   of   the   term   "lululemon   blog"   produces   a   vast   number   of   results   (although   these   hits   include   blogs   with   a   single   post   about   lululemon   or   any   other   page   that   includes   the   words   "lululemon"   and   "blog,"   so   this   number   is   not   an   accurate   representation   of   how   many   blogs   there   are).   Two   such   examples   are   "lululemon  

11  

addict,"  which  posts  reviews,  photos,  and  comments  about  the  company's  products,   and   "lulumum,"   which   discusses   products   along   with   the   author's   physical   activities   and  training;  ("lululemon  addict";  "lulumum").  These  two  blogs  are  good  examples   to   consider   because   they   are   updated   on   a   regular   basis   with   new   posts   about   lululemon   products.   The   existence   of   blogs   that   focus   on   the   company   and   their   products  illustrates  another  form  of  media  that  is  being  used  as  a  way  for  customers   to  express  their  loyalty  to  the  company.   While   social   media   may   have   started   with   the   general   public   using   them   to   stay   connected,   companies   quickly   saw   the   benefits   of   being   involved   in   those   conversations.   Whether   for   updating   customers   with   information   or   sharing   inspirational   ideas,   companies   are   using   social   media   in   different   ways.   Many   brands   have   begun   to   understand   how   social   media   can   be   used   to   generate   customer   loyalty   (Kimberley).   Among   the   companies   using   social   media   in   the   United   Kingdom,   those   with   the   largest   followings   are   fashion   brands:   Burberry,   ASOS,  and  Topshop  (Kimberley).  Lululemon  has  a  web  team  as  part  of  its  GEC  that   works   on   the   company's   Facebook   page,   responding   to   customers   and   sharing   information   about   new   products   ("behind   the   wall";   "what's   up   at   the   GEC").   The   titles   held   by   employees   include   "Online   Community   Manager"   and   "Director   of   Digital  Guest  Experience"  ("fresh  faces  Friday";  "lululemon  is").     The   popularity   of   fashion   brands   in   the   social   media   market   may   be   explained   by   "the   increasingly   important   role   that   such   sites   play   in   influencing   consumers'  online  purchasing  decisions"  (Kimberley).  It  has  been  noted  that  of  the   consumers   shopping   online,   50%   will   read   the   customer   reviews   on   an   item,   and  

12  

16%   "have   actually   been   influenced   by   this   information   when   making   a   purchase"   (Kimberley).   A   customer's   opinion   of   an   item   can   change   for   the   better   or   worse   when   reading   these   reviews,   and   more   and   more   companies   are   beginning   to   understand   the   importance   of   this   type   of   information.   Product   reviews   can   be   posted  anywhere,  from  the  company's  own  website,  to  its  Facebook  page,  to  a  third- party  site,  to  a  personal  blog.     But   it   is   not   only   reviews   that   customers   are   writing   about;   social   media   is   increasingly  being  used  as  a  way  for  customers  to  leave  feedback  and  suggestions  on   their  favourite  products  ("Social  Media  Is  Fashion's  Newest  Muse").  These  types  of   posts   have   opened   the   door   for   communication   between   companies   and   their   customers,  and  many  companies  have  begun  to  listen.  For  example,  lululemon  uses   Facebook   to   discover   what   customers   want,   such   as   which   sizes   and   styles   are   most   popular  (Strauss).  Rather  than  waiting  to  see  which  items  have  been  selling  in  the   stores,  lululemon  can  find  out  directly  from  the  customers  what  they  want  (Strauss).   Using   customer   feedback   from   social   media,   the   company   has   made   changes   to   clothing  items,  from  "where  pockets  sit  on  pants  to  the  placement  of  waistbands  on   running   shorts"   ("Social   Media   Is   Fashion's   Newest   Muse").   News   articles   have   quoted   lululemon   CEO   Christine   Day   stating   that   the   company   uses   Facebook   and   social  media  to  learn  about  customer  demands  (Strauss;  "Social  Media  is  Fashion's   Newest   Muse").   Lululemon   is   thus   using   social   media   to   gauge   feedback   from   customers  and  manage  their  brand.  By  adapting  to  customer  requests  and  fulfilling   their  demands,  the  company  is  keeping  its  customers  happy,  which  is  likely  to  foster   customer   loyalty.   Also,   the   customers   who   are   happy   are   likely   the   ones   who   are  

13  

posting   positive   comments   on   the   company's   Facebook   page   and   writing   positive   product   reviews   on   lululemon's   website,   which   can   be   seen   as   reinforcing   lululemon's  brand.     However,  there  is  always  the  possibility  that  a  dissatisfied  customer  will  post   a  negative  review.  On  lululemon's  product  review  pages,  negative  reviews  are  mixed   in  with  the  positive,  and  lululemon  leaves  the  negative  reviews  for  customers  to  see.   One   study   suggests   that   companies   that   choose   to   have   an   area   for   discussion   on   their   site   should   leave   up   the   negative   comments,   or   even   respond   to   them,   in   an   effort   to   portray   the   area   as   being   "unmanipulated"   (Bickart   and   Schindler   38).   Lululemon   not   only   leaves   the   negative   reviews   up,   it   also   responds   to   some   of   them,   offering   to   help   the   customer   through   customer   service.   While   positive   reviews   can   influence   others   who   read   them   into   trying   lululemon's   products,   seeing  lululemon  offer  customer  service  to  dissatisfied  customers  can  also  positively   influence   potential   customers.   If   a   customer   sees   that   they   will   be   taken   care   of   when   they   are   dissatisfied   with   something,   they   may   feel   that   there   is   less   risk   to   trying   it--or   may   even   develop   an   appreciation   for   a   company   that   gives   the   impression   of   caring   for   its   customers.   Customers   who   have   had   their   concerns   addressed   by   the   company   may   also   spread   positive   word   of   mouth   about   how   they   have   been   treated.   Thus,   the   customers   who   post   product   reviews   and   share   their   opinions  about  the  company  can  benefit  building  that  brand's  equity.   Some   marketers   are   now   encouraging   brands   to   venture   beyond   their   own   websites   and   put   their   messages   on   third-party   sites,   such   as   Facebook   or   blogs   (Strugatz,   "Untangling   the   Web").   A   study   conducted   by   Barbara   Bickart   and   Robert  

14  

Schindler  found  that  participants  who  read  online  forums  generated  more  interest   in   a   topic   than   participants   who   read   about   that   topic   on   a   corporate   website   (Bickart   and   Schindler   36).   Brands   are   also   urged   to   encourage   customers   to   post   their   opinions   on   third-party   sites,   rather   than   simply   posting   on   the   company's   website   (Strugatz,   "Untangling   the   Web").   For   example,   fashion   brand   Tory   Burch   has   a   Facebook   page,   a   Twitter   account,   and   a   Tumblr   blog   that   are   updated   regularly   to   connect   with   its   customers   (Strugatz,   "Untangling   the   Web").   US   department  story  Macy's  has  Facebook  pages  for  its  individual  locations  to  connect   on   a   more   local   level   with   its   customers,   in   the   same   way   that   lululemon   has   individual   Facebook   pages   for   each   of   its   stores   (Strugatz,   "Next   Step").   Taking   Facebook   to   the   next   level,   fashion   brand   Rachel   Roy   initiated   "F-commerce,"   or   "Facebook   commerce,"   which   is   essentially   online   shopping   of   a   brand's   products   through   Facebook   rather   than   through   a   traditional   online   store   (Strugatz,   "Next   Step").  While  it  is  still  a  relatively  new  venture,  having  only  begun  in  early  2010,  F- commerce   is   being   touted   as   "the   next   big   thing   in   digital   for   2012"   and   Facebook   is   being  predicted  as  the  "medium  that  will  have  the  most  impact  in  the  coming  year"   (Strugatz,  "Next  Step").     

15  

Methodology   Facebook      This   research   paper   undertook   a   content   analysis   of   social   media   to  

determine   what   customers   post   online   about   lululemon   and   also   how   lululemon   responds   to   its   customers   online.   Because   customers   post   many   opinions   on   lululemon's   Facebook   page--including   comments   on   products,   service,   and   the   brand   overall--an   analysis   of   the   Facebook   posts   provides   a   way   to   evaluate   the   various   elements   of   brand   loyalty   and   community.   Lululemon   employees   from   the   company's   head   office   often   respond   to   customer   questions   and   comments   on   the   Facebook   page.      The   Facebook   page   is   host   to   opinions   and   reviews   of   lululemon   products,   as   well   as   user   questions   about   the   company's   products.   Therefore,   this   study   performed   a   content   analysis   of   customer   comments   on   Facebook   and   lululemon   comments   and   replies   posted   in   response   to   those   customer   posts.   The   company's   web   team   tends   to   post   most   comments   on   weekdays,   with   fewer   comments   posted   on   weekends,   in   accordance   with   their   customer   service   hours.   Therefore,   examining   comments   that   occurred   over   the   weekend   would   not   yield   the   same   results,   as   they   occurred   less   frequently.   The   results   of   this   study   agree   with   Thomas,   MacInnis,   and   Park's   statement   that   there   is   "a   need   for   fashion   marketers   and   retailers   to   closely   monitor   communication   within   virtual   communities"  (Thomas,  MacInnis,  and  Park  587),  and  this  is  what  lululemon  seems   to  be  doing  by  monitoring  and  replying  to  Facebook  posts.          Questionnaires    

16  

Questionnaires   were   to   be   completed   by   several   lululemon   employees   who   work   on   lululemon's   online   presence   and   respond   to   the   comments   on   the   company's   Facebook   and   review   pages,   such   as   the   Director   of   Digital   Guest   Experience.   The   focus   of   the   questionnaires   was   to   determine   what,   if   anything,   lululemon   does   to   encourage   or   keep   the   behaviour   of   their   devoted   customers.   For   a   working   list   of   questions,   see   Appendix   A.   The   decision   was   made   to   use   questionnaires  for  several  reasons:  first,  the  participants  would  be  able  to  respond   to  questions  in  their  own  words  and  their  answers  could  be  used  word  for  word  as   examples,   if   needed   (if   clarification   of   an   answer   were   needed,   the   researcher   could   send  follow-up  questions);  second,  participants  could  take  as  little  or  as  much  time   as   they   needed   to   answer   questions   (providing   that   they   returned   the   questionnaires  by  the  specified  date);  third,  as  the  questions  relate  to  the  company   they   work   for,   participants   who   were   unsure   how   much   information   they   could   divulge  had  time  to  consult  with  their  supervisor/manager.   Initial   contact   with   the   lululemon   head   office   occurred   via   e-mail.   An   employee   was   invited   to   participate   and   was   asked   to   send   the   researcher   the   names   and   e-mail   addresses   of   three   employees   who   may   also   be   willing   to   participate.        Analysis   This  research  analyzed  the  comments  posted  on  lululemon's  Facebook  "wall"   on  Thursdays  over  a  three-month  long  period.  Lululemon  posted  new  products  on   its  own  website  each  Thursday;  they  also  posted  images  or  links  on  their  Facebook  

17  

page,   directing   customers   to   the   new   products   on   their   website.   Many   users   commented   on   Facebook   on   the   same   day   about   the   new   items   that   appeared   on   lululemon's  website.  It  was  thus  because  of  the  number  of  comments  spurred  by  the   popularity  of  new  product  arrivals  that  the  sample  comments  used  for  analysis  were   taken  from  comments  posted  on  Thursdays.  The  three-month  period  analyzed  was   from   September   to   November   2011,   which   included   the   end   of   the   back-to-school   sales   period   and   included   the   very   beginning   of   the   holiday   sales   period   ("Census   Bureau  News  Facts";  Holmes).  Including  the  end  of  one  popular  sale  season  and  the   lead-up   to   another   yielded   plenty   of   traffic   on   lululemon's   Facebook   page   and   provided  a  large  amount  of  data  to  analyze.  During  the  three-month  study  period,  an   average   of   35   comments   were   posted   on   lululemon's   wall   each   Thursday,   ranging   from   general   comments   to   questions   and   concerns,   to   wanting   to   find/trade/sell   an   item.   Over   these   three   months,   a   total   of   36   comments   were   posted   by   lululemon   and  454  comments  were  posted  by  customers  on  Thursdays.     Data   was   collected   from   Facebook   using   the   following   method.   On   lululemon's   Facebook   page,   the   setting   for   the   comments   was   changed   to   show   posts   from   everyone   (the   default   setting   on   lululemon's   Facebook   page   is   to   show   only   comments   posted   by   lululemon).   Lululemon's   Facebook   page   shows   only   the   most  recent  comments  when  it  is  first  opened;  to  see  more  comments  on  the  page,   the  option  at  the  bottom  to  view  more  comments  must  be  selected  to  reveal  all  the   comments   from   a   given   date.   Facebook   shows   the   most   recent   week's   comments   with  only  the  day  of  the  week  (e.g.,  Monday):  for  this  reason,  the  researcher  had  to   wait   until   the   following   Wednesday   to   gather   the   comments   from   the   preceding  

18  

Thursday,   so   that   the   date   (and   not   simply   the   day   of   the   week)   appeared   underneath   the   comment.   Once   all   the   comments   from   the   given   date   were   fully   visible,  the  pages  were  saved  as  a  PDF  file  to  be  used  for  analysis.   A   content   analysis   was   performed   on   the   data   from   the   posts.   Content   analysis   determines   how   often   certain   themes   or   words   are   found   within   the   content   being   examined   (Bouma   80);   the   comments   were   thus   analyzed   to   determine   if   any   recurring   themes   linked   them.   The   comments   were   first   categorized   into   "general   comments"   and   "questions."   They   were   then   categorized   according   to   the   topics   they   addressed,   such   as   products,   customer   service,   or   general   expression   of   opinion   of   the   brand.   It   was   also   noted   what   types   of   posts,   comments  or  questions,  and  what  topics  lululemon  responded  to.     Two  researchers  coded  and  compared  the  data  independently  and  compared   results.   One   researcher's   coding   was   more   general,   looking   at   whether   posts   were   comments  or  questions  and  determining  their  topics,  while  the  other's  focused  more   on   the   topic   of   the   post.   The   first   researcher's   results   gave   a   broader   analysis,   while   the  second  researcher's  results  were  more  detailed  and  complemented  the  first  set   of  results.  For  example,  one  researcher  split  the  posts  into  questions  and  comments,   and  made  note  of  the  category  to  which  the  comment  referred,  such  as  quality  or  a   specific   item.   The   other   researcher   grouped   comments   in   terms   such   as   customer   inquiry   and   product   info,   and   general   comments   and   customer   service,   which   in   many  cases  were  easily  aligned  with  the  first  researcher's  questions  and  comments   categories.  Because  similar  categories  were  used  by  both  researchers,  the  two  sets   of   data   were   used   together--as   the   breakdown   of   categories   showed   similar   results  

19  

in   terms   of   which   topics   were   seen   most   frequently   and   which   topics   lululemon   responded  to.      Product  Reviews      The   customer   product   reviews   on   lululemon's   website   were   also   analyzed.  

The   study   used   the   top   three   most   rated   products   for   both   women's   and   men's   clothing,  and  analyzed  the  reviews  posted  from  the  most  recent  three  months  (the   same   three-month   period   that   was   used   to   analyze   lululemon's   Facebook   comments).   The  reviews  were  categorized   to  see   whether   they   provided   i)  a   simple   opinion   of   the   product   or   a   customer's   personal   experience   about   it   or   ii)   a   more   detailed   review.   A   review   was   considered   to   be   a   detailed   analysis   if   it   seemed   to   offer   advice   to   other   readers   that   influenced   whether   they   would   purchase   the   product,  such  as  describing  the  fit  of  the  garment  (for  instance  whether  it  is  true  to   size   or   not)   or   the   way   it   wears   over   time.   A   review   was   classified   as   a   simple   opinion   if   it   only   stated   whether   the   reviewer   liked   the   garment   or   not.   This   category   also   included   reviews   based   on   personal   experience:   these   focused   on   elements  such  as  the  reviewer's  colour  preference  or  purchasing  experience,  which   were  not  considered  to  be  helpful  advice  on  whether  to  purchase  the  item.     Another   element   analyzed   was   lululemon's   response   to   the   reviews.   Lululemon  employees  monitor  the  reviews  and  often  post  responses  to  customer's   concerns.   The   responses   were   categorized  according   to   whether   the   response   was   to   a   positive,   neutral,   or   negative   review.   Lululemon   does   not   remove   negative   reviews,  but  rather  responds  to  them  and  leaves  them  up  for  other  customers  to  see.  

20  

This  analysis  will  provide  information  about  lululemon's  customer  service  and  how   it  treats  customers  who  post  concerns  they  have  with  an  item.          

21  

Findings   Facebook  Data   This  study  examined  the  Facebook  posts  from  each  Thursday  between   September  2011  and  November  2011.  This  three-month  period  was  chosen  because   it  encompasses  two  popular  sale  seasons,  the  end  of  the  back-to-school  sales  season   and  the  very  beginning  of  the  holiday  sales  season  ("Census  Bureau  News  Facts";   Holmes).  Only  the  main  posts  on  lululemon's  "wall"  were  examined,  leaving  out   customer  comments,  or  cascades,  that  were  generated  in  response  to  those  posts.   The  comments  were  excluded  from  the  data  count  because  the  cascades  varied  in   topic  and  oftentimes  became  unrelated  to  the  original  post;  however,  they  are  useful   as  examples  when  discussing  the  results,  especially  the  outcome  of  "conversations"   between  customers  or  between  customers  and  lululemon  employees.  The  total   number  of  customer  posts  during  the  study  period  was  454,  averaging  35  customer   posts  per  day.  Any  responses  to  posts  from  lululemon  were  also  looked  at  in  the   study.  Only  the  first  response  from  the  company  was  looked  at,  as  other  comments   to  the  post  were  excluded,  as  were  lululemon  responses  to  comments  within  a   particular  post  (as,  again,  without  the  original  post  there  would  have  been  no   responses).  The  total  number  of  lululemon  responses  to  customer  posts  was  206.   This  shows  that  a  little  under  half,  45%,  of  all  customer  posts  received  responses   from  lululemon.   Lululemon's  Facebook  page  had  more  new  posts  during  the  three  month   study  period  than  new  product  reviews  posted  to  their  website:  454  Facebook  posts   versus  197  customer  product  reviews  (see  Table  1).  There  were  237  comments  and  

22  

217  questions  posted  on  Facebook,  and  164  reviews  posted  for  women's  products   and  33  reviews  posted  for  men's  products  (see  Table  2).    

  

  

23  

   Table  4  ­  Facebook  Posts  and  lululemon   Responses   Date   Facebook  Posts   lululemon   by  Customers   Responses   September  1   27   16   September  8   31   13   September  15   38   21   September  22   33   7   September  29   33   17   October  6   42   32   October  13   43   19   October  20   22   8   October  27   42   15   November  3   35   15   November  10   42   13   November  17   38   17   November  24   28   13   24  

   Customers  posted  more  comments  than  questions  on  lululemon's  Facebook   page  (see  Table  2).  Both  comments  and  questions  were  sorted  into  whether  the  tone   was  found  to  be  positive  (e.g.,  "I  love  this"  or  "I  really  like  this")  to  neutral  (non- emotional  statements)  or  negative  (e.g.,  "I'm  disappointed"  or  an  overall  negative   statement).  Overall,  the  majority  of  both  comments  and  questions  were  neutral  in   tone  (see  Table  5  and  Table  6).      

   While  lululemon's  average  response  rate  was  45%,  this  can  be  broken  down   into  further  detail.  Comparing  comments  posted  on  the  wall  versus  questions   posted  on  the  wall,  lululemon's  response  rate  for  questions  was  70.5%,  while  for   comments  it  was  22%.  Furthermore,  in  considering  what  types  of  comments  or   questions  lululemon  responds  to,  the  results  showed  that  lululemon  responded  to   100%  of  the  negatively  toned  questions  posted  by  users  (see  Table  7).  

25  

   In  considering  the  topics  that  lululemon  responded  to  most  often,  the  results   show  that  customer  questions  and  inquiries  about  a  specific  product  were   responded  to  most  often.  The  second  most  responded  to  topic  was  entitled   "miscellaneous"  by  both  researchers  and  included  a  variety  of  questions  and   comments,  which  separately  created  very  small  categories  and  were  therefore   grouped  together.     In  addition  to  responding  to  customer  comments  and  questions,  lululemon   also  posted  their  own  comments  on  Facebook.  The  total  number  of  posts  by   lululemon  during  the  study  period  was  36  (see  Table  8).   o Lululemon  most  frequently  posted  about  new  products  available  on  its   website,  with  one  new  posting  for  new  products  each  week,  for  a  total  of   13  postings.   o Next  were  posts  about  new  blog  updates,  for  a  total  of  10  posts.  

26  

o o o

Photographs  of  the  new  products  were  posted  a  total  of  6  times.   Random  posts  of  images  or  videos  were  posted  a  total  of  6  times.   One,  atypical,  post  was  a  special  message  from  the  CEO  of  lululemon  in   response  to  a  case  ruling  over  an  event  that  occurred  at  a  lululemon   store.  This  post  received  a  total  of  53  customer  responses;  but  as  this   was  not  a  usual  lululemon  post,  the  customer  responses  were  not   included  in  the  data  addressing  lululemon's  typical  posts.  

   The  most  frequent  type  of  post  by  lululemon  was  about  new  products   available  on  the  company's  website,  which  included  links  to  the  site  and/or   photographs  of  the  new  products.  Customers  responded  most  often  to  this  type  of   post  by  lululemon.  Customers  responded  to  lululemon's  posts  a  total  of  854  times   during  the  study  period  (see  Table  9).  

27  

Table&9&(&Customer&Responses&to&lululemon&Posts&
900$ 800$ 700$ 600$ 500$ 400$ 300$ 200$ 100$ 0$ 854$

539$ lululemon$posts$ Customer$responses$ 146$ Total$ New$product$ post$(including$ product$ photos)$ Blog$posts$ 169$ Image/Video$ shares$

  

Product  Reviews   As  well  as  Facebook,  this  study  examined  the  customer  product  reviews  on   lululemon's  website,  along  with  lululemon's  responses  to  those  product  reviews.   There  were  more  responses  by  lululemon  to  customer  posts  on  Facebook  than  to   the  product  reviews  during  that  time  (see  Table  10  and  Table  11).  

  

28  

     Customer  reviews  were  posted  with  less  frequency  than  comments  and   questions  on  lululemon's  Facebook  page,  so  product  reviews  from  the  top  three   most  rated  women's  and  men's  products  were  looked  at  for  the  entire  time  period  of   September  2011  to  November  2011.  The  study  evaluated  only  clothing  item  reviews   in  order  to  separate  them  into  men's  and  women's  clothing  categories  more  easily.   The  accessories  and  other  non-clothing  items  that  were  sometimes  listed  within  one   gender's  category  often  contained  reviews  by  the  opposite  gender  (for  instance,   yoga  mats  listed  under  men's  top  rated  reviews  also  had  reviews  that  seemed  to  be   written  by  women).  The  top  three  most  rated  women's  products  were,  as  of   December  4,  2011:   - - - Groove  Pant  (Regular)  ­  626  reviews  ­  overall  rating  3.9/5  stars   Scuba  Hoodie  ­  496  reviews  ­  overall  rating  4.5/5  stars   Cool  Racerback  ­  492  reviews  ­  overall  rating  4.6/5  stars  

29  

A  total  of  164  reviews  were  written  during  the  study  period  for  the  top  three  most   rated  women's  products;  67  reviews  for  the  Scuba  Hoodie,  51  reviews  for  the  Cool   Racerback,  and  46  reviews  for  the  Groove  Pants  (Regular)  (see  Table  12).  

   The  top  three  most  rated  men's  products  were,  as  of  December  4,  2011:   - - - Run:  Response  Short  ­  75  reviews  ­  overall  rating  4.6/5  stars   Game  On  Boxer  Brief  (Final  Sale)  ­  45  reviews  ­  overall  rating  3.3/5  stars   Formula  Pant  (Final  Sale)  ­  37  reviews  ­  overall  rating  4.1/5  stars  

There  were  a  total  of  33  reviews  written  during  the  study  period  for  the  top  three   most  rated  men's  products;  13  reviews  for  the  Run:  Response  Short,  11  reviews  for   the  Game  On  Boxer  Brief,  and  9  reviews  for  the  Formula  Pant  (see  Table  13).    

30  

   The  reviews  were  also  divided  into  whether  they  were  positive  (rated  as  being  4   or  5  out  of  5  stars),  neutral  (rated  as  being  3  out  of  5  stars),  or  negative  (rated  as   being  1  or  2  out  of  5  stars)  (see  Table  14  and  Table  15).  It  is  important  to  note  that   one  review  gave  an  item  a  rating  of  1  out  of  5  stars,  but  in  the  written  portion  of   their  review  stated  they  loved  the  item  and  wanted  to  know  the  difference  between   the  item  and  its  predecessor.  As  it  is  not  possible  for  the  researcher  to  know  what   rating  the  reviewer  intended  to  give,  the  original  rating  was  left  in  the  research  as  is,   since  in  its  current  form  it  affects  the  overall  rating  on  lululemon's  webpage,  not   whatever  rating  was  intended.  

31  

   Also  noted  were  which  reviews  lululemon  responded  to.  Women's  product   reviews  contained  the  highest  number  of  positive  reviews,  as  well  as  the  highest   number  of  responses  from  lululemon  (13  responses).  However,  the  reviews  with  the   highest  frequency  of  responses  in  terms  of  a  ratio  of  reviews  to  responses  were   negative  reviews,  which  had  the  highest  response  rate  from  lululemon  (showing   that  a  negative  review  was  more  likely  to  receive  a  response  than  a  positive  one).   Lululemon's  response  rate  for  women's  product  reviews  were  as  follows:   - - - - Positive  reviews  had  a  response  rate  of  9%   Neutral  reviews  had  a  response  rate  of  50%   Negative  reviews  had  a  response  rate  of  73%   Overall  response  rate  was  18%  

In  terms  of  men's  product  reviews,  lululemon  responded  most  often  to  negative   reviews.  The  company's  response  rate  for  men's  product  reviews  were  as  follows:  

32  

- - - -

Positive  reviews  had  a  response  rate  of  4%   Neutral  reviews  had  a  response  rate  of  0%   Negative  reviews  had  a  response  rate  of  57%   Overall  response  rate  was  15%  

It  appears  that  both  women's  and  men's  product  reviews  are  responded  to  at  a   relatively  similar  rate.  The  response  rates  for  women's  and  men's  product  reviews   are  fairly  close,  at  18%  and  15%  respectively.  

   The  reviews  were  also  separated  into  two  categories,  detailed  fit  reviews  and   simple  opinion/experience  reviews  (see  Table  16  and  Table  17).  The  reviews  were   split  into  two  categories  because  not  all  reviews  are  equal  in  terms  of  helping  a   customer  decide  whether  to  purchase  an  item  based  on  the  review.  Detailed  reviews   would  likely  be  more  helpful  than  a  simple  opinion.  Detailed  reviews  included   reviews  that  focused  on  helping  other  customers  make  a  decision  about  purchasing  

33  

the  item,  for  example,  containing  a  more  comprehensive  description  of  the  fit  or   quality  of  the  item.  The  simple  opinion/experience  reviews  included  generic   statements  (e.g.,  "I  love  this  item"),  sizing  information  similar  to  that  found  in  an   online  size  guide  (e.g.,  height  and  weight  measurements),  or  personal  stories  about   purchasing  the  item.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  for  some  men's  products  the   reviews  were  written  by  women  who  bought  the  items  for  their  husbands  and  then   wrote  a  review  on  their  behalf.  

  

34  

   For  both  women's  and  men's  product  reviews,  the  reviews  that  expressed  the   user's  personal  opinion  or  an  experience  they  had  with  the  item  were  more  frequent   than  reviews  outlining  how  the  items  wears  and  fits.  For  examples  of  the  women's   product  reviews,  see  Table  18.  For  examples  of  men's  product  reviews,  see  Table  19.  

35  

   Product   Detailed   reviews   Table  18  ­  Examples  of  Women's  Product  Reviews   Scuba  Hoodie   Cool  Racerback   Groove  Pant  (Regular)  
"I  normally  don't  write   reviews  for  my  purchases,   but  this  is  one  that  I   thought  it  is  only  fair  that  I   share!  This  tank  top  is   functional  and  multi   purpose.  I  can  wear  it  to   yoga,  gym  and  even  to   work  (under  a  jacket  of   course).  You  can  wear  it   with  any  cross  back  bras  (if   not  used  for  sports)  and   most  sports  bra.  I  like  it   that  there  is  no  built  in   padding,  as  not  all  padding   suits  my  shape.  It  is  also   long  enough  (great  for  my   1.73cm  height)  and  does   not  ride  up  during  exercise   or  when  I  walk.  Although  it   may  be  a  little  long  for   slighter  women.  It  gives  me   a  very  womanly  silhouette,   I  finally  have  a  waist!   Notwithstanding  the  clingy   [fabric],  it  is  extremely   flattering,  no  lumps  and   bumps.  It  is  a  true  size  4   for  me  though,  contrary  to   what  some  reviewers  say.   Strange.  Looking  forward   to  seeing  more  colours!"   "This  hoodie  is  the   "I  absolutely  love  the  CRB!   comfyest  ever!!!  Warm  and   I  not  only  wear  them  for   fits  awesome,  bought  in   run,  spin,  and  yoga,  but  I   toothpast  first,  awful   wear  them  as  an  under   color!!!  Exchanged  for   tank  with  my  scrubs  for   Black  Swan,  beautiful  dark   work.  I  do  wish  for  more   purple!!"   colors!!  :)"      "So  I  finely  splurged  and   got  myself  my  very  own   Scuba  hoodie!  So  glad  that  I   did!  It's  a  very  flattering  fit   and  I  think  TTS  (I  got  a  6   and  it's  a  teeny  bit  loose  for   layering  purposes  which  is   great.  I'm  5'8"  ,  34c,  130#   athletic/runner  for   reference).  I  *looooove*   the  thumbhole/hand   covers,  they're  perfect  for   when  I'm  out  walking  my   dog  or  running.  The  color   is  also  gorgeous  (I  got  the   "pigeon/rocksteady"  My   one  complaint  is  that  I   wish  the  hood  had  a   drawstring  or  something,   because  it  feels  like  it's   falling  back  off  my  head  a   little  when  I  have  a   ponytail.  But  otherwise  it's   great!  I  may  need  this  in   other  colors..."   "Just  got  2  new  pairs  of   these,  size  2  &  4,  but   they're  just  a  little  too   short!  I  find  that  they  are   fine  if  you  [wear]  them   with  boots,  but  they  don't   look  right  with  runners   due  to  their  short-ish   length!  The  talls  are  waay   too  long  for  me  so  I'm   kinda  wishing  there  was   like,  an  in  between  length   so  that  us  medium  height   girls  could  fit  them!  I'm  5'6,   so  pretty  average,  but  just   a  little  too  long  for  the   regulars  :P"  

Simple   opinion/   experience  

"these  pants  are  so   amazing!  i  recommend   them  to  anyone  who  wants   comfort  and  there  great  for   working  out  :)"  

         36  

Product   Detailed  

Table  19  ­  Examples  of  Men's  Product  Reviews   Run:  Response  Short   Game  On  Boxer  Brief   Formula  Pant  
"These  are  the  most   comfortable  and  best   looking  workout  shorts   I've  ever  owned.  After   finishing  up  a  30  minute   cardio  session  wearing   these  and  a  simple  (cheap)   cotton  t-shirt,  I  noticed  the   difference  in  my  body  temp   almost  immediately.   Throughout  the  rest  of  my   workout,  my  legs/lower   body  felt  cool  and   comfortable,  my  upper   body  (in  the  cheap  T),  on   the  other  hand,  was   soaked,  hot,  and  generally   uncomfortable.  I  can't  tell   you  how  much  I  loved  the   feel  of  these  shorts   [during]  my  first  workout   with  them  and  I  can't  wait   to  get  a  few  of  the  metal   vent  t-shirts  to  go  with   them.  Love  these  shorts,   the  only  thing  I  would   change  (if  anything)  is  to   move  the  pockets  further   out  to  the  seams  rather   than  more  forward  like   they  are  now.  Reaching   into  these  forward  facing   pockets  to  grab  your  iPod   can  look  a  bit   "interesting"."   "I  love  these  shorts.  The   extra  pockets  are  perfect   for  holding  keys,  gu,  DL,   etc.  I  wish  they  came  in   brighter  colors.  Black  and   grey  are  so  boring."   "I've  been  converted  to   boxer  briefs!  After  finding   out  what  a  hot  yoga  class   does  to  cotton  briefs  I  went   to  my  local  store  to  see   what  underwear  lulu  had   to  offer.  That  was  the   [beginning]  of  the  end  for   my  cotton  underwear!  The   fit  is  superb.  The  fabric  is   simply  amazing.  When  they   say  it  wicks  away  moisture   it's  true.  Even  after  a  90   minute  hot  yoga  class  they   almost  feel  dry.  As  for   comfort.  It's  like  wearing   nothing  at  all!  I've  had  all   of  my  pairs  now  for  almost   a  year  and  they're  all  just   as  good  as  the  day  I  bought   them.  A  quick  note  on   sizing.  I  wear  a  medium  in   other  brands  and  a  large   fits  me  perfectly.  Well  done   lululemon!  Don't  change  a   thing  about  these  and   you'll  have  a  GOBB   customer  for  life!  :)"   "These  pants  are  so  cozy!   They're  very  roomy  too.   Great  to  wear  to  and  from   places,  or  at  school  on  a   lazy  day.  They  keep  you  so   warm!  Note  that  until  you   wash  them  a  few  times,   you're  going  to  be  leaving  a   trail  of  "fuzzy"  behind  you   from  the  material  inside   the  pant.  As  I  said,  they're   very  roomy  so  you   certainly  don't  need  to  size   up.  If  anything,  size  down!"  

Simple   opinion/   experience  

"My  wife  was  an  avid   Lululemon  wearer  but  I   was  [sceptical]  of  the  high   prices.  She  convinced  me   to  get  a  pair  of  the  men's   boxer  briefs  and  I  can  now   say  I  own  10  pairs  and  they   are  the  only  type  I  wear.   Please  keep  making  more   bright  colors!"  

"i  tried  them  on  and  i  liked   them  so  much  i  didn't  want   to  take  them  off  so  I  bought   a  second  pair  and  wore  the   first  out.  I  washed  both  in   case  there  was  shrinkage   (none  fyi),  brought  them   back  to  get  hemmed,  and   had  to  buy  a  third  pair  so  I   could  wear  them  while  the   other  two  were  getting   hemmed."  

37  

   Discussion   Research  Questions      The  first  research  question  of  this  study  addressed  how  customers  create  a  

loyal   following   around   a   certain   brand   using   social   media.   To   better   answer   this   question,   several   sub-questions   were   posed,   some   of   which   can   be   answered   with   the  data  from  Facebook.      The   first   sub-question   asked   whether   customer   assemble   around   a   brand  

due  to  the  level  of  customer  service  received  in  the  online  community.  A  total  of  454   comments   were   posted   on   lululemon's   Facebook   page   with   206   responses   from   lululemon,   and   lululemon's   35   posts   generated   854   responses   from   customers.   These   numbers   show   a   large   amount   of   traffic   on   the   page   created   by   customers.   Of   the   197   product   reviews,   lululemon   responded   to   34   of   them.   Negative   reviews   had   the   highest   response   rate,   probably   in   an   effort   to   resolve   customer   issues,   which   shows  a  high  level  of  customer  service.  The  data  studied  here  pointed  towards  the   notion   that   customers   do   appreciate   the   customer   service   that   they   receive   from   lululemon:   Facebook  user:   "Chinook   Centre   customer   service   is   amazing   WOW!!!   I   went   tonight   and   bought   a   few   things.   I   wish   I   knew   the   names   of   the   associates   but   honestly   all   of   them   were   so   helpful.   Thank   you,   thank   you,  thank  you!!  BEST  customer  service  EVER!!!"      A  customer  response  in  a  cascade:  "Thx  [lululemon  employee]~love  the   customer  service  "      For  some  customers,  the  level  of  customer  service  on  social  media  was  unexpected   (although  the  reason  why  it  was  unexpected  was  not  stated).  

38  

Facebook  user:   "I   was   [disappointed]   when   I   visited   one   of   your   store   and   found   no   coats.   Are   you   not   a   Canadian   Company....this   is   only   November   and   there   is   nothing   in   the   store?   How   don't   know   if   you   read  this  or  not  ...love  your  clothes  but  as  soon  as  something  is  out  the   larger  size  are  gone....do  you  get  the  message."   lululemon   athletica:   "Hey   [Facebook   user],  Thanks   for   sharing   your   feedback   with   us,   and   yes,   we   do   read   all   of   the   posts   here!   I'm   sorry   your   local   store   didn't   have   the   style   of   coat   you   were   after.   We   did   release   a   winter   coat   style,   the   Apres   Piste   Jacket,   last   month   but   we   don't   have   many   left   at   the   moment.   We   are   just   starting   to   see   our   Winter  items  come  out,  so  we  may  always  see  more  in  future.  If  you'd   like  us  to  check  other  local  store  in  your  area  for  the  jackets,  feel  free  to   give   us   a   call   at   the   GEC,   1.877.263.9300   option   #2   ~[lululemon   employee]"   Facebook  user:   "WOW,   I   am   impressed   way   to   go   Lululemon.   I   did   not   expect   a   reply.   I   am   very   impressed.   I   live   in   Pitt   Meadows   British   Columbia   and   shop   at   Coquitlam   Centre   and   they   had   NO   coats.   I   will   keep  checking.  Thanks  again"      This   example   illustrates   that   customers   appreciate   receiving   customer   service   via   social   media.   If   companies   want   to   maintain   their   brand   by   keeping   their   customers   satisfied,   they   must   be   cognizant   of   how   customers   are   treated   and   give   them   a   pleasant   overall   experience,   as   seen   in   the   customer-based   brand   equity   model   (Keller  60).  As  was  seen  in  this  study,  Facebook  is  sometimes  used  as  a  customer's   first  point  of  contact  when  they  have  questions  or  comments,  and  having  a  high  level   of   customer   service   to   address   those   customers   is   likely   to   be   a   beneficial   factor   towards   keeping   customers   happy   and   encouraging   return   customers.   As   for   customer   product   reviews,   leaving   up   negative   responses   and   responding   to   them   shows   customers   that   the   company   takes   their   disappointment   seriously   and   will   work  towards  resolving  the  issue,  which  also  shows  the  company's  level  of  customer   service.      The   second   sub-question   looked   at   whether   customers   assemble   around   a  

brand  due  to  its  popularity,  and  asked  whether  there  was  a  crowd  effect  occurring   39  

or   conspicuous   labeling   with   brand   or   logo   visibility   that   customers   wanted   to   display.   One   observation   here   is   that   whenever   a   Facebook   user   clicks   that   they   "like"   a   page   on   Facebook,   it   shows   up   on   their   profile.   It   could   be   argued   that   some   users   want   to   display   this   on   their   individual   profile   page.   Another   observation   is   that   some   users   do   more   than   simply   "like"   the   page--they   also   write   on   the   lululemon's   page   that   they   love   the   brand,   which   takes   more   effort   than   simply   clicking  that  they  "like"  the  page.  Examples  of  such  statements  include:   Facebook   user   1:   "Love   this   page....for   those   who   enjoy   yoga   &   lulu,   check  it  out....."   Facebook  user  2:  "Love  my  lulu  lemon  top"   Facebook  user  3:  "Love  my  Lululemon...."        While   these   observations   give   the   impression   that   there   may   be   some   customers   who   do   want   to   show   how   much   they   like   they   brand,   the   research   sub-question   could  not  be  fully  answered  with  the  data  from  this  study.  As  the  data  gathered  for   this  study  offered  a  "snapshot"  of  Facebook  comments,  perhaps  a  more  lengthy  and   detailed   study   would   yield   more   results.   This   type   of   question   may   also   require   additional   information   from   customers:   one   way   of   finding   an   answer   may   be   through  interviews  with  them.      The   third   sub-question   asked   whether   customer   assemble   around   a   brand  

due   to   a   perceived   or   actual   quality   or   functionality   of   the   product.   Some   comments   within   the   data   addressed   this   question,   both   on   the   Facebook   page   and   in   the   customer   product   reviews.   Of   the   197   customer   product   reviews,   161   of   them   were   positive,   which   shows   that   customers   are   satisfied   overall   with   the   products   and   their  quality.  Customers  also  wrote  about  the  quality  of  the  products  on  Facebook,   with  comment  such  as  the  following:   40  

Facebook  user  1:   "My   most   comfortable,   best   fitting,   greatest   quality   &   best  looking  gear  EVER!!!!  ....and  I  do  try  everything  folks!  :)xo"      Facebook   user   2:   "heading   to   New   York   for   the   Rock   n   Roll   10k   in   Brooklyn   on   Saturday,   the   to   St   Louis   Rock   n   Roll   half   Marathon   on   Sunday   ...   my   travel   clothes   are   Lululemon,   my   fun   clothes   are   Lululemon   &   my   running   skirts   are   Lululemon   ...   I   just   love   your   comfortable,   unique   and   quality   clothes.   Although   I   do   feel   like   a   walking  commercial  ...  lol!  :)  Keep  making  the  great  clothes!"      These   examples   show   that   some   customers   do   indeed   return   to   the   brand   due   to   its   level  of  quality.  This  may  be  another  factor  in  why  customers  are  assembling  around   lululemon.   As   customers   choose   to   use   social   media   to   voice   their   opinions   about   product  quality,  it  is  important  for  companies  to  not  only  monitor  social  media  for   comments   on   quality,   but   to   use   them   to   address   any   potential   problems   customers   may   run   into.   Responding   to   an   unhappy   customer,   as   seen   earlier   in   the   example   with  winter  coats,  can  make  a  customer  happy  and  give  a  positive  tone  to  a  negative   situation,   which   can   help   satisfy   the   customer.   As   satisfied   customers   will   keep   brands  strong,  companies  should  use  the  various  types  of  social  media  available  to   them  to  create,  improve,  and  maintain  positive  relationships  with  customers.      The   final   sub-question   looked   at   whether   customers   feel   involved   in   the  

brand  and  whether  this  increases  customer  loyalty.  The  data  gathered  in  this  study   showed   that   customers   do   feel   that   they   can   express   their   opinions   in   terms   of   suggestions   for   products,   such   as   colour.   Some   customers   would   respond   to   lululemon   employees   asking   them   what   they   liked   about   a   certain   product,   and   others  would  do  so  without  being  prompted  by  lululemon,  choosing  to  share  their   ideas  on  the  Facebook  page:     Facebook   user:   "Here's   an   idea:   Instead   of   squeezing   out   yet   another   shade  of  berry  pink,  aqua,  or  royal  blue  this  year,  let's  go  GREEN!  Can   41  

you  make  some  clothes  in  green?  How  come  you  never  make  green?  It's   autumn,  let's  see  some  nice  earthy  leafy  greens.  Please?  I  would  be  most   grateful."      Also,   customers   are   quick   to   share   their   opinions   about   products   and   provide   reviews.  One  customer  wanted  help  in  resolving  a  problem  with  viewing  and  leaving   product  reviews  on  lululemon's  webpage:     Facebook  user:  "can't  see  ratings/reviews  on  any  products  today,  and  I   can't   leave   a   review   myself.   Did   something   change?   I   don't   even   see   the   stars  under  a  product  name  and  price  line."      These   examples   show   that   customers   do   want   to   share   opinions   and   suggestions   about   products,   which   may   be   their   way   of   feeling   involved   in   the   brand.   Also,   customer   involvement   in   general   on   Facebook   may   suggest   that   some   customers   feel   involved   in   the   brand.   For   instance,   some   users   are   quick   to   help   other   users   by   answering   their   questions   before,   or   even   instead   of,   lululemon   employees.   This   may  be  one  way  customers  feel  involved  in  the  brand.  However,  whether  customers   actually   feel   involved   in   the   brand   could   not   be   answered   with   the   data   gathered.   Neither  could  this  study  answer  the  question  of  whether  involvement  in  the  brand   increased   a   customer's   loyalty.   Answers   to   these   questions   would   require   further   study,   most   likely   through   customer   interviews,   to   better   ascertain   their   level   of   involvement  and  sense  of  loyalty.      The  answers  to  the  sub-questions  thus  do  provide  some  answers  to  the  first  

research   question.   There   does   seem   to   be   a   level   of   customer   service   and   product   quality  that  customers  post  about  online.  Customer  opinions  also  seem  to  be  valued,   seen   especially   in   the   various   types   of   customer   product   reviews   being   posted   online   and   left   up   for   other   customers   to   read.   However,   this   study   could   not  

42  

confirm  whether  customers  feel  involved  in  the  brand.  It  also  could  not  determine   whether   a   crowd   effect   is   occurring,   or   whether   conspicuous   labelling   has   any   influence   on   customers   assembling   around   the   brand.   In   spite   of   this,   there   does   seem  to  be  evidence  that  customers  have  created  a  loyal  following  around  lululemon   using   social   media,   and   that   social   media   is   an   outlet   where   loyal   customers   voice   their   opinions.   Some   do   so   by   stating   that   lululemon   is   their   favourite   brand;   others   have   implied   their   loyalty   with   comments   about   how   they   "need   lululemon   anonymous"  or  by  discussing  the  number  of  products  they  have  purchased  from  this   brand.   However   it   does   remain   to   be   seen   whether   social   media   encourages   that   customer  loyalty.      The  second  research  question  of  this  study  aimed  to  determine  what  role,  if  

any,   the   company   plays   in   encouraging   extremely   loyal   customer   behaviour   via   social  media.  As  with  the  first  research  question,  several  sub-questions  were  posed   to   help   find   an   answer   to   the   research   question.   The   first   queried   the   company's   level   of   involvement   in   maintaining   an   online   community.   The   study   results   show   that   lululemon   has   a   high   level   of   involvement   in   maintaining   its   online   community.   During   the   study   period,   the   company   posted   to   its   Facebook   page   an   average   of   almost   3   times   per   day,   which   generated   an   average   of   almost   70   responses   per   day   from   customers.   Lululemon's   total   number   of   responses   during   the   study   period   was   206,   which   is   an   average   of   16   responses   a   day.   For   example,   lululemon   responded  to  one  customer:   Facebook   user:  "GEC,  do  the  arms/sleeves  on  the  don't  worry  be  happy   pullover  fit  tight  and  does  the  pullover  fit  TTS  in  the  body?  Thanks  :)"   lululemon  athletica:  "Hey  [Facebook  user],    I  haven't  had  a  chance  to  try   on   the   pullover   yet   but   I   chatted   with   an   educator   this   morning   who   43  

said   that   she   found   it   true   to   size   and   didn't   find   the   arms   to   be   tight.   Hope  this  helps!  ~[lululemon  employee]"      These   numbers   show   that   lululemon   monitors   its   Facebook   page   on   a   frequent   basis,  informing  customers  of  new  products  and  responding  to  their  questions  and   comments,  thus  maintaining  a  high  level  of  involvement  in  this  online  community.     The   second   sub-question   asked   what,   if   any,   kind   of   customer   service   the   company   offered,   whether   it  was   promoted   to   the   online   community,   and  what   its   policies   were   (return,   warranty,   repair,   alterations,   etc.).   Lululemon's   Facebook   page   seemed   to   serve   as   a   platform   for   customer   service.      The   company's   Guest   Education   Centre   team   responds   to   customer's   questions   and   comments   using   their   own  experience  with  the  brand  to  help  customers.  When  issues  with  a  product  arise,   employees   responding   on   Facebook   urge   the   customer   to   contact   lululemon's   GEC   by  phone  to  resolve  any  issues.  For  example:   Facebook  user:  "I  ordered  the  long  sleeve  cabin  II  in  black  swan  and  it   arrived  today  with  the  security  tag  on  it!  Why  would  this  happen?  Why   would   you   put   security   tags   on   merchandise?   Isn't   that   the   stores   responsibility   when   merchandise   arrives?   Also,   why   is   this   the   only   cabin  tee  that  reverses  to  the  same  color?  What  is  the  point?"   lululemon  athletica:  "Hi  [Facebook  user]     Thanks  for  reaching  out  to  us.   Sorry  to  hear  you  received  your  Cabin  Long  Sleeve  with  the  security  tag   on.  We  would  love  to  fix  that  for  you.  Please  call  us  at  the  GEC  at  1-877-   263-9300  option#2  and  an  educator  will  be  able  to  sort  that  out  for  you.   As   far   as   the   black   swan   colour   being   the   same   colour   on   both   sides,   that   was   a   choice   our   designers   made   when   they   decided   what   would   look  best  for  this  style.  I  would  love  to  pass  your  feedback  along  to  our   designers.   What   colour   would   you   like   to   see   paired   with   the   black   swan?  -[lululemon  employee]"      This  type  of  customer  service  was  often  encouraged  on  Facebook,  likely  because  the   company   can   in   this   way   more   easily   discuss   the   problem   at   hand   and   attempt   to   appease   the   customer.   The   option   of   calling   the   GEC   was   often   suggested   for  

44  

problems  customers  encountered  with  orders  or  products.  For  example:   Facebook   user:   "Dear   GEC,   Do   the   Ombre   Stripes   Cabin   LS   tops   run   longer   than   the   other   colors?   Or   did   I   get   a   fluke   one   and   need   to   exchange   for   one   that's   the   correct   length?   Mine   is   2"   longer   than   the   Black   Swan   one   I   already   own   (same   size)   and   it's   also   bigger   in   the   body.  It's  almost  dress-length  instead  of  the  mid-hip  length  I'm  used  to   from   these.   I'm   very   disappointed   because   my   local   store   didn't   get   this   color   (as   far   as   I   know),   so   I   can't   easily   exchange   it   for   another   if   it   is   a   fluke  and  shouldn't  be  as  long  as  it  is."   lululemon  athletica:  "Hey  [Facebook  user],  Thanks  for  taking  the  time  to   share   this   with   us.   It   is   quite   possible   that   there   is   a   difference   between   the  two  colours,  but  so  far  I  haven't  heard  any  feedback  about  it.  What  I   have  heard  though,  is  that  this  season  of  Cabin  LS  are  a  lot  longer  than   last   season.   They   seem   to   be   hitting   a   lot   of   people   around   the   upper   thigh,  like  how  it  sits  on  the  fit  model  online.  If  you  feel  that  the  length   of   your   top   is   beyond   that   however,   I'd   suggest   giving   us   a   call   at   the   GEC  or  taking  it  into  your  local  store  so  we  can  look  into  this  further  for   you.  ~[lululemon  employee]"      With   regard   to   other   customer   service   policies,   while   these   were   not   explicitly   advertised   on   the   Facebook   page   during   the   study   period,   they   were   often   mentioned   on   the   page.   The   company's   return   policy   was   often   referred   to,   with   some   customers   complaining   that   it   was   too   short   and   restrictive   and   others   simply   wanting  more  details  about  it.  For  example:     Facebook  user:   "is   there   any   chance   we   can   return/exchange   something   that  was  bought  in  another  city  and  has  a  gift  receipt?  my  dad  got  me  a   pair   of   shorts   at   the   lululemon   store   in   calgary   just   yesterday   but   I   already  have  the  same  pair"   lululemon   athletica:   "Hey   [Facebook   user],  As   long   as   it's   within   the   return  policy,  you'll  be  able  to  exchange  or  have  the  amount  the  short  is   currently   selling   for   refunded   onto   a   giftcard   for   you   with   your   gift   receipt.  ~  [lululemon  employee]"      Other   customer   service   policies   mentioned   included   complimentary   hemming   that   the  company  offers  in  its  stores.  For  example:   Facebook   user:   "hey   i   was   just   wondering   -   if   i   buy   pants   online   can   i   take  them  to  my  local  store  and  get  them  hemmed?  Thanks."   lululemon  athletica:  "You   bet,   [Facebook   user].   Any   of   our   stores   will   be   45  

able  to  hem  your  pants  for  you.  ~  [lululemon  employee]"      Even   though   lululemon   does   not   explicitly   advertise   its   customer   service   policies,   customers   can   still   find   out   about   them   simply   by   reading   other   customers'   posts   and   lululemon's   answers   on   Facebook.   In   this   way   it   is   visible   that   lululemon   has   customer   service   policies   that   are   made   known   to   its   online   community,   which   may   assist  in  reinforcing  its  brand  image.      The   third   sub-question   asked   whether   the   company   attempts   to   involve  

customers   in   the   brand   image,   and   if   so,   how.   One   such   attempt   is   the   company's   posting   of   images   of   new   items   or   links   to   its   website.   Lululemon's   35   posts   generated  854  responses  from  customers,  some  of  which  were  opinions  about  items   that  were  posted.  This  could  be  seen  as  the  company's  attempt  to  gauge  a  reaction   from  customers  about  those  products.  For  example:   Lululemon   athletica:   "This   Just   In   »   Cuddle   Up   Jacket,   Scuba   Hoodie*Print  and  Dog  Running  Pant!  http://bit.ly/ThisJustIn_Oct20"   Facebook  user  1:  "MUST  HAVE!"   Facebook  user  2:  "Oh  that  cuddle  up  jacket  looks  SOOOO  cozy.  Too  bad   about  the  price.  :(  "   Facebook  user  3:  "Nice  -  I  want  one!"   Facebook  user  4:  "drool!"   Facebook   user   5:  "The  dog  pants  are  my  favourite  pants  of  the  year!  So   excited!   I   wore   last   year's   in   the   rain   last   night   and   my   legs   were   so   warm  and  dry.  But  I  will  be  picking  up  this  year's  version  for  sure!"      Not  all  responses  to  items  are  positive  (for  instance,  many  customers  shared  their   dislike  of  the  name  of  a  newly  released  scarf);  however  both  negative  and  positive   responses  are  helpful  in  terms  of  future  product  releases  (such  as  knowing  whether   to   bring   back   a   product   or   to   give   it   a   different   name   next   time).   Another   attempt   to   involve  customers  in  the  brand  image  can  be  seen  in  certain  lululemon  responses  to   user   posts   that   ask   for   the   return   of   a   certain   style   or   a   new   colour.   In   these   46  

responses,  the  employees  ask  what  colours  or  changes  in  the  product  the  customers   would  like  to  see  and  even  encourage  customers  to  keep  posting  feedback:   Facebook   user   1:   "more   men's   stuff   would   be   awesome.....   gets   depressing  to  walk  in  and  see  the  same  stuff...  AND  more  color  :)  tired  of   the  gray  and  blacks  and  muted  tones"   lululemon   athletica:   "That's   great   feedback,   [Facebook   user   1].   What   types   of   colours   would   you   like   to   see   us   bring   out   for   you   gents?   ~[lululemon  employee]"   Facebook   user   1:   "I   might   be   an   exception....   but   i   have   a   pair   of   pink/magenta   run   response   shorts   and   LOVE   those.   I   have   a   couple   hoodies  that  have  blue/cyan  color  as  well  as  one  that  is  orange,  and  one   that  is  lime  green  (all  older  lulu  stuff)....  and  my  FAV  is  my  Japan  hoodie   (white  and  red)"   Facebook  user  2:  "RED  and  BRIGHT  BLUES!!!!  AND  MORE  LIME  GREEN   :)"   lululemon   athletica:   "Awesome!   This   is   all   great   to   hear.   I'll   let   the   design   team   know   that   you'd   love   to   see   some   reds,   blues,   greens   and   perhaps   even   some   magenta   thrown   in   the   mix.   ~[lululemon   employee]"   Facebook   user   3:   "If   you   could   add   a   few   colors   from   the   women's   palette  that  would  be  awesome.  PS,  I  wore  my  Tight  Tights  on  a  ride  last   night   over   a   pair   of   Pearl   Izumi   cycling   shorts   and   I   can   feel   the   difference  between  the  2  fabric  and  fit  wise."   Facebook  user  2:  "i  am  also  very  happy  about  the  black  plum  colour!   great  for  fall!  (so  I  would  love  a  hoodie  in  this  colour)"   lululemon  athletica:  "Colour  for  all  is  what  I'm  hearing!  I'll  definitely  be   sharing  this  with  the  designers  for  you.  Keep  the  ideas   coming.  ~[lululemon  employee]"      Most   of   the   feedback   the   company   seeks   is   about   its   products,   which   make   up   a   large   part   of   the   company's   brand   image.   While   these   examples   are   evidence   of   attempts   to   involve   customers,   they   do   not   reveal   whether   the   company   takes   these   suggestions   into   consideration   or   implements   them.   And   so,   although   the   data   shows   that   these   types   of   questions   posed   by   lululemon   are   attempts   to   involve   customers,   future   study   could   include   interviews   with   lululemon   to   determine   if   they  indeed  involve  customers  in  their  brand  image.      In   response   to   the   main   research   question,   then,   this   study   found   evidence   47  

that  lululemon  understands  the  important  role  that  social  media  can  play  in  terms  of   customer  loyalty  and  is  using  social  media  to  embolden  it.  The  company  maintains  a   high   level   of   involvement   on   Facebook;   lululemon   also   maintains   a   level   of   involvement   around   its   customer   product   reviews,   as   was   visible   in   its   responses   to   certain  reviews.  And  while  the  company  does  not  explicitly  state  any  of  its  customer   service   policies   on   its   Facebook   page,   it   answers   any   questions   about   them   when   customers   ask.   Also,   examples   show   that   lululemon   does   attempt   to   involve   its   customers,  such  as  actively  asking  them  for  feedback  in  their  responses  to  customer   posts,  although  it  remains  unknown  whether  lululemon  takes  these  suggestions  into   account.  However,  as  lululemon  is  very  active  in  participating  in  social  media,  it  does   appear   that   lululemon   takes   an   active   role   in   encouraging   customer   loyalty   via   their   social  media.        Brand  community      The   data   found   in   this   study   also   supports   the   idea   that   the   lululemon  

Facebook   users   constitute   a   brand   community.   Muniz,   Jr.   and   O'Guinn   describe   brand  community  as  "a  specialized,  non-geographically  bound  community,  based  on   a  structured  set  of  social  relationships  among  admirers  of  a  brand.  It  is  specialized   because   at   its   center   is   a   branded   good   or   service"   (Muniz,   Jr.   and   O'Guinn   412).   Lululemon   is   the   branded   good   at   the   center   of   this   community.   The   authors   describe   three   main   features   of   a   brand   community:   consciousness   of   kind,   rituals   and  traditions,  and  moral  responsibility  (Muniz,  Jr.  and  O'Guinn  418-424).     In   the   first   of   these   features,   "consciousness   of   kind,"   members   of   the  

48  

community  "feel  an  important  connection  to  the  brand"  and  "more  importantly,  they   feel  a  stronger  connection  toward  one  another"  (Muniz,  Jr.  and  O'Guinn  418).  Within   this   feature   is   the   idea   of   legitimacy,   which   is   "a   process   whereby   members   of   the   community   differentiate   between   true   members   of   the   community   and   those   who   are   not,   or   who   occupy   a   more   marginal   space"   (Muniz,   Jr.   and   O'Guinn   419).   This   study   found   some   references   to   this   type   of   membership   on   lululemon's   Facebook   page,  for  example,  when  users  state  how  often  they  wear  lululemon:     Facebook  user  1:  "love  lululemon,  wear  it  5  days  a  week!!!"   Facebook  user  2  likes  this.   Facebook  user  3:  "I  wear  it  7  days/week  LOL!"      Facebook  user:   "Lulu,   thank   you   for   "giving"   me   more   stuff   to   wear   to   DANCE  class!  I  love  you!!"      Facebook  user:  So  many  compliments  of  my  Lulu  jackets...long  one  and   short  one  and  one  is  4  years  old...looks  new.  It  has  been  to  every  hockey   game,   x-c   race   racing/   coaching   and   teaching   gym   outdoors   in   the   fall.   I   love  my  huge  lulu  wardrobe...best  work  clothes  I  have  ever  owned  and   great  investments!!!  Thanks!"      Other   references   included   differentiation   between   people   who   visit   the   Facebook   page   frequently   and   those   who   do   not.   One   example   of   this   occurred   when   customers  asked  when  lululemon  would  be  holding  a  warehouse  sale:  only  the  "true   member   of   the   community"   knew   the   answer   from   (presumably)   reading   one   of   the   first   questions   posed   about   it.   This   "true   member"   did   not   pose   the   question   themself   but   rather   answered   when   others   asked   it.   On   one   occasion,   users   even   joked  about  it  amongst  themselves:   Facebook   user   1:   "When/where   is   the   wearhouse   [sic]   sale   this   year??????????  Inquiring  minds  want  to  know  LOL!"   Facebook  user  2  likes  this.   Facebook  user  3:  "Hahahahahahaha"   Facebook  user  1:  "  ;)  "   49  

   Another   example   showed   users   anxious   for   new   products   to   be   uploaded   to   company's  website:     Facebook  user  1:  "Please  upload  soon!!!!!!"   Facebook  user  2  likes  this.   Facebook  user  1:  "You  tell  us  the  GWs  are  coming  today...and  now  you're   site  is  taking  a  break  :(  "   Facebook  user  3:  "I  think  they  do  it  every  week  right  before  the  upload."   Facebook  user  1:  "Oh  ok,  thanks,  Jen!  I  hadn't  noticed  that  before"   Facebook  user  2:  "what  are  GWs??!!  :)"   Facebook  user  4:  "Looks  like  it's  back  up!!!"      Those   who   know   what   happens   right   before   an   upload,   as   well   as   what   a   GW   is   (Gratitude  Wrap,  a  popular  sweater-type  wrap),  show  that  they  are  "true  members   of  the  community,"  whereas  the  others,  unaware  of  these  things,  are  not.   Another   element   of   consciousness   of   kind   is   oppositional   brand   loyalty,   where   "through   opposition   to   competing   brands,   brand   community   members   derive   an   important   aspect   of   their   community   experience,   as   well   as   an   important   component   of   the   meaning   of   the   brand"   (Muniz,   Jr.   and   O'Guinn   420).   While   the   Facebook  page  exhibited  no  major  direct  comparisons  with  other  brands,  customers   would  post  that  lululemon  was  their  favourite  brand.  For  example:   Facebook  user:   "What's   your   favorite   workout   gear?   I   would   wear   this   every  day  if  I  could!  lululemon  athletica"      Facebook   user:   "My   most   comfortable,   best   fitting,   greatest   quality   &   best  looking  gear  EVER!!!!  ....and  I  do  try  everything  folks!  :)xo"      Facebook  user:  "My  favorite  Yoga  wear  is  Lululemon  Athletica.  We  have   a  store  right  here  in  SA!   http://www.facebook.com/lululemonSanAntonioQuarry"      Facebook  user:   "im   either   clueless   or   biased(love   lululemon   athletica),   but  anyone  know  of  any  good  exercise  clothing  brands?  specifically  for   running  in  cold  weather"   50  

   And   so,   while   this   study   revealed   some   small   hints   that   lululemon   Facebook   users   exhibit  "consciousness  of  kind,"  no  outright  or  detailed  examples  from  this  data  set   fully  support  this  definition.  A  longer  and  more  detailed  study  and  interviews  with   customers  would  perhaps  yield  results  that  would  help  define  this  aspect  of  brand   community  better.     However,   some   of   the   Facebook   posts   exemplify   the   other   two   aspects   of   brand  community:  "rituals  and  traditions"  and  "moral  responsibility"  (Muniz,  Jr.  and   O'Guinn   418-424).   Rituals   and   traditions,   according   to   Muniz,   Jr.   and   O'Guinn,   "represent   vital   social   processes   by   which   the   meaning   of   the   community   is   reproduced  and  transmitted  within  and  beyond  the  community"  and  "these  rituals   and  traditions  typically  center  on  shared  consumption  experiences  with  the  brand"   (Muniz,   Jr.   and   O'Guinn   421).   One   such   ritual   among   lululemon   Facebook   users   is   the   weekly   upload   of   new   products   to   lululemon's   website.   While   the   upload   happens  on  a  different  website,  customers  post  to  Facebook  about  it:   Facebook  user  1:  "UPLOAD!"      Facebook  user  2:   "Have   you   uploaded   for   this   week   already?   Can   see   some  items.  Are  there  still  more  to  come  later  on?"      Facebook  user  3:  "This  week's  upload  is  up!"      Shopping   on   lululemon's   website   as   soon   as   the   new   products   are   uploaded   is   a   ritual  shared  by  members  of  the  community.  Customers  go  to  Facebook  to  post  what   they   want   and   what   they   bought,   and   even   to   seek   technical   support   if   they   are   having   trouble   with   a   purchase.   For   example,   one   particularly   long   thread   of   comments   was   spawned   by   a   lululemon   post   that   a   particularly   popular   item   had  

51  

returned   to   the   online   store.   In   this   thread,   customers   with   technical   difficulties   posted   to   Facebook   about   their   troubles.   Lululemon   seemed   to   be   monitoring   and   actively   responding   to   customers   having   trouble.   Examples   such   as   this   one   show   that  the  community  of  online  lululemon  shoppers  uses  Facebook  as  a  venue  to  meet   and   discuss   purchases,   which   in   turn   works   towards   creating   an   online   brand   community.   Customers   also   often   turn   to   Facebook   as   a   venue   to   seek   help   from   lululemon   if   they   are   having   trouble   with   an   order   and   want   it   checked   on,   which   may  enhance  the  online  shopping  experience.   Another  example  of  rituals  and  traditions  is  that  many  lululemon  stores  offer   complimentary   yoga   classes   once   a   week,   and   sometimes   other   types   of   fitness   classes,  such  as  running  clinics  ("Gift  of  yoga";  "Lululemon  Athletica  Westboro  Run   Clinic";  "about  us").  While  the  complimentary  yoga  classes  are  offered  through  the   various   lululemon   stores,   customers   will   sometimes   post   on   lululemon's   Facebook   page  about  the  event:   Facebook   user:   "Thanks   for   leading   the   run   and   stretches   after   yesterday.   Everyone   was   friendly   and   supportive   of   each   other.   Log   miles  and  get  stuff  -  yeah  that's  another  reason  to  show  up  and  get  our   sweat  on!  Thanks!"      Facebook   user:   "This   Sunday,   [company]'s   own   [instructor]   will   be   teaching   a   free   yoga   class   at   lululemon   athletica   on   66th   &   3rd   from   10-11am!  Be  sure  to  stop  by  and  show  some  [company]  love!"      Facebook   user:   "Must   remember   to   pick   up   a   new   pair   of   lululemon   athletica  socks  tonight  at  the  Lululemon  Running  Club  in  Brentwood.   What  are  your  pre-race  superstitions?"      Offering  complementary  yoga  classes  in  stores  brings  customers  into  the  store  and   likely   reinforces   the   company's   yoga   culture;   but,   given   that   customers   are   surrounded  by  the  merchandise  during  the  class,  this  practice  may  also  be  a  way  to   52  

entice  them  to  purchase  new  items--which  may  be  what  the  customer  was  referring   to  with  "get[ting]  stuff"  in  the  above  example.      Muniz,   Jr.   and   O'Guinn   refer   to   two   main   sub-topics   in   defining   rituals   and  

traditions.  The  first  is  "celebrating  the  history  of  the  brand"  (Muniz,  Jr.  and  O'Guinn   422).   If   lululemon's   history   as   is   considered   as   being   rooted   as   yoga   wear,   then   these   roots   are   constantly   visible   on   its   Facebook   page,   with   customers   posting   about   yoga   events   and   lululemon   itself   posting   new   products   to   wear   to   yoga   (although   the   company   also   offers   clothing   for   running   and   other   sports).   The   second   way   rituals   and   traditions   are   defined   is   through   the   sharing   of   brand   stories,  where  "stories  based  on  common  experiences  with  the  brand  serve  to  invest   the  brand  with  meaning,  and  meaningfully  link  community  member  to  community   member"  (Muniz,  Jr.  and  O'Guinn  423).  In  the  case  of  lululemon,  these  can  either  be   stories  about  lululemon  events,  such  as  the  complimentary  in-store  yoga  classes,  or   about  purchases.  These  latter  stories  are  often  seen  on  Facebook.  Customers  choose   to   share   stories   about   their   purchases   from   lululemon,   including   any   experiences   they  had  at  the  store  or  with  the  products  during  their  use:   Facebook   user   1:   "If   it   wasn't   for   my   business   casual   Wednesday   morning  meetings,  I  would  live  in  lulu.  Eat.  Pray.  Love  Lulu."      Facebook   user   2:   "In   Orlando   5   Minutes   and   blew   my   budget   at   lululemon  athletica  Orlando  Premium  Outlets!  Happens  everytime  I  hit   a  lululemon  athletica!"      Facebook   user   3:   "So   glad   the   lulu   site   is   up   and   running,   and   turbo   tanks  are  back!  Just  bought  a  few  in  store,  and  now  online..  I  absolutely   love  them!  My  favorite  tank  used  to  be  scoop  neck  or  push  ur  limits,  but   I   have   a   new   favorite...   Seriously,   this   tank   is   soo   flattering   for   any   body   size  or  shape,  and  the  length  is  wonderful!  You  can  scrunch  it  up  so  it's   not  too  tight,  or  you  can  let  it  hit  just  below  your  butt.  The  back  is  also   very  unique..  I  think  that's  my  favorite  part.  Yeahh!  :)"   53  

   This   type   of   storytelling   is   centered   on   the   brand   and   its   products,   which   is   another   way  that  lululemon's  Facebook  users  can  be  seen  to  make  up  a  brand  community.   The   final   element   of   brand   community   is   moral   responsibility.   Muniz,   Jr.   and   O'Guinn  define  moral  responsibility  as  "a  sense  of  duty  to  the  community  as  a  whole,   and  to  individual  members  of  the  community"  (Muniz,  Jr.  and  O'Guinn  424).  One  of   the  ways  that  this  is  expressed  is  through  the  integration  and  retention  of  members,   where   "it   is   necessary   to   retain   old   members   and   integrate   new   ones"   (Muniz,   Jr.   and  O'Guinn  424).  This  can  be  seen  on  lululemon's  Facebook  page  when  customers   state   that   they   are   first-time   buyers   of   a   certain   product,   or   the   brand,   and   others   agree   with   them,   creating   a   sense   of   community.   Some   customers   posting   about   a   new   item   purchase   create   a   cascade,   in   which   the   responders   express   happiness   that   the   customer   made   that   purchase.   Having   others   validate   their   purchase   may   make  that  customer  feel  like  part  of  the  community.  In  the  following  example,  one   customer  posted  that  they  bought  a  new  pair  of  pants,  three  Facebook  users  "liked"   the  comment,  and  two  others  responded  in  accord:   Facebook  user  1:  "Just  got  Astro  pants  and  I  am  in  heaven!  I  will  never  ever   take  them  off!  Lol"   3  people  like  this.   Facebook  user  2:  "Yay  for  Astros....I  love  them  too....and  my  astro  crops  as   well!"   Facebook  user  3:  "I  am  soo  glad  you  love  them!"      Customers   will   also   post   on   Facebook   when   they   have   been   introduced   to   the   brand  outside  Facebook:   Facebook   user:   "After   a   14   miler   this   morn   with   new   pal,   came   home   and   purchased   the   same   Turn   Around   long   sleeve   that   she   has.   She   is   already  a  good  influence  on  me!  :)"      54  

In   this   particular   example,   while   the   brand   community   itself   did   not   integrate   this   new   member,   the   fact   that   this   customer   chose   to   join   the   online   community   after   purchasing  a  lululemon  product  could  indicate  that  they  are  joining  the  online  brand   community.  Sharing  the  shopping  experience  may  be  a  way  of  identifying  with  the   community.   Another  element  of  moral  responsibility  is  "assisting  in  the  use  of  the  brand,"   which  means,  "looking  out  for  and  helping  other  members  in  their  consumption  of   the  brand"  (Muniz,  Jr.  and  O'Guinn  425).  In  the  Facebook  data  analyzed  in  this  study,   this  is  the  element  of  brand  community  that  appeared  most  frequently.  Customers   would   post   questions   wanting   help   with   one   aspect   or   another   about   a   lululemon   product   or   purchase,   and   other   customers   would   respond   to   them,   sometimes   before   lululemon   did,   sometimes   instead   of   lululemon,   and   sometimes   regardless   of   lululemon's  response.   Facebook  user  1:  "Anyone  have  the  "Ahead  of  the  Curve"  Jacket?  I  take  a   size  6  in  the  define  jacket  but  it  is  pretty  fitted  from  the  waist  up.  I  would   like  to  be  able  to  layer  under  this  jacket.  Should  I  size  up  to  a  size  8  or  is   this  jacket  made  already  made  for  layering?"   Facebook  user  2:  "It  looks  like  it  has  stretchy  side  panels  so  depending  on   how  thick  of  a  shirt  or  jacket  you  want  to  layer  it  with  will  likely  depend   on  if  you  should  go  up  a  size  or  not."   Facebook  user  1:   "Thanks   [Facebook   user   2],   I   noticed   the   side   panels   too   but   never   thought   that   the   panels   might   be   stretchy.   It's   probably   the   same  concept  as  the  skirts  and  I  know  the  waist  on  them  has  some  give."      Facebook   user   1:   "I'm   sure   this   has   been   asked   before   but   what   is   the   difference  between  regular  and  brushed  luon?"   Facebook   user   2:   "brushed   is   softer   and   a   bit   thicker,   great   for   fall/winter!!!"   lululemon  athletica:  "Great  question,  [Facebook  user  1]!  Brushed  luon  has   been  "teased"  on  the  inside  to  give  it  a  fleecy  feel.  It  offers  a  little  more   warmth  and  is  oh-so  cozy.  Hope  this  helps!  ~[lululemon  employee]"   Facebook  user  1:  "Thanks  [Facebook  user  2]  and  [lululemon  employee]!"   Facebook  user  2:  "no  problem!  I  have  boogie  pants  that  are  brushed  luon   55  

and  I  LOVE  them!"   Facebook  user  1:  "I'm  debating  between  the  regular  stripes  galore  stride   vs   one   of   the   newer   brushed   ones   right   now.   I'm   thinking   the   brushed   one  may  win  as  it's  getting  chillier  out  lately!"   Facebook  user  2:   "Love   brushed   luon,   especially   for   fall/winter...I   say   go   for  it  and  I  hope  it  stays  together  for  ya!"      These  types  of  examples,  with  other  customers  assisting  each  other  in  this  way,  are   evidence   of   the   strongest   factor   of   lululemon's   brand   community.   While   some   of   the   other  elements  are  not  as  visible  in  this  study  (perhaps  due  to  its  "snapshot"  nature)   and  may  not  make  for  a  solid  recognition  of  lululemon's  Facebook  community  as  a   brand   community,   the   abundance   of   examples   of   users   assisting   each   other   is   evidence   of   a   brand   community   around   lululemon.   Further   research   could   be   conducted   to   determine   whether   in   fact   these   trends   are   continuing   and   whether   there  is  a  strong  brand  community  of  lululemon  customers  online.     

56  

Conclusion      The  data  showed  evidence  that  answered  both  the  first  and  second  research  

questions:  customers  are  using  social  media  to  create  loyal  followings  around  a   brand  and  lululemon  is  using  social  media  to  encourage  that  loyalty.  Also  found  in   the  data  was  strong  evidence  of  an  online  brand  community  that  has  formed  around   lululemon.  While  more  research  may  be  necessary  to  provide  more  in-depth  and   decisive  answers  on  the  various  functions  of  this  community,  this  study  has  found   encouraging  data  to  support  the  notion  that  social  media  is  an  important  tool  in   branding  and  encouraging  customer  loyalty.  This  study  has  shown  that  customers   have  taken  a  strong  interest  in  social  media  and  use  it  not  only  for  sharing  their   opinions  but  also  for  seeking  answers  and  suggestions  to  any  questions  they  may   have.  Those  opinions  can  either  be  positive  or  negative,  and  since  there  are  many   ways  customers  can  share  them  (Facebook,  customer  product  reviews,  blogs),  it  is   important  for  companies  to  leave  all  opinions  visible  online  and  address  and  use   this  information  to  better  manage  their  brands.  Addressing  both  positive  and   negative  opinions  shows  that  the  company  acknowledges  the  good  with  the  bad,  and   demonstrates  a  commitment  to  customer  service  when  the  company  takes  action  to   address  and  remedy  any  situations  that  need  it.  This  can  show  customers  their   opinions  are  valued,  which  in  turn  may  lead  to  an  increased  sense  of  loyalty  from   customers  who  have  had  their  problems  remedied  in  such  a  public  manner.      This  research  is  beneficial  to  a  discussion  of  the  importance  of  social  media  

to  branding.  It  can  be  used  as  a  starting  point  both  for  academics  wanting  to  further   the  research  of  this  study  and  for  industry  and  marketing  professionals  wanting  to  

57  

add  value  to  their  brand.  Social  media  is  an  important  tool  not  only  for  keeping   customers  informed  of  company  initiatives  (such  as  new  products),  but  also  for   creating  and  maintaining  an  open  dialogue  with  customers  in  the  hopes  of   encouraging  customer  brand  loyalty.      Future  research      For  future  research,  a  longer  study  period  for  capturing  data  may  produce  

richer  results  and  lead  to  more  substantial  examples  to  support  more  definitive   answers.  It  is  important  to  note  that  because  lululemon's  Facebook  layout  has   changed  since  the  data  was  gathered  for  this  study,  a  different  method  of  collecting   the  Facebook  posts  would  need  to  be  created.1  Initiating  follow-up  with  some   customers  may  also  give  greater  insight  into  the  reasoning  behind  some  of  their   comments.  It  would  also  allow  for  analysis  of  whether  customers'  interaction  with  a   company  through  social  media  does,  or  does  not,  increase  a  sense  of  customer   loyalty  to  that  brand.  Further  study  could  also  determine  whether  customers  who   had  problems  that  were  remedied  via  social  media  feel  an  increased  sense  of  loyalty.   Future  research  could  also  determine  whether  witnessing  such  exchanges  on  social   media  affects  other  community  members'  sense  of  loyalty  to  that  company.    To  gain   a  better  perspective  from  the  company's  point  of  view  about  their  social  media  use,   interviews  with  company  representatives  would  also  be  beneficial.  Face-to-face  or   over  the  phone  interviews  may  be  best,  as  they  would  allow  for  more  flexibility  in   the  questions  being  asked  and  would  lead  to  richer  data  for  analysis.  
1  The  data  was  gathered  between  September  and  November  2011,  and  the  Facebook  layout  

for  lululemon's  page  was  changed  in  March  2012.  

58  

Limitations      One  of  the  limitations  of  this  study  was  its  reliance  on  secondary  data.  

Initiating  follow-up  interviews  with  customers  would  provide  a  richer   understanding  of  the  customer's  posts.  While  attempts  were  made  to  speak  with   employees  at  lululemon,  interviews  could  not  be  officially  scheduled,  and  as  a  result,   this  research  lacks  some  potentially  valuable  company  insight.  This  may  have  been   due  to  the  sensitivity  of  the  topic  or  due  to  proprietary  information  that  the   company  did  not  wish  to  divulge.  This  study  thus  relied  on  public  information  to   learn  about  and  observe  the  company's  activities,  using  resources  such  as  magazine   and  newspaper  articles  and  the  company's  website.  Because  the  study  period  was   confined  to  comments  posted  on  Thursdays  over  three  months,  this  data  provides   only  a  snapshot  of  the  community  that  exists  on  lululemon's  Facebook  page.  A   longer  study  would  yield  much  more  data,  which  would  likely  provide  richer  and   more  detailed  results.  

59  

Works  Cited        "about  us."  lululemon  athletica.  Web.  14  Nov.  2011.   <http://www.lululemon.com/about/>      Akar,  Erkan,  and  Birol  Topçu.  "An  Examination  of  the  Factors  Influencing   Consumers'  Attitudes  Toward  Social  Media  Marketing."  Journal  of  Internet   Commerce  10.1  (2011):  35-67.  Print.      Alreck,  Pamela  L.,  and  Robert  B.  Settle.  "Strategies  for  Building  Consumer  Brand   Preference."  The  Journal  of  Product  and  Brand  Management  8.2  (1999):  130- 144.  Print.      "Athleta."  Athleta.  Gap  Brands  Inc.  Web.  7  July  2011.  <http://athleta.gap.com/>      "Athleta  Clothing."  Facebook.  Web.  7  July  2011.   <http://www.facebook.com/Athleta>      "behind  the  wall."  The  lululemon  athletica  blog.  lululemon  athletica.  27  Apr.  2010.   Web.  28  Apr.  2011.  <http://www.lululemon.com/community/blog/behind- the-wall/>      Bickart,  Barbara,  and  Robert  M.  Schindler.  "Internet  Forums  as  Influential  Sources  of   Consumer  Information."  Journal  of  Interactive  Marketing  15.3  (2001):  31,  31- 40.  ProQuest.  Web.  14  Oct.  2011.      Bouma,  Gary  D.  The  Research  Process.  4th  ed.  Australia:  Oxford  University  Press,   2002.  Print.      Brennan,  Bridget.  Why  She  Buys:  The  New  Strategy  for  Reaching  the  World's  Most   Powerful  Consumers.  New  York:  Crown  Business,  2009.  Print.      Brïdson,  Kerrie,  and  Jody  Evans.  "The  Secret  to  a  Fashion  Advantage  Is  Brand   Orientation."  International  Journal  of  Retail  and  Distribution  Management   32.8  (2004):  403-411.  Print.      Carroll,  Barbara  A.,  and  Aaron  C.  Ahuvia.  "Some  Antecedents  and  Outcomes  of  Brand   Love."  Marketing  Letters  17.2  (2006):  79.  ProQuest.  Web.  22  Mar.  2011.      "Census  Bureau  News  Facts  for  Features:  The  2010  Holiday  Season."  Commerce   Department  Documents  and  Publications.  15  Nov.  2010:    ProQuest.  Web.    26   May.  2011.      Clark,  Kevin  A.  Brandescendence:  Three  Essential  Elements  of  Enduring  Brands.   Chicago:  Dearbron  Trade  Publishing,  2004.  Print.      60  

"contact  us."  Lululemon  athletica.  Web.  3  Apr.  2012.   <http://www.lululemon.com/about/contacts>      Duffy,  Neil,  and  Jo  Hooper.  Passion  Branding:  Harnessing  the  Power  of  Emotion  to   Build  Strong  Brands.  Chichester:  John  Wiley  and  Sons  Ltd,  2003.  Print.      "fresh  faces  Friday  --  meet  the  GEC!"  The  lululemon  athletica  blog.  lululemon   athletica.  26  Mar.  2010.  Web.  16  Apr.  2012.   <http://www.lululemon.com/community/blog/fresh-faces-friday-meet-the- gec/>      "Gift  of  Yoga."  Lululemon.com.  lululemon  athletica.  Web.  27  Mar.  2012.   <http://www.lululemon.com/community/giftofyoga?mnid=mn;community; gift-of-yoga>      Gobé,  Marc.  Emotional  Branding:  The  New  Paradigm  for  Connecting  Brands  to  People.   New  York:  Allworth  Press,  2009.  Print.      Grow,  Jean  M.  "Stories  of  Community:  The  First  Ten  Years  of  Nike  Women's   Advertising."  The  American  Journal  of  Semiotics  22.1-4  (2006):  167,  167-196,   211.  ProQuest.  Web.  7  July  2011.      Holmes,  Elizabeth.  "Corporate  News:  Retailers  Set  Holiday  Discounts."  Wall  Street   Journal  6  Oct.  2010,  Eastern  edition:  n.p.    ABI/INFORM  Global,  ProQuest.  Web.   26  May  2011.      Keller,  Kevin  Lane.  "Brand  Equity  Management  in  a  Multichannel,  Multimedia  Retail   Environment."  Journal  of  Interactive  Marketing  24.2  (2010):  58-70.  Print.      Kim,   Hye-Young,   and   Yoo   Jin   Kwon.   "Soulmates,   Best   Friends,   and   Casual   Buddies:   The   Relationship   of   U.S.   College   Students   to   Retailer   Brands."   Clothing   and   Textiles  Research  Journal  29.1  (2011):  67-82.  Print.      Kimberley,  Sara.  "Fashion  Retailers  at  Top  of  Social-Media  Charts."  Marketing  9  June   2010:  8.  ABI/INFORM  Global,  ProQuest  European  Business;  ProQuest  Research   Library.  Web.  9  Jan.  2012  .      Lazarus,  E.  "The  Tao  of  Lululemon.  "  Marketing  113.6  (14  Apr.  2008):  23-27.   Research  Library,  ProQuest.  Web.  25  Oct.  2010.      Lole  Women.  "Lole  Story."  Lole  Women.  LoleWomen.com.  Web.  24  May  2011.   http://www.lolewomen.com/ca/en/story/      "Lole  Women  on  Facebook."  Facebook.  Web.  24  May  2011.   <https://www.facebook.com/lolewomen>      61  

"lululemon  addict."  LuluAddict.blogspot.com.  Web.  24  May  2011.   <http://luluaddict.blogspot.com/>      "lululemon  athletica  on  Facebook."  Facebook.  Web.  25  Mar.  2011.   <http://www.facebook.com/lululemon>        "Lululemon  Athletica  Westboro  Run  Clinic."  Lululemon  Athletica  Westboro  on   Facebook.  Facebook.  Web.  27  Mar.  2012.   <https://www.facebook.com/events/233992190030784/>      "lululemon  is:  Nancy  Richardson."  lululemon  athletica.  Youtube.com.  17  Apr.  2011.   Web.  16  Apr.  2012.  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zB8-ltIbwYQ>      "lulumum:  a  lululemon  blogger."  Lulumum.blogspot.com.  Web.  27  Sept.  2011.   <http://lulumum.blogspot.com/>      Manlow,  Veronica.  "Creating  an  American  Mythology:  A  Comparison  of  Branding   Strategies  in  Three  Fashion  Firms."  Fashion  Practice  3.1  (2011):  85-110.   Ingenta  Connect  Berg  Publishers.  Web.  17  Apr.  2012.   <http://www.ingentaconnect.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/content/berg/fpcj /2011/00000003/00000001/art00005;jsessionid=1bqhr4rvwyce7.alice>      McAlexander,  James  H.,  John  W.  Schouten,  and  Harold  F.  Koening.  "Building  brand   community."  Journal  of  Marketing  66.1  (2002):  38-54.  Research   Library,  ProQuest.  Web.  20  May  2011.      "meet  our  e-mail  specialist."  The  lululemon  athletica  blog.  lululemon  athletica.  13   Aug.  2010.  Web.  7  July  2011.   <http://www.lululemon.com/community/blog/meet-our-email-specialist/>      Muniz  Jr.,  Albert  M.,  and  Thomas  C.  O'Guinn.  "Brand  Community."  Journal  of   Consumer  Research  27.4  (2001):  412-432.  Communication  and  Mass  Media   Complete,  EBSCO.  Web.  15  Mar.  2011.      Nelson,  Jacqueline.  "Loco  for  Lulu."  Canadian  Business  9  May  2011,  n.p.  Web.  17  Apr.   2012.   <http://www.canadianbusiness.com/managing/strategy/article.jsp?content =20110509_10020_10020>      Newlin,  Kate.  Passion  Brands:  Why  Some  Brands  Are  Just  Gotta  Have,  Drive  All  Night   For,  and  Tell  All  Your  Friends  About.  New  York:  Prometheus  Books,  2009.   Print.      "our  manifesto."  lululemon  athletica.  Lululemon.com.  Web.  2  April  2012.   <http://www.lululemon.com/about/manifesto>      62  

Petrescu,  Maria,  and  Pradeep  Korgaonkar.  "Viral  Advertising:  Definitional  Review   and  Synthesis."  Journal  of  Internet  Commerce  10:3  (2011):  208-226.  Taylor   and  Francis  Online.  Web.  11  Jan.  2012.   <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15332861.2011.596007>      Reuters.  "Factbox-Lululemon  Faces  Competition  For  Women's  Market."  Reuters.   Reuters.com.  2  Nov.  2010.  Web.  24  May  2011.   <http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/11/02/lululemon- idUKN0116447520101102>      Sacks,  Danielle,  and  Kyle  Berlin.  "Om  My!"  Fast  Company  1  Apr.  2009:  92- 95.    Research  Library,  ProQuest.  Web.    25  Oct.  2010.      Shiffman,  Kim.    "Chip  Wilson.  "  Profit  24.5  (1  Nov.  2005):  15.  Research   Library,  ProQuest.  Web.  25  Oct.  2010.      "Social  Media  Is  Fashion's  Newest  Muse."  The  Hindustan  Times:  n/a.  ProQuest   Newsstand  (Canada).  13  Sept.  2010.  Web.  23  Oct.  2011   <http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docvi ew/750308533?accountid=13631>      "staying  fit  with  a  busy  schedule."  The  lululemon  athletica  blog.  lululemon  athletica.   4  Mar.  2011.  Web.  7  July  2011.   <http://www.lululemon.com/community/blog/staying-fit-with-a-busy- schedule/>      Strauss,  Marina.  "Tweet  to  Lululemon:  Smaller  Sizes  Please."  The  Globe  and  Mail  11   June  2010:  B.1.  ProQuest.  Web.  23  Oct.  2011   <http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docvi ew/366746145?accountid=13631>.      Strugatz,  Rachel.  "Next  Step:  Driving  Sales."  WWD  6  Sept.  2011:  6.  General  Reference   Center  Gold,  Gale  Group.  Web.  9  Jan.  2012.   <http://go.galegroup.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ps/retrieve.do?sgHitCount Type=None&sort=DA- SORT&inPS=true&prodId=GRGM&userGroupName=rpu_main&tabID=T003& searchId=R1&resultListType=RESULT_LIST&contentSegment=&searchType =AdvancedSearchForm&currentPosition=3&contentSet=GALE%7CA267154 183&&docId=GALE|A267154183&docType=GALE&role=>.      Strugatz,  Rachel.  "Untangling  the  Web  of  Social  Media's  Second  Generation."  WWD.  8   June  2011:  1.  General  Reference  Center  Gold,  Gale  Group.  Web.  9  Jan.  2012.   <http://go.galegroup.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ps/retrieve.do?sgHitCount Type=None&sort=DA- SORT&inPS=true&prodId=GRGM&userGroupName=rpu_main&tabID=T003& searchId=R1&resultListType=RESULT_LIST&contentSegment=&searchType 63  

   Taylor,  Timothy.  "CEO  Of  the  Year:  Christine  Day  of  Lululemon  Athletica."  The  Globe   and  Mail  24  Nov.  2011:  n.p.  Web.  2  Dec.  2011.   <http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/rob-magazine/ceo- of-the-year-christine-day-of-lululemon/article2247700/print/>      Thomas,  Jane  Boyd,  Cara  Okleshen  Peters,  and  Holly  Tolson.  "An  Exploratory   Investigation  of  the  Virtual  Community  MySpace.Com:  What  Are  Consumers   Saying  about  Fashion?"  Journal  of  Fashion  Marketing  and  Management  11.4   (2007):  587-603.  Emerald  Library  Backfiles.  Web.  11  Oct.  2011.      Thomson,  M.,  D.  J.  MacInnis,  and  C.  Whan  Park.  "The  Ties  that  Bind:  Measuring  the   Strength  of  Consumers'  Emotional  Attachments  to  Brands."  Journal  of   Consumer  Psychology  15.1  (2005):  77-91.  Print.      Urstadt,  Bryant.  "Lust  For  Lulu."  New  York  3  Aug.  2009:  n.p.  Research   Library,  ProQuest.  Web.  25  Oct.  2010.      Vence,  Deborah  L.  "CRM:  You  Know  What  It  Stands  For,  But  You  May  Not  Know   What  It  Means."  Marketing  News  41.15  (2007):  12.  Business  Source  Elite,   EBSCO.  Web.  28  Apr.  2011.      Walker,  Rob.  Buying  In:  The  Secret  Dialogue  Between  What  We  Buy  and  Who  We  Are.   New  York:  Random  House,  2008.  Print.      Walker,  Rob.  "Marketing  Pose."  New  York  Times  Magazine  26  July  2009:   18.    Research  Library,  ProQuest.  Web.  25  Oct.  2010.        "what's  up  at  the  GEC."  The  lululemon  athletica  blog.  lululemon  athletica.  18  Aug.   2009.  Web.  16  Apr.  2012.   <http://www.lululemon.com/community/blog/whats-up-at-the-gec/>

=AdvancedSearchForm&currentPosition=1&contentSet=GALE%7CA258917 216&&docId=GALE|A258917216&docType=GALE&role=>.  

64  

Appendix  A  ­  List  of  working  questions  for  lululemon  interview  ­  manager        Questionnaire  for  lululemon  web  team  manager      1. What  is  your  position  title?   2. How  long  have  you  worked  in  this  position?      Company  commitment  to  social  media   3. How  many  people  work  in  the  online  team?   4. How  many  people  manage  the  Twitter  account?   5. How  many  people  work  on  the  e-newsletter  sent  out  to  customers  ("This  just   in"  newsletters  that  gives  online  product  notifications)?   6. What  kinds  of  qualifications  are  required/desired  to  work  on  team  that   manages  lululemon's  online  presence?   7. How  does  lululemon  differentiate  itself  from  competitors  in  terms  of  its  use   of  social  media?   8. How  important  is  social  media  to  lululemon  in  terms  of  customer  loyalty?   9. Would  you  agree  that  lululemon  does  not  use  traditional  forms  of   promotion?     10. If  you  agree,  how  does  lululemon  leverage  social  media  for  promotional   purposes?      lululemon's  Facebook  community   11. How  many  people  manage  the  Facebook  page?   12. Approximately  how  many  comments  does  lululemon's  Facebook  page   receive  in  a  day?  In  a  week?  In  a  month?   13. What  time  of  year  does  the  Facebook  page  receive  the  most  traffic  in  terms  of   comments,  postings,  questions,  etc.?   14. What  are  the  most  common  types  of  posts  by  customers  on  the  Facebook   page  (e.g.  questions,  comments,  reviews,  etc.)?   15. What  types  of  comments  does  lululemon  respond  to  most  often?  Why?   16. How  long  has  lululemon  been  actively  involved  in  the  Facebook  page?   17. How  does  lululemon's  Facebook  page  differentiate  itself  from  its  competitors   Facebook  pages?   18. How  many  lululemon  stores  have  individual  Facebook  pages?   19. Who  manages  the  stores'  individual  Facebook  pages?      Customer  written  product  reviews  on  lululemon's  webpage   20. How  many  people  manage  the  customer  reviews  on  the  lululemon  page?   21. Approximately  how  many  product  reviews  does  lululemon's  website  receive   in  a  day?  In  a  week?  In  a  month?   22. Are  there  certain  products  that  seem  to  receive  more  or  less  customer   reviews  than  others?  Why?     23. To  what  types  of  reviews  does  lululemon  respond  to  most?  Why?   24. Not  all  reviews  are  positive,  some  are  negative  product  reviews  ­  how  does   lululemon  react  to  the  negative  reviews?   65  

   Customer  involvement   25. Are  customers  involved  in  the  company?  How?  Why?   26. Does  lululemon  involve  customers  in  their  branding  process?  How?   27. Why  is  it/is  it  not  important  to  involve  customers  in  that  process?   28. How  much  input  from  customers  (such  as  design  suggestions  on  Facebook,   or  customers  saying  what  products  they  would  like  to  see  again)  does  the   company  actually  take?   29. Is  Facebook  a  place  to  find  information  for  product  design  and  development?      Customer  service   30. What  are  lululemon's  customer  service  policies  (e.g.  returns,  alterations,   etc.)?   31. Are  these  policies  advertised  to  customers?   32. Is  social  media  a  way  to  promote  those  policies?   33. Is  social  media  a  way  to  promote  any  other  aspects  of  the  company?     

66  

Appendix  B  ­  List  of  working  questions  for  lululemon  interview  ­  Web  team   employees      Questionnaire  for  lululemon  web  team  employees      1. What  is  your  position  title?   2. How  long  have  you  worked  in  this  position?      Company  commitment  to  social  media   3. How  does  lululemon  differentiate  itself  from  competitors  in  terms  of  its  use   of  social  media?   4. How  important  is  social  media  to  lululemon  in  terms  of  customer  loyalty?   5. Would  you  agree  that  lululemon  does  not  use  traditional  forms  of   promotion?     6. If  you  agree,  how  does  lululemon  leverage  social  media  for  promotional   purposes?      lululemon's  Facebook  community   7. What  are  the  most  common  types  of  posts  by  customers  on  the  Facebook   page  (e.g.  questions,  comments,  reviews,  etc.)?   8. What  types  of  comments  does  lululemon  respond  to  most  often?  Why?   9. How  does  lululemon's  Facebook  page  differentiate  itself  from  its  competitors   Facebook  pages?      Customer  written  product  reviews  on  lululemon's  webpage   10. Are  there  certain  products  that  seem  to  receive  more  or  less  customer   reviews  than  others?  Why?     11. To  what  types  of  reviews  does  lululemon  respond  to  most?  Why?   12. Not  all  reviews  are  positive,  some  are  negative  product  reviews  ­  how  does   lululemon  react  to  the  negative  reviews?      Customer  involvement   13. Are  customers  involved  in  the  company?  How?  Why?   14. Does  lululemon  involve  customers  in  their  branding  process?  How?   15. Why  is  it/is  it  not  important  to  involve  customers  in  that  process?      Customer  service   16. How  do  you  think  social  media  serves  to  promote  any  other  aspects  of  the   company?  

67  

Appendix  C  ­  Consent  form  ­  Manager      Ryerson  University   Consent  Agreement      Extreme  Branding:  Examining  Brand  Devotion  of  Fashion  Companies  by  Customers   Using  Social  Media      You  are  being  asked  to  participate  in  a  research  study.  Before  you  give  your  consent   to  be  a  volunteer,  it  is  important  that  you  read  the  following  information  and  ask  as   many  questions  as  necessary  to  be  sure  you  understand  what  you  will  be  asked  to   do.      Investigators:        Caroline  Czajkowski,  Graduate  Student,  Master  of  Arts  ­  Fashion,  Ryerson   University      Dr.  Tasha  Lewis,  Supervisor      Purpose  of  the  Study:  The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  determine  how  customers   create  loyal  followings  around  a  certain  brand  using  social  media,  and  to  see  what   role,  if  any,  the  company  plays  in  encouraging  extremely  loyal  customer  behaviour   via  social  media.  You  are  being  invited  to  participate  in  this  study  because  of  your   experience  with  social  media  and  customer  loyalty.      Description  of  the  Study:  You  will  be  asked  to  fill  out  a  questionnaire.  The  link  to   the  questionnaire  will  be  e-mailed  to  you,  and  you  can  complete  it  online.  The  initial   questionnaire  consists  of  29  questions,  which  may  take  from  25-35  minutes  to   complete,  depending  on  the  level  of  detail  in  the  responses.        Risks  or  Discomforts:  There  are  minimal  risks  associated  with  this  study,  other   than  those  encountered  in  daily  life.  Discomforts  may  include  discussing  various   aspects  about  your  employer  (the  company),  or  customers.  If  you  feel   uncomfortable  with  any  questions,  you  have  the  right  to  not  answer  them  and  move   on  to  another  question.  If  the  majority  of  the  questionnaire  leaves  you   uncomfortable,  you  have  the  right  to  withdraw  from  the  study  at  any  time.  Please   note  that  withdrawing  from  the  study  will  in  no  way  harm  your  relationship  with   Ryerson  University  or  with  the  researcher.      Benefits  of  the  Study:    There  is  no  direct  benefit  to  you;  rather,  this  study  may   provide  benefits  to  the  academic  world,  in  that  a  new  area  of  study  is  being   explored,  that  of  social  media.  This  study  may  provide  insight  into  the  importance  of   social  media  not  only  academically,  but  also  from  a  marketing  perspective,   enhancing  marketers'  ability  to  better  understand  and  connect  with  customers.        Confidentiality:    Your  confidentiality  will  be  maintained.  Your  supervisor  will  not   be  notified  as  to  whether  or  not  you  have  chosen  to  participate.  The  answers  from   68  

the  questionnaire  will  be  analyzed,  and  may  be  quoted  in  the  study,  however  no   names  will  be  published.      Incentives  to  Participate:  Participation  in  the  study  is  voluntary,  and  no  incentives   will  be  provided  to  participate.      Costs  and/or  Compensation  for  Participation:  There  are  no  costs  or   compensations  for  participation.      Voluntary  Nature  of  Participation:  Participation  in  this  study  is  voluntary.  Your   participation  will  not  affect  your  current  or  future  employment  at  lululemon   athletica.  Your  choice  of  whether  or  not  to  participate  will  not  influence  your  future   relations  with  Ryerson  University.  If  you  decide  to  participate,  you  are  free  to   withdraw  your  consent  and  to  stop  your  participation  at  any  time  without  penalty   or  loss  of  benefits  to  which  you  are  allowed.          At  any  particular  point  in  the  study,  you  may  refuse  to  answer  any  particular   question  or  stop  participation  altogether.  If  you  choose  to  withdraw  from  the  study,   any  data  you  have  submitted  will  not  be  used  for  analysis  and  will  be  deleted.      Questions  about  the  Study:  If  you  have  any  questions  about  the  research  now,   please  ask.  If  you  have  questions  later  about  the  research,  you  may  contact.                 Caroline  Czajkowski               cczajkow@ryerson.ca                  Dr.  Tasha  Lewis         tllewis@ryerson.ca        If  you  have  questions  regarding  your  rights  as  a  human  subject  and  participant  in   this  study,  you  may  contact  the  Ryerson  University  Research  Ethics  Board  for   information.   Research  Ethics  Board   c/o  Office  of  the  Vice  President,  Research  and   Innovation   Ryerson  University   350  Victoria  Street   Toronto,  ON  M5B  2K3   416-979-5042      Agreement:      Checking  the  box  labelled  "Yes,  I  agree  to  participate  in  this  study"  below  indicates   that  you  have  read  the  information  in  this  agreement  and  have  had  a  chance  to  ask   any  questions  you  have  about  the  study.  Checking  the  box  also  indicates  that  you   agree  to  be  in  the  study  and  have  been  told  that  you  can  change  your  mind  and  

69  

withdraw  your  consent  to  participate  at  any  time.  You  have  been  given  a  copy  of  this   agreement.        You  have  been  told  that  by  checking  the  box  on  this  consent  agreement  you  are  not   giving  up  any  of  your  legal  right     -  Yes,  I  have  read  and  understand  the  consent  form  and  I  agree  to  participate  in   this  study     -  No,  I  do  not  agree  to  participate  in  this  study     

70  

Appendix  D  ­  Consent  form  ­  Web  team  employees      Ryerson  University   Consent  Agreement      Extreme  Branding:  Examining  Brand  Devotion  of  Fashion  Companies  by  Customers   Using  Social  Media      You  are  being  asked  to  participate  in  a  research  study.  Before  you  give  your  consent   to  be  a  volunteer,  it  is  important  that  you  read  the  following  information  and  ask  as   many  questions  as  necessary  to  be  sure  you  understand  what  you  will  be  asked  to   do.      Investigators:        Caroline  Czajkowski,  Graduate  Student,  Master  of  Arts  ­  Fashion,  Ryerson   University      Dr.  Tasha  Lewis,  Supervisor      Purpose  of  the  Study:  The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  determine  how  customers   create  loyal  followings  around  a  certain  brand  using  social  media,  and  to  see  what   role,  if  any,  the  company  plays  in  encouraging  extremely  loyal  customer  behaviour   via  social  media.  You  are  being  invited  to  participate  in  this  study  because  of  your   experience  with  social  media  and  customer  loyalty.      Description  of  the  Study:  You  will  be  asked  to  fill  out  a  questionnaire.  The  link  to   the  questionnaire  will  be  e-mailed  to  you,  and  you  can  complete  it  online.  The  initial   questionnaire  consists  of  16  questions,  which  may  take  from  20-30  minutes  to   complete,  depending  on  the  level  of  detail  in  the  responses.        Risks  or  Discomforts:  There  are  minimal  risks  associated  with  this  study,  other   than  those  encountered  in  daily  life.  Discomforts  may  include  discussing  various   aspects  about  your  employer  (the  company),  or  customers.  If  you  feel   uncomfortable  with  any  questions,  you  have  the  right  to  not  answer  them  and  move   on  to  another  question.  If  the  majority  of  the  questionnaire  leaves  you   uncomfortable,  you  have  the  right  to  withdraw  from  the  study  at  any  time.  Please   note  that  withdrawing  from  the  study  will  in  no  way  harm  your  relationship  with   Ryerson  University  or  with  the  researcher.      Benefits  of  the  Study:    There  is  no  direct  benefit  to  you;  rather,  this  study  may   provide  benefits  to  the  academic  world,  in  that  a  new  area  of  study  is  being   explored,  that  of  social  media.  This  study  may  provide  insight  into  the  importance  of   social  media  not  only  academically,  but  also  from  a  marketing  perspective,   enhancing  marketers'  ability  to  better  understand  and  connect  with  customers.        Confidentiality:    Your  confidentiality  will  be  maintained.  Your  supervisor  will  not   be  notified  as  to  whether  or  not  you  have  chosen  to  participate.  The  answers  from   71  

the  questionnaire  will  be  analyzed,  and  may  be  quoted  in  the  study,  however  no   names  will  be  published.      Incentives  to  Participate:  Participation  in  the  study  is  voluntary,  and  no  incentives   will  be  provided  to  participate.      Costs  and/or  Compensation  for  Participation:  There  are  no  costs  or   compensations  for  participation.      Voluntary  Nature  of  Participation:  Participation  in  this  study  is  voluntary.  Your   participation  will  not  affect  your  current  or  future  employment  at  lululemon   athletica.  Your  choice  of  whether  or  not  to  participate  will  not  influence  your  future   relations  with  Ryerson  University.  If  you  decide  to  participate,  you  are  free  to   withdraw  your  consent  and  to  stop  your  participation  at  any  time  without  penalty   or  loss  of  benefits  to  which  you  are  allowed.          At  any  particular  point  in  the  study,  you  may  refuse  to  answer  any  particular   question  or  stop  participation  altogether.  If  you  choose  to  withdraw  from  the  study,   any  data  you  have  submitted  will  not  be  used  for  analysis  and  will  be  deleted.      Questions  about  the  Study:  If  you  have  any  questions  about  the  research  now,   please  ask.  If  you  have  questions  later  about  the  research,  you  may  contact.                 Caroline  Czajkowski               cczajkow@ryerson.ca                  Dr.  Tasha  Lewis         tllewis@ryerson.ca        If  you  have  questions  regarding  your  rights  as  a  human  subject  and  participant  in   this  study,  you  may  contact  the  Ryerson  University  Research  Ethics  Board  for   information.   Research  Ethics  Board   c/o  Office  of  the  Vice  President,  Research  and   Innovation   Ryerson  University   350  Victoria  Street   Toronto,  ON  M5B  2K3   416-979-5042      Agreement:      Checking  the  box  labelled  "Yes,  I  agree  to  participate  in  this  study"  below  indicates   that  you  have  read  the  information  in  this  agreement  and  have  had  a  chance  to  ask   any  questions  you  have  about  the  study.  Checking  the  box  also  indicates  that  you   agree  to  be  in  the  study  and  have  been  told  that  you  can  change  your  mind  and  

72  

withdraw  your  consent  to  participate  at  any  time.  You  have  been  given  a  copy  of  this   agreement.        You  have  been  told  that  by  checking  the  box  on  this  consent  agreement  you  are  not   giving  up  any  of  your  legal  right     -  Yes,  I  have  read  and  understand  the  consent  form  and  I  agree  to  participate  in   this  study     -  No,  I  do  not  agree  to  participate  in  this  study     

73  

