Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Examining the effectiveness of formal-informal sector engagement in municipal Pakistan political vs. institutional constraints
Faisal Haq Shaheen
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Public Affairs, Public Policy and Public Administration Commons Recommended Citation
Shaheen, Faisal Haq, "Examining the effectiveness of formal-informal sector engagement in municipal Pakistan political vs. institutional constraints" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 544.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

EXAMINING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FORMAL-INFORMAL SECTOR ENGAGEMENT IN MUNICIPAL PAKISTAN POLITICAL VS. INSTITUTIONAL CONSTRAINTS

Faisal Haq Shaheen, B.Sc, MBA

A thesis

Presented to Ryerson University In partial fulfillment of the

Requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts

In the Program of Public Policy and Administration

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 © (Faisal Haq Shaheen) 2009

Author's Declaration Page

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Research Paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this Research Paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

Date

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this Research Paper by photocopying or by

other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose
of scholarly research.

Signature

Date

11

Abstract
Faisal Shaheen

Examining the Effectiveness of Formal-Informal Sector Engagement in Municipal Pakistan Political vs. Institutional Constraints
M.A.

Public Policy and Administration, Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, 2009

Pakistan's urban informal sector (IS) has been the subject of increased attention in recent years. In light of national policy failures and the rapid growth of the IS, this study asks whether there

are differences in the political will and capacity in engaging the IS between upper and lower
tiered state actors, and whether this engagement can be in a sustainable manner. The social

contexts of housing, water and sanitation, transportation and labor conditions are examined in the

cities of Lahore and Karachi to assess the experiences of the urban informal sector's engagement

with the state. A survey of state and non-state actors is carried out in field interviews to obtain
the perspectives of state policies towards the IS as well as to understand the processes,
constraints and possible solutions to engaging the IS. Evidence from the study supports the

hypothesis that lower tiers of the state are capable of engaging the IS, but due to constraints from

upper levels, are unable to do so. The study's findings suggest that the combination of grassroots
civil society efforts in mobilizing the urban IS alongside the provision of well resourced,

accountable capacities of lower tiers of municipal government can generate low cost sustainable
solutions to urban service delivery. Evidence also points to the benefits of civil society's

engagement with lower tiers of government to ensure that upper-level bureaucrats are held

accountable for ill-conceived policy and its failures. The research shows that before success in
national and provincial policy reforms can be expected, emphasis of policy has to be on the recognition and development of interactions between the IS and lower tiers of the state.

111

Acknowledgements
Without the guidance of my teachers and professors, this work would not be possible. I continue
to be grateful for their engagement, direction and support.

Warmest thanks to my wife and family for their support and understanding as this project took
shape.

Special thanks to Professor Tariq Amin-Khan for serving as my supervisor.

His patience and

guidance has been critical to refining and developing the study's research question and framework from design through to completion.
insight during the course of this project.

I would also like to thank Professor Aparna

Sundar for agreeing to serve as my second reader and offering words of encouragement and

Last but certainly not least, my deepest gratitude to the not-for-profit, policy research and civil

society communities of Islamabad, Karachi and Lahore. I have been honoured to have worked with you in the past and I hope to be able to continue to collaborate and contribute to your efforts in the future.

Faisal Haq Shaheen, September, 2009

IV

Table of Contents
Introduction 1

Theoretical Framework, Scope of Research and Literature Review
Literature Review
Methodology

6
10
12

Risks and Confidentiality Measures
Research Question and the Social Context of Policy Failures of the Urban Informal Sector The Informal Sector in Pakistan Pakistan's Urban Informal Sector

14
15 17 17

Structural Challenges to Servicing and Engaging the Informal Sector
Municipal Engagement of the Informal Sector

18
19

Karachi's Informal Sector
Lahore's Informal Sector

21
24

Research Findings
Primary Research Summary Awareness of the Informal Sector

29
31 31

Profile of Interviewee Awareness of other Programs Engaging the Informal Sector

31 32

Effectiveness of Government Programs
Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Transportation

32
33
33

Labour Conditions

33

Defining the Structural Constraints Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Transportation

34 34
35

Labour Conditions Identifying Possible Solutions
Transportation

35 , 36

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Labour Conditions Secondary Research Summary Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Transportation

36
37

37 39 39
43

Labour Conditions Analysis Macro Level Detachment
Meso Level Disconnections Micro Level Compulsion Discussion

44 46 46
48 49 52

Conclusions and Recommendations Appendices... Appendix I
Appendix II Appendix HI

57 '. 60 60
60 61

Urban Growth Rates Across Pakistan
Profile of the Informal Sector in Pakistan Sample Questionnaire

Appendix IV Appendix V Appendix VI

Profiles of Institutions Engaged Primary Research Results Primary Research Responses

62 64 65 65

Awareness of the IS

Profile of Interviewee
Effectiveness of GOP Programs Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Transportation

'.
...:
e ;

65
66
66 .66
68

Awareness of other Programs Engaging the IS

Labour Conditions

68

Defining the Constraints Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Transportation

.....69 69
71

Labour Conditions

72

Identifying Possible Solutions Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Transportation

..72 72
74

Labour Conditions

75

Appendix VII Appendix VIII
Transportation

Secondary Research Results Secondary Research Survey

76 77

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Labour Conditions
Bibliography Glossary

77
87

91
96 103

VI

Introduction
Solutions to the challenges of urban poverty in developing countries are often tied to political

reforms and foreign 'aid'. The ability of a municipality to engage the urban poor, hinges on the condition of institutional and policy linkages with provincial and federal agencies. If adequate

resources and support (political or bureaucratic) are not forthcoming, service delivery machinery can be undermined by a range of economic, social and political forces. The resulting exclusion of the marginalized poor from urban services forces them to coalesce into a socio-economic and physical space known as the Informal Sector (IS). While this 'unobserved economy' is not

recognized in financial indicators or economic statistics, the urban IS contributes1 in many ways
to the vitality of society. My previous research on sustainable development policies in Pakistan has uncovered linkages between the livelihoods of the IS and the impact of national and provincial policies on urban contexts. This study's research question is: How do policy roles,

capacity and attitude of the upper and lower tiers of the state (political leadership and

bureaucracy) differ in engaging Pakistan's urban IS? In a related stream, within the network of
these actors, Where does the potential lie for sustainable solutions in terms of the recognition,

rehabilitation and development of the IS?

The novelty of the research is that it explores the

grassroots experiences and interactions of IS and state actors through a public administration

lens. More important, the research points to the role and attitude differential between different levels of state functionaries and their ability/commitment to empathize, understand and engage the IS. The research therefore has implications for policy design and institutional strengthening in effectively engaging the IS.

The challenges that face the urban IS have been the subject of increased research within the development studies literature. Socio economic assessments and surveys of the street realities of
'meta cities' across Asia, Latin America and Africa; reveal a sharp contrast between national

'pro poor' market based policy designs and the outcomes that impact the urban poor (Laquian,

1 Interestingly, while political change has become routine in many developing countries, the IS continues to
experience neglect, in spite of its growth and support of the formal economy.

2 The 'Meta City' is defined as cities with a population of over 30 million inhabitants. Such cities are found largely
in Latin America and Asia and are plagued with ad hoc development and limited service provision to inhabitants.

A., 2006). Both external (colonial legacy3, neo colonialism4 and urban sprawl) and internal
(administrative culture, policy, capacity and capability) factors constrain the equitable provision

of basic services5 by municipalities to all segments of urban society. Under the rubric of national
'aid and development programs', foreign interventionist states have overlooked the complexity,

context and challenges faced by developing country municipalities6.

Developing country

governments have also neglected investing in the public sector and remain ill equipped to convert imported policy prescriptions into sustainable service delivery mechanisms (Batley R. and Larbi, D., 2006). As a result, the misalignment of the organizational culture and mindset of

civil servants7 has continued to alienate the bureaucracy from the public at large (Islam, N.,
2004). This has resulted in an artificial and 'context-less' structure, splitting government-public interactions and limiting the engagement of the IS (Haque, M.S., 1996). Four broad challenges hinder the development of the relationship between the state and IS.

Firstly, at the market level, the unleashing of the neoliberal agenda (a combination of structural adjustment, aid dependency and free market ideology-based policy making) are gradually over whelming municipal services and structures by polarizing the accessibility and needs of the wealthy and the impoverished (Brockerff, M. and Brennan, E., 1998). While national economic policies of trade openness, tax cuts and free markets are creating a favourable urban context for
capitalists within the formal economy; there is little in the way of domestic or municipal policy

enforcement, to shield labour, middle and vulnerable low income groups (already excluded from

3 Colonialism in the context of developing country urban governance refers to the struggle of indigenous civil
service staff to adapt and adjust their social and cultural sensibilities to utilizing an administrative structure imposed
from the outside. In spite of the independence of many developing countries from colonialism, the legacies of these

structures persist and result in alienation between the civil service and the populations they serve. The colonial

mindset of top down, hierarchical and class oriented relations within the bureaucracy has also complicated relations

4 Neo Colonialism, similarly, refers to the dominating influence of foreign governments and supranational bodies,
such as the IMF, WB and WTO in shaping the policies of developing country governments, which inevitably influences urban regimes.

within the civil service.

5 In turn, these colonial structures have a bearing on the internal linkages that connect with neo colonial forces and
pressures that also impact municipal structures.

6 The interventionist state refers to donor countries that have increasingly placed the emphasis on market models and 7 Civil servants, having inherited the hierarchical organizational framework from their colonial predecessors, also
share a similar elitist mindset which polarizes the senior levels of the bureaucracy from the lower levels. approaches to development and have ignored the administrative realities and contexts of the developing countries.

economic benefits8) from the adverse effects of market centered growth and development (Babb,
S., 2005). The result is social polarization and inequitable service delivery in employment

(Rakodi, C, 2002), transportation, housing and health (Laquian, A., 2005); where the poor continue to experience persistently lower levels of services. Southern commentators have

observed that the crisis of the administrative and policy development cultures has been driven in
recent times by the attention paid by politicians and civil servants to wealth accumulation (Dwivedi, O., 1989). However, in spite (or possibly because) of state neglect, the IS has

continued to grow unchecked and unabated.

Secondly, the rapid expansion of cities in developing countries has complicated socio economic
relations with their rural peripheries. The expansion of 'meta cities' (Laquian, A., 2005) and

'greater urban regions' continues to erode the efficacy of the state in balancing urban/rural

development and the needs of IS segments of the labour market9. State policies across many
developing countries fail to equitably address the linkages between growing cities and the rural

agricultural

towns

that

support

them.

Polarization

and

disparities

in

socio

economic

development is prompting increased migration from rural heartlands to under serviced segments of the urban periphery (Bhagat, R., 2005). As a result, new IS settlements continue to flourish

while existing settlements expand, further distanced from already overwhelmed municipal
service capacities.

Thirdly, physical insecurity, as a result of environmental and economic deterioration, also continues to threaten communities of the marginalized, urban poor. Social dislocation,

exacerbated by institutional failures (reduced services, lack of faith in the police, harassment, unaffordable utilities) and market volatility (increased prices of essentials, land speculation, market driven development) results in low income communities being evicted from their homes.

The absence of relocation plans results in low income communities resettling illegally in other
areas where after a period of time they are evicted again. government's active withdrawal from its responsibilities The cycle is perpetuated by the as the guarantor of equitable

8 When we refer to those outside of the business or formal economy - we do not assume a disconnection. In fact,
there are many within the formal economy that arguably depends upon inputs from service providers, goods and services from the informal economy in order to operate (Davis, N., 2008). Urban cities in the developing world are often closely surrounded by an agro urban periphery that supplies raw materials for inputs as well as cheap wage labour.

development (Winton, A., 2004).

Over burdened municipalities, become the sites of conflict

over limited resources, rights and entitlements along ethnic, religious, class and geographic fault
lines. Limited municipal staff are allocated reactively to maintaining law and order rather than

proactively addressing the root causes of inequity, communal violence and instability; namely
deficient basic services (Moser, C, 2006).

Fourthly, the political and administrative culture of municipal agencies is undergoing significant transformation and polarization. While developing country governments have historically

prioritized the creation of employment through civic duty, structural adjustment and market
primacy is exerting a downsizing pressure on public sector staff levels. Furthermore, the sheer

volume of services that need to be delivered by a dense and complex network of bureaucratic

process has resulted in the growth of patronage and corruption. Poorly developed programs and policies create the opportunity for bribery and malfeasance. There is then the disappointing

inability of many governments to deliver consistent public services and minimize the persistence
of corruption, poverty, and macroeconomic mismanagement (Tendler, J., 1997). While these

criticisms are warranted, many of the drivers that create corrosive and corruption ridden

environments are aggravated by a lack of funding, poor management, concentration of power by

wealthier elites, favouritism and patronage10. The crisis of leadership is perpetuated, as Tendler
outlines, by managers being hired and fired based on kinship and political loyalty rather than
merit. The result of the increased centralization of power, far removed from the realities of

service delivery, is that it paralyzes the potential capacity of the lower tiers of the bureaucracy.

Socially capable civil servants within this lower tier (and arguably more representative members
of society) are withheld from exercising and serving in their full administrative capacities. The potential capabilities of these public servants continue to be constrained within an elitist driven
framework that focuses resources on sustaining market momentum, preserving structures of

patronage and technology until the talented among the elite leave the public sector for better opportunities elsewhere. The result is the social polarization of government into a two class

10 More often than not - patronage and favouritism can be traced to social interactions within developing countries
where the offering of gifts serves as a means of binding and maintaining relationships. While the escalation and frequent use of gift giving is not condoned - it is practiced. Furthermore, a distinction must be made between reciprocation among peons and clerical staff to simply process work - which does not hinder the system and bribery

which allows certain parties favourable access to services (line jumping) above and beyond what is provided to the
general public.

system of elite and common (low level) bureaucrat. A critical public administrative perspective
suggests that while the upper tier is more disconnected from the needs of society, the lower tier is
more exposed to the realities of the IS. However, as the lower tier is bound by senior

management's lack of vision, they are disabled from delivering services within their capacity,

articulating service delivery models11 and engaging the IS.

Many studies address the four challenges with recommendations centered around private sector

operation, political/institutional reforms and civil society offloading as part of service delivery

improvement efforts (McCarney, P.L. & Stren, R., 2003; Laquian, A., 2005a; Devas, N., 2004). The equitable functioning of such recommendations is weakened as these prescriptions allow for the shifting of transparency, accountability and agenda control from the marginalized to the
middle class and the elite (Cheema, A., Khwaja, A.I. and Qadir, A., 2005). Challenges facing

the IS are left unresolved as programs and services are focussed on catering to higher income groups. Furthermore, their strategic frameworks and financial models are based on cost recovery
rather than on equitable service provision.

Pakistan's engagement of the urban IS has been challenged by factors common to most

developing country municipalities. The 'context less' state, plagued by a dependency on foreign 'aid' and influence, has ignored the reality that most of the benefits of pro-poor policies are
captured by upper class stakeholders. Restructured, polarized, politicized and overwhelmed

municipal bureaucracies continue to find their capacities unable to serve all segments of society.
As a result, a vast number of marginalized citizens are excluded from urban development and

service delivery machinery.

On rare occasions where effective policies are implemented, they

are foreign funded* one-off projects and are consistently less sustainable or substantial than indigenous support to marginalized segments of society. In light of these realities, there is an

urgent need12 to examine the context within which Pakistan's municipalities engage or neglect
the IS and to uncover the constraints to more effective urban service delivery mechanisms.

11 This is not to say that lower level bureaucrats are removed from corrupt practises - rather in many cases their poor
socio economic circumstances may stoke their desire for wealth and engaging in rent seeking behaviour to obtain it. This study is interested in the structures that perpetuate mal governance and constricts positive and engaging spaces

of civil service within public sector departments and agencies - specifically along the front lines.

12 In light of the overwhelming media attention that Pakistan is receiving as a 'vulnerable state', largely derived

from national political and economic indicators, an examination of the issues facing urban areas presents a balanced perspective on the realities that face large segments of the disenfranchised.

Policy recommendations that stem from the experiences of effective engagement between the public sector and the IS will naturally emerge from the analysis. The next section provides the
theoretical framework to undertake this exploration.

Theoretical Framework, Scope of Research and Literature
Review
A number of commentators have struggled with defining the IS. In a broad sense, the World

Bank sees the existence of the informal sector or 'informality' as a reflection of mechanisms that
exclude large segments of the citizenry from education, health care, and judiciary services; and from economic opportunities through a segmented labour market and imperfection in other factor markets. This exclusionary process is related to the extremely high and persistent levels of

inequality, which are rooted in differences in power, voice, and influence; and are empirically highly correlated with informality (World Bank, 2007). Informality is also characterized by: low levels of participation in the social security system, low coverage of many social insurance
schemes, especially among poor people, a large number of small firms (and larger ones) that partially or completely evade tax, labour, and business regulations, low-quality regulation that

increases red tape, exclusion in the access to property rights, judiciary services, and other public services, low-quality public provision of many social services (such as health care or education), low levels of trust in the state and in the fairness of dominant arrangements, low and uneven
enforcement with exceptions and low levels of tax collection.

In order to distinguish the informal sector from other unincorporated enterprises owned by

households, the 15th International Conference for Labour Statisticians (ICLS) recommended the
use of one or more of the following three criteria: (i) non registration of the enterprise; (ii) small size in terms of employment; and (iii) non-registration of the employees of the enterprise. In

2003, the ICLS also adopted statistical guidelines concerning this expanded concept of informal

employment to complement the Resolution concerning statistics on the (ILO 1993). Informal
employment now includes a) Employment in the informal sector (as defined in 1993 by the ICLS); and b) Informal employment outside the informal sector (ILO, 2002). Production based definitions state that the IS is an economic activity that is neither taxed nor monitored by a
government; and is not included in the government's GNP calculations; as opposed to a formal

economy. Many of these definitions incorporate work and production as key components of the
informal sector. Such definitions do not account for the engagement of the state as a regulator or
provider of services to the IS.

Public

administration

literature

on

the

engagement

between

municipal

bureaucrats

and

constituents within the IS is limited.

Furthermore, several variables constrain our ability to

define the IS.

Firstly, there is a limited amount of research (and in turn, definitions) regarding
Secondly,

the interactions between the IS with political and bureaucratic elements of the state.

as fragmented state policies have not defined the IS, it is difficult for this study to assume a

specific set of criteria that can encompass the intended targets of those policies.

Thirdly, as

mainstream definitions of the IS (World Bank, ICLS and ILO among others) adopt a work and production perspective, they are limited in researching engagement of the IS from a service
delivery perspective.

As our study involves habitation and public services, a more public service delivery centered

definition is required.

This study therefore, relies on literature from the IS to anchor its

theoretical framework. For this study's purpose, the IS can be defined as that part of the
society/economy that is not registered with authorities and de jura or de facto, is not subject to

public regulation and does not benefitfrom public services or goods13.
While public administration perspectives are largely absent from the IS literature, this definition

is suitable as it incorporates components of the old and new views of the IS (Chen et al, 2004).
In contrast to the historical work and production based definitions outlined above, more recent

approaches explore sel£ sustaining and self reliant views of the IS, in a way that examines the formal economy as dependant on the informal economy. This is particularly relevant, given that in developing countries, the IS can account for one to two thirds of total employment. Actors in
the IS usually lack access to the full range of financial services and to financial services at

reasonable prices14, which isolates them from formal processes. As such, the study is concerned
with the state's efforts to engage the IS.

13 The origins of this reference are from the Indian charitable trust, MIA (Micro Insurance Academy), which
providesnealthcare insurance and welfare protection to poor communities.

14 UNCE)F, United Nations Capital Development Fund, http://www.uncdf.org/english/index.php

Northern approaches to the IS take a theoretical position that the policy void left by public sector

agencies, disconnects between bureaucracy and citizens will inevitably be filled by non-state
actors (Laquian, 2008; Devas, N., 2004; McCarney, P. & Stren, R. 2003). Thus, their policy

research examines the impact that political reforms may have on increasing engagement between

the political leadership and the public,15 while ignoring the bureaucracy. This theoretical
position, however, ignores the hierarchical structure and dynamics of Pakistan's state machinery, which bears a heavy imprint of the colonial state structure that was in the service of the British colonial occupation of India. This legacy meant that the colonial state's hierarchical structure, re-

imposed in the post-colonial era, was effectively a re-creation of a class of higher level16
bureaucrats (considered worthy of engaging the ruling class) who were educated and groomed to
cater to elite interests through the creation of closed circuits of social and political engagements.

Lower echelons17 of the bureaucracy (more representative of society as a whole) were left with
limited opportunities for education, development or decision-making power as compared to their
superiors. Furthermore, while members of higher levels of the civil service are well respected and their positions at the federal and provincial levels considered prestigious, lower level posts

within the provincial (specifically those that engage the IS) and municipal levels are often perceived as 'punishment positions' and remain under-equipped and less developed in their
capacity for service delivery.

In contrast to the Northern positions on state engagement of the IS, this study's theoretical

framework views the lower levels of the civic service as well as civil society not as an extension of upper tier state functions, but rather, as capable of exerting a degree of influence on senior state functionaries and ultimately, state policy. Thus, civil society stakeholders can engage

municipal administrators in ways that can ensure basic levels of service delivery to broader and otherwise marginalized segments of society. This in turn can influence senior policy makers to develop and maintain the institutions of service delivery and development by making them more accessible to a broader segment of society. Hence, the scope of this research involves the

15 It should be mentioned that many of the solutions accept the reality of foreign involvement and the introduction of
governance models that rely increasingly on the transfer of state responsibilities to the private sector.

16 This upper tier of bureaucrats and politicians, are largely employed within the federal and provincial levels of
17 The lower tier of bureaucrats and politicians, are largely employed within the provincial and municipal levels of

government. These positions are largely prestigious and do not actively engage society or the IS.

the government. These positions are occupied by more front line civil servants and are nested within IS
communities.

examination of municipal capacities (this study's research is centered on the municipalities in
Lahore and Karachi) in order to show to what extent civil society in Pakistan is able to press municipalities to implement successful policies and programs for the engagement of the IS. The theoretical framework is informed by focussed, documented studies on Lahore (Ali, 2005)

and Karachi (Hasan, 2006) which outline the local context and dynamics that impact the IS.
These studies reveal that the IS does not exist independently and experiences a range of

sophisticated interactions with stakeholders from across the formal sector.

Evidence from

Lahore and Karachi also indicates that stakeholders who benefit from the 'economic space' (inexpensive goods and services) generated by the IS also exploit the 'social space' (policy void inhabited by land grabbers, water mafia, transportation operators) unclaimed by the IS. While

elements within the state are complacent in developing the 'policy space' in engaging the IS,
commentators such as Ali and Hasan show that civil servants are key agents for the articulation

of policies and ensuring that service delivery engages the IS. The research proceeds by obtaining a better understanding of the constraints to effective IS engagement. The study hypothesizes that policy failures, specifically government strategies to engage the urban IS, are the result of poor policy formulation rather than poor policy implementation. In following the research hypothesis, evidence from this study may support the following three outcomes for policy engagement:

The first outcome is that ineffective IS policies are the result of poor advocacy, agenda setting, design, development and legitimating of policies. Political constraints suggest that failures take place during the initial conception of policy formulation, which involves ineffective

characterization of the problems, limited stakeholder involvement, favouritism, and exclusionary

development.

Essentially, this outcome suggests that policies fail before they are even

implemented. This suggests that the problem is political and involves the detachment of upper tier functionaries and policy makers from ground realities, and is not the result of a lack of
participation of civic or civil society.

The second outcome is that ineffective IS policies have more to do with poor implementation,

evaluation and policy indeterminacy.

Institutional constraints suggest that even if the political standardized operating

will for change exists, the lack of resources, defined processes,

procedures and the administrative capacity/capability of the bureaucracy results in the ineffective

articulation of well-intentioned and well-formulated policies. This suggests that the problem is institutional and involves the inability of lower tier functionaries and officers to implement
policies and procedures that have been mandated from higher orders of the state.

A final outcome may be a mixed set of constraints, where ineffective IS policies are the result of
poor formulation, agenda setting, development and legitimating as well as poor implementation and evaluation. In other words a combination of failures at the political level complicates

failures at the institutional level which constricts the improvement of service delivery
mechanisms for the IS. While the nuances of this outcome would raise issues beyond the scope of the hypothesis, it would confirm the need for increased examination of the contexts, inter
agency dynamics and political-institutional processes that seek to engage the IS.

Literature Review
Evidence and commentary within the development studies literature is varied on the question of

how to improve the effectiveness of local government engagement of the IS. While the literature discusses the issue from a north south perspective, there is also a political vs. institutional bias in
approaches to solutions.

The most dominant and widely studied perspectives within the literature tend to dismiss state
structures in developing countries as corrupt, incapable and disinterestedijn the IS. Any

prospects for development, this group argues, hinges largely on the increased private sector and

not-for-profit sector involvement. Many commentators argue that bureaucrats are disconnected from the poor (Davey, N., 2004; Batley and Larbi, 2004; Laquian et al., 2005) and are beyond capacity development or reform to any productive degree. Recommendations from this

perspective suggest that alternatives are required for political reform (McCarney, P. & Stren, R., 2003) and the modernization of government is required to drive change and equitable distribution of resources, decision making and service delivery to the poor.

A global South perspective takes a more critical position on the structural roots of the crisis. Commentators within this group argue that until the colonial legacy in the administrative machinery, based in contextless structures with meaningless mandates, is reformed there is no point in trying to move a sovereign development agenda forward (Haque, 1996, Subramaniam,

10

1990). Some studies do examine the situation from a public administration perspective, but they
treat bureaucracies as homogenous and also point to politically driven reform (vis a vis devolution) as the way forward (Khan, S.R.; Sadiq, F.S.; and Akhtar, A.S., 2007). The alternative perspective contends that the control of urban dynamics is mainly as a consequence of elitist power structures and interests that have manipulated and exploited the

socio economic playing fiqld. Commentators (Davis, M., 2006) argue that the social context of
the IS are the result of a class war initiated by capitalism on the IS. Others point to the role that civil society can play (in terms of relief and community support), in developing solutions to

urban service issues in light of their proven on-the-ground record18. However, such a perspective
tends to rely exclusively on the development of project-oriented service providers, many of whom depend on donor funds from abroad (Binswanger, H.P. & Nguyen, T-V., 2005). Even

where such approaches establish self sufficiency on a small scale, they are incapable of providing the sufficient policy inertia required at the meso (provincial) level to institutionalize widespread change, without incurring significant resource expenditures. Social mobilization

through mass movements is also complex and faces resistance from political leaders and elites
with vested interests in maintaining the status quo.

Political leaders address IS concerns in election promises which sometimes results in the drafting
of policies and legislation. However, there is little evidence of machinery indicative of ongoing

policy enforcement, program monitoring and improvement.

Furthermore, when those policies

fail due to the instability of political regimes, there is little discussion regarding engaging the
public administration machinery to improve the articulation of policies across bureaucratic and

political contexts.

Rather, policy failures are addressed through the centralization of power in

political circles and approaches to exclude the bureaucracy from service delivery which merely

politicizes state machinery.

Studies confirm that such efforts, that ignore the bureaucracy, are

neither effective nor sustainable (Baqir, F., 2009). Activists from the non-state sector (Hasan et

al., 2005, Rahman, 2004, Siddiqui, 2003) indicate that engaging front-line bureaucrats is critical for IS support and service continuity. It is this interface at the micro level, that this study seeks to examine to obtain a better understanding of state-IS relationships. In order for this study to

18 The successes experienced by self help and welfare organizations on the ground demonstrate the effectiveness of
philanthropy in the country in alleviating human suffering. However, as Baqir outlines, a distinction is required between such organizations and 'contractor NGOs' who are driven by market forces in supporting the IS.

11

assess the dynamics between municipalities and the IS, a number of approaches must be
incorporated into the methodology.

Methodology
This study employs a multi-pronged approach to assessing the policy development context and history of state interactions that constitute the IS experience in Karachi and Lahore. Given the

enormity of Pakistan's IS19, the lack of empirical policy research and the complexity of its
interactions with the formal sector, a range of information sources are included as part of the
study's investigation. Analysis of the IS policy context and history consists of an examination of

government, non government and community-based experiences and perspectives.

Given the

breadth of the IS, the study focuses on the housing (water/sanitation), transportation and labour
contexts. The research methodology has three components.

First, the methodology includes a review of the existing literature on the urban IS and the state of municipal efforts to engage the IS. State efforts to engage the IS and outcomes will be

incorporated into the literature review. The study's scope and research question is also outlined.

Second,

a

qualitative

analysis

of key

actors

who

engage Jhe

IS

across

the

housing

(water/sanitation), transportation and labour contexts in Karachi, Lahore and urban Pakistan was

conducted.

This aspect is particularly valuable as it assembles insights and experiences from

practitioners and activists who are familiar with the social contexts and realities of the IS.
Research was based at the host organization, The Sustainable Development Policy Institute and

contact with potential interview subjects was initiated through the Institute's contact database.
Potential participants were limited to those individuals that had the capacity to actively engage

the IS through advocacy, service delivery or policy/program engagement.

Approximately two

hundred individuals and offices were identified as 'urban IS subject experts' and potential
participants. Requests for information interviews were sent to the two hundred stakeholders

along with a background note on the study's objectives. Sixty positive responses were received

19 The IS contributes an estimated $32 billion USD to the country's $160 billion USD economy (Khan et al, 2005).

12

and interviews were set up in person and via telephone

.

Of the respondents, eleven

representatives were engaged in active provincial/municipal service, twenty individuals were
actively employed by non government organizations and twenty nine persons were active within
non government and community based organizations. Fifteen of the respondents are based in

Lahore while twenty eight are based in Karachi. The remaining seventeen are from other urban
areas. Interviews were conducted from November 2008 to January 2009 in Karachi, Lahore and Islamabad. A number of specific questions were posed to each of the interview subjects and the results transcribed on site and summarized in a table for analysis. Each interview took
The semi-

approximately 1 to 2 hours, depending upon the detail of interviewee responses.

structured interviews explored the understanding of the IS, the constraints to equitable service

delivery (institutional vs. political) and contrasted the experiences of top down and bottom up
approaches to engaging the IS in urban areas. While the questions served as guides to engaging

the participants, the objective was to record the experiences and perceptions of upper vs. lower

tier (political vs. institutional) initiatives in engaging the IS across different social contexts.

In undertaking the interviews, it is important to realize that the interviewees can often provide information based on how they perceive the interviewer. That is, the former may not wish to be candid if it is at the risk of offending the interviewer. For example, if a non-Pakistani or member of an influential institution or aid agency were to conduct the interview, the responses that would

have been obtained might include a bias that seeks to either appease or avoid offending the guest.
As a researcher nbt affiliated with any organization in Pakistan, independent from any aid
agency, and not a civil servant or activist, interviewees were candid and provided insight and

information regarding the IS related policy experiences and challenges. As the research involved individuals, their responses to various questions IS engagement were coded and tabulated.

In order to obtain quality responses from interviewees, the majority of interviews took place on a face-to-face basis. Due to security concerns and the tight schedules of municipal employees, Detailed notes were taken with all

some of the interviews took place via telephone.

20 A limited window of in-country research time, and because of the volatile security situation, dispersed offices,
geographical location between Karachi and Lahore, spur of the moment opportunities for interviews required that some interviews be conducted over the telephone. The same format of questions were asked and participants were explained the approval received from the research ethics board.

13

interviewees.

In order for targeted participants to agree to the interviews, feel comfortable in

answering potentially controversial questions and protect them from possible repercussions,
every attempt was made to eliminate identifying information in the coding of the subjects. However, most respondents insisted in having their responses and institutional information published in the study so as to draw attention to the need for state engagement of the IS.

Third, a review of IS specific case studies across the housing (water/sanitation), transportation and labour contexts was conducted to provide insight into the history of efforts to mobilize and
engage the IS. This review is valuable as it compares the experiences of documented municipalIS engagements across a range of contexts and perspectives. This component also draws upon

the studies of an expert group of institutions that rank prominently in their activity, engagement, research and advocacy for the IS in urban Pakistan (See Appendix IV). The relevant reports,

studies and publications of three types of institutions (Government, NGO and CBO) are based on primary research and surveys of urban Karachi and Lahore. A survey of GOP contacts provided
some context of the state reality of urban service delivery challenges. Active NGOs and

academic contacts provided more overarching perspectives on structural constraints

and

experiences in engaging the IS. The CBOs provided lessons learned on efforts to engage the IS

and facilitate lobbying

state

service providers.

Their analysis

incorporates

governance

dimensions into the IS commentary, particularly in light of the implications related to the Local
Governance Ordinance 2001. Recurring themes from all of the data sources were identified and compiled within the secondary research section and form the basis of analysis and discussion.

Risks and Confidentiality Measures
Given the goals of the research question and design, and as stated earlier, the risk of such an

interview process is that interviewees may not provide candid and honest responses to questions due to power imbalances and structures that instil fear in people, and within organizations and communities. In other words, they may provide responses that are non-critical of existing

structures and processes as it may require them to criticize their superiors and risk action from the latter. This risk would emerge in the relationships between communities and their leadership, civil society and their NGO managers/donors and the civil service and their bureaucratic and political leadership. In order to eliminate or at least minimize this and related risks, the

interviewees were assured that all responses from participants will remain anonymous and group

14

trends will not be communicated to their superiors. Prior approval of the process of interviewing
human subjects was obtained from Ryerson's Ethics Approval Board.

Research Question and the Social Context of Policy Failures
of the Urban Informal Sector
In order to assess the effectiveness and attitude of the different levels of government in Pakistan

towards the urban IS this study focuses on the experiences of municipal levels of the state (Karachi's and Lahore's) and non-state actors . An assessment of local and provincial

government engagement within these two cities will reveal the impacts of poverty alleviation

policies on the IS as well as generate insights on successes and failures of programs and their
consequences. This study poses the following research question: How do policy roles, capacity and attitude of the upper and lower tiers of the state's federal and provincial bureaucracies differ

in engaging Pakistan's urban IS? Furthermore, within the network of these actors, "Where does the potential lie for sustainable solutions in terms of the recognition, rehabilitation and development of the IS?" An analysis of the policy, program and 'street level' interfaces across
the above mentioned contexts will test the following hypothesis:

Policy failures, specifically government strategies to engage the urban IS, are the result of poor
policy formulation rather than poor policy implementation.

For the purposes of this study, poor policy formulation and implementation refer to the different stakeholders and stages of the policy cycle. Policy formulation refers to the political engagement and involvement in policy development: from the agenda setting stage to the drafting of policies

and passing of legislation. Stakeholders at this upper tier of the state include politicians, political
parties and senior levels of the bureaucracy. Political behaviours may include political

interventions in existing policies and the political will in reforming and improving processes.
Policy implementation refers to the actual service delivery, monitoring and feedback

mechanisms that stem from the policies.

Institutional behaviours are characterized by process

flows and behaviours involving actual service delivery machinery and agents.

Stakeholders at

21 While we will examine the interactions at the City District Government level, the provincial and federal
interventions and their outcomes within urban society will also be examined.

15

this lower tier include front line service delivery agents, professionals and technocrats within the
municipalities and communities that are served.

In terms of researching the policy failures, this study is concerned with assessing the role of the Government of Pakistan (GOP) or lack thereof in engaging the urban IS. As the research

question and hypothesis is concerned with the processes, dynamics, behaviours, levels of service

delivery and recognition of members of the IS, an examination of the social context (as opposed
to a more economic sector based context) of the following areas of activity is conducted. In

order to focus the analysis, the research will limit its examination to three specific social

contexts.
low

The Housing-Water/Sanitation context involves the state's provision and support of
housing and the municipal water authority's provision of water/sanitation

income

connections to the IS, namely the slum communities (katchi abadis) and low income housing

developments22.

The Labour Conditions context examines the IS' working conditions and

efforts by the provincial and municipal authorities to address issues related to wage levels and
the practice of retaining bonded and marginalized labourers. This context is important as the IS' most significant contribution to the formal economy is its provision of flexible, low wage labour.

Finally, the Transportation context will be examined to assess the state's management of the infrastructure (roads and public transportation) required by the IS to travel to and from places of
work. The social context of the findings is critical as they will elaborate on the equitable and

effective engagement by the state in systems and infrastructure of most value to the IS. Potential solutions to ensuring service delivery, entitlements to property and recognition of rights are all context based and involve a series of processes carried out by specific stakeholders. An

examination of those processes within each context will allow state functionaries to better

understand and contribute to developing and maintaining sustainable solutions to the recognition
and rehabilitation of the urban IS.

22

Housing and Water/Sanitation are linked as water/sanitation connections are linked to the household.

16

The Informal Sector in Pakistan
This section provides the background an analysis of the IS broadly in Pakistan, and more specifically, in Karachi sind Lahore. An assessment of current government structures provides a context from which to examine the state of existing public administrative and service delivery
machinery.

Pakistan's Urban Informal Sector
Pakistan's urban IS has experienced persistent marginalization since the nation's creation in

1947 due to a range of political, economic and social factors (See Appendix I). While estimates

of the IS are difficult to determine with accuracy, commentators and practitioners indicate that 35% of Pakistan's 160 million reside in slums (Siddiqui, T.S., 2009). Urban slums have been

manipulated politically through 'votes for services'23 during periods of democratic and military
rule. Partial experiments with devolution have failed in part due to the lack of accompanying

resources to fund and expand service delivery. Existing institutions have been marginalized by

the political appointments of previous and subsequent rival administrations, leading to a
disjointed policy and program environment of outreach to the IS. Economically, Pakistan's

urban centers have not received sufficient funds or policy attention due to pressing national
concerns (debt payments, military spending).

Simultaneously, the market orientation of a development-driven state has utilized value chains of
the IS to serve as buffers for periods of economic hardship while maintaining the low wage competitive advantage to the economy. While state service machinery charged with engaging

the IS are marginalized, market restructuring and economic shifts (rising food prices, inflation and reduced purchasing power) place a growing burden on an increasingly exposed IS (See Appendix II). Socially, urban areas have born the brunt of insubstantial rural development

policies by absorbing waves of migrant workers from neglected rural areas. This has resulted in

a further marginalization of the IS as the demand for scarce physical space and resources increases. The situation is exacerbated by the gradual withdrawal of state capacity and support

23 Political and Military leaders would mobilize voters with the promise of providing them with services that they
should already have been receiving under existing state machinery.

17

for Pakistan's overwhelmed urban centres. Accompanying this withdrawal is the move towards increasing privatization and allocating development resources to foreign interests, which has marginalized the equitable distribution of basic urban services. The outcome has been the

continued concentration of urban wealth and direction of service delivery and support for a
narrow band of interests.

The literature on urban regimes in Pakistan is concentrated largely on the experience of Karachi followed by the smaller city, Lahore. Three broad challenges are faced at the macro level by

Pakistan's municipalities in providing improved governance frameworks and equitable levels of
service delivery to members of the IS.

Structural Challenges to Servicing and Engaging the Informal Sector
While there are a number of structural issues that reduce the ability of the state to meet the needs of the IS, three major ones are highlighted here. First, the highly centralized federal control of
resources acts as a detriment to local level service delivery (Cheema, A. and Mohmand, S.K.,

2003).

As local level bodies are unable to recoup the costs of capital, operations and

maintenance investments, they abdicate the role to the provincial government (Sayeed, A.,
1996). In turn, the province's capital-intensive and often unsustainable project focus ignores

operations and maintenance costs and ground realities within the large cities. This is exemplified
by low income housing policies, where provincial standards for building codes place units

beyond the affordability of low income groups. As such, provincial bodies that are supposed to

be active in municipalities are often found to be disconnected from the realities faced by citizens
(Alvi, I., 1997). Similarly, imported mega projects are not designed with the needs of the

majority of urban citizens in mind (Hasan, A., 2006). Much of the formal economic structures

that are in place for the public, fail to take into account the needs of the IS (Alvi, L, 1997). The donor influenced and facilitated project-based operation and functioning of the civil service from
higher orders of government has contributed to the unsustainable functioning of municipal capabilities in providing basic services. (Siddiqui, T., 2005).

Second, variances in the collection of revenues have negative implications for financial self

sufficiency.

For instance, provinces exhibit different methods of revenue collection, linked

18

largely with commodity movements and resources.

Federal negligence in harmonization

between provinces has been remedied by the recent establishment of provincial finance commissions. However, gathering consensus between a diverse range of procedural practices

and contexts continues to be difficult (Ahmad, N. and Wasti, S.A., 2002). As a result, there are

several uncoordinated pfbvincially controlled legacy24 agencies which do not transfer adequate
resources to appropriate municipal levels, and in turn, constrict the delivery of basic services
(Hasan, A., 2006).

Finally, the legal and institutional context of municipal-provincial relations is misaligned. While legislative responsibility is assigned to entities for some services, the actual allocations of functions are assigned to others. For example, local governments are legislatively responsible

for link roads, intra urban roads, street lighting, solid waste management, fire, parks and playgrounds. Actual allocations of functions are also made to local governments. Local

governments are legislatively responsible for curative health, land development, primary

education, preventative health, farm to market roads and water supply, drainage and sewage, but the actual allocations of functions are made to the province. The disconnection between the roles
and responsibilities of various agencies has been problematic for local governance and improved service delivery efforts (Hanif, N., 1996). Similarly, the lack of fund transfer from the provinces to the local governments has left the latter to deal with deficits, a feature which is endemic to tax collection in Pakistan (AERC, 1990). While these structural issues constrain the ability of

municipalities to provide basic services, a number of specific policy and context specific
challenges also persist.

Municipal Engagement of the Informal Sector
State policies have experienced limited success in engaging the IS due to constraints in both planning (high level policy disconnect, a lack of familiarity with ground realities, rising levels of
corruption and nepotism, donor agendas) and implementation (lack of operational department

24 Legacy agencies refer to those that were established by previous administrations only to be marginalized or
politically manipulated by subsequent administrations, reducing the functionality. Such agencies and institutions
would continue to staff personnel, but would not serve any purpose. Akhtar Hameed Khan (1996) laments this in
his autobiography.

19

capacity, capability, elite capture25, market factors, etc.). Such internal factors have left existing
municipal capacities ill-equipped to deal with swelling numbers of migrant residents. While
critics have provided ample evidence on the limitations of federally developed poverty
alleviation programs in Pakistan, scarce attention has been paid to the disabling factors that

hinder the urban public sector engagement of the IS, and barriers to the delivery of basic

services.

Urban commentators point to an urgent need to understand the significance of urban

development as a shared responsibility between various state actors and institutional structures.
However, they fall short in terms of proposing an organizational strategy and/or practical steps to devolve power efficiently (Reza, A., 2003). Suggestions involve decentralization in a way that

loosens the hold of the central government and increases autonomy for both the provincial and
local levels of government while placing effective monitoring mechanisms in place. Increased

interaction with citizens and civil society, they argue, will translate into more rapid responses to
community needs and more relevant program design (Cornia, G., 1992). A failure to do so will

result in the expansion of the existing policy void and the activity of rent-seeking non-state
elements.

The constrictions to improving equitable municipal service delivery machinery can be attributed
to a myriad of stakeholders with alternative interests and poverty alleviation remedies. Political

stakeholders, exploiting the weaknesses of a fragmented system26, use project-based solutions to
poverty alleviation in order to garner voter support (Hasnain, Z., 2008) (i.e.). Bureaucratic

stakeholders and the civil service maintain the status quo, where minimal changes in direction are required. Market proponents celebrate the lifting of elements of the urban IS put of poverty

through trade and market liberalization (i.e. EPZ's, industrial restructuring).

In contrast, civil

society advocates lobby for increased social rehabilitation, development and humanitarian relief sometimes facilitated by intensive funding from external sources (welfare and contract NGO models). An impermanent and often temperamental 'donor-driven development agenda' has

further complicated the shape of public administrative capacity, to the detriment of service

25 Elite capture refers to policy outcomes where the benefits of subsidized programs such as utility stores or lower
income housing, have been captured by income groups higher than the targeted,group.

26 For example, most recently the Benazir Income Support Program has been proposed to target the poorest of the
poor. However, the program is to be managed by senate offices rather than existing machinery that already

distributes funds to the marginalized and poor. This is an example of politicians marginalizing existing structures in favour of building their own political credentials or legacies.

20

delivery channels to peripheral segments that are being increasingly excluded from large donor (WB, ADB) funded projects. The result is a range of conflicting forces that divert funds away

from sustainable public sector capacity building and addressing the challenges to ensuring basic
services to all urban citizens.

Despite the overall ineffectiveness of service delivery and inefficiency of state stakeholders, the
IS continues to flourish and evolve. Both capitalist driven trickle down economic growth models and the welfare state approach have proven to be unsustainable. Until and unless transparency,
ownership and accountability are assigned from within - ultimately through the offices and

agencies of the state, possibilities of service delivery improvement remain scarce.

An

assessment of the specific municipal capacities that service Pakistan's urban regimes has often

been neglected by development studies' commentators as political solutions have drawn more
attention. The ongoing conflict between political motivations and bureaucratic momentum has

also convoluted the strategies and tactics with which to engage the IS in the municipal context. As the majority of our analysis focuses on service delivery within the urban regimes of Karachi

and Lahore, it will be beneficial to provide a brief summary of the context of the two cities.

Karachi's Informal Sector
Karachi ranks among one of the world's largest Meta cities and its IS is well studied by both Pakistani and foreign based urbanists. The Meta city has only Hyderabad (about 160 km away), as its immediate neighbour, to alleviate the pressure of urbanization. Karachi is ethnically

diversified by entrenched migrant groups, which contributes to a polarized urban regime, often
characterized by violent conflicts between different migrant groups.

A number of studies have been conducted on Karachi, outlining the disconnections between the

provincial authorities, municipal agencies, political and social realities. Urbanists illustrate how
socio economic realities and urban needs are outpacing the administrative capacities of the

province and the municipality (Hasan, A., 1999). Historically, the lack of coordination between
municipal and provincial entities in their accountability to higher orders of government has been

blamed for the poor quality of service (Hasan, A., 1999).

For example, fourteen government

agencies and housing authorities in Karachi have control over land distribution (Hasan, A.,

21

1999). While executive municipal officers used to be elected, provincially-driven appointments

are reducing accountability to citizens.

Capital projects are managed by the province and

operations and maintenance responsibilities are managed by the City District Government.
While some programs are ineffective, others have served as model cases for service delivery.

However, under the burden of urbanization the city has become unmanageable, compelling the provinces and federal governments to intervene by way of providing service delivery on a project-by-project basis (Hasan, A., 2006).
from day to day operations.

Planning however, continues to be disconnected

The diverse range of often conflicting interests within Sindh contributes to the fragmented nature and ineffectiveness of Karachi focussed policy. The single Meta city of Karachi, far from

Hyderabad, is forced to absorb a continuous surge of migrants through urbanization as no
satellite towns serve as spill over sites of development. The growth in power of interest groups such as the Sindhi nationalists, the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM, representing the North

Indian migrants), politicians (representing the landlords of rural Sindh), Awami National Party

(ANP, representing Pakhtun frontier migrants) and sectarian groups (Sunni/Shiite) all exacerbate urban stability (Siddiqui, T., 2005). Violence as a result of] inter group conflict is all too

common and has led to a paralyzed policy environment (Khan, N., 2007). As the city depends
on large projects and direct funding from the federal government, its administrative structure
remains vulnerable to political favouritism. The policy void of wealth distribution is exploited

by mafia consortiums that illegally acquire and sell public land, water, and power resources.

The City District Government of Karachi (CDGK) is home to a number of similar but separate agencies that struggle with their responsibility for urban development. Plagued with a lack of

communication and duplicated mandates, federal, provincial and city governments have invested

heavily in Karachi's development, often supported by project linked loans from international
financial institutions. The WB, ADB and JICA (water, sewage, traffic and transport and

environment) have supplied loan packages in excess of US $654 million for urban development
(ADB, 2005). However, numerous studies have underlined their failure due to marginalization,
and non sustainability (Gorson, F.S., Lawrence, S. and Gregory, R., 2003). Furthermore, the

debt resulting from the loans, paralyzing conditionalities and the lack of coordination with City

22

master plans, has stymied development efforts across the municipality. The absence of services
has led to a 'policy void' and proliferation of community based organizations striving to ensure a minimum level of basic services to the poor. The vast number of such organizations is testament to the limitations of the^municipality's ability to address the needs of the poorest of the poor.

The provincial government of Sindh (www.sindh.gov.pk), home to a number of ministries and consolidated departments charged with largely rural-oriented responsibilities, also finds its IS efforts relying on civil society support.
through provincial offices.

There is limited evidence of donor activity managed

Of the thirty one departments that are charged with urban

development, the most relevant target the industrial relations sector (Labour Department and

Directorate).

Other city specific offices are reduced to low profile portfolios that are largely such as the Ministry of Local Government, Katchi Abadis and Special

under funded,

Development (MOLGKASD).

There is evidence, however, of successful agency operation, in

the Sindh Katchi Abadi Authority (SKAA), nested within the MOLGKASD (Ismail, A., 2004).

A combination of visionary insights from senior management and staff initiated service devolution has led to significant improvements in the SKAA's service delivery capability (Zaidi, S.A., 2001). Furthermore, the development of effective CBOs based on the SKAA model in

social housing (SAIBAAN) are now facilitating the organization and mobilization of the IS in

engaging municipal stakeholders in the provision of services beyond social housing.

Another

NGO, the Urban Resource Centre, has also served as a forum for state and non-state actors to

engage on a range of urban issues and has been replicated in Punjab and other Asian cities. The formation of informal networks between front line bureaucrats and community based

organizations at such gatherings is testament to the success and persistence of Karachi's urban
civil society, in the midst of political and bureaucratic neglect.

As a result of Sindh's urban-rural policy divide, Karachi's municipal agencies have remained vulnerable to political interference, civic and ethnic strife. Federal agencies own significant

tracts of land in Karachi but work independently of local governments and focus their resources

on development projects. This approach of bypassing provincial offices and capacities has led to friction between local and provincial governments^ (Hasan, A., 2008). For example, while the

province introduces new development projects to cater to a specific segment of people (e.g. the

23

Lyari expressway), local government is left with little funds to maintain existing infrastructure to service the greater society (e.g. local bus routes, transit authorities and road management). Rather than mediate between the two levels of government and align their mandates, the federal
government formulates economic policies proactively while mandating social policies reactively.

Hence, the province with weak and poorly coordinated legacy agencies continue to be at odds with a City District Government whose jurisdictional boundaries. autonomous agencies are still unsure of their

The politicization of diverse ethnic and clan interests combined with

urban - rural disparities continues to push migrants to Karachi's slums. As the province refuses to acknowledge its responsibilities to the meta city, the autonomous district government of Karachi will likely continue to rely on targeted federal/donor project support for its survival. As much as CBOs are trying to bridge the gap between the IS and the state, it is at a pace that may

be too slow for the marginalized city agencies to engage or be convinced of the CBO's merit.

Lahore's Informal Sector
The highly populated province of Punjab has thirty five district governments whose municipal

infrastructure is funded through provincial support.

Projects such as the Faisalabad Area

Upgrade Project (FAUP) have allowed medium sized municipalities across the agriculturally rich province to keep pace with population and economic growth . This has reduced population
Punjab's urban context is

pressure on the province's largest city, Lahore (Zaidi, A., 2008).

underpinned by a network of agricultural cities,

diverse land holdings

and the ethnic

homogeneity of its citizens. Provincial institutions reflect these ideals in their emphasis on agrobased industrialization.

These ideas guide pro-poor municipal policy in Punjab, which are intertwined with the sense of
balanced industrial development based on agriculture (food and textiles). A strong industrialist

class has emerged from textiles and agricultural related investments and is proactive in supporting and maintaining a diverse rural base within the prgvince.
matched Punjab's institutional goals by dedicating funds towards

In turn, the ADB has
province's resource

management and institutional development efforts (ADB, 2003).

Similarly, the 2005 Punjab

Financial Corporation (PFC) grant system empowers districts to apply for project funding as
27 Punjab P&D Urban Unit staff members have mentioned in interviews the advanced position of Faisalabad's
institutions as a result of professional development and capacity building - leading to growth from within.

24

infrastructure needs emerge. Key projects include Katchi Abadis in Lahore, the Sialkot - Lahore
Motorway and Lahore Mass Transit. However, audits of such efforts have led donors such as the World Bank to recommend enhanced provincial auditing, district budget reporting and increased
performance management of the districts to enhance provincial support. Overall, the province

has managed to reduce urban pressure by supporting agricultural and industrial development in
rural areas and smaller cities.

The interests found within Punjab and to a greater extent Lahore, are ethnically homogenous and balanced between urban and rural areas. Despite a north/south and urban/rural divide in Punjab

and the presence of Afghan migrants towards the west, familial ties and urban-rural clan relationships influence linkages within society that balance the overall policy framework. The

development of medium sized cities has also alleviated the pressures of urbanization from
Lahore. In a shift away from one time projects, donors are now focussing more on facilitating Over half of the ADB's support to the Punjab housed within the Planning and Development

institutional reform and urban development. Resource Management Program (PRMP,

Ministry), a total of $500 million USD, from 1998 to 2003 is directed towards decentralization
mechanisms, linking rural roads and urban development (ADB, 2003). The Punjab government
has consistently transferred at least 85% of its Rs.150 billion development budgets (increasing annually by 10%) to district governments (Punjab Government, 2007). This is interesting as

while Punjab government's allocation to urban development has increased by only 200% over the past year, it is still the lowest allocation within its infrastructure budget and exhibits the

lowest amounts of percentage utilized.28 Given the political will that is apparent from urban
focussed budgets, donors appear to be interested in freeing up the bottlenecks to urban development through assistance in institutional reforms.

The government of Punjab and to a lesser extent the City District Government of Lahore
L

(CDGL) embody a range of programs that support urban development programs and municipal agencies charged with service delivery. However, the stronghold of the province on urban

development projects often diverts the operations and maintenance responsibilities and budget

28 Ineffective utilization could be an indicator of poor capacity in development and infrastructure upgrade, as many
studies for urban renewal in Punjab have not been implemented as actual projects.

25

requirements of the city.

This is an issue to which IS advocates within civil society are

increasingly drawing attention.

The government of Punjab is home to a number of autonomous departments which support a

range of municipal development interests. Nine autonomous, externally funded, special agencies

address cross provincial development issues.

The most inwardly focussed is the ADB funded

Punjab Resource Management Program (PRMP), mandated to implement institutional reform, civil service training and professional development across the province (ADB, 2003). additional twenty nine autonomous operating agencies exist throughout the An

province's

municipalities and are responsible for areas such as water supply, solid waste management,

education, economic research and transportation (www .punj ab. gov .pk).

There are forty-one

operating departments that deliver services specifically to urban areas.

While a number of

provincial agencies exist to support social and welfare needs (Housing and Urban Development and Labour and Human Resources) they target wealthier homeowner services and support policy

development

(Local

Government

and

Community Development)

rather than

front

line

operations. The most relevant provincial ministry is the Planning and Development Department

(www.pndpunjab.pk) which coordinates the majority of large infrastructure, donor development projects within the province. The 'Urban Unit' of the Ministry of Planning and Development

(P& D) engages municipal capacity building needs across all sectors, (www.urbanunit.gov.pk). Another P&D agency, the PRMP, engages in the development of cross cutting investment

strategies linking urban with rural Punjab and setting out tangible targets (Government of Punjab, 2006) in line with federal goals and mandates. Hence, while the province is focussed on service provision for the wealthy, the capacities of municipal offices and agencies, at least in

terms of policy, are incorporated into program delivery that may benefit the urban poor.

The urban regime in Lahore is composed of two levels of municipal government.

The Lahore

Development Authority (LDA) (www.lda.gop.pk) is accountable to the province of Punjab and
manages infrastructure projects of water/sanitation, transportation arid urban development. The City District Government of Lahore (CDGL) (www.pportaLpuniab.gov.pk) is also embedded

within the province and manages day to day operations and maintenance as well as programs
such as community development, funding applications and enforcement of road laws. While far

26

from autonomous, the CDGL seems to be increasingly held responsible for more of the outcomes

of urbanization's growing pains.

Furthermore, it relies heavily on the province for reserve

funding and civil society for technical support.

Despite of the well funded provincial development efforts, civil society actors emphasize that a growing segment of the IS is beyond the reach of the government and the involvement of CBOs is required for community development. Lahore's CBOs confirm that the CDGL is not equipped to manage the needs of day to day operations or service delivery to the ISs. In a signal to

facilitate communication between the public and NGOs/CBOs, the CDGL has listed all active
NGOs/CBOs on its website. Furthermore, the 'self help' modelled CBOs originating in Sindh

are increasingly taking root in Punjab.

Organizations such as MUAWIN deal with sanitation,

social housing (Khuda Ki Basti) and legal advocacy for the poor (Foundation for Law and
Governance). The self-help organizations are emerging to draw municipal attention to the need

to engage the IS.

Lahore is the recognized center of power in Punjab - and even though relatively balanced development takes place across the province's cities, deference appears to be given to Lahore by all levels of Punjab's policy makers. Furthermore, Punjab has more alignment politically

between itself and the city and experiences limited pressures from rural-urban disparities. Donor

support for programs aimed at institutional reform reflects the commitments of provincial
stakeholders to allocate resources for urban development. However, Punjab's expansive urban

portfolios (LDA) and its commitment to capital projects risks neglecting the operations and

maintenance needs of the City District Government service delivery.29 As both of these tiers of
government vie for space, funding and legitimacy, those in need of outreach and support are

unable to avail themselves of services and are, therefore, beyond the scope of CBO assistance
(Alvi, L, 1997).

29 White the capital project oriented LDA is operated and maintained by the province of Punjab, the CDGL is the
actual municipal government, which is responsible for operations and maintenance. The overlaps and disconnections between the two tiers of government within the same jurisdiction complicate efforts at maintaining
city services and deteriorating infrastructure.

27

In both Karachi and Lahore, the context and structures that influence their urban regimes consist

of varying levels of federal (Karachi) and provincial (Lahore) engagement as well as municipal
capacity. The unpredictability of upper tier support and the politicization of development, Given the politicization of citizens across

impacts the IS and further marginalizes the poor.

ethnic lines and a rural-urban policy divide; one can appreciate how municipal performance and service delivery is undermined. It is understandable, from an administrative perspective, how

service support from the lower tiers to the IS has diminished in light of the lack of coordination,
alignment, planning and monitoring between municipal agencies and focussed support from higher levels of government. In spite of such constraints, the responsibility for engaging the IS on a day to day, ad hoc basis, falls to the municipalities and more specifically to the programs and actors that engage the IS on the front lines. In order to develop an understanding of

municipal level engagement of the IS in the Pakistani context, attention in the next two sections
turns to the presentation of primary and secondary research findings in the three contexts,

housing/water and sanitation, transportation and labour conditions. An assessment of outcomes

of state engagement of the IS, in light of the preceding state challenges to effective policies, will shed light on where the constraints and potential for improved engagement of the IS lies.

28

Research Findings
Both primary and secondary research findings have generated a range of insights regarding the role of civil society - IS engagement and the responsibilities that stakeholders play.

A range of criticisms, perspectives and recommended courses of action in improving service delivery to the IS emerged from the interviews. The primary research findings (interview

responses) can be summarized by the following points:

·

There is a broad knowledge of the IS across a range of public and civil society stakeholders.

All of our random interview respondents were aware of the IS and its social dislocations.
· Many stakeholders engage the IS in various ways through advocacy or policy related

activities.

Whether in government or non government organizations, all of our interview

respondents engaged the IS in supporting or advocating for service delivery.

·

Constraints to the engagement of the IS are seen to be linked with higher tiers of political

leadership and bureaucratic functionaries, along with external variables that impact the
provision of services to the IS.

·

Solutions to ensuring engagement of the IS are seen to be linked with the provision of basic services (housing, water/sanitation, transportation) and ensuring basic standards of

employment and rights (labour) for members of the IS.

Their potential for effective

implementation is believed to lie in the lower tiers of government where the administrative
aspects of policies are implemented. For example, respect for rule of law, standardization of processes, and de politicisation of procedures and adopting of sustainable solutions that are

low cost.

These solutions need to be managed through more transparent, accountable and

documented front line officer - civil society engagement.

Institution-generated research reports show that despite variances in service delivery machinery across various social contexts, community centered processes are experiencing the most success as civil society and civil service actors continue to engage and lobby for IS related concerns.

Secondary research findings (reports and institutional evidence) indicate a number of points:

29

·

Water/Sanitation - Success has been experienced through the 'component sharing model'where a community based organization (with the technical help of an NGO) takes ownership
of the internal laneway water and sanitation connections while the municipality manages the
external connection.

·

Housing - Success of 'incremental housing', where a community based organization assumes management responsibility for publicly owned land to be allotted (through a public sector or not for profit agency) for the settlement and gradual construction of homes for the poor. While land speculators offer public land to the market, focussed social housing schemes ensure that homeless, migrants and their families by sheer presence, are able to occupy a
small unit and gradually work to build its walls, roofs and utilities.

·

Transportation - The continued failure of ad hoc private schemes has reiterated the need for
shared responsibilities of infrastructure and system monitoring. There is an urgent need for a transportation system that is publicly run and managed. Limited success has been

experienced with small pilot projects of publicly operated transit and community maintained infrastructure. The established need exists for better governance of a private system that is

ad hoc and rife with corruption

·

Labour Conditions - Challenges continue to be experienced in countering the powerful interests of industrialists who commit violations of labour rights across a range of export oriented industries. However, success has been seen in monitoring through the organization of citizen voluntary groups that report bonded labour and labour rights violations.

The following sections outline in detail the results generated by the primary and secondary
research methodologies.

30

Primary Research Summary
The interview participants represent a range of government, non government and community based actors providing service delivery, advocacy/training and leadership to the IS in Pakistan's major cities. The following subheadings represent the key questions that were posed to the The text within each

interviewees (for a sample questionnaire, please refer to Appendix El).

subheading is a summary of the main responses that were provided (for a list of detailed responses, please refer to Appendix IV). While the questionnaire was designed to draw

responses addressing the research question, the study recognizes that perspectives on service delivery to the IS are not restricted to the survey. Interview participants were invited to build on their responses and add additional information where relevant.

Awareness of the Informal Sector
When asked if they were aware of the social dislocations of the IS, all sixty of the interviewees

responded that they were aware of the existence of the IS and were familiar with the local social
dislocations and challenges faced.

Profile of Interviewee
While the interviewees represent a range of occupations within the civil service and civil society, they could be divided into two main groups. One group was involved in service delivery

(providing and involved in the delivery of services and support to the IS) while the other was more engaged in policy advocacy (researching, lobbying and representing the IS in policy development arrangements) related activities. Forty five interviewees responded that they were from the service delivery context while fifteen respondents responded that their engagement of the IS was from the policy advocacy area of activity. Interestingly, when asked which other

institutions and/or individuals should be contacted regarding the study, many of the respondents
referenced one another, even though they were not actively engaged in each others work. This trend points to the existence of a network of state and non-state actors who engage regularly in
pushing for service delivery improvement to the IS.

31

Awareness of other Programs Engaging the Informal Sector
When asked whether or not they were aware of other programs and agencies interacting with the IS, twenty-two responded that they were aware of Government programs. that they were aware of IS oriented programs within the NGO sector. Only ten answered

A slim majority of the

respondents, twenty-eight in total, answered that they were aware of IS oriented programs from both the GOP and NGO sectors. This trend suggests that state agencies are more prominent in

delivering support to the IS as opposed to those within the non government sphere of activity.

Effectiveness of Government Programs
When asked as to whether they felt GOP policies and programs are effective at engaging the IS,

the majority of respondents indicated that GOP programs are ineffective in engaging the IS. Only twelve respondents indicated that mixed outcomes have resulted from government attempts
to engage the IS. No respondents indicated conclusively that they found GOP programs The following subsections summarize the broad reasons why

effective at engaging the IS.

respondents felt that GOP policies and programs are ineffective at engaging the IS:

·

Politicians and institutions lack leadership and commitment to public service delivery. This

is linked with the politically motivated appointments of unfamiliar individuals with
municipal agencies and provincial ministries. · Politicization of processes and service delivery persistently takes implementation away from

technocratic objectives towards political ones. For example, federal incumbents and/or
provincial politicians will interfere in the operation of public machinery and duties by

municipal bureaucrats as a means of acquiring political objectives.
· Solutions are over-designed with hidden operations and maintenance costs, wh|ch are embedded in imported solutions from abroad. This is exacerbated by donor/federal government pressure on provinces and municipalities to adopt larger projects.

While these key points summarize the respondents' perspectives on the limited effectiveness of GOP policies, specific insights on each of the social contexts are summarized in the following subsections (for a complete listing of interviewee responses, please refer to Appendix VI):

32

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
According to the interviewees, policies on housing and water/sanitation infrastructure have been
ineffective as policies:
· Treat both rich and poor the same with limited appreciation of ground realities.

·

Are vulnerable to market price volatility and land speculation by the investor class.

·

Lack documentation, enforcement and monitoring, leaving them vulnerable to 'land
grabbers' (collusion between corrupt political and institutional officials).
b

·

Fail to engage current bureaucratic structures/organizational culture and offer little incentive for to engage the IS. Offices that engage the Katchi Abadis are considered low priority

('punishment posts'30) and receive limited support from other agencies.
· Are vulnerable to political interference by local leaders. Favouritism and nepotism

influences which communities receive water/sanitation infrastructure and tanker service.

Transportation
According to the interviewees, policies on transportation have been ineffective due to the following factors:

·

A lack of policy maker understanding of ground realties in favour of financially intensive capital projects imported from abroad. This feeds a financial dependency on imported
studies and solutions rather than allocating policy space and resources to local solutions.

·

Policy makers do not recognize the need to address structural constraints to management
improvement within transportation.

·

There is a lack of budgeting for staff/resources for operations and maintenance at the

municipal level. While the province takes ownership for major capital projects, no funds are
left for law, enforcement or traffic management as administered by municipal agencies.

Labour Conditions
According to the interviewees, policies related to labour conditions of the IS have been ineffective due to the following factors:

30

Such positions are considered punishment posts as they do not lead to any higher promotions nor do they wield

any degree of power or budgetary authority. This reflects state neglect in the treatment of the IS in katchi abadis.

33

·

Policies do not budget funds for institutional capacity building or agency alignment at the
local government levels to ensure effective implementation.

·

The combination of low inspector pay and powerful industrial interests (often linked to political influence), leads to bribery and intimidation of inspectors who refrain from

inspecting and reporting on facilities (brick kiln factories, bangle manufacturing facilities,
textile mills, leather tanneries) where labour violations are common.

·

Reliance on project based donor monitoring, which is limited to time bound studies (random surveys) rather than continuous institutional monitoring and lacks community engagement.

Defining the Structural Constraints
When asked what the structural constraints in engaging the IS were, fifty one respondents

indicated the constraints were political in nature and had to do with the neglect of political
leadership and self interest of senior bureaucracy. Only five respondents indicated that the constraints were institutional, and that the machinery of the bureaucracy and service delivery

mechanisms was to blame for the lack of engagement with the IS. Four respondents indicated
that the constraints included both political and institutional factors.

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Interviewees responded that the structural constraints to engaging the IS in the housing and
water/sanitation contexts were due to the:

·

Lack of will by upper tiers of government to empower the IS. In the case of social housing,

there is no incentive to amend policies so as to increase the ease of registration or strengthen the framework so to encourage stakeholders to follow the rules. · Lack of understanding by higher levels of the government regarding the realities of the IS and the need to design policies and programs enable them to meet their challenges. · Imported capital intensive solutions from abroad do not account for ground realities and IS sensibilities. Policy makers, engineers and planners are not concerned with the sustainability
of IS resources and are keen on implementing plans from abroad. · Lack of coordination by too many agencies with little collaboration or legislative

cooperation. Stalled bureaucratic processes result in resource captured by criminal consortiums. Government appears to be unable to manage its programs.

34

·

Financially intensive capital projects are not accompanied by operations and maintenance
funding. This has led to the deteriorating of infrastructure in the medium to long term.

·

Lower level political and bureaucratic offices are disempowered as decision making power is

concentrated at higher levels of the province and municipality. Decisions by knowledgeable
staff on the ground are bypassed by the dictates of higher level officials.
j

Transportation
Interviewees responded that structural constraints to engaging the IS within the transportation
context were due to:

·

The development industry's pursuit of projects (NGOs and donors) rather than institutional
accountability and strengthening.

· ·

Lack of political vision as local sustainability is overlooked in favour of imported solutions. Short term economic gains for market players crowd in political and industry stakeholders,
excluding the operational bureaucrats and agencies from acquiring government resources.

·

A lack of capacity in staff training and relevant legislation is widespread. Municipal officers

are overwhelmed by a complex set of stakeholder interests and behaviours which they are not
trained or empowered to manage. At the planning levels, legislative compliance is weak.

·

Limited autonomy or empowerment is given to agencies to perform their functions. Political interference leads to staff frustration, lack of training and limited citizen engagement.

Labour Conditions
Interviewees responded that structural constraints to engaging the IS and improving the state of labour conditions were due to: · The failure of state offices to admit to their failure to target the IS, as the policies are political constructs, not geared to address the needs of workers in precarious and bonded conditions. · A disconnection between upper tier bureaucrats to consider implementation and monitoring realities and a focus on project planning and commissioning studies.

· ·

Federal legislation is weak and without 'teeth', while lower levels are not empowered. Market conditions place the power of the industrialist class far above the pay and incentives of the inspector or bureaucrat, to follow procedures and legislative codes.

35

·

Efforts to protect the IS are developed from a distance and the politicization restrains technocrats from engaging the IS and avoiding the addressing of poor IS labour conditions.

Identifying Possible Solutions
When interviewees were asked where feasible solutions lie and probable improvements needed

to be made to better engage the IS, fifty respondents indicated that the solutions lay primarily with the institutions and improving their ability to deliver services to the IS. Only one respondent indicated that political steps and engagement was the solution to engaging the IS.
Nine respondents indicated that both political and institutional steps needed to be taken to
improve the state's engagement of the IS.

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
Interviewees responded that the following steps need to be taken to increase the state's
effectiveness in engaging the housing and water/sanitation context of the IS:

·

Develop policy frameworks in consultation with stakeholders who are part of the IS reality. Embed the models of component sharing and incremental housing in frameworks that
empower lower level staff to deliver services while installing monitoring (district) protocols to ensure that variables of politicization/favouritism are removed from basic services.

·

Involve the education of upper tier politicians, bureaucrats and donors regarding ground
realities, specifically the operations and maintenance and sustainability aspects of programs.

·

Ensure that programs designed to engage the IS are insulated from market imbalances and
speculative price volatility.

·

Increase accessibility of the IS through one window (Sindh Katchi Abadi Authority model of
bringing service to the community) models of service delivery.

·

The state must assume the role of manager and arbitrator of disputes, and in turn, reduce land
grabbing through better social housing frameworks. >

·

Institutionalize the collection of documentation and communication of data through

consistent processes on the physical reality of the IS. Create predictable' standardized operating procedures will compel upper tiers of government to engage communities and

ensure transparency and accessibility to information regarding planning processes.

36

·

Eliminate the practice of shuffling individuals between ministry areas through political
appointments and promote from within.

Transportation
Interviewees responded thatthe following steps need to be taken to increase the state's

effectiveness in engaging the transportation context of the IS:
· Build capacity at lower levels both in solution generation with operations and maintenance sustainability in mind. Simple solutions are more effective, sustainable and will ensure outreach and accessibility. The approach of Bus Rapid Transit would resolve financial issues
but would require political will to dedicate roads for bus and transit traffic, as opposed to

Light Rail Transit which would cost significantly more and benefit the wealthy. · Implement protocols ensuring the effective coordination and guidance of line agencies and monitoring of their separate/joint activities. · State engagement of civil society and IS groups from across concerned districts impacted by
transportation issues.

·

Ensure that provincial government needs to coordinate, check and 'monitor' the lower levels of government without getting involved in 'doing'.

·

Unbundle efficiencies between public and private sector stakeholders. On the operations and

maintenance side, it may be beneficial to have NGOs assist in training bureaucrats in
transportation as they have within the water/sanitation contexts as to ground realities, and

facilitate engagement with the IS.

Labour Conditions
Interviewees responded that the following steps need to be taken to increase the state's

effectiveness in engaging and improving the labour conditions context of the IS: · Encourage engagement on the ground with inspectors, citizen groups and police authorities
to elevate the profile of efforts to reduce incidences of labour rights violations.

·

Depoliticize training and engagement of municipal employees and ensure their free and
secure access to work environments where labour conditions are deplorable.

37

·

Increase pay of technocratic and more empowered lower level bureaucrats to avoid bribes. Where staff is paid more, there is less tendency to engage in rent seeking behaviour. Similarly, municipal offices should be autonomous, reduce over staffing.

·

Ensure the recognition of unions, engagement and legitimization of their concerns.

·

Advance donor reporting beyond projects to institutional monitoring and sustainability.

Overall,

the

interview

results

indicate

that

the

majority

of respondents

feel

that

the

ineffectiveness of government in engaging the IS are linked to the detachment of upper tier leaders, functionaries and policy makers (politicians and to a lesser degree bureaucrats) from ground realities. Respondents also indicate that the constraints to engaging the IS are a result of
higher level decision makers and orders of government (as well as donor driven activities)

actively disempowering (politically, economically and socially) municipal service delivery machinery, front line agencies and communities, from developing solutions to and providing services. This is complicated in turn by the complexity of each of the social contexts, where

elitist interests (land prices, roadways and capital productions) are trumping those of the public,
which the IS bears the brunt of (social dislocation, ineffective access to transportation facilities and adverse working conditions).

Respondents appear to agree that solutions to increasing the effective engagement of the IS lie in institutional strengthening, driven largely through the establishment of documentation, protocols

for engagement and planning-oriented standard operating procedures. Furthermore, the removal
of politicization of institutional machinery is a key theme that appears across all social contexts

in the responses of the interviewees.

There was little in the way of responses that indicated a
Perhaps this suggests a degree of

prominent role for politicians and local councillor activism.

faith in the expertise of state actors on the front lines and merely the need to remove the
constraints to their capabilities. The repetition of common procedural and processes as solutions
to improving engagement with the IS across contexts supports the hypothesis that more attention

should be paid to the administrative aspects of urban management. ^

38

Secondary Research Summary
A review of documented and published cases studies provides insight into the positive and negative experiences of past engagements between the state and the IS. The following section

outlines the main findings that emerge from this body of literature and summarizes key themes that appear in the three contexts.
appears in Appendix VII.

A complete description of the secondary research findings

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
In the housing, water and sanitation context, thirty housing water/sanitation infrastructure case studies were examined. Evidence points to the limitations of top down project and program

development (in terms of feasibility and sustainability) and the success of public-community based frameworks of engagement.

A prominent finding within the case study literature is that while a plethora of IS oriented legislation exists, the implementation, enforcement and monitoring of laws is non existent. Federal and provincial acts, ordinances and municipal plans regarding housing and

water/sanitation for the IS suffer from a lack of coordination and institutional inertia, leaving

infrastructure vulnerable to market capture.

The result is the random bulldozing and razing of

'registered' informal housing units by authorities to make way for formal developments (Ismail, A., 2002). Where implementation outcomes from policy decisions exist, they are often

expropriated by new policies that ensure service delivery investments (such as water and sanitation) cater to a narrow segment of society (Hasan, A., 2004). In sum, top down Field evidence

infrastructure policy development has been unable to effectively engage the IS.

demonstrates however that community based housing models that accept ground realities and

foster gradual development are experiencing success (Hasan, A., 1999).

The 'incremental housing' approach to social housing that sees the gradual erection of small

units by owners has proven to be far more effective than larger development projects which price
housing units beyond the economic reach of the poor. The approach of slowly developing public land, documenting allocations and building single unit homes is more manageable for the state

39

and cost effective for the homeowner.

Furthermore, where the process has been managed by a

field oriented, self sufficient state (Sindh Katchi Abadi Authority) or not for profit agency (SAIBAAN, Khuda Ki Basti) with collaboration with all stakeholders, high occupancy targets have been achieved (Hasan, A., 2004). Public sector agencies which operate in the context of the IS through a one window process have increased IS accessibility to frontline staff and services (Ismail, A., 2002). This has been shown to reduce corruption, patronage and favouritism as non value adding upper tier bureaucrats ('land grabbers') are removed from the process of service delivery. It has also resulted in cost savings, increased contractor control and sustainability

(Khaliq, A., 2000).

The 'component sharing' model has also demonstrated that community based self help models can streamline and enhance community engagement with municipal utilities to obtain water and sanitation services. procedures through The benefits of joint mapping, documentation and standardizing of community-staff (engineers, bureaucrats) collaboration has facilitated The

relationship building and advocacy between the IS and local utilities (Rehman, P., 2008).

Orangi Pilot Project pioneered NGO supplied technical expertise and information to anchor partnerships between communities and frontline staff of the Karachi Water and Sewage Board for service delivery to IS communities (WaterAid, 2006). The model has been adopted by IS

communities across Pakistan to influence politicians and bureaucrats to adopt low cost sanitation models rather than capital intensive solutions from abroad (OPP, 2008). Direct contact between

communities and lower tier bureaucrats (front line staff) has resulted in the segregation and

reduction of government agency overlaps31, minimization of encroachment by other agencies,
improving of utility operations (WB, 2006), consolidation of infrastructure information,

addressing of the lack of accountability (OPP, 2000), project affordability, examining of cheaper alternatives, pressuring for attention to low cost solutions on storm water and drainage

management and highlighting of weaknesses to current state machinery32 (Pervaiz, A., Rehman,
P. and Hasan, A., 2008). Commentators also argue that innovation is more likely to emerge from

31 In other words, government agencies at local and provincial levels should be assigned separate roles and
responsibilities to ensure that there is no overlap of duties and inter agency tension, and enabling service providers

32 There is a significant amount of commentary on the performance and threats to the KWSB vis a vis the
misalignment within the KMC and now the CDGK. However, the point within our study is simply the advisory capacity that an expert NGO can provide not only to communities but also to the state in terms of institutional
functioning.

suchastheKWSB.

40

;

/

J° souoiJsdxQ sqx

'(8661 ''V '

a xv\n%3i qSnojq} sqotajos oj si sqi uupiM suszpp ajqeuo Suipjinq

se jpM s^ Jojraora 'S90TAJ9S jedpiunui sS
OH3 's9Tuop3 joozuejai pue ueXq '
pue sspuoxte jEdpxunui
^q^xz^qr) jo soijiunuiuioo si

jo sunqs aqijo soseo oqj tq

'(8661 'V '

pu^ Suxpu^jsjspun suszpp ps^onps oj Qnp

juqiuujsaoS qS^Suq oj sjjojjo si J°
ps^jqp^j Xppos \taio iuojj pa^nsoj sjqotjjo
ii juip sa^jjsnni suoip^jojui uiojj

'su^pijipd u^q^ jsq^j s^jon^ojnq uo jBdpxunui pu^ si oqj

·Xppos jiAp Xq p^ndd^ U9oq s^q XouspTjjQ pu^ XjqiqBjunooo^ joj amsssjd 'si ^ 01

90TAJ0S jo SS0U9ATP9JJ9 sqj pos^QJoux si?q Xuiouojn^ ^H^AV

'(8003 'ddO) Jfcraunpe

jo SJU9UI9P puB s^jon^ojnq jap joddn jo juquisaioaut 4Suipp^ sn^A uou, sqj pire Suxpunj jouop
joj po9u sqi S9AOUI9J s^uo^ui pu^

\uoo\ jo ssn oqx

's^soo sjnprujsejjin 9tq^9§^u^ui ut

Xjqpn jsjem sqj qixA\ siuouioo

spunj pssrej X^xununnoo 'ppoxn dpq jps Xixunuraioo

jo os^o sqj iq *(i00Z '*V'S 'TPT
jo sou^uQiureui oqj ojnsuo oj 'SO9D

uojojjsjut ^opqod uiojj s^jojja guiipsoj sdiqsuop^pj

SOON J^o qoeaijno punojg Qqj uo ui X^p^d^o pnnq

sq \\\/& juquiqS^ubui jjbjs
ureiureui si jqjjo sjo^juquiuioo oi

'ojouuoqjjnj '("K)0£ '"V 'ireujsi) Aouopxjjns jps
jo QuinpA oqi qs^ojout oj VV^S 9lP J0J P99U

*jood sqj Xq pue joj guisnoq dopAsp Xn^np^jg pue

q iuojj jo poqpui sui^s sqj A\onoj j^qj (NVVHIVS)

OON Pu^ (PS13H 13 ^Pntra) soippos Suisnoq joqjo jo uoti^qjo oqj oj '(8661 ''VI 'P^IPPIS) soojnossj jo au^uioS^u^ui ajqtmreistis pu^
Si
sqi

Xq Xjqiqxssooo^
oj pQjnquiiE st

pss^ojoui

's^AOjdd^ jo
uinjs jo uo

'sassQoojd jo
sqj q^iM

'sopxununuoo

Xjuoqjny xp^qy iqoj^ qpuxs sqi jo ssooons sqx ooxajos 'QpnjittB i^uoxssojojd u qixM puuosjod Xq
Xoqi uoqM
si
oj

'SI

J° SuxpuBisjispun put^ ausuiixiuiuoo
put^ qouqjqjjoiux uiojj snouiouoane

sxjojjo

qons

osp?

soseo

·Xppos put^

sqj joj sixjousq

Xixunuiuioo-oxjqnd pss^ojoux qgnojqi poured aq ueo

gguo si
poui qoiqM

qons

'(8003 '*N 'p^iuqv) sspiunuiuioo jtrnpiAxpux jo spssu
9J0UI UT

UO

Colony demonstrated how the sustained development of relations based on labour-union
linkages, was able to generate service delivery improvements more than political engagement (Hasan, A., 1998). These cases demonstrate that the institutionalized decentralization of power and resources to accessible levels of government coupled with the persistent engagement by IS representatives generates returns on service delivery more so than political engagement.

However, in order for such models to truly become community centric, models of monitoring
and accountability must follow (Khan, S.R., Khan, F.S. and Akhtar, A.S., 2007) and sufficient
staff capacity building must also be present.

The ability of the state to engage the IS has been shown through the capacity building and

development of front line agencies, officers and staff. The case studies repeatedly conclude that
improved service delivery is linked to improved documentation, information sharing and focussed engagement by the IS on constraints to state delivery of required services (Fernandes,
K., 1997). Civil society capacity building on appropriate engineering, contractor management

and performance standards can improve agency operation and make civil society engagement more productive through standardized partnerships. Furthermore, the sensitization of leadership (as well as donors) to ground realities can enable the valuation of partnerships with civil society. While government is still required to play the role of resource manager, there is an opportunity through increased engagement to reach out to even illegal land developers to distribute tracts for resale to the IS while retaining high end plots (Hasan, A., 2000). Similarly, utility operational

issues can be resolved through increased civil society engagement that encourages graduated

levels of tariffs and infrastructure repair and rehabilitation (Hasan, A., 1999).
benefits to IS engagement lie in local agency strengthening.

The most direct

Evidence from the housing and water/sanitation contexts illustrates proven returns and savings
from increased municipal staff-community collaboration to address service delivery constraints

to the IS. Similar themes also exist within the transportation context tfiat support the case for
sustainability through increased IS engagement of lower tier staff.

42

jo

sqj sjjoddns spafojd qons uiojj

'(9003 *'Z <m^sIH)
oijjbji '(^003 '1AI
uiojj pQOusuodxo

jo uopeziuoiun oqi pus (6661 *'V '
*]/\[ '^p^H) SQjnoj 4snq ojpui,
sjuQuiSAOjdun uio^sXs ^q^urejsns jo

spofojd
Apijqnd

jo suisjqojd uodswex\ oip oajos oi suire puB psugisap Xn^ooj ussq s^q j^qi auo st sspp

pp

joj stq^jms uopnps Xjuo sip j^qj apnpuoo os^ soipms jsoo

'(9003 'VDIf)

oj qoeojdde QAisnpui qjoui ^ jdop^ oj sj^s sqj joj posu sqj so^jjsuoraop sdnojg
jo uoijBziiregjo pu^ suopnps poojoduii jo amjrej 'snsuosuoo jo ?pu\ sqx '(6661 4'V

xuojsXs usAup stiqiuiui puB snq oqj ssjejsdo XpAxpsjjo qoiqM btjbui uop^^jodsu^jj oqi jo

po^ooqoun oqj joj psAvone s^q piOA Xoipd Supps^j aqx '(9003 '*V 'l!^1118)
jpqi uiojj sspiunuiuioo si J° uopoiAO psnupuoo sqj ui pajjnsoj s^q spsfojd X^A\q§iq A*q uoips^ojd p9^{Si§9| si J0J pJExfejsip oqj Qjouuaqyn^ '(^3003 '*V

Si $m Ji\\moddsd 'suszpp \\u joj s^uquiuojiauq gupnumioo snopj^z^q b oj psjnqujuoo s^q

pu^ JU9UI90JOJUQ jo 5[O^| 'suejd 9ou^uj9AO§ jo QDussqB 'ssipoq jjodsuEJj jo

|rej p^^Asp si? qons) spsfojd ojq^urejsnsun Xpgj^j pue qaisuqjui suopnjos jouoq -uio^sXs aqi jo uop^jQdo juopxjjQui oqj oj Supnqxjjuoo

avqu 9JBQJ0 oj uosq 9A^q uop^^jodsuujj u^qjn jo juauiOxfeuBuisiui oqi o^ suopnps

p

*ju9ui{rej9p {^opipd jo juapuodspux 'sspuoS^ qj^js Xq uop^uipjooo poAOjduix

'suszpp ip joj jopss sqj guig^u^ui ux sspinqisuodssj sji suinss^sj oV juquiuj9ao§
jo Xjxxqduioo §uis^3joui sqj jmp ozxs^qduio soipn^s ss^o pas^q uopejJodsuEJ}

\\e

i joj qsnd sjo^iuouiuio3 *si

joj A*jinqiss3Doe pu^ Xjinqoui 'Xji|iq^pjojjB oj sjurejjsuoo pu^ sopmbsux ^UQj
ui iu9ui9§bu^ui qj^js jo o\ojl sqj oj juiod saipms sqx 'i^opuo si s^jjoavoui^jj p

jo ju3ui9*feueui s4qj^js sqj 'Aho sq; uiqjiM s^qjb |Bujsnpui ui jusuidopAap oiuiouooa oj

oi si 9lP J0J IBpu9SS9 si uisisXs yodsuBJ} onqnd QApoojja u^ sy

ixqjuoo

soiui^uXp si-^js quiui^xq oj psXaAjns qjom ssiprijs uop^yodsu^jj

previously mismanaged, yet high potential urban rail system (Ismail, A., 2002a). Furthermore,

the feasibility of self help community based efforts to maintain infrastructure and monitor a
geographically dispersed system points to the need for state leadership in coordinating such

efforts (Sohail, M., 2000). Finally, in contrast to elevated rail systems, Bus Rapid Transit has
proven to be successful in several other Asian cities due to its affordability and accessibility in

terms of establishment and maintenance.

Such a system that uses existing resources and relies

on transparent management and maintenance can also be unbundled to allow for community

maintenance and involvement in the governance of the infrastructure (Penalosa, E., 2008).

The case studies from the transportation context emphasize the need for the government to
assume responsibility for the operation, coordination and management of the system's

infrastructure for the public and the IS as a whole. Failed attempts at reforming the system in isolation have demonstrated the need for the state to engage the IS and all stakeholders more holistically. The results of pluralistic efforts are more likely to transform the system to one that

is sustainable, accessible and participatory for all segments of society.
civil society collaboration is echoed in the labour rights context.

The potential of state-

Labour Conditions
Eleven case studies were assessed in the examination of state-IS interactions within the context

of welfare, labour rights and working conditions. While several .state policies and programs are in place to support the needy, most social safety nets and general welfare programs have met

with limited success due to agency overlaps, lack of coordination and poor management (PILER,
1999). Similarly, a plethora of overlapping and weakly enforced legislation exists on labour

rights, but has failed to consistently improve working conditions across ja. range of sectors
(Aslam, H., 2004). Efforts to monitor employers and enforce legislation are challenged by a

complex political economy that favours industrialist interests, overlooks employee rights and

undermines information gathering regarding violators (Ali, M.Z., 2005). The state's investment in high skilled sectors has also distracted funds from the maintenance of primary sectors where the IS are employed (Hasan, A., 2002). The cases also emphasize that the solution is to align existing policies and enforce existing legislation to protect IS labour and invest in backward
linkages with sectors the employ members of the IS (GOP, 2008).

44

pue paseq si jnoqej si aisqM sopiunmuioo

oj /LomonvQinq oqi jo sjsp jqavoj ie sjappqo^as p^uij uopeiusuiQjduii jo
§^§uo oj oibjs oqi joj pa^u sqj siejisuoiuop Xjsunpeui ojejpM jo sssoons psinnij

jo ojnjrej aqx 'SI 9I# J° sjoquisui apnpui oj siqSu j^joav ootajqs oi
jpu3x\no/3uuoxiuoui ui Xppos iiaio qjiM SupmoqEnoo 'sjopodsui pAO{ jomoj

Xq si dm jo spssu Qqj oj puodssj pu^ Xjp^dBO sjt jo ^uopejiuni 9ip oziuSoosj oj
joj p99U sqi ozxs^i|dui9 jxqjuoo suopxpuoo §up[JOA\ pu^ s^qSu inoqej oqj uiojj soxpnjs qsbo

SI 9tP J° suopipuoo

OAOjdlUT O^ SUOp^pUOUIUIOOQJ JO 5JBd ||^ 3IB SJOJ^pTA XjJStipUT gUTJOJTUOUI OTJBOQjd JO JU9UI90JOJU9 'xftlTJOOipS 'S^qsp QAp^JTO|dX0 JJO fad 01 SW20J JJOS

jo juouiosjnqsip sip joj suistu^i[09]ai

'(^003 'OH) suopBjoiA s^qSu jnoq^i jo sss^o jo^tuoui oi
'

§UISip2U0ptUpSUI Sip pQpUQUIUIOOQJ OA^q SJOUOp 'A*JpU003S

i£00£ '"Z '^HS) ssquqjbm^ Apj^s pire n^sq pu^ suoissnosip sjqSu jq^joav
ui sj95[joa\ si guTpnpui jo ^puojod sqj SQ^oipuT ipjEQSOi 'ojouijsq^jnj '(900Z '*N'S

"3#V 'W^ia '*A 'rareX^H) sosssooid qatsuqjut ^jid^o jo oou^piOAB sip uiojj jjnssj
jsoo §uizi|B9J ui jsiss^ pu^ (t700£ 'VSVAV) XjQAipp soiajqs oou^quo 0} jnoq^i si J° pspusuiuiooQj 9A^q soppus sdiajss 9}Ejs snoTOA 'SI 9t[l J° sjoquisui spnpui oj popuudxs
uopiuijop sjijsuQq pire pod jopos Dijqnd gq^ ^qj js9§§ns sjojbju9uiuioo 'ApsjLj -avsiaoj Xpn^s

uiojj sq§J9UI9 si 9lP J° }U9UI9§12§U9 St9^is sqj SuiAOjduii o; qoeojddB psSuojd oavj v

'(17003 ''HHTLd) Xjoqdusd u^qjn aqj ui sjq^joav popuoq jo X|j^|nopjBd 'uo
pue Suijoiiuoui ui jqgnos pu^ psjojid ussq s^q luouiSApAut Xppos \iaio 'qo^sjjno jouop

pu^ o^js jo 5pq oqj joj dn o^ui oj jopjo ui '(^003 '>I3Hd 'LOOZ '*Z '^^S) sisijo jo spouod
guunp suioq Xououi puss oqM sopiunuruioo iubjSiui s^ jpM s^ Xjtjouiui ui stuj Xn^psdso si siqx

'(1003 ''O'S ^W^qx) pA9j Xiiunuiuioo Qqi ^ uopeziue&io onsjnd oj uioq^ pduioo oj siijsusq
jo ogpQjMOiq jo sspnpcj sqj ui §up[o^| punoj ussq osju QA^q sjq^jom si '(LOOZ 'S '

·g 'psX^s '^003 <#S 'ofe^TO) ps^psqoun SI 9tP J° uopBiio|dxo ljaj 9A^q sjqSu ois^q jo
jo ?pv\ v puB uop^ziuoiun oj s^urejjsuoo j^qj po^oipui 9A^q si ^qi jo sX^Ajns 'uoisssjddo jo

S9IUIOUO09 icopiiod §up^9jq ui }U9uiuj9ao§ jsiss^ oi p9A|0Aui sq suopeziuE§Jo pgs^q Xiiunuiuioo

suopipuoo jnoq^t si Joiiuoui o^ A*j9uiqoi2ui iuquiuj9ao§ jo Xjp^d^o jopun

Analysis
Both primary and secondary research findings have generated significant insights into state-IS interactions across the three contexts of study. In order to analyze the dynamics, factors and

variables that constitute municipal-IS engagement, the findings are assembled at the macro (national), meso (provincial) and micro (municipal/community) levels of policy development
and implementation. The analysis reflects on the initial research hypothesis during the

assessment of the states' institutional and political interactions with the IS.

Macro Level Detachment
The research findings at the macro level reveal that the higher policy making tiers of government are ineffective at engaging the IS. The evidence supports the widely held notion within civil

society that policies developed at the national level have fallen short in addressing the needs of

the poorer segments of society and the IS. contexts.

Three recurrent themes appear within the three

First, while subsequent federal policies and legislative items have been passed

pertaining to all three sectors, their suitability, appropriateness, enforcement and understanding
of IS realities at the municipal levels of government has not expanded and has left marginalized
segments of the IS disengaged within urban regimes. Furthermore, there has been little in the

way of federal initiatives to encourage the institutionalized provincial monitoring or reform of
existing policy machinery.

Second, political change has only resulted in incoming party leaders adding to the plethora of

policy documents and legislation. A scant number of initiatives have even attempted to address
existing enforcement issues and seriously engage in institutional strengthening with the needs of
the IS in mind. The tendency of political actors to ignore the need for deep policy reform and

simply create new agencies reflects the disconnection and self serving reality that plagues the

higher tiers of the state. Such behaviour however, is not surprising as politicians largely utilize
the voting process as a means of obtaining votes in exchange for the provision of basic services.

This is unfortunately accepted as normal by the IS, who have no recourse in light of their lack of
representation. The oscillation between policy development and redevelopment is perpetuated

by political instability with no net policy impact or outcome on the IS.

46

Third, the simultaneous complication is that higher levels of government focus on large projects, donor engagement and importing solutions from abroad. Most alarming is the trend of higher

tiers of government to embrace and promote mega project solutions (treatment plants, LRT and
infrastructure) which are beyond the affordability of society and threaten the already precarious

physical space and dwellings of the IS (Ercelan, A., 2005).

The preoccupation with foreign

solutions is reflective of the detachment of upper tier state actors from ground realities in urban Pakistan. It also suggests that upper tier leaders are also economic beneficiaries of policy Katchi Abadis of the IS for example, are a As economic and political conditions influence

inaction and the adoption of large projects. component si|b set of the construction context.

how much housing material is available, the demarcation lines of the low income housing

segment become vague.

Density levels in and around Katchi Abadis quickly impacts land

market values, resulting in the eviction of slum communities to make way for formal development and even social housing projects.
testament to the cities dependence on

The failure of state housing initiatives is
modes of production which maintain

capitalist

impoverishment where the gainers are capitalists within industry and government.

The Katchi

Abadi phenomenon cannot be removed from the economic conditions surrounding it and poverty must be addressed first (Alvi, I., 1997), which translates into a policy shift away from large development projects to more engagement oriented, sustainable and municipally driven ones.

While upper tiers of policy makers persistently demonstrate an inability to formulate effective

policies, the evidence points to the potential for inter provincial learning and the effectiveness of
community based learning. Vertical policy transfer across levels of government, albeit slow, has

resulted in the drafting of some policies modelled after micro level models.

The province of

Sindh is now modelling its institutional reform programs on the success experienced by Punjab (with the assistance of the ADB). Lessons learned from community based models such as

incremental housing and component sharing are also influencing provincial and national policies. However, recently formulated draft policies based on the micro experience (national shelter policy and national sanitation policy) will now need to be supported through translation by higher tiers to lower orders of government to achieve some dissemination across jurisdictions.

This will also test the ability of national and provincial governments to assume a monitoring role, without interfering in municipal processes.

47

Meso Level Disconnections
While the research findings at the meso level reveal disconnections with ground realities, they
reveal more importantly, a series of shortcomings and misalignments with implementation at the micro level. The provincial levels of engagement have performed the role of both monitor and

implementer in the past, which has marginalized their purpose and duplicated agency efforts. At
the local level, provincial bodies are misaligned with the management, support and coordination of municipal offices. Three re-emerging themes appear in this examination.

First, the failure of the Local Governance Ordinance (LGO 2001) to outline the provincialmunicipal working relationship has led to mismanagement. There are disconnects in the lack of provincial support of municipal agencies in their efforts to equitably provide basic services and
engage the IS. A lack of coordinated planning, service support and ground level engagement

persists despite the presence of municipal offices in marginalized communities.

The result is

duplication, institutional overlap and inconsistent support from provincial levels that fails to support sustainable urban development. Furthermore, as in the case of transportation and

water/sanitation infrastructure, provincial levels of government interfere in municipal operations
by politicizing operations or failing to adequately provide resources. Robust provincial support

(professional development) for municipal offices is required to expand the reach of basic urban services. At present, the support that is articulated is captured through patronage and favouritism
by the elites, leaving the IS to fend for themselves.

Second, in terms of operations and maintenance, the absence of adequate and sustained support and standardization from provincial levels in terms of budget and resources, leaves municipal service providers under funded and inconsistent in routine practices and procedures. Donor

studies have illustrated that devolution holds promise, as it can enable the effective management

and improvement of service delivery on the ground (ADB, 2004a). However, these studies insist
on cost recovery gains from revenue generation, derived from the political echelons and broad

public engagement rather than through the technical assessment of productivity within service delivery units and interaction with community based organizations (ADB, 2004b). This is particularly alarming as consultants such as JICA push for increased private sector involvement, following their training and sensitization of risk so as not to burden the public sector. If this is

48

T sjjodai OHD VTM OON m0JJ aouapiAg

"(8003 'Vs & zreAJSj) suoijnjos

jsoo avoj jo XHjiqtSEQj oqi in sopu^Se jEdpiunui uiojj qjrej ojoui SuiureS Aqoiaqj 'SAipojjo
jsoo sioui jej sis suopnps podopAQp Xjxuninuioo yey\ uA\oqs 9Aeq soao pue SOON 'suoiseooo

uo

'isixo jeqj suiqqojd sqj 9zxu§oo9J oj spsfoid jo|id 'js^9| sqj ys jo

90TAJ9S Suiurejqo ux sssoons ppiX 'guiAqqoi 09N PTO 093 luojSTSJsd j^q juauioS^gus jusiSTSjad joqj^j jnq diqsj9pB9| ^opip^ J0J }ou pip ssipms qs^o puu XoAjns jo X^uofeui oqx *SI 9l# TOM suoijaBisjin Supsixs
9AJ0AUT sjopoxn ossqj jeqj ojou oj ^u^jjoduix si j[ 'juouioS^Suo i^dpiunui

p

joj sppoxn Suxsnoq ^juouiojout pu^ ^uiieqs jusuoduioo jo sjo^ini°^J s^ s0H3

SOON J° 90U9§J9ui9 oqj Xq pojmjsnni si siqx "juouiaS^u^ui sun ^uojj j
uinjusuioui pojoq^S seq jusuidopAsp urejgojd si 1^^ ssn^suouiop \dAd\ srqi

pUtlOJ§ 9qi UO
si

jo

'SI 9lll J° S9pi|^9J 9IP °1
OON/093

pgdpranra

ouios so^jjsuouiop si 9t[l J° ^U9uio§^§uo psjEjii
QAip^oad pspunj-jpM ^ jo souosq^ sqj uj -jouu^ui ooq p^ u^ ui si

psqsnd uosq QA^q (so93 p^u§i^ pue) sjuouiujqaoS pujsip Xjp 9JsqA\ juqujuojiauq ub pu^ si joj pioA uoi^iu9iU9tduii-Aoipd b po^Qio seq ;u9inuj9AO§ jo spA9| jsqgiq uiojj

uo/sinduiOQ /a/ia7
\eiouiAoid Xq iuouiujoaoS jo spAq \uoo\ oqj jo guuojiuoin

sqj sureuiQj 3|q^TMA Xs^i oqx *SI 9lP °1 Xinnixojd ssop ui sm pue Ojq^urejsns

sji SQ^jjsuouiop jopos oi{qnd sqj 'suoi^mis osoqj iq

*SO93 pue SOON

qjtM

ju9in9§^§u9 pire uopmoq^noo qSnoxq; si 9tP J° ^oddns jpqj ui sjpssi A\oqs
jo q^js ^ ui ssApsuisqj) soujsiuiui njpuiAOjd po2u\mui jpA\ 'snouiouojn^

B pu^ (sisuo

'VVUS

SVSVAV 'S9SAV '9XS s^ *Pns ^SIX9 SI 9m J° Juqui9§^§u9 oqqnd jo

·oqqnd sqj qoiajqs pue qSuBuo XpAipajja oj Aqiq^ 4sopi^dpiunui oqj spujsqj

jjoddns n^puiAOjd jo ?pu\ oqx

'Jopas oqqnd sqj jo Xip^d^o oqj dn pjtnq Apjoui pTO

sqj o^ui 5[0^q sooiajqs uoijBjJodsum; §uuq oj uos^oj ojoui oqj \p si ojoqi usqj 'os^o

support

beyond

infrastructure

(housing,

water/sanitation)

to

other

areas

of engagement

(employment, training, education, disaster relief) that is being demanded by communities following completion of initial housing/water/sanitation project work (OPP, 2008).

Second, with regard to other more complex contexts such as transportation, the state is de facto responsible for delivering key services. The failure of the transportation system following the

state's withdrawal from the sector and the crowding in of private sector actors (largely criminal elements) has necessitated the return of the state as lead stakeholder. For example, the shutting down of Karachi's Circular Railway has been accompanied by increased fares in a dangerous and chaotic system of travel within and to and from Karachi. Violence in the city is

accompanied by the burning of buses and road accidents in the chaotic system of commuting have become alarmingly common. There is a need in this situation for the restarting of core

public transportation services in major arteries in both Lahore (Bus Rapid Transit) as well as Karachi (Karachi Circular Railway), with an empowered and monitored municipal agency as the lead public administrator of the service. The ability to perform this function is only within the

capability of the state to ensure that all segments of society benefit from the system. Furthermore, it requires that standardized, transparent and accountable processes and procedures

are followed to avoid the mismanagement of the systems historical experience.

Third, in light of the state's inability to effectively address incidences of child labour, there is an
opportunity for state-IS (NGOs, CBOs) collaboration to monitor the status of labour rights

violators. This is especially the case in the urban industrial fringe where bonded labour is most prevalent, and under resourced municipal/provincial inspectors are unable to cover large geographical areas. An opportunity exists to buttress state monitoring of through CBO, NGO

citizen group engagement to monitor the labour conditions that are being beyond the reach of the formal. In pilot projects where state agencies have worked with Tehsil Volunteer Agencies

(TVA), there has been success in reducing the activity of labour rights violators.

Fourth, an analysis of the key findings from the primary and secondary research supports the initial research hypothesis. Evidence from the primary research suggests a lack of faith in the

potential of political solutions to the state of the IS in urban areas. Historical evidence from the

50

secondary research and case studies illustrates the success that citizen-state engagement (utilizing existing service delivery machinery) has experienced in developing and implementing
service delivery machinery on the ground. Several studies reveal the persistence required, which

extend far beyond short the windows of political engagement, to ensure service delivery improvement. Such efforts are likely to be more sustainable as focal points are now on the

citizens, their social context and front line municipal staff, rather than on lobbying upper tiers of government far removed from ground realties.

The analysis of the macro and meso levels of state engagement with the IS demonstrate the ineffectiveness of upper tiers of government in developing and implementing policies to engage the IS. The survey of case studies at the micro level demonstrates the potential and success of

pilot projects, community based efforts and municipal facilitated small scale-low budget efforts in providing services to the IS. In light of the processes, documentation and alignment that is

required to deliver services, it is not surprising that the research reveals that the constraints to engaging the IS have been largely political in nature. The politicization, interference, deviation

from previously planned approaches, exclusionary policies and primacy of elitist and market interests have constrained policies at the formulation stage, restricting them from realizing their implementation. scarce resources, Where policies experience limited implementation, they are vulnerable to limited ongoing support from higher levels of government and are

overwhelmed by the sheer volume of service demand.

The implications for the differential

approaches and capacities between upper and lower tiers of government deserve further
discussion.

51

Discussion
In light of the study's initial research question, the findings and analysis supports the study's

initial hypothesis. Namely, that the structures leading to policy failure in engaging the IS are the
result of political constraints and interference at higher levels of government rather than solely institutional mismanagement at lower levels of government. As institutions and the bureaucracy

as a whole have been compromised in recent years (Cheema, A. & Sayeed, A., 2006), evidence from this study suggests that the lack of institutional capacity is responsible for a lack of IS
engagement, rather than solely corruption. Rather, it is the ongoing detachment of higher levels of government from ground realities and the promotion of donor-driven projects that have adversely impacted the IS. The analysis demonstrates that solutions to IS engagement are linked

with local efforts and community-municipal engagement rather than higher level policy
reformulation and weakly enforced legislation. Front line engagement, serving as conduits of

bottom-up development, may expose the inefficiency of retaining power at higher tiers of the state and importing capital intensive solutions from abroad. Rather, the returns of aligning

federal, provincial and municipal tiers of government to channel and empower the capacity and
abilities of the lower tiers of the state to engage the IS, are worth policy consideration.

In the context of federal-municipal and provincial-municipal relations, state success in IS

engagement hinges on community organization and engagement of the public sector.

While

community based organizations are the best positioned to express the needs of the IS, the public sector must take the lead in service delivery investment that extend to all members of society (Pasha, H.A. & Palanivel, T., 2003). The interview responses support this perception by citing
that many constraints to engaging the IS are rooted within the politicization of processes and unnecessary interference in service delivery. Processes are not allowed to function freely and the

lack of resources results in favouritism, nepotism and corruption to overcome the bureaucratic
inertia. The solutions lie in freeing municipal agencies from politicization and interference,

establishing robust monitoring mechanisms, strengthening institutions and ensuring capacitybuilding at the lower levels closest to the CBOs of the IS. In the same way that government

cannot operate on the ground without effective community engagement, communities must

engage the government and hold them to account in order to realize successful service delivery.

52

The lack of capacity at the institutional levels is complicated by the politicization of bureaucratic decision making, a lack of leadership which results in the freezing of any policy benefits to the poorer segments of society and the IS. Functional power is more concentrated in the hands of

federal (Karachi) and provincial (Lahore) development authorities resulting in a lack of resource

devolution down to the municipal levels. For example, the KDA in Karachi has been stripped of
its portfolio, aside from the sale of dwindling amounts of land, while the LDA in Lahore has absorbed more responsibilities over the years to include infrastructure, water/sanitation,

transportation and housing issues. The Province of Punjab has taken more measures to build the
capacity of local government organizations, although much more has yet to be done (GOP, 2004). A stronger provincial presence in Lahore is in sharp contrast to an under-funded

provincial office in Karachi that could not survive the conflict and lack of coordination with municipal corporations (Hasan, A., 2002). While the benefits to Punjab's urban development are self evident, the reality of managing rising operations and maintenance costs, will be experienced in Lahore. This confirms the lack of understanding of municipal sustainability by federal

authorities. This is complicated by capital oriented donor funding, which places an increasingly

large burden on municipal operations and maintenance costs, omitted from budgets.

The literature on economic development and finance also echoes the warnings arising from the evidence of weak institutional capacity. Undoubtedly, trickle down economic growth (either

politically or economically facilitated) has not worked and there remains the need to harness the creativity of the poor (Wignaraja, P., 2005). This is especially urgent as there is a shared

appreciation in the literature that the IS will continue to grow, particularly during periods of inequality (Chong, A., & Gradstein, S., 2006). Therefore, if institutions are weak and IS growth
continues unchecked by state agencies, institutional strengthening becomes increasingly

complicated and difficult.

Commentators point out that in order to embrace the IS and bring

them within the formal structures of the state, tax collection and incentives to engage the IS must be in line with their socio economic realities. Commentators have found that while the IS

declines during steady state periods; it has also been found to decline as the economy transitions towards a steady state (Ihrig, J. & Moe, K.S., 2004). These shared realities support the need to develop municipal institutional engagement of the IS before examining political solutions, in

order to build the economic capability of the IS.

53

While institutional challenges exist, the success of the SKAA, OPP, metro bus and WASAs points to the efficiency gains from autonomy and effective monitoring of service delivery to
communities. At the provincial level, capacity building efforts underline the importance of

urban development by provincial offices such as the PRMP and the Urban Unit^which have in turn reduced urban pressure on Lahore. Sindh's approach has been more concerned with rural

rehabilitation and development, often resulting in the neglect of burgeoning urbanization. As a result, Karachi has been left to seek federal funding and endure 'unsustainable bouts' of industrialization without persistent institutional guidance or support. However, donor responses

to institutional building have also been noticeable. Following years of injection in Punjab, there
are signs of similar developments within Sindh, as the ADB has added to its historically agricultural oriented project portfolio by committing to the Sindh Basic Urban Services Project,

valued at over $300 million USD (ADB, 2009). However, sustained institutional improvement is
still required from within and it is questionable whether it will emerge sustainably from donor facilitated projects, which will diminish in the medium to long term.

The status of autonomous institutions and its correlation with effective service delivery deserves

increased examination.

While provincial institutions enjoy more autonomy in Punjab, Sindh

exhibits a greater number of autonomous service delivery units at the city district government

level. Commentators and donors are now arguing for more in the way of provincially resourced institutional autonomy at the city level as a means of increasing service delivery effectiveness (Qasim, M., 2006) and ensuring that operations and maintenance budgets critical to service delivery remain well funded (World Bank, 2006). The risk of not funding operations and

maintenance budgets is to continue the trend of privatization and offloading of various urban issues, such as transportation. As a result the IS risks receiving less engagement from the state
(Yaw, D.A., 2007). The government of Ghana uses an innovative IS employment strategy

(which recognizes the ability of the IS) to bridge the gap and provide flexible labour to the
market through state capacities (Jonakin, J., 2006). While problems exist, the current Ghana

analysis and understanding of the IS develops engagement, capacity, training and entrepreneurial

efforts in ways to buttress the state. As the IS in Pakistan has shown it will continue to grow in
periods of market led growth, there is an opportunity to address common pool services, such as
transportation (Jonakin, J., 2006) as well as water/sanitation and labour rights within institutions.

54

While institutional strengthening at the municipal level is receiving increased attention, the
success of component sharing, incremental housing and self-help models has resulted in the rapid diffusion of community-based models and organization (from Karachi outward and northward), through municipally facilitated policy transfer. In other words, as municipalities build their

understanding of the IS, they are able to facilitate the transfer of policies to other urban contexts, elevating the importance of and role of CBOs in those communities. The growth of the IS and

the recognition of its needs by municipal offices, has led to the proliferation of 'self help' modelled civil society organizations. The range of typologies regarding effective civil societysegments are

government collaborative frameworks can measure the degree to which IS

improving in their relations with the state

(Coston, J.M.,

1998).

Complementarity,

as

experienced by the OPP, is the gradual advancement of relations where there is the most benefit to the goals of both sides. In turn, participatory engagement and resourced devolution can direct the focus of the bureaucracy away from catering to the elite classes towards addressing institutional issues. Streamlining processes from within could therefore support institutional

machinery which is currently under funded, before it is dismissed as ineffective.

The trends illustrate the existence of horizontal policy transfer both at the provincial and
municipal/community levels. At the provincial level, the success of Punjab's institutional At the micro

strengthening at the program level is being mimicked by the Sindh Government.

level, the transfer is in the opposite direction as CBOs forged in Karachi and Sindh are now

replicating in other urban regimes within the country, raising and organizing the concerns of the
IS. How these are recognized at the provincial level through the interpretation of national shelter and sanitation policies still remain to be seen. (Gibson, B., 2004)

A host of factors33 that contribute to the provincial-municipal dynamic has not been factored into
our study and are noteworthy as research continues. Firstly, our definition of the IS has limited the study to public administration dynamics rather than incorporating a range of economic and political variables that impact the growth and autonomy of the IS and its interaction with the shifting boundaries of the state (Tripp, A., 1997). The impact of the market and its interactions

33 The more prominent factors include structural adjustment, political instability, regional relations (Afghanistan/
India) and foreign intervention (US domestic military and political interventions).

55

with civil society and the state are also underestimated in the ability of the state to engage the IS.
Secondly, the uneven distribution of resources such as skewed provincial transfers (Punjab, Sindh over NWFP and Balochistan) are not factored in our analysis as their impact on the
structural relations of provinces with municipalities is quantitative. Thirdly, a level of

complexity also exists between upper and lower tiers of the state.

The attitude differential

between the upper and lower tiers of the bureaucracy vis-a-vis the IS implies that politics of the bureaucracy and the state's structure underlie certain constraints in terms of the policy towards IS. However, whereas these constraints originate at the upper tier of the bureaucracy and the political leadership and display a lack of concern by the upper level bureaucrats, the situation

with the lower level bureaucracy is just the opposite. The lower level bureaucrat is more
empathetic and understanding of the conditions of the informal sector, and is quite willing to

work within the constraints to offer even a semblance of service to the IS.

Evidence of the

challenges faced by provincial and municipal agencies illustrates that a range of complex

interactions also exists within and between levels of government. For example, some provincial
agencies, such as the SKAA, are more engaging of the IS than some municipal agencies such as

the municipal housing and building control boards. In turn, some municipal agencies are more
engaging of the IS than others. While these variables have not been included in the scope of this study, they are valuable components of more detailed examination of the institutional landscape that experiences the engagement of the informal sector.

56

Conclusions and Recommendations
Effective engagement of the IS, in light of the findings of this study, have been shown to be more
dependent on the development of frontline solutions and community centered engagement. Evidence from the field reveals how indigenous housing, water/sanitation and transportation

approaches are more sustainable than the implementation of upper tier policy solutions and donor funded mega projects. The articulation of effective grassroots solutions is critical to

development efforts to counter the cynicism that emerges from the IS when considering the
reality of elite-driven decisions. Arguably, governance from below can offset the adverse effects

of upper tier power structures that oppress the IS, and create increased momentum for more active municipal involvement in the public sector.

The challenge, as Khan and Siddiqui have lamented, is how to amplify the potential of
marginalized bureaucrats and the efforts of CBOs. Akhtar Hameed Khan's constant refrain was that he could only find a limited number of visionaries within the bureaucracy who understood

active engagement of the IS as a way to sustainably improve the livelihoods and service support
of vast members of society (Khan, A.H., 1996). Siddiqui also correctly states the constraints on colleagues to make changes in the face of overwhelming pressure from senior levels was unbearable for most to endure (Siddiqui, T., 2005). However, while policy reforms experience a slow pace, front line bureaucrats are less vulnerable to higher level political change and are capable of providing traction and facilitating policy shifts from within the establishment to affect ground realities (Hasan, A., 1997). While reform at the provincial levels is key for the transfer

of municipal policies to the national level (national sanitation policy and national shelter policy),
how and where upper level stakeholders engage community based self help models will remain

to be seen.

This is especially important, given the rapid unchecked polarization of wealth and

expanding social space between elites and ordinary folks.

Similarly, where a balance is achieved between reforming institutional responsibility and downloading service delivery to community based efforts, remains to be seen. The policy

behaviours and interest differential of the politicized upper tiers and the frontline operational
tiers will likely influence the demarcation lines between state and community. While civil

57

servants may have once found danger in advocating for the interests of the people they serve

(Siddiqui, T.S., 2005), recent developments show that they can be agents of policy transfer in
collaboration with non-state actors. The self-reflection of the PRMP, the innovation of the

Urban Unit, the activity of joint traffic management programs, the legislated effectiveness and vision of the civil servant managed Sindh Katchi Abadi Authority (Zaidi, S.A., 2001), and the
outreach of the voluntary labour rights monitoring efforts are all testament to the ability of the

public sector and civil society to collaborate if the right incentives, such as transparency and accountability to communities, are put into place. However, in order for policies to be effective, state and non state actors must engage the lower levels of the bureaucracy. engage this level, policies will continue to fail. If policies do not

While the scope of this study has been to

illustrate the differences in various levels of government to engaging the IS, some policy
recommendations emerge from the discussion.

Firstly, the evidence shows that a degree of confidence exists in the abilities of lower level bureaucrats to engage the IS. Provincial policy makers need to empower these specific

municipal agencies with the authority to download management systems and support machinery to levels that meaningfully engages the IS in their context. Such an approach has been attributed
to the success of the SKAA and should be transferred across urban boundaries by the various
provincial authorities.

Secondly, there is a general sense among the interview respondents, that the province would best
serve urban issues by reducing its role of micro management of municipal bodies and engaging

solely in regular monitoring and reporting.

Unnecessary interference in municipal affairs may

supplement weak local government capacities, but it also adds an unnecessary layer of processes and sign offs that restricts service delivery movement on the ground. Civil society institutions can be contracted by the province to serve as monitoring agencies for municipal service delivery
and validating performance indicators and outreach.

Thirdly, the capacity building of talented management capacities on the ground level to
coordinate the interactions between the state and the IS will be critical for success. Punjab has
made institutional inroads in dedicating the professional capacity building of staff for urban

58

planning and development.

While city development plans are in place through some donors,

there is little to reveal any thorough examination of Sindh's municipal institutional capacities.

More research is needed on the pace of provincially-managed institutional reforms and their effectiveness in creating autonomy from higher or lateral agencies. Shifts in donor funding and province generated implementation vs. feasibility studies may serve as indicators for movement in this regard. If the vision of the SKAA and the innovation of the OPP are to be replicated

effectively across and beyond municipal Pakistan, it will require several stages of reform. Most
importantly, it will require the transparent, resourced and monitored devolution of

responsibilities and service delivery to local levels of government. The success experienced by civil society - IS engagement in building linkages with lower tier bureaucrats and obtaining services is in part the result of empowering municipal and IS actors in the communities that they
serve and reside within.

59

Appendices
Appendix I
Year
1972

Urban Growth Rates Across Pakistan
Urban Population by Province

Punjab
9,260 13,256
1981

Sindh 5,726
8,243 14,840

NWFP

Balochistan 399 677

Pakistan
16,594 23,841

1,209 1,665 3,079 3,966
11%

Urban Population (,000)

1998 2005
1972

23,548
29,834
24%

1,569
2,218

43,036 54,923

18,905
40% 43%

16% 16%
24%

25%
28%

% Population in

1981
1998

28%
32%
34%

13% 15%
16%

Urban Areas

49% 53%

33% 35%

2005

29%

Source: Pakistan Economic Survey 2004-05, & 2005 Estimated by JICA Study Team

Appendix II
Criteria

Profile of the Informal Sector in Pakistan
Percentage contribution of the IS 66.5%
38.5% 28.7%
^1.2%

% of Non Agricultural Employment % of Total Employment Contribution to non agricultural GDP
Contribution to total GDP

Gender composition of informal as
compared to formal Young and less educated

Same Over represented in the IS as compared to the formal sector

Large differences in working time, compensation and job turnover between the two sectors Higher wage differentials by sex in the IS.

Source: Gennari, P. (2004). IS: Statistical Definition and Measurement Issues. Presented at the

Non Observed Economy, May 11th to 14th, 2004, Bangkok, Thailand.

OECD/UNESCAP/ADB Workshop - Assessing and Improving Data Quality: Measuring the

60

Appendix III
1.

Sample Questionnaire

What is your understanding of the Informal Sector (IS) - does it benefit the economy and society and how?

2.

Are you aware of the social (housing, water and sanitation) and economic (livelihood insecurity) dislocations within the IS?

3. 4.

What is your organization's role in engaging the IS? Please explain. Are you aware of any other related government/non government programs that are meant to assist the IS in terms of economic sustenance (labour laws, wage levels, health and safety)?

5.

How effective are state policies and programs in reaching a significant segment of the IS?
What evidence do you have to support this?

6.

The programs and policies of the state are often seen as being ineffective in addressing the needs of the IS. In your view, what are the reasons for their ineffectiveness? What are the structural constraints to developing effective policies and programs to engage the IS?

7.

What steps need to be taken to in terms of policies and programs to increase the state's effectiveness in effectively engaging the IS?

61

Appendix IV
·

Profiles of Institutions Engaged

In Karachi, the following organizations were visited and interviewed:
SAIBAAN - a not for profit social housing organization, whose goal is to manage the allocation of smaller units of public lands for Katchi Abadis (informal settlements). o · Executive Director - Tasneem Siddiqui URC (Urban Resource Center) - a not for profit think tank that focuses on researching, communicating and drawing attention to urban issues in Karachi.
o o Executive Director - Arif Hassan Senior Researcher - Zulfiqar Shah >

·

PILER (Pakistan Institute of Labour Education and Research) - a not for profit think tank that focuses on labour issues and advocacy across Pakistan. o Senior Researcher - Zulfiqar AH Shah

·

OPP (Orangi Pilot Project) - the pioneering NGO engaged in component sharing water and
sanitation services o Senior Researcher - Perween Rehman

·
·

CDN (Community Development Network) - the network of CBOs supported by OPP.
o
o

Senior Trainer - Anwar Rashid
Minister of Labour - Sabur Ghuyar

MOL (Ministry of Labour)

·

PILDAT (Parliamentary Institute of Legal Development and Transparency) - an NGO
focussed on the support and sensitization of parliamentary officers o Senior Communications Officer - Aamir Hasan

In Lahore, the following organizations were visited and interviewed:
· MUAWIN - an OPP replicate NGO in Lahore o Senior Project Manager - Hafiz Rasheed

c

·

PURC (Punjab Urban Resource Centre) - a not for profit centre in Karachi and researches
and draw attention to urban issues o Senior Researcher - Aamir Hasan

·

FLAG (Foundation for Law and Governance) - a law and advocacy practice in Lahore that

focuses on the needs of the informal sectors and provides legal advice to OPP, PURC and
other CBOs. o Senior Advocate - Usman Mohammed

·

UU (Urban Unit) - a division of the Province of Punjab's Planning and Development Department, which is solely focussed on addressing urban issues. o Senior Project Officer - Abid Hussainy

·

Punjab P&D, PRMP (Planning and Development Department - Resource Management
Program)

o

Senior Program Officer - Mehmood Pracha

In Islamabad, the following organizations were visited and interviewed: · SDPI (Sustainable Development Policy Institute) - a think tank in Islamabad that focuses on
research and advocacy issues related to sustainable development in Pakistan

o
·

Senior Researcher - Ahmed Salim Senior Researcher-Riaz Shah

SUNGI - a rural development, field based NGO in Pakistan.

o

62

MUHHDC (Mahbub ul Haque Human Development Centre) - a report oriented NGO that
publishes the annual South Asian Human Development Report o Executive Director - Khadija Haq AHK Foundation (Akhtar Hameed Khan Foundation) - the foundation of Akhtar Hameed Khan, designed to encourage the proliferation of self help models in Pakistan. o Executive Director - Fayyaz Baqir
LUMS (Lahore University of Management Science) - one of Pakistan's leading university's

and centres of management research.
o Professor - Dr. Ali Cheema

PIDE (Pakistan Institute for Development Economics) - Pakistan's leading civil service
research centre for economists, political scientists and development studies experts. o Professor - G.M. Arif

63

Appendix V

Primary Research Results

Criteria

Sub Criteria

Number

·
100.0% 100.0% 75.0% 25.0%
36.7% 16.7% 46.7%

Karachi

Lahore

(28)

(15)

·
100.0%

IS Aware IS Aware
Organization

Aware of IS
Aware of Social Dislocation
Service Delivery Organizations

60

28

100.0%

15

60 45 15 22
10

28
21 7
7

100.0%
75.0%

15
13

100.0%
86.7%

Organization

Policy Advocacy Organizations

25.0% 25.0%
7.1%

13.3% 10 3 66.7% 20.0% 13.3%
0

Awareness of Programs
Awareness of Programs Awareness of Programs Effectiveness of Programs

Awareness of IS Programs GO
Awareness of IS Programs NGO
Awareness of IS Programs Both

28
0 12 48

19
0 1 27

67.9% 0.0% 3.6%
96.4% 89.3%

GO Programs Effective
GO Programs Mixed GO Programs Ineffective
Political Constraints

0.0% 20.0%
80.0%

0.0% 66.7% 33.3%
86.7% 6.7%

Effectiveness of Programs
Effectiveness of Programs
Constraints Constraints Constraints

10
5

51
5 4
1

85.0% 8.3% 6.7% 1.7% 83.3% 15.0%

25
1 2

13
1

Institutional Constraints

.3.6%
7.1%

Political and Institutional Constraints
Political Steps

13.3% } 0
12

Solutions
Solutions Solutions

0
25 3

0.0% 89.3%
10.7%

0.0% 80.0% 20.0%

Institutional Steps Political and Institutional Steps

S

50 9

3

64

Appendix VI

Primary Research Responses

The interview participants represent a range of government, non government and community based
actors providing service delivery, advocacy/training and leadership to the IS in Pakistan's major cities.

The following subheadings represent the key questions that were posed to the interviewees which guided and framed their responses. While the questionnaire was designed to draw responses

addressing the research question, the study recognizes that perspectives on service delivery to the IS

are not restricted to the survey. Interview participants were invited to build on their responses and add
additional information where possible. The additional insights have buttressed key themes that have In total, sixty interviewees were engaged as

emerged throughout the course of the survey responses. part of the study.

Awareness of the IS
When asked as to whether they were aware of the social dislocations of the IS, all sixty of the interviewees responded that there were aware of the existence of the IS and were familiar with the local social dislocations that the sector continues to experience. While this may suggest that the

sample of respondents are biased, in that that those who were wiling to speak with us were obviously

aware of the concerns of the IS, the result is still informative.

Profile of Interviewee
The interviewee profiles represent a range of occupations within both the civil service and civil society. For the purposes of our analysis, they can be broadly categorized as service delivery

(providing and involved in the delivery of services and support to the IS) or policy advocacy (researching, lobbying and representing the IS in policy development arrangements) related. Forty five interviewees responded that they were from the service delivery sector while fifteen respondents

indicated that their engagement of the IS was from the policy advocacy area of activity. Interestingly,
when asked which other institutions and/or individuals should be contacted regarding the study, many of the respondents answered with the references of one another, even though they were not actively engaged in each others work. This trend points to the existence of a network of state and non-state

actors who engage regularly in pushing for service delivery improvement to the IS.

65

Awareness of other Programs Engaging the IS
When asked whether they were aware of other programs and agencies interacting with the IS, twentytwo responded that they were aware of other Government programs. Only ten answered that they were aware of IS oriented programs within the NGO sector. A slim majority of the respondents, twenty-

eight in total, answered that they were aware of IS oriented programs from both the GOP and NGO
sectors. This trend suggests that state agencies are more prominent in delivering support to the IS as

opposed to those outside of the government sphere of activity.

Effectiveness of GOP Programs
When asked as to whether they felt GOP policies and programs are effective at engaging the IS, the

majority of respondents indicated that GOP programs are ineffective in engaging the IS. Only twelve
respondents indicated that mixed outcomes have resulted from government attempts to engage the IS.

No respondents indicated conclusively that they found GOP programs effective at engaging the IS. The following subsections outline the broad responses, followed by the sector specific ones. The reasons why policies and programs are constrained is outlined in the following responses:

·

Politicians and institutions lack leadership and commitment to public service delivery. Politically

motivated appointments are a problem in municipal agencies and provincial ministries. · Solutions are over designed with hidden operations and maintenance costs, which are embedded in

imported solutions from abroad. This is particularly noticeable with donor/federal government
pressure on provinces and municipalities to adopt larger projects.

·

There is a politicization of processes and service delivery away from technocratic objectives

towards political ones. For example, federal incumbents and/or provincial politicians will interfere
in the operation of duties by municipal bureaucrats.

While these reasons summarize the general responses regarding the corporate levels of decision

making, the explanations for the limited effectiveness of GOP policies by context are outlined below:

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
· · Policies on low income housing do not work as they treat both rich and poor the same Policies on infrastructure water/sanitation, social housing and transportation are ineffective as they
are based on first world solutions with no understanding of local problems and ground realities in Pakistan's urban cities.
66

Many Programs are vulnerable to market price volatility and land speculation vis a vis non resident investment interests, specifically with respect to low income housing.
Low income policies are ineffective as they are dependent on loans from target communities which are largely unaffordable.

Politicians and institutions are ineffective as they are unwilling to engage with CBOs in program
development and wilfully neglect realities. Policies are not enforced or followed up on and the lack of monitoring opens up opportunities for

collusion between corrupt political and institutional officials, resulting in land grabbing, which
marginalizes low income housing projects. Policies for the rehabilitation of displaced peoples are plagued with poor planning as the real numbers of displaced people from politically driven development projects are much higher than
what is planned for.

Policies that do not experience monitoring or follow up would be more effective if they experienced persistent pressure from local CBOs to provide services. This is exemplified in the case of some district offices downloading service for Katchi Abadi monitoring to other NGOs and
CBOs.

Policies in water/sanitation infrastructure and social housing fail as the bureaucratic mindset is hard

to break. Furthermore, offices that engage the Katchi Abadis are considered low priority

('punishment posts'34) and such corrosive structural dynamics within the bureaucracy results in
little support and/or incentive for bureaucrats to engage CBOs. Policies on social housing are ineffective as they are supported by large investment, donor facilitated state approved programs which depend on market dynamics and become attractive to

investors and in turn, land grabbers. Policies and programs are more effective where they emulate CBO policies such as the National shelter policy (NSF) and national low cost sanitation policy (NSF) which are cost effective, sustainable and managed by the CBO community. This has been the case with incremental
housing and component sharing in water/sanitation infrastructure. There is a lack of consistent focus on basic services and support from federal policy makers and provincial institutions charged with development. Projects remain unfinished, experience cost overruns and contractors are not held to account.

34 Such positions are considered punishment posts as they do not lead to any higher promotions nor do they wield any
degree of power or budgetary authority. This illustrates the neglect with which the state treats the IS in katchi abadis.

67

·

Intentions behinds policies are changed and skewed through the political meddling and interference in the work of technocrats by politicians. This is the case in water/sanitation infrastructure.

Transportation
· There is a lack of investment and resources at the municipal level. While the province takes
ownership for major capital projects, little is left for law and enforcement as managed by the
municipal agencies.

·

Policy implantation is dependant on loans from abroad for studies, large capital investments and
consultants, rather than consolidating locally developed solutions.

·

There is a lack of monitoring and inter agency cooperation leaves them vulnerable to corruption and lack of will. Over time, the problems have become so complex that they are beyond the ability
of any one agency to address the issues.

·

There is no consistency or continuity in planning from the federal policy making level down to the
provincial and municipal levels.

·

Policy makers and agencies don't understand ground realties and only invest in large projects as
promoted by consultants and donor agencies

·

The public services machinery lacks capacity - where staff are developed arfd professionally trained - services are delivered. Where staff is under developed, there are problems and limited
service delivery.

Labour Conditions
· Policy launches are not accompanied by institutional capacity building at the local government
levels.

·

The lack of pay, in light of market forces and powerful industrial interests, results in officials taking bribes or turning a blind eye, to avoid death threats. Inspectors for labour conditions in the brick kiln industry for example, are often at the mercy or are bribed by powerful industrial actors to
ignore blatant labour violations.

·

Top down office policy development is limited to donor behaviour and direction (time bound studies rather than continuous engagement) and lacks any consistent level of community
engagement

·

Policies don't develop the IS and merely feed dependency (labour relations)

·

Policies do not challenge the political economy that places the interests of the elites and wealthy
and industry above those of labour.
68

· ·

Policy makers and programs are politicized structurally at the provincial level. There is no provincial program support for municipal realities. For example, simple measures of enforcement such as minimum wage, a provincial responsibility cannot be implemented by either
the province or municipal agencies.

·

There is too much competition exists between departments and politicians which marginalize existing structures in favour of new politically motivated ones. The policy outcome is zero.

·

Officials are disinterested and there are no incentives to enforce or encourage better working conditions and as a result, little exists to push poorly paid lower level staff to engage the IS.

Defining the Constraints
When asked what the constraints in engaging the IS were, fifty one respondents indicated that the
constraints were political in nature - and had to do with the neglect of political leadership, the self

interest of senior bureaucracy. Only five respondents indicated that the constraints were institutional,

in that the machinery of the bureaucracy and service delivery mechanisms were to blame for the lack of engagement with the IS. Four respondents indicated that the constraints included both political and
institutional factors. Responses included the following explanations regarding the constraints:

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
· Policies are constrained as they are developed at the higher levels of government and are more constrictive of the IS space. In other words, they don't empower the poor. In the case of social
housing for example, there is no incentive to register or follow the rules.

·

Policies are constrained by the lack of government understanding of the realities of the poor and the need to design programs that meet the challenges of their realities (Social housing)

·

Policies are constrained by decisions to import solutions from abroad and do not take into account
ground realities and sensibilities. Policy makers, engineers and planners in the water/sanitation
context - are not concerned with ground realities and are keen on implementing plans from abroad.

·

Policies are constrained by government thinking in terms of big budgets - which complicates
outcomes. What is required is sustainable, low budget thinking in the water and sanitation/sanitation context.

·

Policies are constrained by the top down thinking rather than bottom up engagement and
monitoring, particularly in water/sanitation infrastructure.

·

Policies are constrained by the inertia of too many agencies with little collaboration or cooperation being introduced into the agenda setting process. Once processes grind to a halt, the policy void is
69

captured by illegal elements and consortiums. The net outcome is the image that government can't
manage its programs, as has been the case in social housing.

Policies are constrained by the policy makers and decision makers of the state being detached from
realities of low income housing and water/sanitation infrastructure. Policies are constrained by a lack of will as politicians and councillors are not interested - and it is bureaucrats who are end up being diverted. Hence, changing bureaucratic mind set is difficult, specifically with regard to social housing and water/sanitation models. Policies are constrained in that high level capital projects are not accompanied by the funding of operations and maintenance costs in the long term. This has led to the deteriorating of water/sanitation infrastructure. There is a lack of dialogue as the formal and ISs do not understand one another and results in

resentment. For example, bureaucrats need to be in people's lives and in the communities rather
than in offices. This exacerbates the neglect of the IS with respect to social housing projects that end up getting derailed. Policies are constrained as the lower political and bureaucratic levels are disempowered with power concentrated at higher levels of province and municipality. Social housing and

water/sanitation infrastructure projects experience this - where knowledgeable staff on the ground
is bypassed by the dictates of higher level officials. Policies are constrained by a lack of institutional memory, in that lessons from the past are not

heeded or incorporated into policy development frameworks. For example, higher level officials pad budgets with personal allowances, while lower level staff lacks capacity and resources to implement policies and administrative machinery. This is particularly the case in low income
housing and water/sanitation infrastructure. Policies are constrained by a lack of outreach as citizens have a poor understanding of GOP

services. Where there is an opportunity for communities to approach government, citizens are not
aware of the process and require assistance to develop their ability to engage.

Policies are constrained as their development does not factor in coordination with NGOs. State officials will go ahead with projects in housing and water/sanitation infrastructure, only to have them fail and then resort to CBO assistance to mitigate project shortcomings. Policies are constrained as legislative priorities have not been followed, such as LGO 2001 beyond their establishment on paper. Local governance empowerment that seeks to elevate the profile and

70

capacity of municipalities to take more control of their context, are being withheld. The result is
continued inter agency conflict and overlap.

·

Policies are constrained by a lack of legislative authority where inter agency cooperation leaves lack of responsibility for what is happening on the ground. To this end, there is a need to monitor home grown solutions with the IS in social housing and water/sanitation infrastructure.

·

Policies are constrained by the attention drawn by large funded projects that naturally entice the embezzlement of funds. This is particularly the case of social housing projects.

·

Policies are constrained by their vulnerability to market volatility - where land is purchased for
investment rather than living.

Transportation

·

Policies are constrained at the development stages as political vision is not geared to sustainability
because of "solutions" from abroad.

·

Policies are constrained by senior politicians and bureaucrats who take development opportunities
leaving junior and front line agency officers with a lack of awareness and capacity.

·

Policies are constrained by the advantages of short term gains that crowd in political actors rather
than operational technocrats.

·

Policies are constrained by a lack of capacity. For example, junior officers possess the technical ability to learn but are not trained or empowered. Furthermore, at the decision making and planning levels-preparation, legislative compliance is weak. Inter-government cooperation and jurisdictional agreements need to be respected in order for capacity potentials to be realized.

·

Policies are constrained by a lack of empowerment at the agency level. In other words, there is a

limited level of autonomy provided to current agencies to enable them to perform their jobs. Furthermore, there is limited interaction with customer interactions - as staff are under capacity
developed

·

Policies are constrained as well funded projects and donor interests drive policy rather than lower
level capacities and infrastructure/system realities. This is exacerbated by corruption and rent
seeking behaviour of senior level politicians and bureaucrats.

·

Policies are constrained in the civil society spheres as NGOs and donors have grown to be more
interested in projects rather than institutional building.

71

Labour Conditions
· Policies are constrained by an inability of GOP outreach, as they can't target the IS a& the policies are political constructs and not geared for people. · Policies are constrained as they do not factor in implementation or monitoring of what is happening on the ground and focus solely on project planning and commissioning studies. · · Policies are constrained as the federal legislation is not capable and lower levels not empowered. Policies are constrained as policy makers are disconnected from implementation of legislation and
enforcing laws.

·

Policies are constrained as they are too high level - and via implementation, there is not enough pay to justify the adverse environment and taking on the political economy of the industrial class.

·

Policies are constrained as they are developed from a distance, politicization shackles technocrats

and engagement within the IS - realities are avoided and democracy is oppressive. · Policies are constrained by a lack of education and awareness by the local IS, many of whom are unskilled and can't engage politically, leave alone understand municipal services.

Identifying Possible Solutions
Finally, when asked where feasible solutions and probable improvements needed to be made to better engage the IS, Fifty respondents indicated that the solutions lay primarily with the institutions and

improving their ability to deliver services to the IS. Only one respondent indicated that political steps and engagement was the solution to engaging the IS. Nine respondents indicated that both political
and institutional steps needed to be taken to improve the state's engagement of the IS.

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
The responses on the types of workable policy solutions are premised if policies include the following
criteria:

·

Framed in consultation with stakeholders who are part of the IS reality. Models that incorporate the frameworks of component sharing and incremental housing need to be accompanied by the

empowerment and monitoring of lower level staff to ensure that processes are followed and politicization/favouritism is removed from basic services and programs in social housing, water
and sanitation.

·

Involve the education of GOP and Donors regarding ground realities, specifically the operations and maintenance side of programs. Once they realize that people intensive rather than capital

72

intensive programs need to be pursued, and then lobby for the improvement of documentation and
outreach to engage the poor. In order for this to happen, there is a need to educate professionals in
engaging the realities of the poor.

Focus on basic services and ensure that programs designed to engage the poor are insulated from
market imbalances and speculative price volatility.

Institutionalize component sharing, reduce political meddling and get bureaucrats to document all
processes. For example, monitoring of WAS A operations should take place at the district level.

Operate within better accountability frameworks to engage the poor at piloted levels of social
housing (housing)

Decentralize to engage poor on the ground and increase their accessibility through one window (Sindh Katchi Abadi Authority model of bringing service to the community).
Engages the IS, thereby eliminating the current policy void (which has led to the spread of the land

and water mafia) and commits to more documentation of plans of what exists and is possible to
maintain in terms of housing and water/sanitation infrastructure. State assumes the role of manager and arbitrator of disputes, and in turn, reduces land grabbing through better social housing frameworks. Improved frameworks to serve the IS. Policy makers need to survey social housing pilots of

Khuda Ki Basti and SAIBAAN, for example to disseminate resources in engagement of the IS.
Politicians must be sensitized to the realities of the poor.

Empowering of the poor through the provision of basic services and avoid targeted policies from

the top (Benazir Income Support Program) down which bypass current institutional frameworks.
Empower lower level bureaucrats, through engagement with the NGOs and CBOs for better
processes, better documentation and service delivery.

Empower municipal government to take ownership of processes from inception to completion, and benefit from monitoring from higher orders of government. Empower lower levels of capacity building to generate more documentation through consistent
processes. Predictable standard operating procedures will also compel politicians to engage

communities and ensure that more transparency and access to information is made available internally for plans on social housing and water/sanitation infrastructure. Respect documented processes and rules, more enabling power of bureaucrats to set the standards and follow procedures without political interference. Ownership of projects and programs needs to

be brought down to a level that is accessible by members of the IS and their CBOs/advocates.
73

Similarly, policy solutions in disaster management will work ifcapacity building is required at
lower levels.

·

Funding is sustainable in that the wealthy must inevitably subsidize the poor - a component sharing model that sees this is required.

·

Emphasis on bureaucratic accountability and the promotion of competent staff from junior levels to
higher levels within institutions rather than shuffling individuals who are part of networks of
political appointment.

·

Decentralization or devolution plans accompany local government ordinances. Need to have funds dependency on the external on the PFC. Need to ensure that hire and fire is brought down to

municipality. Eradicate political appointments. Ensure that orders are predictable and respected, should not change in stride. Projects should not start and then stall due to political change. Internally, need more staff, reduced turnover, better agency coordination, better capacity and
ensure motivation - address union concerns.

· ·

Educate community through skill development and then build on it. Establishment of better frameworks and governance to serve the poor - show where government works - insulate from market shocks (social housing).

Transportation
· More downloading of decision making authority to lower level bureaucrats who can engage and be
held accountable by the public. · Provision of effective coordination and guidance of line agencies and effective monitoring of their activities - particularly their relationships with one another. · State engages civil society groups from across concerned districts impacted by transportation issues and empower organizations.

·

Increased provincial emphasis on inspection and monitoring and less on duplicating municipal
agency mandates and functions.

·

Unbundling of efficiencies between public and private sector stakeholders. On the operations and maintenance side, it may be beneficial to have NGOs assist in training bureaucrats in transportation as they have within the water/sanitation contexts as to ground realities, and facilitate engagement
with the IS.

·

Builds capacity at lower levels both in solution generation and in maintenance. Simple solutions are better, cheaper and create more outreach and accessibility. Specifically, the approach of Bus

74

Rapid Transit which would solve many management issues along roadways and dedicate roads for
specific buses only, as opposed to Light Rail Transit which would cost significantly more and may
not be recoverable as usage would be restricted to the wealthy. · State reasserts itself as a regulator, particularly in the area of transportation where inter agency friction and jurisdictions are not resourced or coordinated.

·

Ensure that provincial government needs to coordinate, check and 'monitor' the lower levels of
government without getting involved in 'doing'.

·

Avoid one off projects and focus on basic services through institutional strengthening and
monitoring.

Labour Conditions · Decisions and plans are depoliticized and if training facilities for employment and municipal
engagement are free and accessible to the IS.

·

More recognition of unions, engagement and legitimization of their concerns.

·

There is a need to advance donor reporting beyond projects to more institutionalization and
ongoing sustainability.

·

State recognizes the potential of the IS more than it has in the past - economically and socially, not
just politically as vote pools.

·

Increase pay of technocratic and more empowered lower level bureaucrats to avoid bribes. Where staff is paid more, there is less tendency to engage in rent seeking behaviour. Similarly, municipal
offices should be autonomous, reduce over staffing.

· - Proper checks and balances and sincerity in engagement between provinces and municipalities and
community based organizations.

·

Engagement of shadow government and politicians need to be in communities and not solely with
industrial actors.

·

Engagement on the ground with frontline bureaucrats and technocrats.

75

Appendix VII
Importance in Engaging the IS
Critical
Politicians

Secondary Research Results
Cases/Commentators
H

Actor

w/s

T

LC
3

>

-''/'Authors
Rashid (1998), Hasan (1999)

"I" " 

Khattak, S.G. (2001), ILO, (2005), Shah, Z. (2007)
Siddiqui and Khattri (1998), Hasan (1997, 2000, 2002, 2004,1999),lsmail (2002, 2004), Siddiqui (1998), Khaliq and Siddiqui (2000), Alvi (1997), Pervaiz, A., Rahman, P. and Hasan, A., (1999), Khan, S. et al. (2007)

Neutral
Hinders

1 10

2 4 2

Siddiqui and Khattri (1998), Rahman (1998), Aleemuddin (1998), Hasan (1997, 2004, 2000, 1999, 2002), Fernandes (1997), Siddiqui (1998), Khaliq and Siddiqui (2000), Ismail (2004, 2002, 2006), Zaidi
Critical Institutions Neutral
Hinders
1 4
1 1

12

10

7

12

(2001), World Bank, (2006), OPP, (2008), Rehman (2000), Ahmed, N., (2008), Aslam H., (2004), Shah, Z., (2005), Dharejo, S., (2005, 2009), Khoso, A., (2005), Ali, M.Z., (2005), PILER, (2005, 2007), Khattak, S.G. (2001), ILO, (2005), Shah, Z. (2007), Government of Pakistan (2007, 2008), Penalosa, E. (2008), Hisam, Z., (2006), Imran, M. and Low, N., (2003), Sohail, M., (2000)
Hasan (2004), Pervaiz, A., Rahman, P. and Hasan, A., (1999) Ismail (2002), Alvi (1997), Hasanl (1999), Hasan (2002)

1

Critical
Donors Neutral Hinders
1 1

Nonedb
Hasan (1997) Alvi, (1997), Imran, M. and Low, N., (2003)

Critical

8

7

3

4

NGO
Neutral
Hinders
1

Siddiqui and Khattri (1998), Aleemuddin (1998), Rashid (1998), Hasan (1997, 2000, 1999), Khaliq and Siddiqui (2000), Ismail (2002), Zaidi (2001), Pervaiz, A., Rahman, P. and Hasan, A., (1999), OPP, (2008), Khan, S., Khan, F.S., Akhtar, A.S., (2007), Aslam H., (2004), Dharejo, S., (2005), Khoso, A., (2005), ILO, (2005), Hisam, Z., (2006), Sohail, M., (2000) Siddiqui and Khattri, (1998)

1

Nonedb
Siddiqui and Khattri (1998), Rahman (1998), Rashid (1998), Hasan (1997, 2004, 2000, 2002), Fernandes (1997), Khaliq and Siddiqui (2000), Ismail (2002, 2006), Hasanl (1999), Zaidi (2001), Pervaiz, A., Rahman, P. and Hasan, A., (1999), OPP, (2008), Khan, S., Khan, F.S., Akhtar, A.S.,

Critical CBO Neutral Hinders

13

9

6

12

(2007), Aslam H., (2004), Dharejo, S., (2005), Khoso, A., (2005), Ali, M.Z., (2005), PILER, (2005,
2007), Khattak, S.G. (2001), ILO, (2005), Sayeed, Z. and Javed, S. (2001), Government of Pakistan None None

\

(2007. 2008), Penalosa, E. (2008), Hisam, Z., (2006), Imran, M. and Low, N., (2003), Sohail, M., (2000)

35 While there was no direct emphasis of donor involvement being critical to engaging the IS, a role for them has been mentioned in the literature that is more 36 While NGOs have not been stated as hindering engagement of the IS, some survey information does caution against the role of contract NGOs, that operate to
supplement the goals of large donor and state projects

advisory and steers governments away from large projects

c

76

Appendix VIII

Secondary Research Survey

The third component of the research methodology examines documented case studies of state
(provincial and/or municipal) engagement of the IS. Insights and lessons from past case studies

may provide insight into the drivers of both positive and negative experiences in municipal - IS

engagement.

The following section outlines the experiences and summarizes some of the key

themes that emerge from case studies from across the three contexts.

Housing, Water/Sanitation Infrastructure
In the first context, twenty housing and nine infrastructure water/sanitation case studies were examined. Aside from illustrating that top down project development and implementation is

neither sustainable nor feasible, a number of recurring themes across the case studies affirm the
benefits of effective frameworks of public - community engagement that harness public and community sector strengths and capacities.

The first finding within the literature was that while legislation is abundant on paper, it is

ineffective at reaching the IS as monitoring, enforcement and implementation of such laws is non existent. Furthermore, where policy outcomes from decisions do exist, it is often expropriated by
new policies that serve a narrow segment of society. Top down policy development has not

engaged the IS.

A recurring theme within the studies is that despite a history of Katchi Abadi related legislation

at the national level (National Constitution, Sindh Katchi Abadi Act, Martial Law Order No. 103,
building Control Ordinance) and planning at the municipal level (Greater Karachi Resettlement Plan, Karachi Master Plan, Land Regularization); Katchi Abadis continue to be established,

bulldozed and razed; leaving members of the IS displaced and vulnerable to illegal invasion or
organized state funded invasion. As land prices rise in urban centers, speculators including

senior bureaucrats, politicians and capitalists - have pushed for the demolition of Katchi Abadis. The hardest hit slums within the IS tend to be those without linkages with powerful political

actors or deep community roots (migrants). While sufficient tracts of public land exist outside of

77

Karachi - a lack of political will at the senior levels constrains the mobilization of institutional machinery to designate the areas as solely housing for the poor (Ismail, A*, 2002).

Interviews from the IS reveal a harsh criticism of the elite bias of development projects and their
impact on the poor. For example, automobile centered transportation and development policies, such as the Lyari Expressway and Northern Bypass in Karachi, have not only displaced IS

members but have also made their commutes to work longer and more expensive and their slums more isolated. Rather than invest in the management of more accessible public transit, which

would be utilized by a significant proportion of the populace and resolve several other related issues, the government ceded to the development objectives of a small group of planners and pursued the capital intensive development of the two highway arteries. Development and

construction took place in spite of repeated warnings and protests by professionals within civil society regarding the projects' impact on the IS. The impacts of related development

displacement and the socio economic upheaval of the IS could have been remedied through the
creation of public consultations between local government and community organizations. However, as with national policies such as The Katchi Abadi Act and National Resettlement

Policy continuously, there continues to be gross violations due to the lack of capacity of local
government to fend off provincial and elitist development projects (Hasan, A., 2004).

In light of the limitations of top down policy development constraints, the literature also demonstrates that community based development models that accept ground realities and

facilitate gradual development are experiencing success.

The 'incremental model' of social

housing has been far more effective than larger development projects as it works with tenants

and their context.

The approach of slowly developing land and building homes is sustainable

and less burdensome for the homeowner.

Katchi Abadis are at the lower end of Karachi's polarized housing sector and exposes the inefficiencies in land allocation and inequity in service provision to rich and poor. According to commentators, the existence of Katchi Abadis and their persistent under-servicing are due
largely to greed at the highest levels of power and a lack of technical, regulatory and planning

professional capacity in service administration. In spite of over 50% of Karachi being composed

78

of Katchi Abadis, federal and municipal housing policies have consistently failed at engaging the
poor. In fact, state attempts at developing social housing have only resulted in increased land

capture by middle class investors as access to a limited supply of land has been complicated by cumbersome procedures, credit shortfalls and officials/IS animosity. The IS have consistently

been excluded from the benefits of such programs, due to their inability to comprehend and

engage in the workings of an inefficient system. Pakistan's welfare state model (site construction
of homes for poor/government employees), site and services model (land sold directly to the
poor) and regularization model (KAIRP) all suffered from market valuation placing housing

beyond the reach of a disengaged poor.

Corrupt officials have taken advantage of the weak

framework by forming consortiums with utility firms and real estate offices (collectively referred to as land grabbers) and developing the land as private entities, before selling parcels of

land/homes off to the investors37. The OPP (low cost community based sanitation) as well as
SAIBAAN (incremental housing approach) have shown relative promise. Evidence shows the

success of self help models which persistently pursue public sector engagement (Hasan, A.,
2004).

The incremental housing approach to engaging the IS (after which SAIBAAN is modelled to replicate across the country) has proven to be the best application within the public sector, following the model of Hyderabad's 'Khuda Ki Basti' (KKB), meaning God's Community. Ongoing involvement and gradual, phased, social development by technically staffed and locally

based NGOs in community development to members of the IS has benefited the poor.
Assistance with documentation and procedural engagement have enabled public sector officials

to engage the IS better.

Incremental (SAIBAAN, KKB) and component sharing (OPP) models

have been proven to be successful a#d according to Urbanists, should be followed (Hasan, A., 1999). Self financing, transparent documentation and minimal intervention have also led to

increased leasees, increased networking and employment within the social housing compounds. Transferable lessons have been shown to be more successful through technocratic engagement of

the people, less political intervention (in policies and institutions) and the formalization of local

37 While land grabbers have developed many of these tracts of once public property as private development
initiatives, they are sold off to investors and members of the IS at higher prices. Hence, while many of these

informal subdivisions (i.e. Yakoobabad) are capable of meeting the needs of the IS, they are supported by corrupt
officials. In order to afford the properties, members of the IS engage in precarious and sometimes bonded labour relationships to pay off the debt.

79

grassroots institutions.

The experiences of incremental housing also show that the requisite

context is one where the government role is limited, predictable, simple, transparent and widely
publicized. The implementation stage is where petty politics, patronage, corruption, etc. happens resulting in exemptions. A simple 'one window' bureaucratically managed procedure is required

with minimal staff managing a scheme and the external components of services. NGOs then act
as catalysts for leadership development to ensure that self styled leaders stay away as no kickbacks are available to community leaders (Ismail, A., 2002).

Similarly the 'component sharing model', demonstrated by the infrastructure water/sanitation sector, has shown the most potential in streamlining community engagement with municipalities

to obtain an external connection for water and sewage services. With respect to infrastructure in water/sanitation, studies highlight the success of mapping and documentation, for effective relationship building and advocacy. Karachi's water and sewerage utility, has been long plagued with organizational deficiencies, a lack of aligned plans, robust procedures and documentation (Rehman, P., 2008). Documentation and mapping, which are at the heart of the Orangi Pilot

Project's (OPP-RTI's) community based work, established the grounds on which relations with government could enable the building of drinking water and sanitation lines within the community. A combination of formal and informal processes, underscore how relationships and the component sharing model have been nurtured over time. The OPP's component sharing

model includes issues identification, field experience, linkages/partnerships with government,

research and extension, civil society partnership, ownership of process and media channelling for information rather than publicity (WaterAid, 2006). All of these processes require collaboration

at the community level as well as persistence engagement with municipal officers. Side effects

include segregating and reducing government agency overlaps38, minimizing encroachment by
other agencies, consolidating infrastructure information, addressing the lack of accountability,
commenting on project affordability, examining cheaper alternatives, pressuring for attention to

38 In other words, government agencies at local and provincial levels should be assigned separate roles and
responsibilities to ensure that there is no overlap of duties and inter agency tension, and enabling service providers
such as the KWSB.

80

low cost solutions on storm water and drainage management and highlighting the weaknesses

current state machinery39 (Pervaiz, A., Rehman, P. and Hasan, A., 2008).

The low cost component sharing model has been shown to work beyond Karachi in Lahore and other urban contexts. Lahore's MUAWIN has served as a training and support base for the

model's replication in Punjab. In 1994, the SKAA adopted the component sharing model in its KA upgrade program in Karachi. In Nov 2002, The Punjab Katchi Abadi and Urban

Improvement Directorate (PKAUI) adopted the policy and successfully advocated for its adoption in a government - ADB financed project for 21 towns (SPBUS). In November 2006

the National Sanitation Policy was approved by the GOP, and provincial policies are being finalized. The CDGK is increasingly supporting development of natural drainage canals as box trunks for storm water management. OPP-RTFs proposal for sewage disposal for other CDGK water utility plans is also being followed. OPP documentation is being regularly used by state

agencies for their work and also by the media to highlight and resolve issues. At the request of engaged client communities, the OPP set up a Community Development Network (CDN) as a

forum for the strengthening of mutual learning, support and policy advocacy between members
of the IS and municipal agencies. Misereor and Water Aid continue with their focussed donor support of programs that also encourage the youth to train and encourage outreach across Sindh. The Citizens Water and Sanitation group based at the partner NGO Urban Resource Center
(URC) provides a forum for discussions and promotion of peoples alternatives. Concerned by

the Japanese International Cooperation Agency's (JICA) unrealistic proposal for water supply for Karachi, OPP-RTI, assisted by members, has come up with solutions for the water supply for the city, focusing on ensuring water for the poor. Partner PURC in Lahore is also undertaking
research and organizing forums on the city's issues (OPP, 2008). The OPP component sharing

model illustrates the benefits of engagement that result from a participatory model. Such efforts

illustrate that the effectiveness of public sector organizations can be increased through people
centered engagement and solution development.

39 There is a significant amount of commentary on the performance and threats to the KWSB vis a vis the
misalignment within the KMC and now the CDGK. However, the point within our study is simply the advisory
capacity that an expert NGO can provide not only to communities but also to the state in terms of institutional functioning.

81

Case studies also illustrate that public sector organizations, such as the SKAA, have worked well in the past where bureaucrats embody a professional attitude, understanding of the IS. service commitment and

In the case of the water/sanitation context, similar benefits can be

realized if municipal service utilities such as WASAs are sensitized through the assistance of
technically competent NGOs.

The regularization of Katchi Abadis in Karachi - has been the responsibility of the Sindh Katchi
Abadis Authority (SKAA), based within the Provincial Planning and Development Department. When the agency was highly dependent on provincial and federal funds, it was inefficient and under performing in terms of leases granted to IS homeowners. Once it assumed new leadership, it was made autonomous after which internally driven administrative reforms (reductions in red

tape, acceptance of ground realities, visits to communities and citizen centered development) improved accessibility and engagement with the IS. The demonstration of the SKAA's

effectiveness influenced the Hyderabad replication of Khuda Ki Basti (Siddiqui, T.A., 1998). Changes made by the SKAA show that administrative reform from within can lead to more efficient service delivery - if coupled with the decentralization of decision making (authority for granting leases), procedures (streaming the grant process), accessibility (mobile services through

'one window'

leasing) and training in dealing with community.

Indicators for agency

improvement were measured in terms of leases granted to members of the IS, taken for granting
of leases (1440 days to 144 days) and cost effectiveness (as compared to local councils). The

only critique of the current administrative set up is that higher leasing rates will be required if the SKAA is to become fully self-sufficient (Ismail, A., 2004). This of course assumes the

continued ineptitude of higher orders of government in refusing to monitor, recognize and
support the achievements of the agency.

The performance of the SKAA is impressive in spite of threats to the public service agency from

administrative misalignment and political interference.

The ability of the agency to develop

financial self-sufficiency, a vibrant organizational culture, decentralized services to the poor,
standard operating procedures and documentation, partnerships with NGOs and CBOs, employee welfare - productivity linkages and communications/outreach programs; demonstrates the

capability of state agencies to effectively engage the IS. Persistent problems with year end fund

82

recovery, head office - field coordination, rewarding persistent levels of OT by staff and
succession planning requires management vision, guidance and support from within government.

However, commentators maintain that opportunities to buttressing the SKAA position are in more NGO and CBO outreach as well as in marketing of leases to existing KA owners (Zaidi,
S.A., 2001).

While the internal benefits to SKAA administrative reform are obvious, the external benefits are also noteworthy. The improved ability of the SKAA in project and lease management revealed the lack of control on contractors (scope, cost overruns) that was responsible for high costs in the past. SKAA reform involved work with OPP - RTI as monitors of contractors around more A survey of 60 KA settlements revealed that SKAA Public

sustainably developed design solutions.

OPP RTI design and construction was a fraction of the cost of KMC developments.

engagement, simpler designs, transparent bidding processes and in house plan processing all contributed to the retention of control on development processes that translated into cost controls

and savings.

In a survey of 48 development schemes, SKAA managed projects experienced a

30% savings in time and money and better quality workmanship (through GO - CBO collaboration) as compared to those managed by KMC (Khaliq, A., 2000). Other studies outline the current disconnects between the GOS, KWSB and KMC which burden public funds ands

undermine

government

efficiency

(OPP,

2000).

OPP

practitioners

argue

that

more

improvements and connections between staff and citizens in terms of KWSBs operations are

required to encourage the entities sustainability (OPP, 2000).

The exploration of alternative

service arrangements such as Awami tanks40 has been proposed to improve distribution, employ
the poor and increase effective institutional performance (Ahmed, N., 2008)

Public sector management challenges are also found within Water and Supply Agencies and echo the needs for increased community engagement. Recommendations for agency

improvement include establishing customer service standards, business performance standards,
cost recovery alignment plans, service provider staffing decisions, improving collection

protocols with communities, graduate tariff increases, improved accountability mechanisms,

40 Community-managed public tanks (Awami tanks) have been used in Orangi, Karachi's largest informal
settlement, to cope with water shortages. These tanks are an example of a water supply service developed as a cooperative arrangement between informally developed community organizations and public sector agencies.

83

utility autonomy, ministerial oversight and performance management standards - tied to funding.

In order for these recommendations to be implemented effectively, more capacity building and
autonomy is required for the operating agencies that provide services to the citizens. This

ultimately would translate into power for utility strategy and management decisions to be shifted
to lower tiers of government (WB, 2006).

Case study experience also reveals that improved engagement between the IS and municipal
officers resultedfrom IS facilitated pressure on bureaucrats rather than politicians.

Several studies in Karachi reveal the gains of IS community based efforts in engaging
government service delivery machinery, through educated community champions and activists.

The experience of Ghaziabad and Orangi revealed that economic conditions have improved due in part to the level of education and skills of residents. In other words, the experience that

prominent residents have in dealing with municipal agencies and understanding what they are

capable of getting out of line departments, has enabled the rest of the community to benefit.
Such educated and prominent citizens, it was found, are typically suspicious of and alienated
from political groups and hence don't engage politicians. As many of the activists serve as state

employees, there were effective in engaging other municipal agencies within their communities
and inserting their neighbours into the decision making process (Hasan, A., 1998).

The case of Nawalene and Lyari revealed that CBOs within the IS need to pursue capacity
building efforts to effectively engage municipal government for service delivery improvements. CBO capacity improved through their organization, participation in networks, retention of

educated leaders, acquisition of technical support (through NGOs) and development of leaders to press state agencies for service delivery improvements. CBO development also revealed the
limitations of government patronage and media support, which the residents had previously

relied upon. What was more beneficial was the capacity building of their organizations to
engage and monitor government services, thereby minimizing corruption and rent seeking behaviour through frequent follow up with KWSB and KMC officials on plans (Hasan, A.,
1998).

84

'SJJOJJQ 093 WM PH^JEd UI
ui s^is sqj SutBu'Bud usqi puB si ^J J° jxojuoo oqj jo ssquojbme o^js Suisbqjoui
JOOd 91$ OJ XlQAipp 90TAJ9S gupepiUI JO

qjejs uo posssjduii Ajsnonupuoo ojv
guunsus pu^ uoi^zi

qons joj qsnd oj §uip|inq A^pedeo 09D su^^ui sxqj 'si

soao JOd -(Z,003 "S'V
pire Suuojtuoui jo sppoui '

oinqoEin XjQAipp qotajss ^dpiunui jo Ajinqi T poojnossj oqj uo spuodop ssquqatpojjo pire J9A\od jo

Xjiunuiuioo puu Xj
jo

inq 'suorp^p jo Apo jou sjstsuoo uopnpAop j^qj sA\oqs ^sspiunuiuioo qons ut oouauodxg

'(8661 '*V 'ubsbh) sajnpsoojd pu^ sopipd '
9JOIU 'sjpsoj 9Aup u^o UIJ9J §uo| oqi j^ao pourejsns sdiqsuoi^pj

si XuojO3 9JBJPAV m0JJ uoss9| sqx

·sdiqsuoi^pj pdpiunui - Xjranuiuioo jo

uo SQAipsdsjod psAoidun qjiM ssS^un OApisod o^ poj s^q sdnojg 093 Pu^ uoiun
IPA\ qgnojqj juoraujQAog gumsjnd jo Qousjsisjod sqx *9A^q uuo dtqsjop^ot pu^

uoiun moqej qgnojqi uot^ztubSjo ye\\\ ssooons oqj ps^QAQj osp Xuop3 ^J^JPAV J°

'(8661 '*V 'treseH) Suipnnq ^xocdBO O93
uiojj sjipuaq 'Xouoi^dsu^jj pu^ jo jusuiQAOjduiT sqj ut

stCjoO -tojiuoui o\ Xjje
so93 jo a*}!!!0^ oqx *S9pu9§^ Qjqisuodssj

uoipipsunf xvsp joj paiqqoj os|B SO93 '
90TAJ0S oqi oj ^JiUQO 'sjQpBO| ipqj jou puB sspiunuiuioo s^reui oj jopjo uj -

90IAJ9S qjj{\ lijousq ^ou pip qoiqM suiBiSojd pn^JBd puB su^|d juquiuj9ao§

jo Suipus oqj joj paxqqoj sisiApo^ 093 'suopounj dxqsjspEQi jo uop^zppqod piOAB oj
u[ *Xuop3 joozu^]ai ut sjuspisoj si jo sousuodxa oqj sba\ sb popa^ou sq ppoM sopiununuoo

jpqj 4p9§B§u9 Xn^opTpd ojoui omvooq sj9p^9| Xjiunuiuioo sb ^qj sea\ qo^ojdd^ sxqj jo
*spooqjtioqq§pu pooiAJOs jspun joj ouip ssuodsoj sqj sonpsj pu^

§

oqM sjop^Qj 093

'

oj sjjojjo 093 pajij^uaq jjoddns ODN lBtP P^F^aqj Xuo|O3 joozubjaj jo qsbo

The flourishing of the IS and the push for a new redistribution of wealth4s required to mitigate

the impacts of the unplanned revolution (Hasan, A., 2002).

The failure of the formal housing

market for example, has prompted the IS to take control of land. However, the government still

has a role to play in the management of resources and state agencies need to be strengthened by
sensitization with ground realities. The government is capable of working with CBOs within the

IS and developing alternative models to service the IS. Similarly, there is an opportunity to even reach out to the illegal land developers to distribute some land and plots for sale to low income
groups in exchange for retaining high end plots (Hasan, A., 2000).

In order for governments to offer services to the IS (specifically the Katchi Abadis), they must be

sensitized to the context, needs and abilities of the IS. What is repeated across the case studies,
is the need for documentation, information sharing and persistent focussed lobbying on an issue that can force specific government agencies to deliver on their required services (Fernandes, K.,

1997). Government agencies are highly politicized, with officers being changed spuriously and their successors finding fault with their work - and incurring stoppages in work during transition periods. If communities engage government agencies, they can force government departments to perform through support from NGOs and technocrats. While government agencies can accept

but not own the model (such as component sharing), they can be pushed to adopting standard
operating procedures, chain of command, appropriate engineering, contractor management practices and predictable levels of performance. State agencies can function better if department

leadership is aware of ground realities and engages CBOs and NGOs as resources as well as partners. Similarly, international agencies which are pulled in other directions vis a vis wrong

assumptions can be effective if they are sensitized to the context of the IS. To this extent, CBOs representing the IS need to organize and push information sharing and capacity building with
government agencies.

The state of water and sanitation infrastructure would also benefit from advancing the relationship between the state and advocates for the IS. The example of the OPP engaging the

KWSB on internal - external component sharing has shown to work (Hasan, A., 1997). As the

OPP has pointed out, numerous issues related to supply gaps, bulk water/leakage ratios, tanker

86

operations and hydrant usage; donkey carts supplying KMC piped water through bribery all require improved state management practices and addressing. On the revenue side, only 30% of consumers pay, while 70% of connections are illegal. 40% of sanitation is treated, with the rest discharged to storm water tributaries which make their way to the sea. Many of the IS

connections are not factored into large official plans nor are there efforts to separate storm from
sewage. The dynamics of infrastructure development consist of donor lobbying for large

treatment plants (which are often operating at 30% capacity) and resistance by smaller CBOs and NGOs that insist on repairing and rehabilitating below ground piping infrastructures, which is harder to maintain (Hasan, A., 1999). Regardless of the outcome, the sustainability position that CBOs representing the IS advocate for, is a critical component in the push for more state accountability and ensures relationship building between the CBOs and the state for improved
service delivery.

Evidence from the housing and water/sanitation contexts illustrates proven returns and savings from increased municipal - community collaboration to address service delivery constraints to the IS. Similar themes also exist within the transportation context that support the case for

sustainability through increased IS engagement.

Transportation
In the second context, seven separate studies examine various dynamics between the IS and the transportation context. Urban public transport is key for the IS to contribute to economic The studies conclude that state management of

development in industrial areas within the city.

the context is imperative to addressing current inequities and constraints to affordability, mobility and accessibility for the poor. Commentators push for increased collaboration between
police, road construction and highway management authorities.

The case

studies

in transportation reveal that the complexity of the challenges require

government to take back its responsibilities in managing the sector for the IS, through improved

coordination by state agencies, independent of political derailment. Failure to do so will result in
chaos.

87

Democratic and Military administrations have unsuccessfully reformed civic administrative
structures, resulting in the proliferation of duplicate agencies and offices which further stall the efficient operation of the system. The effective operation of the Karachi Transport Corporation (KTC) service from 1978 to 1984 and the perseverance of the city through periods of

management turmoil demonstrate the potential of the public sector to manage and operate a public transit system. However, the KTC shut down, due to losses combined with 70% of

commuters using minibuses (which are the only service that the IS receives within the Katchi

Abadis).

The absence of a detailed transportation governance and ownership plans41 for
has reduced livelihood opportunities, lowered the potential for economic

transportation

development, polarized planning (rich 'automobile' policies, rather than poor 'bus' policies), increased injuries and accidents and has contributed to reduced service quality for users and citizens (Ismail, A., 2002a). The lack of enforcement (federal and provincial policies and acts)

and coordination (local level agencies) has created a chaotic environment in urban transport. IS labour within the transportation context suffers from cutbacks as they are unprotected. The

government has failed numerous times to address transportation issues through imported solutions (KCR, KRTC, KOS, SRTC, KTC) demonstrating that effective reforms require the

inclusion of all stakeholders (Sohail, M. 2000).

However, surveys of experts within the field

indicate that a lack of management capability and space with respect to the KCR, minibuses (transporter - operator relations and fares/quality balance for the poor) and the various

government agencies is all that undermines the current system, which is now plagued by the
transportation mafia (Hasan, A., 1999). The solution then, would be to engage the IS and all

stakeholders in developing sustainable solutions to systemic issues.

Numerous stakeholders have signalled a desire to collaborate to address system deficiencies, which necessitates a lead management role of the government. Transporters and users have

organized and demonstrated a desire to move forward in solution development, if managed by
the public sector. Operators have established a compensation fund for victims and have

signalled a willingness to cooperate with administrators regarding systemic issues (permit
management, eradication of extortion by police, traffic violations, encroachment) which

41 It is important to note here that the private sector has not been able to sustain transportation system plans that are
affordable. Hence, the responsibility falls back to the public sector.

88

overwhelm the system.

The Minibus drivers union (part of the Karachi Transport Ittehad) has

lobbied for terminals, repair depots, a rationalization of routes and the creation of a Karachi Municipal Transport Authority (KMTA) to coordinate transportation management. These

requests have been echoed for both social and economic development (JICA, 2006) as

infrastructure management continues to be pushed back to the government.

Self help at the

community level (bus stop maintenance, vehicle interior standards and fare recovery) has been recommended as a means of maintaining and monitoring a geographically dispersed system. The coordination of improvements would then fall to municipal agencies and communications with the public (Sohail, M., 2000).

The success of CBO - NGO - state collaboration in the KPTS Metro bus shows that government can manage public transport systems (albeit at a higher fare). Unionization of IS workers in the transportation context has also resulted in the reduction of extortion and bhatta as paid to the police. This approach has started in Lahore and is spreading to Karachi (Hisam, Z., 2006). A set
of senior bureaucrats have experienced success with the Traffic Management Project, showing

that updated administrative and recognized governance functions can lead to improved efficacy
of Karachi's transportation issues (Hasan, A., 1999). The Karachi Circular Railway, the

celebrated, subsidized, urban railway loop for the city, was shut down due to a spate of management, subsidy and expansion problems. However, in light of the current traffic, roadway and congestion problems, there is a pressing need to bring back a publicly managed rail based

transportation system. Furthermore, the limited potential of capital intensive solutions, and the
proven capability of a well managed rail system, supports the need for a publicly owned system. (Ismail, A., 2002a).

Furthermore, the government needs to engage the IS more in its planning and design of transportation policies in order for them to realize mass acceptance and forecast usage.

Several solutions exist that require increased government management of the system, rather than importing capital intensive solutions from abroad. Interviews of IS reveal that the automobile

policy of Lyari in combination with the Northern Bypass, has not only displaced IS members but has made their commutes longer, utilities expensive, lives more expensive and their slums more

89

isolated as markets are shut down. The double displacement and their socio economic upheaval
could have been remedied through the creation of public consultations between local government and community organizations. National policies such as Katchi Abadi Act and National

Resettlement Policy continuously are violated due to lack of capacity of local government to
enforce (Ismail, A., 2006).

Urban transport and global trends also place an unsustainable influence and burden on urban
planning. The Urban Transport Master Plan of Lahore prepared with the technical and financial

assistance of Japan International Corporation Agency (JICA) pushes high technology Light Rail
Transit (LRT) along with construction of new roads. However, high densities, intensely mixed land use patterns, short trip distances and a high share of walking and non-motorized transport

makes such an option sub optimal. As such, large investments in high tech solutions cannot be
expected to solve Lahore's transport problems. The Comprehensive Urban Transport Master

Plan of Lahore must encourage non-motorized transport and provide the opportunity to fast growing private vehicle users to change their travel mode. Secondary research concludes that the
only solution suitable for Pakistani cities is one that has been locally designed and aims to solve
the transport problems of the majority (Imran, N. and Low, M., 2003).

Solutions will be largely management based rather than capital intensive.

In contrast to Light

Rail Transit, Bus Rapid Transit has proven to be successful in several other Asian cities, to be far less expensive, more accessible and more affordable to governments to establish and maintain. It

is also, according to Diaz and Penalosa, more symbolic of equitable relations between people and
individuals in society. Bus Rapid Transit and dedicated infrastructure to meet the realistic needs of the large majority is more effective than expensive LRT projects. BRT can be unbundled as well to allow for community maintenance and involvement in the governance of the
infrastructure (Penalosa, E., 2008).

The case studies from the transportation context emphasize the need for the government to

assume responsibility for the operation,

coordination and management of the

system's

infrastructure for the public and the IS as a whole.

However, failed attempts at reforming the

system in isolation have demonstrated the need for the state to engage the IS and all stakeholders

90

16

uopdrujoo pire uopeiusrasfdun juopxjpui 'sdejJOAO 'uopEjusuixfejhi

·suimSojd Jjijdn TBP0S uo

juouiujqaoS sqi A*q jusds §upq jqq jo %g ueqj ssaj sq} A*q papojiQj si pire suipsp ^qj uo osje si

spuu^qo jeuijoj qgnojqi ^5^z jo uopoojpo sqx 'sjnoAed uiojj Jijousq guxure^qo ui poSuSud are

qSnojqi oqM ps^uij puB sjmsjn ^ s! IT 'sui^j^ojd juouiujsaox? jsqjo qjiM sy '(6661
noq^i pnqo pu^ sopipd 9§ea\ uinuiraiui jo as^o Qq^ si sb 'punojg aqj uo
jnq 'jod^d uo jsnqoi j^odd^ sspipd a\ojs^ lusuiSxteuEiu jood pu^

9ATP9JJ3UT '9xfel3A00 JOOd 'odODS JOOd qjTM SJUTBJJSUOO O^ 3tip gUTUipsp SB

(qojoj jnoq^i pajuunjsa 000^/6661 ^1 J° %Zfr) SI &f\ UT 9S0tP JQAoo iou op sraajsXs
*sjsruj pu^ suot^ztu^Sjo qjbjpm snoj^uinu puB pspunj X|^npTAipui opnpui

jps) oiejpM y^pos jo tpunoo ^uop^u 'usuiom 'suosjsd pstq^sip opnpui

\mduoQ

-uox^pdod aq^ jo uoxpejj ^ pu^ soaXojduio iu9uiuj9ao§ p§je} qoiqM suoisusd

pp puB i^puiAoid spnpux sui^jSojd jofeui oqx \\puox\no \uox, ut sopuspxjjs sjqEuopssnb
jnq ouip ouios joj dou\d ut UQQq 3A^q svamSoid oijpods jnoq^j pu^ spu a*pjes \upos

·guuojraouj pue juoui9§^§u9 pA3| punojg sojitibaj pra p^Tuiq si oj qo^ojdd^ 4uA\op doj, sqj 'sjxsjuoo snoiAQjd oqj qi|A\ sy ·}U9iuui9AO§ jo
Aq

pu^ w podopAop spu a*pjes jupos ut punoj uasq seq sssoons

SI ^qi uiojj sj95[joa\ pozT^uiSj^ui pu^ papuoq Apejnopjed 'uop^jsu^S ssouoj^m^ pu^ Sutjohuoui
UI JU9UI9§^§UQ JOJ 01 pQ^OOJ 9JB 1U9UIQA|OAUT SOON Pu^ SO9O 'qSBSJJtlO JOUOp pUB 9JBJS JO 5fO^J

joj dn 95[buj oi jopjo uj 'jnoq^j si jo siq§u oqj spojojd j^qj uopejSTxfej qojojus pu^ sspipd
Sip? oj si uoTinps oqi jeqi szTS^qdujo sjo^juoujuioo '

jo suopxpuoo §ui5[joa\ oqj pue sjqgu jnoq^j jo juq§t|§ou uqjjo qj^ oqA\ 'sjsn^T
JOdXQ 0§JB| SJtlOA^J JBqj XUIOUOOQ JBOpnod X9|duiO0

Ut S9§U9n^t[3 9lP Pu^ 490B|dp5[J^UJ JEUIJOJUT pU^ {^UJJOJ 9qj UiqjTAV
ut iuouiujoaoS jo suopejiunj sqi jno aurod soipnjs os^o oqx ixq^uoo |butj sqj jo

ut psunirexQ qjqm suopipuoo SupjJOM pu^ jnoqej si jo sj^js aqj uo ssxpnjs
suoi)ipuo3

sjqSu jnoq^i sqj ut psoqos si
'Xppos jo sjusuixtes \\u joj 9{qxss9oo^ pui?
si
ouo oj oqj ujjojsubjj oj

must be addressed according to commentators, through merging programs nationally, expanding pension and insurance schemes (to be self sufficient), expanding public works (to ensure wage minimums), developing food subsidy and reforming government agencies (Aslam, H., 2004). Current policies for engaging the IS are insufficient and more programs tied to their

independence, growth and economic development are required (World Bank, 2009).

Over twelve laws are in place that addresses occupational health and safety legislation, but there is no one comprehensive and enforced piece that is positively impacting the working conditions of the IS. Across the mining and engineering sectors which utilize a significant proportion of IS

labour, there is a lack of safety equipment and protective devices which leads to eye injuries.
Many suffer from ocular trauma. The construction, garment and hosiery industries all utilize IS

workers and lack regularity of daily wages and benefits.

Some success in Lahore and Karachi

has been experienced with Occupational Safety and Health Centers with trained staff. However,

little awareness generation among workers is taking place and many are unaware of basic protective equipment that should be made available to them by their employers. There is a need

for data and more registration of workers and facilities to expose injuries in the IS (Ali, M.Z., 2005) particularly those in hazardous work environments such as brick kilns found in the urban
periphery (PILER, 2004).

In a related finding, the sheer under capacity of government machinery requires that community
based organizations assist government in breaking political economies of oppression.

The IS (70% of labour force) is largely excluded from pay and pension rights. They are unable
to form unions (4% do) and hence, lack collective rights with employers and as per the survey,

cannot claim the legislated minimum wage levels of 2,500 Rs. per month. In a Karachi survey of
textile/garment/tannery workers, analysts found that over 50% of the IS workers were unaware

of their basic rights, receiving less than minimum wage and were working in precarious positions

(Dharejo, S., 2005). Womens workers are also with less wage rates than men and are unaware of
the benefits of organizing. However, funds are saved through committees, assistance is provided
through intervention in mutual health issues and while a desire existed to organize they were not

sure how to. Most respondents said that they needed a place to gather to organize before taking

92

action - this would likely be back within the katchi abadis, where their social status carries more
weight and in the end, can facilitate relationship development (Khattak, S.G., 2001). Enforcing

existing regulations in the precarious working conditions of the poorest of the poor is critical to social uplift and supports the case for public work programs (GOP, 2007). Furthermore, as

migrant workers within the IS are active conduits for relief and financial support to their home
communities during times of crisis, they must be engaged (PILER, 2005).

The marginalized segments of the IS feel the brunt of state neglect the most, as they are beyond both cultural acceptance and state outreach. For example, the condition of low caste Hindus in

Karachi has multiple layers of oppression which is exacerbated by being deprived of state
support and biased legislation. As a consequence, many low caste Hindus end up employed in

bonded labour conditions. Their poor state is an indicator of the need for legislative reform from
institutions across Pakistan.

Recommendations are needed to provide special concessions in the areas of land reform, education, employment opportunities in the public realm, etc. to encourage their targeted uplift in
society (Shah, Z., 2007). This is particularly the case of poor women in Karachi's IS who have not been targeted effectively by state policies. As women workers contribute to less debt within the families, they are considered to be more productive components of household income levels

(Sayed, E. and Javed, S., 2007).

However, women workers in the IS experience lower wages The extension of state

whether they work at home or within the small factories of Karachi.
coverage and labour rights to women workers in the IS are required.

Another conclusion from the labour conditions studies is that in light of volatile conditions, more
government collaboration with NGOs is required to engage the IS and insulate from market
factors.

As it is difficult to predict the manner in which the IS will adjust under adverse economic
conditions. In any situation, increased collaboration between state and CBOs will be required to

mitigate their vulnerability to free market shocks.

Market volatility has placed increased
State

pressure (rupee devaluation and price increases) on the purchasing power of the poor.

93

investment in skilled, formal industries such as telecommunications and ICT, diverts funds away

from employment opportunities for the IS in historically prominent industries such as textiles
and agricultural (Hasan, A., 2002). Nevertheless, there is a recognition by the state that the poor in urban areas are not being serviced and more public funds should be invested in backward linkages, empowering the entrepreneurial capacity of the IS in ways that are closer to the ground,
effective and accountable (GOP, 2008). Within the scope of this study, evidence from WASA

Lahore indicates a gap in labour to maintain sewage and drainage channels from continuous
silting, a task that is easily filled by members of the IS (WASA, 2004). The public sector, in

such situations, can actively provide employment opportunities in a predictable and coordinated
manner, for the IS.

Labour conditions can also be addressed through the direct intervention of the state in their own
employment practices and those of industry. Research indicates that potential returns exist

should terms of reference for non-state workers be included in wage increase discussions for
state workers (Shah, Z., 2005). Furthermore, the expansion of health and safety awareness to

contract work and EOBI benefits to poor workers is beneficial in the face of rising medical and
food bills (Khoso, A., 2005). Research also shows that multi-pronged strategies to eradicating

bonded child labor have found success in Sindh - providing soft loans to pay off exploitative debts, access to schooling for child weavers and organizing communities. Relevant legislative

measures and enforcement must also prevent employment of children in all precarious working conditions for different age groups (PILER, 2007). Monitoring through mystery clients,

combined task forces and NGO - ILO - consultant partnerships, inter agency partnerships, ILO
led consensus among NGO, unions and CBOs engagement will be required to effectively address

violations by identified industry violators (ILO, 2005)

Donors insist that cost effective

innovative transformations geared toward capacity building of the District level labour

departments, District Governments, Provincial Planning and Development Departments, and
NGOs be institutionalized. The aim of the training should be to inculcate learning about a

proactive work culture with a missionary zeal (ILO, 2005), thereby embedding the ingredients
for cultural transformation of acceptable work practices within the public sector machinery.

94

Ultimately, as pointed out in the literature, (Agarwala, R., 2007) IS labour demands benefits from the actors of the state, not those of the employers. The result of neoliberal structures is that
new pathways are opened for the IS to be considered as a class through organization. (Hayami, Y., Dikshit, A.K. & Mishra, S.N. 2006) For example, waste pickers in Delhi are making a

valuable contribution to society beyond their income as they contribute to public savings in

avoiding more costly means of disposal.

Expenditures on such members of society need to be

better understood to increase their appreciation as contributors to society.

The secondary sources of literature overwhelmingly build the case for IS engagement through

increased collaboration and engagement with municipal actors (See Appendix V).

The sources

of information buttress the findings from the primary expert interviews and illustrate the
recommendations for improved IS engagement across contexts.

95

Bibliography
1. Agarwala, R. (2007). Resistance and Compliance in the Age of Globalization: Indian
Women and Labor Organizations. ANNALS, AAPSS, 610.

2.

Ahmad, N. & Wasti, S.A. (2002). 'Pakistan', in Smoke. In Paul and Yun - Hwan Kim, (Ed.), Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers in Asia: Current Practice and Challenges for the
Future, Manila: Asian Development Bank.

3.

Ahmed, N. (2008). 'Water Supply in Karachi - Issues and Prospects.
University Press.

Karachi: Oxford

4.
5.

Ali, M.Z. (2005). Occupational health and safety in Pakistan. Pakistan Institute of Labour
Education and Research, 3 (4)

AM, I. (1997).

The IS in Urban Economy: Low Income Housing in Lahore.

Karachi:

Oxford University Press.

6. 7.

Applied

Economics

Research

Centre

(1990).

Local

Government

Finances

and

Administration in Pakistan, Research Report no. 72

Asian Development Bank. (2003). Report and recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Program Cluster of Loans to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for
thePRMP. Report - Pak 36057.

8. 9.

Asian

Development

Bank.

(2004a).

Devolution

in

Pakistan

-

Overview

of the

ADB/DFID/World Bank Study. Islamabad: Asian Development Bank. Asian Development Bank. (2004b). Devolution in Pakistan - An Assessment and

Recommendations for Action. Islamabad: Asian Development Bank. 10. Asian Development Bank. (2005). Aide Memoire, Megacity Development Project for
Karachi. Manila: Asian Development Bank.

11. Asian Development Bank. (2009) 'Sindh Urban Services Project', from Asian Development
Bank Web Site: http://www.adb.org/projects/project.asp?id=37220

12. Aslam, H. (2004).

Pre empting Poverty: Social Security in Pakistan.

Islamabad: Network

for Consumer Protection.

13. Babb, S.

(2005). The Social consequences of structural adjustment: Recent evidence and

current debates. Annual Review of Sociology, 31, 199-222. 14 Bakker, K. (2003). Archipelagos and networks: urbanization and water privatization in the
South. The Geographical Journal, 169(4), 328-341.

15. Baqir, F.

(2009). The role of NGOs in government and state interactions (forthcoming). Assessment of public-private-NGO partnerships: Water and sanitation

Islamabad: Sustainable Development Policy Institute.

16. Baruah, B. (2007).

services in slums. Natural Resources Forum, 31, 226-237. 17. Batley R. & Larbi, G. (2004). The Changing Role of Government - The Reform of Public

Services in Developing Countries. Birmingham: Palgrave MacMillan. 18. Bhagat, R. (2005). Rural - Urban Classification and Municipal Governance in India.
Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography, 26(1), 61 - 73.

19. Binswanger, H.P. & Nguyen, T-V. (2005). A step by step guide to scale up Community Driven Development, Presented at the International workshop on 'African Water Laws: Plural Legislative Frameworks for Rural Water Management in Africa', 26-28 January 2005,
Johannesburg, South Africa

96

20. Brockerff M. & Brennan E. (1998).

The Poverty of Cities in Developing Regions.

Population and Development Review, 24(1), 74 - 115.

21. Chaudhury, N. & Devarajan, S. (2006). Human Development and Service Delivery in Asia. Development Policy Institute, 24 (si), 81-97. 22. Cheema, A. & Mohmand, S.K. (2003). Local Government Reforms in Pakistan:
Legitimising Centralization or a Driver for Pro-Poor Change?
Science Research, Karachi, UK: DFID.

In Pakistan Drivers of Pro-

Poor Change Study conducted by Institute of Development Studies UK, Collective for Social

23. Cheema, A., Khwaja, A.I. & Qadir, A. (2005). Decentralization in Pakistan: Context, Content and Causes. Kennedy School Working Paper, RWP05-034.
24. Cheema, A. & Sayeed, A. (2006). Bureaucracy and Pro Poor Change. PIDE Working
Papers 2006:3. Islamabad: Pakistan Institute of Development Economics.

25. Chen, M., Vanek, J. and Carr, M. (2004). Mainstreaming Informal Employment and Gender in Poverty Reduction: A Handbook for Policy-makers and Other Stakeholders. London: Commonwealth Secretariat 26. Christiansen, P.M. (1998). A Prescription Rejected: Market Solutions to Problems of Public
Sector Governance. International Journal of Policy and Administration, 11(3), 273 - 295.

27. Chong, A. & Gradstein, S. (2006). Inequality and Informality. Journal of Public Economics, 91,159-179
28. Cook, S. (2006). Structural Change, Growth and Poverty Reduction in Asia: Pathways to

Inclusive Development. Development Policy Review, 24(1), 51 - 80. 29. Cornia, G. (1992).
University Press

Accelerating Human Development in Pakistan.

In Banuri, T. (Ed.)

(1998). Just Adjustment: Protecting the Vulnerable and Promoting Growth. Karachi: Oxford 30. Coston, J.M. (1998). A Model and typology of Government: NGO Relationships. Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 27(3), 358 - 382.

31. Davey, K. (1996). Urban Management - the Challenge of Growth. Brookfield: Avebury. 32. Devas, N.

Regional Seminar and Learning Event, February 10th to 12th, Manila, Philippines. Manila:
Asian Development Bank

(2004). Local Governance and Pro Poor Service Delivery, Presented at the

33. Davis, M. (2006). Planet of Slums. Los Angeles: Verso Press.

34. Dharejo, S. (2005). Are Working Conditions Decent? PILER Social Watch - Advocacy for People's Rights, 3(1)

35. Dwivedi, O. (1989). Imperial Legacy, Bureaucracy and Administrative Changes: India 1947 - 1987. Public Administration and Development, 9, 253 - 269
36. Ercelan, A. (2005). Narrow Visions & Grim Outcomes: Aid from Tokyo to Islamabad via Washington and Manila Who decides what happens to whom in Pakistan? In The Reality of Aid Asia Pacific 2005. Quezon City: The Reality of Aid 37. Fernandes, K. (1997). How Communities Organize Themselves - Stories from the Field.
Karachi: City Press

38. Gibson, B. (2004). The transition to a globalized economy: Poverty, human capital and the IS in a structuralist CGE model. Journal of Development Economics, 78, 60 - 94. 39. Gorson, F.S., Lawrence, S. & Gregory, R.
Asiand Development Bank

(2003). The ADB in its Own Words. Manila:

97

40. Government of Pakistan.

(2003). Accelerating Economic Growth and Reducing Poverty -

The Road Ahead - Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. Islamabad: Government of Pakistan,
Ministry of Finance, Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Secretariat.

41. Government of Pakistan.
Government of Pakistan.

(2005). Pakistan Economic Survey 2004-2005.

Islamabad:

42. Government of Pakistan. 43. Government of Pakistan.
Planning Commission.

(2007). A Social Protection Strategy to Reach the Poor and (2008). Report of the Special Cornmittee on Poverty Reduction, Islamabad: Government of Pakistan

Vulnerable. Islamabad: Government of Pakistan Planning Commission. Social Protection and Women's Empowerment.

44. Government of Punjab. (2004). Annual Report on Capacity Building of Local Governments.
Lahore: Government of Punjab, Planning and Development Department.

45. Government of Punjab. (2006). Poverty Focused Investment Strategy (PFIS).
Government of Punjab, Planning and Development Department Punjab
Management Program (PRMP).

Lahore:
Resource

46. Government of Sindh. (2008). Planning and Development Department Monitoring and Evaluation Cell Annual Review. Karachi: Government of Sindh Planning and Development
Department.

47. Haider, M. and Badami, M. (2004). Public transit for the urban poor in Pakistan: Balancing efficiency and equity, Forum on Urban Infrastructure and Public Service Delivery for the Urban Poor, Regional Focus: Asia, June 24-25, New Delhi, India

48. Hanif, N. (1996, August 25th).
Friday, Karachi.

The structure of government in Pakistan.

The News on

49. Haque, M.S. (1996).
Countries.

The Context less Nature of Public Administration in Third World

International Review ofAdministrative Sciences, 62, 315-329 Working with government: the story of OPP's collaboration with state

50. Hasan, A. (1997a). Working with Government. Karachi: City Press.

51. Hasan, A. (1997b).

agencies. Karachi: City Press.

52. Hasan, A. (1998).
Press.

Community Initiatives: Four Case Studies from Karachi.

Karachi: City Karachi:

53. Hasan, A. (1999). Understanding Karachi - Planning and Reform for the Future.
City Press.

54. Hasan, A. (2000). Housing for the Poor - Failure of Formal Sector Strategies. Karachi: City
Press.

55. Hasan, A. (2002a). The changing nature of the IS in Karachi as a result of global restructing
and liberalization. Environment and Urbanization, 14(1)

56. Hasan, A. (2002b).

The Unplanned Revolution - Observations on the process of socio Islamabad: The

economic change in Pakistan. Karachi: City Press.

57. Hasan, A. (2004a). In Search of Shelter - Housing Problem in Pakistan.
Network for Consumer Protection.

58. Hasan, A. (2004b). URC Karachi Series - Livelihood Substitution - The Case of the Lyari
Expressway. Karachi: Ushba Publishing International.

59. Hasan, A. (2006a).
451-480

Orangi Pilot Project: the expansion of work beyond Orangi and the

mapping of informal settlements and infrastructure, Environment and Urbanization, 18(2),

98

60. Hasan, A. (2006b).
Press.

The Scale and Cause of Urban Change in Pakistan.

Karachi: Ushba

61. Hasan, A. (2008). 62. Hasnain, Z., (2008).

The Urban Resource Centre, Karachi - The IIED Gatekeeper Series. The Politics of Service Delivery in Pakistan: Political Parties and the (2006). Waste Pickers and Collectors in Delhi:

London: International Institute of Environment and Development. Incentives for Patronage, 1988 - 1999. The Pakistan Development Review, 47(2). 63. Hayami, Y., Dikshit, A.K. & Mishra, S.N. 64. Ihrig, J. & Moe, K.S. (2004). Poverty and Environment in an Urban IS. Journal of Development Studies, 42(1), 41 - 69. Lurking in the Shadows: the IS and government policy. Journal of Development Economics, 73, 541 - 577.

65. Rehman, P. (2008). Water Supply in Karachi, Situation/Issues, Priority Issues and Solutions.
Powerpoint 66. Herlin, H.

Government Karachi, by the Managing Director KWSB on 18th May 2007.
(2003). Poor Nations, Rich Nations,

Presentation

briefing

to

the

District

Coordination

Officer,

City

District Public

a Theory of Governance.

Administration Review, 3 67. Hisam, Z. (2006). Road Transport Workers in Pakistan. Karachi: Pakistan Institute of Labor
Education and Research.

68. ILO. (2002). Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture. Geneva: ILO
http://www.gdrc.org/informal/huss0772.pdf

69. ILO. (2005). Baseline Survey Reports on Child Labour in the Glass Bangles, Tanneries,

Surgical Instruments and Coal Mines. Lahore: AKIDA Consultants.
70. Imran, M. & Low, N. (2003). Impact of Global Institutions on Urban Transport in Pakistani Cities. Istanbul: ISoCaRP Congress. 71. Islam, N. (2004). Sifarish, Sycophants, Power and Collectivism: Administrative Culture in Pakistan. Journal of International Review ofAdministrative Sciences, 70(2), 311 - 330 72. Ismail, A. (2002a). URC Karachi Series - Transport. Karachi: City Press. 73. Ismail, A. (2002b). The Story of Khuda ki Basti - Shelter for the Shelterless.
Press.

Karachi: City Karachi: City

74. Ismail, A. (2004).
Press.

The Story of SKAA - Sindh Katchi Abadis Authority.

75. Ismail, A. (2006).
76. JICA, (2006).

URC Karachi Series - Hawkesbury Resettlement Scheme.

Karachi:

Ushba Publishing International. Pakistan Transport Plan Study in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Final

Report.

Islamabad: Japan International Cooperation Agency, National Transport Research
(2006). Cycling between vice and virtue: Assessing the Informal Sectors'

Centre, Ministry of Communications, Government of Pakistan. 77. Jonakin, J.
290-312.

awkward role under neoliberal reform.

Review of International Political Economy, 13(2), Theories of Urban Politics. London: Sage

78. Judge, D., Stoker, G. & Wolman, H. (1995).
Publications. 79. Khaliq, A. (2000).

Upgradation/Improvement of Katchi Abadis - Departmental vs. Karachi: Government of Sindh, Planning and

Contractors Work, a Comparative Study.

Development Department, Sindh Katchi Abadis Authority.

80. Khan, A.H.

(1996). Orangi Pilot Project: Reminiscences and Reflections.

Delhi: Oxford

University Press.

99

81. Khan, N. (2007).

Mobilization and Violence in the Mohajir Community of Karachi.
Quantifying Informal Trade Between

Economic and Political Weekly, 42(25). 82. Khan, S.R., Yusuf, M., Bokhari, S. & Aziz, S.
Pakistan and India. Islamabad: World Bank.

83. Khan, S.R., Khan, F.S. & Akhtar, AS. (2007). Initiating Devolution for Service Delivery in
Pakistan. Karachi: Oxford University Press.

84. Khattak, S.G. (2001).

Women, Work and Employment.

Sustainable Development Policy

Institute Working Paper No. 4, Karachi: SDPI

85. Khoso, A. (2005). Right to Social Security: Still a Dream. PILER Social Watch - Advocacy
for People's Rights, 3(1).

86. Laquian, A.

(2005a). Metropolitan Governance Reform in Asia.

Journal of Public

Administration and Development, 25, 307-315 87. Laquian, A. (2005b). Beyond Metropolis - The Planning and Governance of Asia's Mega
Urban Regions. Washington D.C.: Woodrow Wilson Center Press.

88. Laquian, A. (2005c). Beyond Metropolis. Bethesda: Johns Hopkins University Press.

89. Laquian, A. (2006).

The Inclusive City - Infrastructure and Public Services for the Urban

Poor in Asia. Connecticut: Greenwood Press.

90. Laquian, A., Tewari, V. and Hanley, L. (2007).
Public Services for the Urban Poor in Asia.
Press.

The Inclusive City - Infrastructure and

Washington D.C.: Woodrow Wilson Centre

91.McCarney, P. and Stren, R. (2003). Governance on the Ground - Innovations and Discontinuities in Cities of the Developing World. Washington D.C.: Woodrow Wilson
Center Press.

92. Moser, C. (2006). Reducing Urban Violence in Developing Countries. Brookings Global Economy and Development Reviews, Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution. 93. Mustafa, D. (2007). The Production of an Urban Hazardscape in Pakistan: Modernity, Vulnerability, and the Range of Choice. St. Petersburg: University of South Florida Press.
94. Orangi Pilot Project. (2008). Institutions and Programs - 115th Quarterly Report, July, Aug.,
Sept. 2008. Web Site: http://www.oppinstitutions.org

95. Pasha, H.A. & Palanivel, T. (2003). Pro Poor Growth and Policies: The Asian Experience.
The Pakistan Development Review, 42(4, 1). 313 - 348. 96. Penalosa, E. (2008). Sustainable Urban Development and Transport. The Urban Unit Urban Dialogue Series. Lahore: Government of Punjab, Planning and Development
Department, The Urban Unit.

97. Pervaiz, A., Rahman, P. & Hasan, A. (2008). Lessons from Karachi: the role of demonstration, documentation, mapping and relationship building in advocacy for improved

urban sanitation and water services. Human Settlements Discussion Paper Series, Water - 6.
London: International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).

98. PILER. (1999). Child Labour in an Urban Development Framework. Karachi: PILER.

99. PILER.
100.

(2004). Unfree Labour in Pakistan: Work, Debt and Bondage in Brick Kilns.

Karachi: PIELAR and ILO (WP No. 24)

PILER. (2005). Karachi's Labour Force and the Affected Families. Pakistan Institute of

Labour Education and Research Social Watch, 3(3)

101.

PILER. (2007). Effectiveness of the Interventions for the Release and Rehabilitation of

Bonded Child Labour in the Carpet Industry of Thar, Sindh. Karachi: PILER.

100

102.
103.

Punjab Government. (2007). Punjab Economic Report. Lahore: Government of Punjab,
Qasim, M. (2006). Status of Implementation of LGO 2001 Primary Research Study of

Ministry of Economic Affairs.

Four City Districts under Federal TIP-F 309. Islamabad: Government of Pakistan, Finance
Division, National Program Support Office (NPSO), Decentralization Support Program,
Policy Research for Strengthening Local Government.

104.

Rakodi, C. (2002).

Economic development, urbanization and poverty. In Rakodi, C,

Lloyd - Jones T. (eds) Urban Livelihoods: A People Centred Approach to Reducing Poverty.
London: Earthscan Publications.

105. Rehman, P. (2000). Sewerage, Drainage and Treatment Plants - Responsibilities, Finances, Issues and Policy Changes Needed. Karachi: OPP RTI. 106. Reza, A. (2003). Underestimating Urbanisation. In Zaidi, S.A. (ed) Continuity and Change: Socio political and Institutional Dynamics in Pakistan. Karachi: City Press. 107. Sayeed, A. & Javed, S. (2001). Household Characteristics, Poverty and Indebtedness
among Women Workers in Urban Pakistan. PILER Working Paper No. 3. Karachi: PILER

108. Sayeed, A. (1996). Social Sector Development and Social Summit. Policy and Development Centre.

Karachi: Social

109. Seneviratne, L. W. (2000). Challenges to Urban Water Management in Sri Lanka. International Journal of Water Resources Development, 16(1), 131 - 141. 110. Shah, Z.A. (2007). Long Behind Schedule - A Study on the Plight of Scheduled Caste
Hindus in Pakistan. Karachi: PILER.

111. Shah, Z.A. (2005). Pay and Pension Revision: Excluding e Workers. PILER Social Watch - Advocacy for People's Rights, 1(3).

112. Shamsul Haque, M. (1996). The Context less Nature of Public Administration in Third World Countries. International Review ofAdministrative Sciences, 62. 113. Siddiqui, T. (1998). Katchi Abadis - The Problem and Ways to A Solution. Karachi:
SAIBAAN.

114. 115.

Siddiqui, T. (2001). Towards good governance. Karachi: Oxford University Press. Siddiqui, T. (2005). Dynamics of Social Change. Karachi: Sama Press.

116. Siddiqui, T. (2006). The Dynamics of Bureaucratic Rule in Pakistan A Personal View, Experiencing the State. Karachi: Oxford University Press.
117. Siddiqui, T., (2008). Presentation on Incremental Housing Scheme, Karachi, Pakistan. Powerpoint Presentation, SAIBAAN. 118. Siegmann, K.A. & Shezad, S. (2000). Pakistan's Water Challenges: A Human Development Perspective. Islamabad: Sustainable Development Policy Institute. 119. Sohail, M. (2000). Urban Public Transport and Sustainable Livelihoods for the Poor - A Case Study: Karachi, Pakistan. Leicestershire: WEDC Loughborough University. 120. Subramaniam, V. (1990). Public Administration in the Third World - An International Handbook. New York: Greenwood Press. 121. Tendler, J. (1997). Good Governance in the Tropics. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.

122. Tripp, A. (1997). Changing the Rules: The Politics of Liberalization and the Urban Informal Economy in Tanzania. Berkeley: University of California Press.

123. Uitto, J. & Biswas, A. (2000). Water for urban areas: Challenges and Perspectives. New York: United Nations University Press.

101

124.

Valfrey-Visser, B. & Schaub-Jones, D. (2006).

Access through innovation: Expanding

water service delivery through independent network providers - Considerations for practitioners and policymakers. In Bernard, Collignon & Chaponniere (eds). Building
Partnerships for Development Project, France.

125.

van Dijk, M.P. (2006).

Managing Cities in Developing Countries - the Theory and

Practice of Urban Management. Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishers.

126. Van Eybergen, N. & Hoffer, J. (2007). Managerial Autonomy: Does it matter for the performance of water utilities. Public Administration and Development, (27)

127.
128.

Vojnovic, I. (2000).

The Transitional Impacts of Municipal Consolidation.

Journal of

Urban Affairs, 22(4)

Warren, R., Rosentraub, M. & Weschler, L. (1992).

Building Urban Governance: An

Agenda for the 1990s. Journal of Urban Affairs, 14 (3/4), 399 - 422. 129. WASA Lahore. (2004). Action Plan - Project for the Retrieval of the Sewage and Drainage System for Lahore City.
Water and Sanitation Authority.

Government of Punjab, Lahore Development Authority,

130.

WaterAid.

(2006). WaterAid Learning for Advocacy and Good Practice.

Islamabad:

WaterAid.

131. Wignaraja, P. (2005). Pro - Poor Growth and Governance in South Asia: Decentralization and Participatory Development. The Pakistan Development Review, 44 (4,
2), 1159-1171.

132. 133.

Winton, A. (2004). World Bank.

Urban Violence: A guide to the literature.

Environment and

Urbanization, 16 (2), 165 - 179

(2006). Government of Punjab Final Report - Urban Water Supply and
Prepared by Fichtner Gmbh & Co., Stuttgart,

Sewerage

Reform Strategy - released December 2006.

Germany. Islamabad: World Bank. 134. World Bank. (2007). http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLAC/Resources/CH8.pdf

135.

World Bank. (2009). Pakistan - Social Indicators in Pakistan. Islamabad: World Bank.

136. Yaw, D.A. (2007). Promoting the IS as a source of gainful employment in developing countries: insights from Ghana. International Journal of Human Resource Management,
18(6), 1063 - 1084.

137.

Zaidi, A. (2008).

Issues in Pakistan's Economy - Second Edition.

Karachi: Oxford

University Press.

138. Zaidi, S.A. (2001). Can the Public Sector Deliver? An Examination of the Work of the Sindh Katchi Abadis Authority - UNDP LIFE Program. Karachi: City Press. 139. Zar, L.A., Xu, L.C. & Zuluaga, M. (2002). Thirsting for Efficiency: The Economics and Politics of Urban Water System Reform. In Shirley M., (Ed.) Institutions, politics, and contracts: The privatization attempt of the water and sanitation utility of Lima, Peru. New
York: Elsevier Science.

102

Glossary
ADB
AHK BRT

Asian Development Bank Akhtar Hameed Khan Foundation
Bus Rapid Transit

CBO
CDGK CDGL

Community Based Organization City District Government Karachi City District Government Lahore
Community Development Network Commons Law Company Foundation for Law and Governance
Government of Pakistan

CDN
CLC

FLAG
GOP

GOPu GOS
ICLS
IMF ILO

Government of Punjab
Government of Sindh

International Conference for Labour Statisticians
International Monetary Fund International Labour Organization
Informal Sector Japanese International Cooperation Agency

IS
JICA KA

Katchi Abadi (slum dwelling or community) Karachi Development Authority
Karachi University

KDA

KU
KKB

Khuda Ki Basti (God's House)
Karachi Municipal Corporation Karachi Municipal Housing Board Karachi Water and Sewerage Board

KMC KMHB KWSB KMTA KTC LDA LRT LUMS MOL

Karachi Municipal Transportation Authority
Karachi Transportation Corporation

Lahore Development Authority Light Rail Transit

Lahore University of Management Sciences
Ministry of Labour

MUHHDC
NGO NWFP

Mahbub Ul Haque Human Development Centre
Non Government Organization North West Frontier Province

OPP RTI
OPP P&D PIDE PILDAT
PILER

Orangi Pilot Project - Research and Training Institute
Orangi Pilot Project

Planning and Development Department Pakistan Institute of Development Economics

Pakistan Institute of Legislative Development and Transparency
Pakistan Institute of Labour Education and Research
Punjab Katchi Abadi Authority Punjab Resource Management Program Punjab Urban Resource Center

PKAA PRMP

PURC SAARC

South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation

103

SAIBAAN
SDPI

Social Housing Organization

Sustainable Development Policy Institute Sindh Katchi Abadi Authority
Tehsil Volunteer Associations
United Nations United Nations Development Program

SKAA
TVA UN
UNDP UNICEF

United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
Urban Resource Center

URC UU WASA
WB

Urban Unit

Water and Sanitation Authority
World Bank

WSB WTO

Water and Sewage Board World Trade Organization

104


