Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Moving around the world : Russian Jews from Israel in Toronto
Lea Soibelman
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the History Commons Recommended Citation
Soibelman, Lea, "Moving around the world : Russian Jews from Israel in Toronto" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 500.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

T

MOVING AROUND THE WORLD:

RUSSIAN JEWS FROM ISRAEL IN TORONTO

by

Lea Soibelman

BSW, Tel Aviv University, 1981

A Major Research Paper

Presented to Ryerson University In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts In the Program of

Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008

Lea Soibelman 2008

t L13v 11 LJtTi

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I am greatly indebted to Dr. Myer Siemiatycki for his supervision of this project. His
guidance and dedication made a great contribution to this paper.

The invaluable input of Dr. Arthur Ross is also greatly appreciated. I would also like to thank all my professors for their guidance throughout my studies
at Ryerson.

Special thanks to my family for their incredible patience and support.

IV

Table of Contents

Chapter 1

Introduction
Chapter 2

1

Historical and Conceptual Context
Chapter 3

6

Russian Jewish Immigrants of the 1990s in Israel
Chapter 4

22

Russian Jews from Israel in Toronto
Chapter 5

30

Conclusion
Bibliography List of tables

45
50

Table 1- Socio-demographic Profile of the Respondents
Table 2 - Primary Identity of the Respondents in their Countries of Residence List of Appendices

4
39

Appendix 1 - Questionnaire

48

Chapter 1

Introduction

This paper will explore the immigration experience of Russian Jews from Israel

arriving in the Greater Toronto Area, herein referred to as Toronto, in the late 1990s and

early 2000s. During the last two decades of the 20th century there has been a continuous
influx of Russian Jews from Israel to Toronto. This cohort is usually referred as "a
secondary migration of Russian Jews". This ongoing immigrant cohort has become the major source of recent Jewish immigrants in Toronto. Unlike Russian Jews who arrived in Canada directly from the FSU (Former Soviet Union) this group of immigrants had a different journey. They left a hostile FSU for their historical homeland, Israel, and then arrived in Toronto joining another diaspora, which is rather welcoming and, in a way, embracing. Thus, one could say they had the experience of living in the diaspora and their homeland, though for some of them Israel remained a homeland only from a
mythical point of view.

In Israel they were exposed to the wide range of Jewish culture e.g. Hebrew language, Jewish holidays, Jewish education, etc. Whether integrated or not they had

lived in a Jewish state. They also had lived in a Westernized society and had acquired
some salient skills that their counterparts arriving directly from the FSU lacked e.g. they
were used to a systematic job search, had some experience with organizational structures

found in the Western world, and many had improved their English skills as an

international professional language. On the one hand, they have gone through the

difficulties of immigration once, gaining "migration experience", on the other hand, they experienced the emotional trauma and hardship of immigration again. Thus, we cannot include all Russian Jews arriving in Toronto in the same broad category, ignoring their
"Israeli experience".

Moreover, there are differences within the cohort of Russian Jews from Israel. It can
be divided into two major groups: the first one, which had to struggle to leave the

communist Soviet Union before 1990, and the second one, which freely left the country

during the process ofperestroika and the breakdown of the communist regime. Unlike
those in the first group, the immigrants, who left for Israel in late 1980s early 1990s,
rapidly left a country which was in a crisis with collapsing political structures and deteriorating economic conditions. They arrived in Israel at a unique time: never before had Israel experienced such a high influx of immigrants in a short period of time and it

had difficulties accommodating thousands of newcomers arriving every month.
Therefore, the circumstances of both the departure and arrival of this second group were

different from the previous one, which affected their settlement in Israel and consequently contributed to their motivation to leave Israel. This study is focused on the immigration related experiences of the second group, e.g. those who left the FSU for Israel in late 1980s and early 1990s and arrived in
Toronto as secondary migrants in the late 1990s and early 2000s. It will explore the

unique character of this cohort, their settlement in Toronto as well as their identities and transnational practices. I argue that this cohort of Russian Jews has notable features

which have affected their adjustment and integration in Toronto. I contend that their identities fluctuated as they came to settle in new places. It is important to take into

UI pSALLre pUB SJB3A" JI - 01 J0J P^JSJ UI p3AIJ pBIJ OUM 'gg 0} g£ S3§B 'aTBUiaj £ pUB
ajBUI £ 'pB-ISJ UIOJJ SJUBjglUIUII IJSIAVaf IIBISSlV£[ 9 JO pSJSISUOO ajdlUBS AptV)S 31JX '

ut §u:ai| pBiSi uioij SA\.3f xreissn^ Suoxxxe sj[jomj9u puuojui umo Aui ui jmod SuxpBjs
sjbxisjsj SAijnoasuoo Aq pajBOO] sjsav Xpnjs aqj joj sjuBdpxjJBj
sjoxu saansua oinj ui qoiqAV 'Bpp papajpo jo AjTpnb pue 'ss9Ut[ou

'sssujnjiptu} aip oj sajnqujuoo Xjmbux SAtjBJJBU aqj Suxsn jBqj 9A9ipq I'(/,!? d)
^jiasjx 9jTi 35{X| Ajdtms st \[ -\mrmnosjVBXi 'jBouojstiisuBJj 'TBuoijBiirajm si 9aijbjjbjs[

9ATJBXIBU jpqj 3ABIJ sdtlOJ§ UBUmq J|B 'S3SSB|0 IJV,> :S9JOU (8661) JSOZUBJj SV

(£ <J)

ctji jo S30U3uadxa sc9i[do3d jo / puB ppoAV sqj jnoqB sjiiSisux sjsjjo snqj puB aouaiptiB

ajrayap b joj Xbm. injSuiUBaui b ui sjusas spsuuoo }Bip J9pJ0 jBijuanbas JBap b ijjiav sasjnoDSip sb X||BUOisiAOJd pauijap aq p^noqs souaps UBiunq aip ui (sauojs)

jbi]i sanSjB (gOOZ) W°!IIH "AJinbux saijbxibu sb uavoicj XSsjbjjs 9AijBji|Btib
b 8msn papaipo 'BiBp 9ApBji^Bnb SuizX|bub Aq ojuojox ui saouauadxs jubjSitxiuii ijsi 0} pajBpj suoijsanb ,/hav,, puB 4tA\ot{,, 'ltjBX}M,, jsavsub oj ;dui9jjB ub 3>[bui oj

i si uopBuiuiBxs siqx "sjusuinSiB puB savsia 'sanjBA 'sjaxpq 'sSuipaj 'Supjxniji jo

sXba\ 'suoijdaoaad csjuBdpi^Bd aip 9JO|dxa oj si Apnjs 3Ai;B}ijBnb stqi jo ssodjnd sqx
·saujunoo

jaqjo puB ubji 'oooojojaj 'pBisj 'B0U9UIV qjtios 'saujunoo UBadomg luajsBg Aubui uiojj
sjubjSiuiuii §uijsoq uaaq sbi| ji -Xjojsiq qsiAvaf pajooj A]daap puB Suo| b tpiAY Xjiununuoo

b pauiof AVinjuao

02 3U.1J° PU9 9lP ^B BpBUB3 oj auiBO oijm SA\af ireissn^

Xiiunuiuioo

qsiAvaf paqstiqBjsa aqi Xq paApojad aiB Xatp Moq pire BpBUB^ ui saApsuiaqi aas

Avoq si uopsanb Suijsaaajui aijx 'P^sj ui suBissn^ jnq 'fiSH 9lP UI SM9f P9I9C1BI9J9M
Aaqi 'pbjsj pire nsJ 9lP mo<\ UT sdnojg Xiuoutui aaaM SA\af ubissti^ jBqj uopBjapisuoo

Toronto in late 1990s and early 2000s. The majority of them were employed at the time

of study and lived in private homes in Thornhill, Richmond Hill and other suburbs. To preserve the anonymity of the participants, I have changed their names, but kept intact
other personal details (age, occupation, length of residence in Canada, etc.). Table 1

illustrates the socio-demographic profile of the respondents.

Table 1

Socio-demographic Profile of the Respondents

Name

Age

Occupation
Former / Current

Years in
Toronto

Family
Composition

Anna Alex

48
55

teacher/settlement worker
electronic engineer/same

7 10

married +2 (19, 23)*
married+2 (18, 25)

Olga
Lena

45
40

system analyst/same teacher/student mechanical engineer/same
programmer/same

6
6 7 9

married+2 (8, 20)
married+2(10, 15)

Vlad

36
43

married+2 (7,10) married+1 (16)

Josef

*Number and Ages of Children

·suoi}BAJ9sqo 9S9q: uo pgseq 3xe jadfed sup jo syed 9UK>s
·ojuojox ux SM9f uexsstva Joj pszuregjo S1U9A9 Xjiunuiinoo snojsuinu 9AJ9sqo pue

gjedptped oj Aixutujoddo ub pBq osjb j sisX|bub jpqj pue sguxpuij pajusssad aip jo AjxjTqipaJo aqj oj ppB ranj m \pi\\JA sanssi ps^pa aqj pue s}tredpi}ied arp ojui jt[§isux
ptre SuxpuBjsjapun qjdsp-ui Aui o; 9}nqu}uoo saouausdxs uopBjgiuiuit jb];xuiis i[gnojqj

9uoS SuxABq pire sjbsX 8| aoj peasi xhoji SM9f uBxssn^ qaxM ps>[JOA\ Sux

'(9003)
A"q psquossp sb Suxpoo opBxixaqj Suxsn pazApuB pus psquosuBaj
3J9AV SM9XAJ9JUX

put? Ajtrep '9qoid oj 'uopsgnb 9qj pusdxg oj Xjx]xqxssod 'sj9avsub pgnepp 9jqxssod jo
;raqtunu b motjb oi suoxisgnb p9pu9-u9dojo pgsodiuoo sbm gjreuuopsgnb
ux pspnpuoo 9J3AV S9jnuxxix

'£002 'sTAvgq) sgnssx 9axjxsu9S pue spgfqns gaeAud 9iO|dx9 oj se ipAv se 'sgixxoojno

put? 'speduix 'suoxspgp 'suoijbaxjoui gouejsux aoj 'sgnssx pue ssgoojd X9iduxoo

pueisjgpun oj |exju9SS9 9ie sav9xaj9jux 9qx irepp pue qadgp ux sgnssx Suuojdxg
pue jX9}uoo jeuosigd gqj Suxpuejsjgpun 'sjunoooe |euosJ9d Supei9U9§ joj xepxpraq
SA\9iAa9iux q;d9p-uj -SAV9XAJ9aux qjdgp-ux 9 pgpnpuoo 1 e^ep pqjoo ox

9oxjjo opioioi sqj 'lB9i}uojAj ux pairado sbm (psnBO isjxj sbav :x sb Aigpos pxy }UBjSxuirai

qsiAvsf) svif J° 9OJJJO 1SJU 3lLL -uox:iB:igxuiuix usiAvaf joj uoxibzhibSjo ubxj>bub3
JB.I1U90 B JO U0X1B9.I9 B JOJ guXJJBO UOIjnpS9J B p3SSB(J |B3JJU0]^[ UX SS9J§UO3 l[SXAV3f

psqsxiqBjss A|M9U b jo /C^quiassB AjBusid isjxj 9X|j '6161 jo Sxiuds sqj iq
(At^I 'd) bpbub^ ux Xjranuruioo

Xjoisxq sqj ux ^uoxjbzxubSjo jo BJ9,, ub sb pouad sxip oj paxxajaj Bnsqy
·suoxjbzxubSjo SuxsxBjputy puB AjuBqo '|Bjnj{no xjsxAvaf psqsxyqBjss Aaqj 9J3ijm ojuojox
PUB XB9J1U0JM JO tcSOW9tr§,, 9qj OJ XilunOO 9ip JO qiJlOU 9qa UX S9UXUI pUB BpBUBO UJ91S9^V UX SUXIBJ UIOJJ §UXAOUI XnBnpBjS ld95[ SJUBjgxUIUIX qSXM9f UBISSTI^ 0£6I PUB T7T61 U99AVJ9g

·ggdxuuxyw ux AflBxoadsg 's9uxbjj 9qi ux pgpps SM9f uBsdoang ujgjsBg jgqio pUB uBxs
SQZ61 9lP §uunp uopBiSxtu jgqjanj paonpux uoijti|OA9J isxunuxtuoo 9qi puB

jsjxj 9qi jo ixotainj 9x^x "S9SBy|XA puB suavoj UBxssxrg ux saaoBSSBUi puB sdxqspjreq oxuiouoog
p9Tj SA\9f jo spuBsnoqj ugqM Am;u9o qiugaaauiu 9qa jo pug gqi ib pgpBis BpBUB3 01

bxssti-jj uxoaj SM9f jo uoxjBigxtu 9qx "(2661 '^su'tPinL '0661 'Bll9qv) o^uojox ux sb \\3/a
sb

9xiubj:iv sqi ux pgdopAgp S9pxunxuuioo qsiM9f iBUopxppB S0981 P1"^ S0S8T

guXJtlQ 'IB9JXU01AI UX p9pXS9J pUB AuBUXJ9{) pUB pUBjgug IUOJJ 9UIB9 UI9ip JO JSOUI

ux SA\9f pgjputiq oav} jnoqB 9J9A\ 9J9q; 01781 ^a "AJmuao qau99aqSi9
PU009S 9qj Ul 0§B S9UttlU90 OAVJ J9A0 BpBUB3 UX p9AUIB SJ9|119S l[SXA\9f JS9XJ

was established in 1922. The mandate of this organization was to influence Canadian immigration policy to allow more Jewish immigrants into the country as well as to

provide assistance to arriving immigrants. The idea of creation of such an agency was
primarily based on one of the most important principles of Judaism, that each Jew is
responsible for another and for saving a Jewish life. In addition, the Canadian Jewish
community was also acting in its self interest: the relatively small Jewish community saw

immigration as a key component to its growth, intensification and development.

"Immigrants established JIAS so JIAS could establish immigrants" so went the motto of

JIAS in its early years (The JIAS Toronto 75th Anniversary Community Heritage Book).
Since 1922 the Toronto office of the Jewish Immigrant Aid Services has been providing immigration and settlement services to immigrants from all over the world: Poland,
Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, the Former Soviet Union, Romania, Morocco,
Syria, Israel, Argentina and other countries.

From the onset of the Great Depression until the end of the Second World War,

Canada practically shut its doors to Jewish immigration. Not until 1948 did thousands of Jews, predominantly Holocaust survivors, find refuge in Canada, in part as a result of pressure from the Canadian Jewish Congress, Bnai Brith and other Jewish organizations, as well as from labor unions. Around 40, 0000 Holocaust survivors arrived in Canada during the late 1940s. Between 1950 and 1953, several thousand Jewish refugees from
Eastern Europe, including Russian Jews, managed to enter Canada before the Cold War
closed entry again (Cohen, 2001, p. 215).

In 1972, after years of pressure from the Western World, the Soviet government

announced that Jews could leave for Israel for the purpose of family reunification. The

aq; jo agBtiSuBj ogpads sqj ujbsj oj pBq Asq; sgBnguBj ubisstvh aip jo agpaTMOiq jp
oj uoijippB ui nsJ 3lP UT 'soubjsui joj -AjisjaAip iBjnijno snoiAqo pajBJjsuoiusp

pin? uiojj suibo Aaifi soijqtufoj aqi ujojj tt9gBggBq TBJnijno,, jo Ajuajd

(1661 'puBjrasa '1661 'ui^Ja pub 5{0SBe '£661 'J
oiuiouooa 'uopBoijxunaj X-ixurej 'sjqSu uBtunq pxre uiopaso; jo spe\ 'uoijBuiuiuosip
joj

'SVir SB tjotis OON B M pajosuods aq
pjnoo Xsip 'smji -AjogajBo asuosi9j U] 90U9piS9J JU3UBOU9d JOJ AjddB OJ

UBadoang }SBg,, jo sssp ps^uSisap b ui

3J9AV SAV3f UBXSSn^ '6Z-6I J°

oj gmpjoooy (001 'd '£661 'a35raxdB>[s-qouAv) £861 ^q %18 <n Jaqpnj U3A9 psquiip
I pUB o/og9 SBM |9BJSI 0} og O^ p9StlJ9J pUB BUU9IA UI p9AUIB OqM SAV9f UBISSTl^ JO 9JBJ

0861 UI p3SB3J0U! ^ijubisuoo pBJSj oj og oj guistygj SM9f UBissn-g jo jraquinu
pjaoM 99ij 9qj oi A\i}uno9 jsxunuiuio9 gqj uiojj 9dB0S9 oj Xbav

9qj JSTlf SBAV JI UI9qj JO 9UIOS JOJ pUB '90IAJ9S AJBJI]XXU AjOJBpUBUI pUB {9BJSI UI XjI|iqBJSUI
p9JB9J AUBUI 'BpBUB3 pUB
UJ9qj JO 9UI0S :SUOSB9J SnOUBA

OJ 9T\p J9BJSI OJ Og 0} P91UBAV SAV9f

JO VSfl 3lP- uif ^U9UI9|W9S
JO

JOJ guiA|ddB pUB 9dOJt\g UI gUI/felS

OJ UO gUlOg U99A\J9q 90lOqO B U9Alg 9J9AV

joj Aouagy qsiMSf sqj jo
O} p3|3ABJ} Aaqj 3J0J9J3qj 'pBJSJ pUB

b Aq jam sjsav Xsqj ajaqAv 'buusia

SUOIlBpj Oi;BUIOldlp OU 3J9AV 9J9l[X

"(1661 'ubuijph '1661 C5t0SBa) sjiuusd jixs Jiaqj m usijijav sbav ji sb ssapjB^s Ajjunoo
sqj guiAB9| diqsuaziip piaos jpqj dn 9Aig oj psoJOj sjsm Xaqx -pBJSi uiojj SAijBpj b

UIOJJ UOIIBJIAUI UB p9JU3S3jd OqM 'SM9f OJ SllUUSd JIX3 guiJUBjg p3JJB;S S3IJU0qjtlB J3IA0S

republic of residence, e.g. Ukrainian, Moldavian, Latvian, etc. Even their common Russian language was often different in terms of the dialect and pronunciation. In

addition to linguistic differences, there were obvious differences in gender relationships,
family dynamics, food and even in the ways they celebrated Jewish Holidays. Jews from Asian republics had darker complexions, their clothes had different colors and silhouettes, they usually had more children and consequently were noticeably different from Europeans. There was a certain "geographical classification" and sorting within the
immigrant community itself, which had an impact on the development of their social
networks.

Those who arrived in Toronto in early 1980s joined an existing community of approximately 8,000 Russian Jews (Avrich-Skapinker, 1993, p. 167), who had already made some efforts to have the Russian Jewish community become structured and
organized. However the process of integration of the Russian Jews into the larger Toronto

Jewish community moved very slowly. Some members of the Toronto Jewish community

expressed concerns that "the Soviet Jews were just too different, too disinterested or distant to ever become part of the mainstream community" (Avrich-Skapinker, 1993, p.

158). The Toronto Jewish community made a lot of efforts to assist Russian Jewish
immigrants to successfully settle in Toronto: financial support, assistance finding
accommodation, emergency medical aid, free membership to the Jewish Community

Centre, free summer camps for children, subsidies for Hebrew schools, as well as certain
assistance with employment. But the integration, the way the local Jewish community

had perceived it, did not take place as expected. The established community wanted these
immigrants to become its members, not just service recipients. However, as Cohen

01

tc/Crixinoo 9tp ux 9ju}s oxuqp puB uoriBjggjuxsxp poijijod 'guxpgp oxuiouoco

9Xfl JO guXU9SJOM. 9l£l,, 0} 9t\p 9AB9J 0} p9}BAX}0XU 9J9AV '}U91X9 }B9jg B 0} '9jdO9d AUBUI
-SM9J- iOJ 9JBS 1OU SBM. QSJ 3lP SdtlOjg JSXOSBJ-O9U SUXSU pXIB UOXJBUXUIUOSIp 'UISX1XXU9S-X1UB guXMOjS qjXAV :}JOXIO0 JUBjgxXUXIIX SnOXA9jd JO SSOqj OJ JB|XUIXS

3J9M nSJ isxuniuixxoo-jsod aip ux SAvaf UBXssn-a jcoj siopbj tti|snd,, sqx
?l0Bq og pjnoo snqj pus dxx{su9zxjxo jxsqj dn 3Axg oj 9ABq iou pxp 'pabjj

pjtlOO A9t[} 'AJJUnOD JSXUnXIIXIIOO B gUXABSI 9J9AV OXJAV 9S0ip S^xpfl '°t3 'SJ9dBdSAV3U
'uoxsxAapj 'sssad xigpjoj aip 'epBTOQ ux spuauj puB saAxiBpj ipxp xjgnoji|j
UOXJBUUOJUX OJ SS900B JO !XJ9U9q 91^ pBlJ A9XIX U9;pq 9J9AV S|]X5[S 9gBllgUB| puB jggunoX 9J9a\ A9q} 'Apugnbasuoo X'^3 'uoxjBdnooo 'qsxjgug jo sgpgjMOiDj

'uoxjBonpg '9§b) bu9;xjo uorpgps gqj pgui oj p^q Xgqj 'sjuBjgxxuiux juapuadspux
SB guXUIOO 9J9M. JSOXU 90UX§ "9UO SnOXA9ld 9qj UXOIJ JU9J9JJXp SXBA\ XUBXII UX SBAV isiunxxiiuoo-;sod gqi moi; SM9f UBxssn-a jo ^oqoo a\9U sxxjj, -sauoggjBO Ajxxubj put?
}U9pU9d9pUX 9lfl UI
'SAV9f UBXSSn^[ JO XtlTJUI AV9U B P90BJ

Aixunuiraoo qsiA\9f ojuojox sip S066T
joj ,t9jnoj 9domg,, siqj jo pug 9xp ux

*d '1661 '>ios^a) SA9f
sbav ssBp p9{xxa

-jpS UB9dojng jsBg gqj 'gxxxxggj jsxuntuxxxoo

guxpug gqj gmMojipj '0661 UI
·SUOXJXpBJJ

sraoisno qsxAV9f jpqj pgoxpBid X^pjBq Agxp 9J9X|A\ Xppos JB|no9S b uiojj 9XXibo ox^av

'sjuBjgxtuuix gqj pUB 'suopnjxjsux ppos pus snoxgxpj six ipxA\ 'Xjxunuxuioo jsoq qsiM9f

U99Avpq dBg |Bjnj|no juBOijxugxs b sbav 9J9ip ;no pgjuxod (f86l) s^reAvs puB snojBjAj sy

'd) «9-"UI^ UBissn-y oj juauxqoBjjB guojjs apq; puB uopBjugxjo JBinogs jpqj goxpBjd OJ 9U01B ^9} 9q OJ pUB p9JSISSB A^TBOXUIOUOOg 9q O; p9padX9 SM9f UBISSTVa,, p9JOU (1003)

1991, p.4). According to Tolts (2004) the immigrant cohort leaving the FSU in the 1990s

was more assimilated into larger Russian culture than the previous ones. The findings of

another study also confirm that "recently arrived Russian Jews in Toronto brought with
them less of the Jewish cultural capital" (Anisef, Baichman-Anisef & Siemiatycki, 2002,
p. 8).

The large wave of Russian Jews from Israel started in the middle of 1990s. This
cohort is usually referred as "a secondary migration of Russian Jews" (Cohen, 2001,

Kraft, 2000). While Russian Jews from the FSU arrived as an oppressed group of people fleeing ant-Semitism and discrimination, the secondary migration of Russian Jews from
Israel to Canada was typically prompted by fear of war and terrorism, mandatory military service, economic hardships, difficulties encountered by intermarried couples, as well as difficulties integrating into an Israeli society, predicated on a more religious ideology revealed in religiously based legislation, than they had expected or were comfortable with. This ongoing immigrant cohort has become the major source of recent Jewish immigrants in Toronto (Shahar & Magomet, 2005, JIAS records, 2007). As noted in the introduction, this cohort was different from the previous ones in many ways

starting with their very "itinerary": from a hostile FSU to their mythical homeland, Israel,
and then to the Jewish diaspora in Canada.

In order to present an informed analysis of Russian Jews from Israel in Toronto, it is necessary to establish the working definitions of a Jew and a Russian Jew.

11

z\

oj dnjsuazxjp ajBipauxiui puB Ajjua smoijb ijoiijay '0S61 u!
aip Aq pajBjnSaj si jaBisi oj uoijbjSiuiuii 'j3A9moh "SAvap paaapxsuoo

jou aiB apis jBuiajBd aip uo SAV9f-jpH 'jusosap stJ3ii}i2j aqj jo ssaipjBSaj 'M9f b sx jsqjoxii

p]xqo b Xjuo vyovpfjAq 'pa;ou sy 'AV9f b paaapxsuoo sbav o^avjo AixnSxqxiiB
oj pajnqujuoo 8^61 in pBisj jo apis aifljo uotibsjo aqx jsqjBj qsxAvaf b jo

b J9ipx9 oj moq 9J9M Xaqj jx AV9f b sx uosigd b uisreprif uuoj9"a 01 Suxpjooov " b pgjgpxsuoo sx jgqjoiu qsxAvgf b oj xuoq pnqo b '(vqovjvjj) axb\ qsxA\9f oj Suipjoooy
p9sn sx Ajxjugpx

oj qoBOJddB oxxiqjg jo snoxSxpj b jaqjaqM uo Suxpuadap JU9JX9 atuos oj Ajba M9f b sx jo uoxjxuxjap 9i{j Sux^BXix 'gjnjpo b puB 'uoigxjai b 'Xjpiiqja ub 'uoijbu b jo

gqjjo atuos sgjBqs rasrepnf -(Ll-91 "dd 'TOOZ 'P13JU!9AV) uoxjbzxjxaxo UBadoang
puB XjxuBxjsuqo Aq paougnxjux 9J9M oqM puB 'gjnjjiiD pus 3§btiSub| qsxppx^ qjXAV

P9jbxoossb 9jb 'sdojng xugjsBg puB |bjju93 ux sjb suxSuo asoqM SAvaf aqj oj SJ9J9J dnoi§
joj paoM Avajqan Japp sip si zvudqifsy) SM9f xzBua^sy 9iB dnojS puB ureds uiojj pajBuiSuo asoqj sjsm (M9aq9H hi ltu?Bd§,, suBaxxi

BORJV H^OM Pub Jsb3 9IPP!P\[ 9lP jnoiiSnoiqj sgijiunuxuioo
qSXAV9f guipUBJS §UOl UIOJJ 9UIB0 SAV9f (jlfVJZlffl) JBJU9U0 SM9f JO UOIJBJJU9OUOO

puB suoxjBpdod JofBixx 99jqj 9J9M 9i9T|j '^t76T u] uoiSTjidxg qsiuBds 9qj jo 9UIXJ 9tp ·(9 |-d '1002 'PFJU!9A\.) sajnqxjjjB |Bjnj|no jgqjo puB 'Xjojsxq jo gsuas b 'jusosap uouimoo
b Aq p9uxjap dnooS oxuqja ub 'Qauisi jo uoijbu aqj,,) pvus^ wv 'gjdoad b 9JB SAvaf
V SI

and grandchildren on both sides (maternal and paternal). The Law of Return was amended in 1970 because of the lack of clarity of the fundamental question "Who is a Jew" in the Population Registry (Al-Haj, 2004, p. 35). The amendment expanded the Law
of Return and stipulated that "the right of return applied also to the non-Jewish child,

grandchild, or spouse of a Jew, as well as to the children's and grandchildren's spouses"
(Al Haj, 2004, p. 35). In this way the right of return and citizenship was extended to many who were not Jewish according to VLalacha. The estimated number of non-Jews

among the last wave of Russian Jews currently living in Israel is around 350,000, that is,
over one third of the total, as indicated on the Interior Ministry's website (Remennick, 2007, p. 61). The "Who is a Jew?" question still vexes Knesset (Israeli Parliament) and has brought orthodox and secular Israelis into sharp conflict. For the purpose of this paper an individual who has at least one Jewish parent and who identifies with Jews will
be considered a Jew.

The definition of Russian Jews has been always problematic and sometimes confusing. "Russians" is a general term commonly used to describe immigrants from all the republics of the FSU. One can argue this is wrong, because each republic has its own distinctive ethnic nature, which is typically manifested in language, arts, and customs and

often in a particular accent and dialect of the Russian language. However it is essential to remember that all the republics of the FSU went through a process of Russification, i.e. an adoption of the Russian language or some other Russian attributes (whether voluntary or not) by non Russian communities. It is significant to remember that the community in Toronto defines itself as Russian Jewish: indeed the name of its largest community
institution is the Russian Jewish Community Centre. Hence, the most basic and

13

gupq sb Ajpuapi,, smsia 'o}uojox ux siuBjgirarai qsiA\9f uBxsstra uo saxpnjs tbj9A9S

papnpuoo oxjav '(ZOOZ) 5[OSBa -sxup J9AO 9iBtvpnxj ubo pxre jubisuoo jou si /fyjuapx oiuqp

angjB (£003 'SuoS '2003 '^os^a 'x_00Z: 'uosjgpuv) sjejpxps msj b ajm^) ·soxjspos
mspoiii ux psgjsras 3ABq sarixjuspx \vpos puB oxnqjs gidxjjnj/\[ -

aq A|piBi| p|noo suoiieiixjjb oxxiqp asisAip jo sidosd jo Aixjxqoxu aqx (91^ -d) ^p
oxxixpa jo SuuawBos sqj Xq pajBoijduioo X|§uxsb3joux stuooaq seq Aspoj uoxjBoijri
oxuipg -SUOXJBTIIXS jobjuoo oxxiqp xajduioo Xpraajjxa,, oj 'sapBoap jusosa tix

jnq 'ssuniuao jsao pajnqujuoo 9ABq SBiodsBip }Bqoi§ l^qi jno sauxod (1003)

'·(SCZ "d) ..suxSuo
p3Ai90J9d jo |B9J iraxj} uo pasBq sdnojg uuoj ajdosd uaqM saSaauxs isip uoijBogxpjis

xmoos jo acKj b puB Ajpuspx ^uosaad jpip auxjap s|BnpxAipux ipujM ux Abav aip qjoq sb U93S sx Aipxuqp 'aSBsn Araiodiuajuoo ux,, jBip sanSiB (OOOZ) V®<P}H 'IBUoijbu suboui
-3jni|no puB 9{do9d b jo gpnjxwB puB juxds aAipuxjsxp gqj sx soutpa -s9pBJiuoo jo puBq b jo 'AuBdiuoo b 'jgqpgoj Suiax| gjdogd jo J9qxunu b ^ub9ui souyja >J99JO
uj soymifja puB souifjd :spjoA\ 5[99JQ OM1 u*0-? S9AU9p oxuqp UU9J

9ip 'BAoppjM 'ssjbjs oxj|Ba 9i# ssojob ^U9o jgd ge jnoqB qjiM 'Bissnjopa

UX p9AX| SAV9f QSJ 9tp JO AlXJOfBXU 9qX "UX SuipXSSJ 9J9AV A9^J 0Xiq
gjnijno jB]noxwBd b Xq pgougnxjux 9J9M sgpxjugpx pire 'suopxpBJi 'suioisno j

9St\BD9q 'SAV9f UBISSXl-JJ JO AjXSJ9AXp SUX§UBJ 9pXM. 9ip pUXUI UX d995[ OJ JBX1U9SS9 SX 1J '
gqi ux ujoq sav9£ 9jb SM9f uBxssn^ :jgdBd sxip ux pgsn gq \[\a\ uoxjxuxjgp

constantly (reconstituted in relation to local and global encounters" (p. 345). She suggests that people may be uncertain about what constitutes their own identities and

when some immigrants question and redefine the meanings of their ethnic identities, it
can result in identities becoming fragmented (p. 342). These findings resonate with those by Anisef, Baichman-Anisef & Siemiatycki (2002), who argue that Russian Jewish youth, especially those who lived in Israel, develop multiple fragmented identities: "Are
they Russian? Are they Israeli? Are they Jewish, and if so, what part of their identity does
it take?" (p. 22).

Some aspects of identity can be self-imposed and others can be the result of outside

influence. According to Weinberg (1996) identity is multi-faceted; therefore an individual can identify with more than one group on multiple levels. Issues of identity
and belonging to a group might be more complicated for diasporas' minorities such as
Russian Jews. Historically the formation of the identity of Russian Jews was, to a great

extent, affected by their experiences: pogroms, anti-Semitism, the creation of a
communist Soviet Union, the Holocaust, the creation of the state of Israel, etc. Russian

Jews had to maintain their collective memory and traditions to keep their Jewish identity
and preserve it for future generations (Weinberg, p.63). Their identity had to incorporate traditional Jewish values and modern life. For the majority of Russian Jews, who grew up in an atheist society, being Jewish meant to belong to an ethnic group. But their Russian

Jewish identities were also influenced by their education and exposure to arts and literature, as well as other experiences, which were based on Russian culture. Consequently, culturally they identified themselves as Russians. As Cohen (2001) has

observed many leading Russian writers, poets, journalists, actors, composers, and

15

91

i 'S9tV[BA JO aomOS B SB upUB|aiUOq,, B O} UOXJBJiraUO aq} SI UOUSJUO 9AIJTt)IJSU00

puooas aqx 'SJapjoq areis sassojo uoisjadsip aqj }Bq} papiAOjd 'ajdoad jo uoisjadsip jo pupj Aire sb XjpBOjq papjdjaim aq ubo jj -uousjuo psjdsooB XppiM jsoui aq; si uoisaadsiQ

aq o} psjdsooB XppiAV sjb a^qj sjusuiap sjoo 93iqj sjb siaqj j^q; sang-iB ·Xjxunmuioo oxuqp Aub jo uoxsjadsip aqj oj SJ9J9J BJodsBip uuaj sqj '

(l "d) lt3I!x9 -10 'uopBjStunin 'uoijbjSiuijo
aqj xiSnojqi puBjsuioq saxjbu araq; uiojj ps^BOOisxp traaq 9ABq oqAV sjdosd jo saxjiunxxituoo paoBjdsip,, 01 SJ3J3J BJodsBip uus; aq; jBq^ anSit? Asqx 'usp93S iajjBOS jo avos oj,, - ududds pire ctssojOB,, Suiubsui 'm/? :ududdsvip uuai 5{93JO 31IJ tuo-H paAuap si

piOAV sqj }Bq} jssSSns (£003) -inuuBjAj puB pizBag susAg -SBiodsBip ibuoijbxisubjj Sui;
ssuiunoo Suiisoq puB sauioq Jiaq} usaMjaq q^0J puB 5[OBq saoui oj pua; siubjSiiuiui,
d 3qo|§ sqj ssojob ssaoojd 9AipBJ3jux ub ut suoijbaouux fBan^no puB stiuoj

i 'A§oiouqoa; '^BjidBO jo avojj aq^ 0% asuodsaa b sb paAvaiA aq ppoo uoijbjSijaj
jD^ijod pire jbioos 'oiuxouooa juaxmo aq; sb TjaA\ sb 'sap iBJnjjna jo juaurisaAm

'apBJj 'aouanijui jBoijqod 'uoijbziuojoo jaqjBa uo pasBq ajB qaiqM suopBuijsap puB suiSuo

uaaMiaq s>piq aqj jo jxajuoo jBoiJOjsiq aqj pajjaj sassaoojd asaqx 'Auiouooa |Bqo|§
SuipuBdxa ub jo jxa^uoa oimouooa puB jBopijod aqj ui uaas 3JB sassaoojd uoijbjSxjaj
wstjvuoiivusuvj} pun VAodsviq

qsiAvaf UBissn^ puB suoijipBjj jBJTtijna UBissn^jj aqj uaaAvjaq uoipauuoo pips aqj suiBjdxa -Bis)uaSq|ajui uBisstvy aqi jo tipBaq aqj,, papqB] xiayo '^Bd |BJ§a}ui ub ajB Aaqx,,
UBissn-y; aqj jo sjo}B3jo aqj Suouib ajaAv SAvaf - SA\af ajaA\ sxiBioisnui

T
and loyalty. Safran (1991) suggests four characteristics of homeland orientation. These

include, first, a collective memory or myth about the homeland; second, regarding the
ancestral homeland as home and as the place to which one would eventually return; third being collectively "committed to the maintenance or restoration of the homeland and to its safety and prosperity"; and fourth "continuing to relate, personally or vicariously" to
the homeland, in a way that significantly shapes ones identity and solidarity (Safran, 1991, pp. 83-84). The third constitutive criterion is boundary-maintenance, which involves "the preservation of a distinctive identity vis-a-vis a host society or societies" (Brubaker, 2005, p. 7). He argues that boundary-maintenance is an indispensible criterion of diaspora. It is this that makes diaspora a distinctive community, held together by an active solidarity, "as well as by relatively dense social relationship, that cut across state boundaries and link members of the diaspora in different states into a single
transnational community" (p. 7).

According to Shuval (2000) the essence of diaspora is a social construct founded on
feeling, memory, history, mythology, group identity, longings, allegorical and virtual

elements, all of which play a role in establishing a diaspora reality. In her discourse on
diaspora she quotes words of Walter Benjamin (1968): "effaced stories are recovered,

different futures are imagined..." (p.43). She suggests that this term has acquired a broad
semantic domain and now encompasses "a motley array of groups such as political

refugees, alien residents, guest workers, immigrants, expellees, ethnic and racial minorities, overseas communities" (p. 42). She provides several examples, such as

Russians living in non-Russian states of the Former Soviet Union, Palestinians, who have
developed a sense of diaspora since 1948, a Black diaspora which pertains to persons

17

from a variety of African countries, and the group of refugees from Kosovo. Shuval (2000) argues that time is an essential element in understanding diaspora consciousness.
A sense of diaspora can be immediate: a response to the trauma of exile. It can also occur or re-occur after several generations when group members are themselves no longer

immigrants though their predecessors were. When a diaspora group experiences exclusion, social discrimination, or limited opportunities for advancement, an active
diaspora culture helps to maintain a sense of community and belonging to a more rewarding welcoming social entity (Shuval, 2000). What distinguishes a diaspora is an ongoing or reawakened attachment and loyalty to an earlier culture and specifically to a

space defined as a homeland which has been left.
Before the establishment of the state of Israel in 1948, all Jews were considered to be living in the Diaspora. In the Diaspora Jews kept their Jewish identity alive for centuries even in the absence of a homeland, to which they could return. Clearly Israel has been

defined as the homeland of the Jewish people and its diaspora is located all over the
world with major concentrations in the USA, Canada, France, the FSU, and Argentina.

Jews remain intimately connected to their biblical homeland - Israel, and generations of diaspora Jews have traditionally prayed for a return to a Holy Land, reciting "Next Year

in Jerusalem" at the end of Passover Seder, and praying daily for a return to the Holy
Land. In the case of Russian Jewish emigration to Israel we may speak not just about "coming home", but the creation of a new diaspora in the mythical homeland. Trier (1996) argues that Russian Jews "do not simply come home; rather they become diasporic in relation to their erstwhile homeland, Russia. Diaspora does not cease to exist

18

when Russian Jews come home to Israel. On the contrary, a new Russian-Jewish diaspora emerges" (p. 2). Israel tended to be regarded as a "homeland" in the sense of a refuge, to which Jews could seek in case the socio-political climate in the FSU should make emigration imperative (Trier, 1996). Despite the expectation that Russian Jews in Israel would not become a diaspora community, they have created one with strong transnational
links to the FSU.

It is essential to point out that while a diaspora may be described as transnational, it is not synonymous with transnationalism. A diaspora may be conceptualized as "a concomitant of transnationalism" (Evans Braziel and Mannur, 2003, p. 8). Wong and Satzweich (2006) argue that there is considerable overlap between the concepts of transnationalism and diaspora. According to them the concepts of transnationalism and transnational communities are broader and more inclusive than those of diaspora and diasporic communities. "Transnational communities encompass diasporas, but not all
transnational communities are diasporas" (p. 6).

Unlike immigrants in previous generations who usually made a once in a life-time move from their country to another, contemporary immigrants tend to move back and forth (physically, virtually, and otherwise) between their country of origin and their host
country, creating transnational ethnic communities. Common language and cultural

heritage are the key cementing factors for transnational diasporas. According to Glick

Schiller, Basch and Blanc (1995) transnationlism can be defined as "process by which immigrants forge and sustain simultaneous multi-stranded social relations that link
together their societies of origin and settlement" (p. 48). There are ongoing and

19

-ouqp jo 90U9gj9ui9 9xjx ·ssoxpBjd jbuoxjbusubji sxjoddns pire S9}Otuojd 'jirajxa uibij90
b oj 'xixsxjBjrujnopitrai jo Aoxjod s4BpBUB3 jeqi uoijBJgpxsuoo oiux 9>[B} oj ibxju9SS9 si ji

Ulds pUB '{BtH09|pjUI '{BUOIJOUI9 'jBUOXatllXlSUX 'jBU0SJ9d rspadSB IBUOIJBUSUBJ} ST1OUBA

Aq p9?[JBtu 9jb sspxunuiuioo oiuqja -saoipBid jeuoprasireJi ^uboxjiuSis pus juanba^
ui ag^Sus oj sjuBjgiuraii joj 9jqxssod ji 95JBUI S9igo|ouqo9j uoijByodsirejj pire ui9po]A[ "Xjapos jsoq 9ip ui uotjb§9jS9S puB uisijBJBdgs |Bjnjjno jo spA9{
jxqxqxg sgijtuniuuioo ju9J9jjiq -uoxiBoggjuT jo ssaoojd 9t[j mojs Abiu puB saippos

§UTAI909J Xq 0TJBUI9jq0jd SB p9AX90J9d U91J0 SX SJUBJSXXIIIUI SUOIUB S9XJIbA0| JBOXJX|Od
pire 'ppos 'oxxnouoog jo ix^ds 9t[} 'sgxjranxiixuoo iubjSxxuxiii jo Aix^uoiaBusuBij 9ijx
·sdnojg

ao uxSuo |buoxjbu jBjnoxpBd xjjxm. pgjBpossB !U9xxi9§bSu3 ibuoxjbusubj: jo sgdAi jo 9q Xbui 9.I9XJ1 'Xjba uopBdpx^Bd jo gdoos puB 'Xjxsuajux 'Aougnbgij
·S90XJ0Bjd JO S9dX} 9AOqB 9l|l JO |JB JO 9HXOS UX 9gBgU9 XbUI S^BTipiAXpUJ -(S9nSSX guxpiBggj sau9Tixai9Aog isoq 9qi guxAqqoj 'sju9ux9aohi jBpos so sgxyBd joj spuxij guisrej 'guxiOA) jBOxaxjod pus '(Ajaunoo 9xuoq b ux Aygdojd jo 9uxoq b guiMO 's;u9mjS9AUX

'S90UBJ1XXXI9J 9AXp9|pD 'S90UBJ1XXII9J AjUIIBj) 0XTXIOUO09 '(sUOIJBZXUBgjO pUB Spsfojd p9SBq
-qarej joj poddns oxuxouoo9 'uox§9J jo Xjjunoo 9iuoq gqj ux pasBq suoxanaxjsux jo sjgpB9|

oxjxo9ds qixM pgjBpossB sgoxpBjd puB S9Xixju9px snoxgxpj guxuxBiureiu S'd) snoxgipj t(A"j}unoo 9xuoq 9qj qiXAV pgjBpossB sA"Bpxjoq jbuoijbu jo snoxgxpj 'oxuqp gmiBjqgpo
Sa) \vm\\no \{-ojd 'suoxsbooo a"uujbj joj pabj: 'gxuoq?{OBq spugxjj puB S9AXiBpjqjXA\

SPB1UOO JBjnggj) {BpOS :guxptl]OUX 'SUJJOJ SnOXJBA 95[B1 ABXU S9X1IAXPB {BUOXJBUSUBJX
'(6P *d) c/ppos 9uo UBq: gjoui ui ssgupgppgqujg sno9UB^nujxs

9injxasuoo9J puB pnjisuoo sjUBjgxuJUix ^ABp-jugjjno,, qoxqAV ux sAbm guxnuxjuoo

cultural transnational communities within receiving societies indicates that people from
particular regions of origin share ways of life and structure their new social spaces,

neighborhoods, and local communities in a manner that accommodates both old and new.
"Old and new mentalities and practices overlap in a single space and through migrant linkages both worlds overlap in communities of origin too" (Harzig and Hoeder, 2006, p. 43). Such community formation allows for the establishment of institutions deemed

necessary for adjustment and backward linkages. Wong and Satzewich (2006) note that
transnationalism in Canada "may be conceptualized as an extension of multiculturalism

beyond national borders and thus as having a cross-border spatial dimension" (p. 4). This
paper will demonstrate that Russian Jews from Israel show strong transnational links with
both Israel and the FSU.

In this chapter we have examined the different immigration cohorts of Russian Jews

as well as the complexity of the definition of a Jew. We have also examined the conceptual framework of ethnic identity, diaspora and transnationalism. The next chapter
will explore the settlement of Russian Jews in Israel.

21

Chapter 3

Russian- Jewish Immigrants of the 1990s in Israel

Cohort Profile

In order to understand the profile of Russian Jews who arrived in Israel in the 1990s from the FSU it is essential to explore some of their important characteristics. In his research Tolts (2004) identifies two major groups of Russian Jews in the FSU. One is the
"core" Jewish population that consists of those who identify themselves as Jews in terms of their ethnicity. The second group is the "enlarged" Jewish population, which includes Jews "along with their non-Jewish household members". According to Tolts the
proportion of the "enlarged" to "core" Jewish population has been constantly increasing.

It was 1.5 to 1 in the late 1970s, increased to 1.6 to 1 in the late 1980s, 1.8 to 1 in 1994, and 1.9 to 1 in 2001 (pp. 38-39). The statistics show an obvious increase in intermarriage
rates that undoubtedly have influenced Jewish identity.

In the FSU a Jewish identity is formed in the home and is primarily based on a collective memory, traditions and spiritual aspects of Jewish life. However, the exposure to the basic elements of the Jewish identity is declining and weakening within the

growing "enlarged" Jewish population. Consequently the immigrant cohorts leaving the
FSU in 1990s were more assimilated into the larger Russian culture that the previous ones. It is important to remember that being Jewish had never been a matter of choice for Russian Jews. The internal passports of all the citizens included a nationalnost entry, meaning ethnic origin - the infamous fifth paragraph - that "became synonymous with

Jewish "social disability" among other "normal" citizens" (Remennick, 2007, p. 20).

22

T
Having this written in their passports prevented many Jews from having equal rights

entering universities, job promotions and it sparked frequent anti-Semitic remarks. At the age of sixteen everyone was ascribed the ethnicity of one's parents; those born of mixed
marriages could choose either ethnic designation. Thus a person born to two Jewish
parents entered society officially defined as a Jew.

According to Trier (1996) in early 1990s when the gates of the FSU were opened and Jews could leave for Israel, offspring of mixed families whose passports indicated non-

Jewish nationalities and who never thought of themselves as Jews, began to consider the possibility of emigration. "Being a Jew became something desirable, as Jewishness opened a gateway to new possibilities" (p. 5). It is important to bear in mind that the
latest immigration wave from the FSU was set in motion mainly by "push factors" (economic crisis, political instability, growing nationalism and anti-Semitism). Positive identification with Judaism, Zionism and other Israeli values was rather weak. For many Russian Jews Israel was a less desirable destination than the US and other Western countries, which introduced strict migrant quotas for Soviet citizens in the early 1990s.

Thus, for most leaving for Israel was a pragmatic rather than an ideological decision Just as immigration to Israel is known as a homecoming, or reuniting of the dispersed diasporas, the Hebrew word aliyah (ascent to Jerusalem) and olim (the ascending returnees) are used in Israel instead of the international terms "immigration" and "immigrants". I will use these words because they are very typical of the Israeli discourse on immigration, constantly appear in the mass media, and are used by
immigrants themselves.

23

VI

pgijsxjqnd 9J3A\ uBxssxvy; ux ssutzbSbui puB sjgdBdsAvau a"}U9a\i jnoqB puB pBisj ssojob
pausdo 9ABq S3JOJS oxsnm/O9piA/>[Ooq UBXssrry 00£ ^KO 'P^isi ux P5[jbxii Bipaui iBjnijno
9jx}bsj9a b jo uoxjb9jo 9ij} pire nSd 9lP tflTM s^H Ibuoijbusubjj rspxnreno ureui omj

bia sjtnino UBissn-a tpiAv sap jpip paurejsns sjubjSiuiiui (/,003 't^OOZ: '300Z) jpiuustua'H
0} Suxpaooov '(666 T 'msqsaq pire 5[Bsstq) jsbjsi ui uisxuoxz - ASojospi ;uBuxuiop jaqjouB oj gmquosqns m snox;tiBO sjsav Xsqj ns J 9lllu! Agopapx pasoduix-sjBis lofeui

auo pay guxA^H "(000^ 'sj9turaq>j pus urajsdg) KuopBzipBJSi,, pxdsa jpip jb
paisxssj puB 3§B}U9X{ jraxp paqsuaqo sjra>[B9ds uBxssn^ jytipB 'xureaa TBjnjjno axp '(6661 'uiaqsaq puB JjBSSiq)
-oo x|3bjsi jpqj qjxAv spsjuoo jo s^uxod a\sj pBq pus Ava-iqaj-j jo puBtiiiuoo ipip

o} s3axju9oux pajxp ou pBq A9ip reqj SuxuBSUi 'jnjssaoons Ajsa }ou sbm sjubjSxxuuix

UBissn-g jo uoijBjgajux cthtb3i {BuoxjBdnooo aqj ux 'snqjj-(666I c>[oxiiu3ui9'a) jopas aoxAias

91{1 UX U90JO '5[JOM p3||X>[S-XUX9S JO p3l|X5JSUn Xq §UXAX| jpip 3>{BUX OJ pBq 'SJUBOSXUJXUX

9|Bui9j puB J9pp Ajjmogdsg 'AjuopBui 9qx 'SuoxjBogxjBnb jpip oj :uBA9pj sqof
puxj ppoo ;u90J9d A^iiip X|uo 'sdxqsjB|oqos reuoxjBonpa puB sgsjtioo |Buoxss9joad 'Suxuxbjj
M9iq9H jo abay Aq sjubjSxxuuix pajBonpg jo uoxjxsubjj aqj qjooxxxs oj syojjg sta;Bis

sip 9;xds9p 'J9A9AVOH '(6661 SSO) flSd 9tP UI sj95[joa\ JBnoo-9jxqAV jo sreuoxssajojd
U99q pBq puB S99J§9p oxuispBOB pBq SJ9XU00AV9U 3\# jo JU90 jsd 09 jnoqv 'iBjxdBo jBpos

s/jjunoo 9i{} oj pajnqujuoo XjjB9J§ 9ABq nSd 9XP UI0-9 sj9xmoom9u pBdxux oxqdBjSouigp
S9pXS9g '(ZOOZ '>{0XUU9ra9-a) S9ABpU9 OXUqp 9JB9J0 qOXqAV 'JU90 J9d Of - (}£ p9qOB9J
uonB^ndod 9if> jo 9JBqs jpqi (popqsy 'bjxbh '§'3) suavoj puB S9xjp guios ux 'ajjutxoo

gqj ssojob payjps 3abi[ tuijo uBxssn^ iiSnoqj|v 'Appos jsoq 9ip uo pBdxux puB oxxxxouoo9-opos 'gdoos sjx ux gnbxun jgqjBJ sbm (uo 6861 mo-9) mU° J° sabav

(exceeding the number of Hebrew publications). All pivotal cultural events in the FSU were exported to Israel by Russian TV channels and live tours of Russian artists

(Remennick, 2004, p. 433). As Epstein and Kheimets (2000) pointed out, most Russians
held to the superiority of Russian Cultural traditions as compared to Israeli culture and

wished to preserve the old ways. The transnational links to the FSU appeared to be more
than obvious. It is also important to point out that the Russian language and Russian-

Soviet culture play the crucial role in the formation of Russian-Jewish ethnicity and the Israeli Russian community. In fact, it is the main common ground for the otherwise diverse groups of the FSU immigrants, including Jews of various ethnic origins (European, Caucasian and Asian) coming from a wide array of places and social backgrounds. Thus, it is possible to say that, in a way, cultural retention united Russian
Jews from different areas of the FSU.

Al-Haj (2002) argues that immigrants from the FSU in Israel form a distinct ethnic

group within the Israeli social and cultural fabric. This is reflected in their closed social
networks, ethnic information sources, strong desire to maintain ethno-cultural continuity,

and the fact that the ethnic component (Jews from the FSU or immigrants from the FSU)
is central for self-identification. He argues that their purely ethnic identification is

connected with difficulties in absorption and a lack of social and psychological adjustment to Israeli society. He suggests that as a whole the ethnic identification of immigrants from the FSU in Israel "is not a reactive identity, which is mainly generated by alienation". It is rather based on "group connectedness and pride in their Russian cultural roots". Hence, he concludes that "the desire to perpetuate ethnic organizations is

25

91

stAj;unoo

,, ·sagipijs in suszijp guxdgg^ puB sumoi xpBJSj guipgiB} S9|issiui xbBJj iijim JSJXJ 91J1 p9JTUB9J potted 1BIJ1 JO S1U9A9 JBOXJXJod 9UJ,

·ppxj

iA ux s|Buoxss9jo.id pgureaj A||booi i[§nou9 pgpiAOid pms\
smj SJ9UI00M9U piAos J9xmoj jo

JO SU9} JO

JX9JU00 0IUI0U009

S()661

d 'LOOZ
ojut ipM Xj9a p9pu9|q puB ssep

9|ppiiu ipBJSj 9ip pgmof AjpxdBJ,, X9ip jguq ui -Ajpugpi pp jpip guippgqs 'S9U0 AV9aq9H 0} S9UIBU iretssn"a Jpqj p9§uBqo pire ggBnSuB] XjBinud jpip sb o; pgqojiMS ut9ip jo Xubui }9taos puB uBissn^j Suiq^uB o; }U9tui}U9S M9j Suiabh
·guxsnoij oi|qnd pazrpxsqns

0} ss9oob ;o§ osjb SJB9X 9S9qj jo tuijo Aubiu puB 9Aisu9dx9Ui U99q pBq guxsnoq s;bauj ·suoissgjoid pjo jpqj ux 9jx| b 95jbui ppoo wijo jsoui os 'sjspxraps puB 'sjgauigug 'sjopop
p9lirej} Aj|B0O|JO p99U UX \[}}S P5JJBX1I ipBJSJ UB UX pUBXU9p llgn{ UI 9J9M UilJO 9^1 JO

sjjp[S |t?uoxss9jojd 9HX "Ajiunoo AV9U ipq; A\oiq oj pg puB A\9jq9j-[ Xpnis oj Xnunpoddo
ub

uoxjdiosqv p9.iosuods-9jB}S ux JB9A asjxj jpqi lugds Agqx
9ApO9J pjtlOAV XxiUtlOO J9qjO OU 9SXlB99q 10U pUB 9JB1S qSIAV9f B UX 9AX| OJ p9JUBAV

9SnB39q pBJSJ OJ p9A0Ui pBq 9jdO9d 9S9qi JO 1SOJAI -JU9ip9dX9 pUB IJJOOUIS

SBAV S9ABM S086T ^I-IB9 pUB S0A6T J° mU° treiSStra JO 90U9XJ9dX9

·(§9 -d) CCS|9A9| 9AIP9||OO pUB |BnpXAXpUX 9qj ipoq IB S1S9J9JUX

puB snjBjs iraip jo av9ia oxgg^BJjs b jo i]ns9J gqi jnq 'gpnjx^B [BxjuBismnoap-9AipB9j b iou

internal agenda was certainly full and its resources stretched as thin as ever; adding to the
strain, the Russian immigrants kept arriving by the thousands" (Remennick, 2007, p. 55).

The small country was flooded by newcomers, looking for house rentals and jobs. The new policy of so-called direct absorption meant that new arrivals received direct financial aid for six months (the so-called absorption basket) that was hypothetically sufficient for
them to rent an apartment in the free market, buy basic home appliances, and devote most of their time to studying Hebrew in full-time free classes. For the next six months, those who did not find jobs could get an interest free loan that had to be repaid after three years. In practice, the financial aid was barely sufficient to cover housing rentals and
most olim had to find manual jobs soon upon arrival in order to supplement their
absorption basket.

The occupational adjustment of the newcomers was very difficult. In the early 1990s, the unemployment level among Russian immigrants reached 40 percent; this slowly declined and reached the national average of 11 percent by the late 1990s. Yet throughout this period, just over a quarter of the olim holding academic degrees from the FSU
worked in their original professions (Remennick, 2007, p. 57).

The extent of occupational downgrading was especially dramatic for women and

older professionals of either gender, who had often been senior specialists before emigration (Remennick, 2003). Governmental programs of retraining and aid in finding
the first employment were of help mainly to younger and more dynamic immigrants. It

was highly traumatic for educated immigrants to find themselves in the bottom tier of the
workforce. Remennick (2007) points out that the feelings of social displacement were

"augmented by an overarching sense of insecurity - financial (due to unstable income

27

and mounting debts), physical (reflecting ongoing military conflict and acts of terror), and psychological (reflecting poor command of Hebrew, misunderstanding of local
norms, and loss of support networks)" (p. 58).

In addition to the above difficulties, Russian and other non-Jewish wives of Jewish
men found themselves in an especially precarious position. There is no legal separation between the state and religion in many important aspects of Israel's laws and government. Orthodox Judaism dominates all official religious institutions. According to the Law of Return non-Jewish wives were granted Israeli citizenship, but were denied

basic civic rights. The matters of marriage, divorce, registration of newborns and burial
are all controlled by the religious authorities, which exclude non-Jews from their

proceedings. This meant that non-Jewish olim could not get married in Israel, although their foreign marital certificates were fully recognized by the state for all official
purposes. They also had more troubles getting divorced, registering their non-Jewish

children as citizens and inviting their non-Jewish parents or siblings to visit or join them
in Israel.

Obviously their children inherited their Russianness. The only way out was to go

through conversion {giyur) in its most thorough Orthodox style, which meant attending the giyur classes, passing a final examination and keeping other Jewish traditions and

rituals. According to Remennick (2007) during the early and mid-1990s, thousands of
Russian, Ukrainian, and other women studied in the giyur classes, but only about half of them could pass the final examinations. This situation caused mixed families to feel that
they were second class citizens.

28

The economic, social and mostly political situation in Israel in the 1990s made many

olim question whether they want to continue living in Israel. Even if they had reached a certain economic stability {e.g. well paid positions, purchased real estate) and felt more
or less comfortable in the Israeli society, the constant stress caused by the terrorist attacks

and by the ongoing military threat, and mandatory military service motivated them to leave Israel. According to Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics the number of immigrants
from the FSU, who left Israel in 2000 was 3,022 and it climbed to 4, 406 in 2002.

29

Chapter 4

Russian Jews from Israel in Toronto The receiving community

Throughout the 1990s and early 2000s Canada became one of the most appealing
destinations for Russian Jews from Israel. Eligibility for independent economic immigration in the "skilled worker" category is assessed by means of the Point System, whereby the applicants and their adult family members are ascribed points for their age, education, occupation and work experience, proficiency in official languages, whether they have a close relative living in Canada, and proof of authorized employment. "The relative lenience of Canadian immigration policy towards skilled immigrants and high
human capital of the Russian Jews reflected in their eligibility under the Point System"

(Remennick, 2007, p. 279). A steady stream of applicants has been stalking the offices of
Canadian Embassy in Tel Aviv since the mid 1990s and an estimated 3000 to 7000
(includes Russian Jews and other Israelis) left for Canada every year (p. 283).

Russian Jews from Israel arriving in Toronto came to a city with a large and vibrant Jewish community. According to the 2006 Census the Jewish population in Toronto has

reached 141,685. There are numerous facilities available to the community ranging from
Jewish day and afternoon schools for students of every background to kosher restaurants

and shops, a large number of synagogues of every denomination and two community centers. With a third in a building stage Jewish community services are available from
cradle to grave to help those in need. Culturally the community offers museums, art

galleries, annual Yiddish and Jewish film festivals, a Jewish Book Fair, a variety of

30

concerts and Holidays celebrations. There are active immigrant communities from South Africa, Russia, Israel Argentina, Morocco to name a few, who add to the cultural

diversity of the Toronto Jewish community.
There is a strong bond between Toronto's Jewish community and Israel. The connection of the Toronto Jewish community to Israel is not just an expression of identification and shared fate. Israel is joined to Jews in diaspora through social and communications networks. The older social networks facilitated by membership in Zionist organizations still exist, but they are "overshadowed by a broad range of relationships: familial, economic, professional, cultural, and philanthropic" (Schoenfeld, Shaffir, and Weinfeld, 2006, p. 281). The United Jewish Appeal in Canada (UJA) raises millions of dollars each year. A large portion of the funds goes to social welfare in Israel. Israeli universities, hospitals, social services, and religious institutions have established "Canadian Friends of..." to raise funds directly and develop ties with the Canadian Jewish population. Religious groups have parallel, cooperating organizations in Israel and Canada. The Hebrew language and identification with Israel are part of the curriculum of Canadian Jewish schools. Missions to Israel, programs of touring and study involve hundreds of Canadian Jews each year, and the list goes on. While Russian Jews arriving from the FSU were viewed as an oppressed group of people fleeing anti-Semitism and economic hardships, migrants from Israel were viewed differently by the established Jewish community. They were considered yordim, literally "those who go down", those who had chosen to leave Israel -- violators of the Zionist ideology and, as such, a potential hazard for the Jewish state. In addition they were often

considered "double dippers", e. g. those who had received assistance with their settlement

31

in Israel and wanted to benefit from the services here. The established Jewish community was reluctant to accept the fact that Russian Jews from Israel have the right and opportunity to choose where to live. Recently, however, this attitude has been changing slightly and attempts have been made to better integrate them into the mainstream Jewish
community.

Jewish Immigrant Aid Services, Toronto (JIAS, Toronto) is the agency providing services to all newcomers to Toronto. During the past decade 75 per cent of the agency clientele have been Russian Jews from Israel. The agency provides variety of settlement
and integration services such as information and referral, English as a Second language classes, immigration consultations, employment counseling, short term financial assistance, youth program, programs for seniors, a family matching program, and Jewish

Holidays celebrations. In addition to JIAS there are other agencies within the Jewish community providing services for newcomers: the Bathurst Jewish Community Centre, the Jewish Information Service, the Board of Jewish Education, Jewish Family and Child
Services, Jewish Vocational Services, and some others.

Findings and discourse

The individual interviews conducted for this study pertained to the four general

realms: causes of immigration to Canada, settlement experiences, identity, and
transnationalism. I will discus each of them separately.

32

Causes ofimmigration to Canada

Unlike the findings of the recent study by Remennick (2007), which included both Russian Jews arriving in Toronto directly from the FSU and Israel, who reported
economic reasons as primary in their decision to move to Canada, all the participants in

my study strongly identified lack of safety and political instability as primary reasons for
leaving Israel. They reported leaving Israel to escape the constant stress caused by the ongoing military threat and terrorists attacks. It is important to remember that all of them

had experienced bombings during the Gulf War, as well as numerous terrorist attacks.
They had gone through the experience of warning sirens, wearing gas masks and hiding in bomb shelters. One of the participants witnessed a terrorist attack. A close friend of another one was injured in one of the attacks. As one of the participants said: "Our
generation knew about the war only from our parents' stories, books and movies; it is

very difficult to live in a country where a war can start every day. But the most terrible
thing is that even when there is no war, one does not feel safe; one takes a bus or goes to

a mall and never knows whether he will be a victim of a terrorist act". All of the

participants also voiced concerns that their children, both male and female, would have to serve in the Israel Defense Forces. They also cited additional motives reflecting their wish to leave Israel due to limited employment opportunities, its Middle Eastern cultural
flavor, their dislike of native Israelis, the overly religious character of the state, the hot
climate and other reasons.

Some participants shared that their preferred destination was the U.S., but as

immigration there was almost impossible, they decided on Canada. Others preferred Canada due to relatively inexpensive higher education, universal access to health care,

33

and a developed welfare system. An additional argument in favor of moving to Canada
was the promise of initial help from relatives or friends already living in Canada. Being one of the few Western countries still receiving independent immigrants, Canada became their destination of choice. An interesting observation is that some participants sounded embarrassed and even apologetic when discussing their motives for leaving Israel. Only 2 of them did not mention how much help they had received and how much they missed
Israel.

Settlement experiences

The majority of the respondents named employment as the major challenge in their
settlement in Toronto. All of them had been admitted to Canada as independent immigrants meaning that their education and occupational skills had been recognized as

eligible. However, just several specific categories of professionals experienced a
relatively smooth transition from the Israeli to the Canadian labor market, namely programmers, electronic engineers, and other computer specialists. Barriers to career

continuity were the highest for members of the so-called regulated occupations: physicians, nurses, psychologists, teachers, social workers, accountants, lawyers and others. The newcomers had known that they would have to go through an accreditation
process to be licensed to practice, but did not realize how complex, stressful, and time

consuming the process would be. For many immigrants their limited command of English posed a significant barrier to getting Canadian accreditation in their profession. Although most of them attended

English classes, their language was insufficient to pass complex examinations in medical

34

specialties, accounting, teaching, and others. Lena, who was an elementary school teacher in Israel, shared that she could not pass the TOEFL (Test of English Foreign Language)

to obtain a teaching license in Ontario. As a result, she decided to go to college to
become a Social Service Worker. The participants shared that that their expectations about work opportunities in Canada had been unrealistic, partly because the points they
had scored on their applications made them believe that their specific skills were in

demand. Alex, whose spouse had worked as a pediatrician in the FSU and then (after
licensure) as a general practitioner in Israel, recounted that she knew too little about

Canadian medical regulations. Upon arrival she learned that Ontario offered foreigntrained physicians a very limited number of residency slots each year, and those who did not complete a residency had no chance to practice medicine at all. She was ready to
move out of Toronto and practice in a small town, but even this was impossible. After
taking an expensive course she became an imaging technician.

In addition to the above, the respondents also named the lack of Canadian experience

as a significant obstacle in obtaining employment in their occupations. It seemed like a
vicious circle: the employers were reluctant to hire them without Canadian experience. -

The only way out was to find a volunteer position, which was not easy either. In agreement with the earlier findings by Remennick (2007) my study has shown that the immigrants with former professional careers had a harder time finding employment than

did immigrants in skilled technical or manual occupations. This could be explained both
by higher demands for English proficiency placed on professionals vs. manual occupations and by the need to overcome tight licensing regulations to enter the
professional labor market.

35

9£

Suojav,, aip ipiAV :no §UBt{ pjnoAV A9ip. }Bip prexfB osjb

9J9AV jnq 'ugjpjxip xpvp. jo s}ti9ui9A9ixpB oxurapBOB aqj jnoqB Ajuo jou snoAjau 9J9M A9Xij[
·Aijunoo Avau b in Suxpps jo pouad ibijiui sip guunp ssuioav pu^ sstjstxub ^jsuag Jiaxp oj u9Jp|Tqo Jiaqj Aq psoususdxa saijinoxjjxp aip jmp psJBifs sjusjBd aqj Ara guuna -suioq jb jpj Aaip ajraqM 'jsbjsi oj >[OBq oS oj sjuared apqj psSSsq
JO 9UI0S -

iAv paaeqs suasj sqx 'sjuapnjs juBjgxunni guiifBads Avajqsn pue ireissn^ jo sdnooS
s|ooqos |boo| jsotu 9J9T{av 'spooqjoqt[gi9U aopuioo jsmqiBa uraqyou ut

i

I^auJ^ uodfi "nsdi 3V\ PUB P^jsj uiojj su99j jo sdnojg

i pgmof pBa^sm puB sdnojg J99d \T3oo\ m pgpnpui 9q oj ^noxjjip }i punoj

scU9Jp|xiio apup jnoqs sguojs {B^uaiBd uiojj pggaguig sgtugqj

(2002) i^oAjBTUiais pxiB 'jasiuv-treuiipxBg 'jasTuy Aq sqjnoX Sux?[B9ds
uo qoat?9S9J 9qj jo sSuxpuij 9ip suuxjuoo n -s>jJOAV9xiiBJtf jgqjo pue spoqos

ux

Suxpnpux 'Appos u^xpBUBQ xiiB9Jisurexii put? s9Apsni9qj u99A\^9q d^8 put? oxjsxnSxixj pt?oaq b p90Bj pBisj xiiojij s;ubj®xiuuix SunoA Aubj/j 'Asb9 jou sbm

'sj9§bu99j AnBpgdsg 'U9jp|xqo jpip jo ju9uxasnfpB gqj ib^j pgjBoxpux sjuBdpx^Bd jsojai ·op 'U9jp]xi{o iptp joj duiBO jguimns pgzxpxsqns 'uiBjSoid qs3 '§UH9Suno° JusuraiW^s

SB XptlS 'SVIf ^O^ P3AI909J A9l[J S90XAI9S |TVJ9ST1 9X{} p9§p9|AVOiqOB SJUBdpxpBd 9lfl JO
-SJ9Ao|dlU9 ]Bt\pB 0} XJU9tJJ P9XIUO0 JOU p^tlOO A0U9§t? 9^ JBIfl p9JUX0ddBSXp 9J9AV A9lfl IBtlpXAXpUX p9ApO9I ptlB (S90IAJ9S jBUOXJBOOA MSXA\9f) §Af 9lP W SJBUXUI9S
AlIBXU

pip ipxM 9oubisxssb 9JOXH joj pgdoq pBq Agqj pgiBOipux sjUBdpx^Bd 9qi jo

Some participants indicated that they had had language difficulties attending teacher-

parent interviews. On many occasions the parents felt very insecure. As one of them noted: "We really did not know what was good for our son. Was it in his best interest to attend school with such a high number of Russian and Hebrew speaking students? How could we recommend what subjects to choose? Should we encourage him to find a job or
is it better for him to attend summer school?" Some expressed concern that immigrant

students and their parents had not received sufficient information and support from
schools.

Some parents considered the option of sending their children to a Hebrew day school. Though they were offered substantial tuition subsidies, they were reluctant to do
so due to the fact that the curriculum included religious studies and that they would not qualify for the same subsidy when they start working. A recent survey conducted by UJA

Federation of Greater Toronto shows that less than one in ten immigrants from the FSU
have their children enrolled in Jewish day schools, and they are also not likely to provide
a supplementary Jewish education for their children.

Similar to the earlier findings by Basok (2002) and Remennick (2007) my research has shown that Russian Jews from Israel could hardly find common ground with main stream Canadian society generally and the established Jewish community specifically.
The participants appreciated Canadians' open attitude towards other cultures and

languages. They did not experience any kind of discrimination on the basis of their Jewish origin or immigrant status. At the same time, only one of them mentioned having informal relationship with native Canadians outside workplace, school, or any other

37

8£

Axiom. 0} 9ABq jou pip pire BpBire3 ui sjbs jpj Aauj pajBpaaddB sjuspuodsai aqi jo
\,UIbSb 3JIJ AV3U B }JB}S O} 9|duilS }OU SI }J SpU3UJ A\9U 35[BUI 0} J9ISB9 SBAV }l pUB

ui qof poo§ b puij oj suiij sssj aui ^ooj jj -auioii ;b psj puB spustg sjjbui 'a^Xjs 3ji|

0} JSTlfpB O; 9UIIJ S9>JB1 X[ '\9U1S[ UIOJJ JU9J9JJip XJ9A SI BpBUB3,, :jU9pU0dS9J 9UO JO SpJOM uj -/Cijunoo AV9U b oj jsnfpB ovpBOJ Aduinq b sbav ji jBqj p9;B0ipui Xgq; 'J9A9M0H
Suiuiooj9ao
|njss9oons
ui

pgjgpisuoo sjiigpuodsgj gqj nBJ3AO
"Ajranmuioo
90UBjsip

qsiA\9f

9q; jo

S9ApstU9qj

pUB jbioos

"SA\9f UIOq-UBIpBUB^ O} UBqj OJUOJOJL UI SUIAIJ SI]9BJSI OJ J9S0p }J9J jBqj pgpodgj s^uBdioiyBd gqx "]9bjsj oj uoipguuoo oipquiAs jraqj uibjuibui oj Abm

b sb mbs Agqj qoiqM 'sgpiAipB Ajiunuiuioo ui gjBdpi^red pire 9ji| qsiAV9f ui ^Bd 9>[B^ o;
3JOUI 3J3AV pBJSJ UI p9AI| pBq OqA\ SAV9f

gsoqj 9?inun 'U9jp|iqo Ji9q; joj spoqos qsiAV9f Xspuns puB (sqBAz;iui-jBq/JBq)
9§b jo §uiuioo jo aouByoduii gqj ui p9A9ipq guios \ssiqj o} pgsn jou 9jb 9yv\. "Ajiunuiuioo

oj Suopq noA gnSoSBuXs b pugnB noA ji 'BpBUB3 ui '9J9H "93J diqsagquigui ou si gjgqj
puB XBjd 0} }uba\ noA ji Ayuo 9nSo§BuAs oj oS noA pBJSj iq,, :pgjou jubuuojui 9UO sy

·s>{J0Mpu sji uiojj pgpnpxg sq ppoAV Agqj p9A9ipq pue Ajiunuiraoo qsiA\9f ojuojox 9qj

jo suopBpgdxg gqj p9ui oj g^qBun ^pj Agqx '^vaiss gqj gq 0} pgpgdxg 9J9M sj9Uioda\9u
puB juBAjgsqo AjsnoiSipa SM9f UBipBUB3 pgjgpisuoo auios 'psuBA sjuspuodsaa
aqj jo suoipBaa aqj Ajiunuiuioo qsiAVSf UBipBUBQ sqj qjiAV suoijbjsj joj sy ·sjubjSiuiuii qjiM saij |Bpos SuiABq

Ul p3JS3J9^UIUn pUB p|OO SB SUBIpBUBQ p9ApOJ3d UI3qi JO JSOJAJ 'JX91U00 |BUOI}nJl}SUl

about a war, military service or terrorist attack. They generally reported an improvement

in their material well-being.

Identity

In agreement with Basok's earlier findings (2002) this study confirms that "new
identities emerge as people come to settle in new places" (p. 341). Table 2 reflects the participants' responses to the question on their primary identity. It illustrates the

multiplicity and flexibility of identities of Russian Jews from Israel.

Table 2

Primary Identity of the Respondents in their Countries of Residence

FSU Anna

ISRAEL

CANADA Jew

Russian Jew

Russian Jew Soviet Jew
Russian
Jew Jew

Alex Olga Lena Vlad

Soviet Jew
Russian Jew Russian Jew
Jew

Israeli Jew
Russian Jew Israeli Jew
Jew Jew

Josef

Russian Jew

Russian Jew

39

Ofr

m SM9f aaqjo Aq suBxsstva psipo Ajsnonuxjuoo aaaM Aaq:i ;Bqj pajou Aubjaj -UBi

paj uiaqi apBux puxjsxp sb nSd 3XP tuo-9 SAV9f pSApoiad oqA\ 'sM9f uioq-ipB-isi guxpnpux
ux SM3f isqio ipiAv sjsjunooua puei{ jsqjo atp uo 'suopipBj; qsiAvaf

oj ajqe 9J9AV Asqj asn^osq qsiM3f aiom paj uisqj apBtu peasj ui psAiy SuiABq

pres uiaqj jo auios "91(109(3 jusagjjip uo pajja ju9J9jjip b paonpoid p^jsj in Xbjs

jpqj paqsunou jmp sgouauadxa sb aouBpuajjB anSoSBuAs pire 'Ajojsiq qsiAvaf jo a§paiMoiDj 'suornpeij qsiAvaf jo uoijBjqapo pauiBii sjirapuodsaj z uoijippB uj -sajijuag
jo Ajisouiure puB paijBq aqj Aq osp jnq 'spodssBd jpqj ui Ajpxuqja jpqi jo uoxjBOXjxiuapx

aqi Aq A|uo jou ssauqsxAvaf xpqj jo papuxuiaj ApuBjsuoo aj9M Aaqj nSd 9tP UI '
-tjub sbav SMaf sb A;pu9px jpqj Suxuij9p 90U9U9dx9 juBpoduix puooas sx\± ~
ux

sb uoxjBoxjxssn^j jo ssaooad guxoSuo oj pajnqxxijB aq ubo Ajxjuapi apq; jo juauoduioo
sxqx luasaad Ajsnonuxjuoo sba\ Ajxjuapx jaiAOS jo UBissn^j jo juamg^jj

us jnq 'AfxiuBj qsxM9f b ux uaoq ajaM Aaqj asnBoaq Ajdmis qsxMaf jpj Aaqj

flSJ 9^ UI JBlP ps-i^qs sjuapuodsaj jo AiuoIbux aqx '(ZOOZ 4>[osBa) ppoM aqj jo s^JBd
luaaajjxp ux ajba Abui Ajxjuapx sxqj oj pauSxssB sSuxuBaux gqj puB juajuoo aqj 'saApsxxxaqj

Ajxjuapx 0} pqBj aures aqj 9sn Abui aoBjd 9uibs aqj uxoaj SuxjbuxSuo ajdoad qgnoqx
·Ajxjuapx sxq ux Aouajsxsuoo aqj

ureydxa Abui sxqx "61 jo a§B aqj jb pBJSj oj paAOiu aq puB S0661 ^lJB9 0861 3VS\ ux QSd
aqi ux paAXAaa sbav uisreptif uaqAV suaaj ajBj sxq ux sbm oqA\ 'jUBdpxyBd isaSunoA aqj sx

jpj sAbmjb aq §uxjbjs Ajxjuapx sxq ux saguuqo ou payodaj luapuodsaa auo Ajuq

who made them feel that they were not Jewish enough. As one participant noted: "It was

expected from us to give up our Russian culture. Everything Jewish was sort of imposed on us, which alienated me from Judaism and strengthened my Russian identity". It is
interesting that overall, the stay in Israel seems to have had a negative impact on the

religiosity of Russian Jews. On the other hand almost all of the immigrants surveyed
indicated that the Israeli experience strengthened their connection with Jewish traditions. The majority of them feel Jewish, however their Jewish identity is defined as ethnic

rather than religious. Here, in Toronto they have been showing behavioral expressions of
Jewishness and an affirmative connection to the Jewish traditions and Israel. It is manifested in celebrating Jewish holidays, such as Passover, Chanukah, Rosh Hashanah,
and Yom Kippur, and they do not want their children to forget Hebrew. They show

attachment to Israel by participating in related activities e. g. the celebration of Israel Independence day, the annual UJA Federation Walk for Israel, the Israeli Bazaar, etc. These findings resonate in the results of a recent survey conducted by the UJA Federation, which demonstrate that most FSU born immigrants feel a strong sense of

patriotism towards Israel. Only 2 respondents indicated they occasionally attended the
Jewish Russian Community Centre for Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur. The majority of

participants expressed the notion of "feeling good to be Jewish in Toronto". The
following comment illustrates this: "In Canadian multicultural society no identity is

imposed on individuals and they are not afraid to disclose their identity. Our children are
taught in schools to respect people from all ethnic backgrounds".

Two respondents indicated "Israeli Jew" as their primary identity here in Toronto. This phenomenon could be a result of significant experiences in Israel, which had impact

41

jpqi isgujunoo qioq oj sureysd xzyyeivxp jbuoxibusubj} aqj 'j9A9moh "S()86l P!m 31V 90UJs

90U9}sxx9 ux uaaq SBq ojuojox ux 9Jtiptu}SBJjux irexsstvg pgdopAgp jj9M 9qx 'A^xj
JX91P JO }JBd JBlgsjUX UB SB SUOXJBJU9XJO JBUOXJBUSUB.I} p9UXUU3}9p9J[d UXBJJ90 IflXM 0} 9UIB0 SM9f treXSSTVg 'j|tlS9J B SB 'jBqj ABS Ol 9jqXSSOd SX }\ -SUIBiSoid OXpBJ pUB U0XSXA9J9J
's|ooi[os 'sjgdBdsM9u 'S9jojs5[ooq 'sa9jB9qj UBXssn-g {boo| qixM umo jpip jo 9atvnnoqns

guxAuip b p9}B9io |9bjsi ux SM9f uBxssn"a S066I Suutip 'pgjou sy -sjgpjoq jbuoxibu ssojob

S0XXiqj9-00 U99AVJ9q |9A9| |BTipXAXpUX UB UO S9X} |BJttHnO pUB IBXOOS 9-X (8661 'W^S PUB
ozxxuBtio) ^Avopq xxiojj ujsi|buoxjbusxibjj,, jo suSxs Aubui 9JB 9J91JJL ureiuop ssguxsnq puB

OIXUOUO09 iretp agqjBJ '|BOxgopqoAsd puB |BJtnino 9ip ui pimoj Xprexu 9jb xxisiibuoxjbusubji
JO SU0XSS9jdX9 9qX -9|XlS 9JX| pUB XjXJU9pX JBUOXJBUSUBJ[J JO SixgiS 9|dn|nUI JS9JIUBUX
s^ubjSxuixiix qsxM9f UBifssn-^ 'BpBiiB3 puB 19BJS] 'spuBpxuoq M9U Iraqi jo qioq ui
msipuopvusuvjj

JO flSJ 3lP mo:9 A"jJ09JXp p9AXXIB OqM. SAV9f UBXSSTl^J q}XAY UOUIUIOO UX }0\ B 9ABq
1OU S90p 9H "SX|9BJSI 9AXJBU pUB pBJSJ UXOIJ SM9f UBXSSn^J 9pnpUX O^UOJOX UX S>];JOAVJ9U

jBUOxss9joid puB ]bxoos sxq X9]v °1 Suxpioooy 'Ajxjuapi AaBxuud sxq sb C[M9f xpBasi,,
p9JB0XpUX OS{B 'SJB9A" 01 JOJ OJUOJOX UX U39q SBq pUB i£ JO 9§B 9JnjBUI 3J0UX B IB J9BJSI

Ol 9XUB0 OqAV 'X9JV 'I3BJSI OJ JUSUiqOBWB JO 9SU9S SUOJ^S B SBq \\V\S pUB SJB9A" 9 JOJ
ux U99q SBq 9qs "op '5[J0A\pu jbxoos 'uxgjsAs |ooqos 9qi quM gouBjurenboB ' A\9jq9H aqi jo 9gBsn -§'9 '9jq stA|xxxrej jgq oj uss9uq9Basi,, jo }0\ b jxiSnoaq U9jp]xqo 9qX -pBJSi ux moq 9J9M. ugjpnqo J9qjo qioq pUB pgxxiBXU jog 9qs 'SJB9A z\ joj pBJSi ux guxAq U99q pBq (£Z jo 9gB 9qj jb J9BJSI oj 9UIBD oqAv) BU9^ c3|dxuBX9 joj -Aix;u9px jpqi uo

country of origin and their first country of immigration. On one hand, they feel part of a global Russian speaking community stretching between the FSU, Israel, and the West, on

the other hand they do not see themselves as just Russians, but rather "Russian Israelis."
It is hard to determine which part of their transnational nature prevails. Russian language and the Russian literature play a salient role in the Toronto Russian community. There are numerous free newspapers in Russian, which are available in Russian deli and book stores. There are only a few in Hebrew. The majority of respondents said they would prefer to read Hebrew newspapers. The participants reported that they sometimes rent Russian movies as well as attend Russian theatre productions and concerts. Some of them have both Russian and Israeli satellite TV. They prefer to go to Israeli restaurants and buy Israeli foods. They are well aware of the political and
economic situation in Israel. Almost all of their friends are Russian Jews from Israel; they

have little in common with those who came directly from the FSU. As one respondent notes: "It is hard for us to relate to somebody who had not lived in Israel. They often express their opinions about Israel and criticize it without really understanding what this country is all about. They have never experienced living in a Jewish state." The majority

of the respondents refer to Israel as their homeland. Many immigrants of all ages keep
close personal ties with their relatives and friends in Israel, the FSU and the U.S. With the development of cheap and accessible communications, such as e-mail and calling

cards more immigrants maintain these ties. The majority of the study participants have travelled to Israel at least once since their arrival in Canada, mostly to visit elderly parents. All of them have received in their homes guests from the FSU, Israel and the US.

43

ltBi0dSBip JSIUnUIUIOO-JSOd gui?[B9ds-UBISSn^[ 9I{} JO dBlU guipUBdX9 9IJJ UO 9JSI JUBJJOdUII
ub guiuioogq Aiurepao si ojuojox uBisstra,, }Bip sapnpuoo sqs "(/,()£ "d) us
pnoad s3A|9sui3ip tjbo ubo uiaqj j

UI UOIJBZIJBUlgiBUI 3AlJBpj JI91J1 SI 'SJS9ggnS 9tfS 'SUBISSn>f OJUOJO.T, guOUIB

-oo ipiAV S9ij ^BUoijBUSirej} J9;B9jg jo uoijBUB|dx9 gjqissod J9qjouy 'pBJSj q;iA\. p9dopA9p
:Bisstry Aubui spuoq rein}|no guojjs 9in sb \\3/a sb 'HSd 9Xfl UT 9A!l 1111s
saijiuiBj p9xiui A||B0iuqj9 jo gjBqs J9ugiii b ifiiM ojuojox ui Ajiunuiuioo

qsiAvgf UBisstry; 9qj jo uopisoduioo oijpgds sin Xq p9uiB|dx9 9q ubo 90U9J9jjip

O} guipjOOOy "pBJSJ JO nSd 3V& J9ipi9 l[JIAV SJU9UI9gBgU9
AV9J pUB UOHB1U9UO AjJUtlOO-JSOq guOJ^S B psABjdsip BiqdppBliqj UI SAV9f UBIS

OJUOIOJ[ UI SA\9f UBISSn^J 9>UlUf1 ·BiqdppB|iq(J UI SA\9f UBISSTI^J guOUIB (t7002) B>[SA\BJOp\[

Aq Sguipuij JU909J UI S90U9J9JJip 9t[J SJU^I|lJ§iq (iOOZ) >[0lUXI9tU9"a A"ptUS J9q UI

Chapter 5

Conclusion

"Trading place trading luck" so goes an old Hebrew proverb. Russian Jews from

Israel dared to do it twice. This study addressed the causes of their secondary migration
to Canada, settlement experiences, identity, and transnationalism. Russian Jews from Israel present a particularly interesting case because of their multiple migrations. Having

experienced a variety of push and pull factors they moved around the globe in search of a
better future for them and their children. After residing in a country with a communist doctrine they left for a country with a

dominant Zionist ideology and a strong religious influence, and then moved to Canada, a
country without a strongly imposed belief system. In the FSU they were forced to be atheists as well as to abandon their Jewish roots. In Israel they were expected to leave

behind their Russian culture. Here in Canada they have joined a society which supports
multiculturalism and transnational migration. Moreover, transnational migration is being

viewed as an almost inevitable solution for first generation immigrants. Being a minority in all three countries supports the trend towards a hyphenated identity which includes strong attachment to their Russian background. They were transformed from being a member of Jewish national minority in the FSU to a member of Russian national minority in Israel. Being a minority in Israel did not prevent them from keeping their Russian
culture. Moreover, as one journalist put it they created "their own world apart, a Russian

speaking state-within-the state" (Green, 2003). Here, in Canada the community of Russian Jews from Israel is sustained by Russian language publications, book stores,

45

websites, cultural events, etc. Russian culture plays a significant role in the lives of
Russian Jews from Israel.

When people migrate their understanding of the world often changes. They are confronted with new categorizations and labels imposed on them. They are driven by two conflicting desires: to adapt to the new environment and to retain the memory of
their previous life as something precious and worthwhile. Though the ethnic component

is central to the self-identification of the majority of Russian Jews, there are clear
indicators of a multifaceted set of identities as well as the invention of new ones. Some consider themselves "Israeli Jews", others "Russian Jews". Apart from the name they
manifest strong attachment to Russian culture. Russian culture and language are major

cementing factors for Russian Jews. They also demonstrate strong sentimental and
cultural ties to Israel. Thus, the concept of homeland acquires an additional connotation.

It is not just a country of origin, but a place one feels he belongs to. There are clear indications that Russian Jews from Israel combine their "Russianness" and "Israeliness".

Given the diversity of their immigrant experiences they are at liberty to choose the best of
both worlds.

It looks like Russian Jews from Israel living in Toronto manifest feelings of foreignness towards their host country. So far, Canada has become home in terms of their
place of residence and the security of citizenship. However, they did not indicate any feelings of attachment or identification with Canada. This could be a result of several

reasons. First, the relatively short time the migrants have been residing in Canada. Second, it is important to remember that as secondary migrants, they have experienced
the emotional trauma of uprooting and relocation again. Furthermore, they have

46

developed strong extensive networks, which help them to maintain their transnational
practices. Russian Jews from Israel view Canada as a safe and comfortable niche. For

them, Canadian identity, integration and social inclusion are benefits for their children.

47

Appendix 1

QUESTIONAIRE

1. Demographic Data
· Age

·

Year of immigration to Israel

· ·
·
·

Year of immigration to Canada Family status: single, married, divorced, separated, common law
Children: number, sex, age
Current occupation

2. Can you please tell me what Jewish traditions, if any, did you observe when you were living in the FSU? Did it change when you moved to Israel? And now that you are
living in Canada?

3. When you were living in the FSU what did you consider to be your primary identity?

Did it change when you moved to Israel? And now that you are living in Canada?
4. Can you tell me the reasons for leaving Israel?

5. What were your most significant experiences when you were living in Israel?
6. Can you tell me about the main obstacles / difficulties / challenges you had upon
arrival in Toronto?

7. What support did you receive and from whom?

48

8. After living in Toronto for

_years how would you describe your settlement and

adjustment to Canada?

9. Have you had an opportunity attending any community events? If yes, which ones? 10. If you are attending cultural events (concerts, theater, etc) what productions present
the most interest to you (Canadian, Russian, Israeli)? 11. What are your major sources of information?

12. Who are your circles of friends (Russians from Israel, Israelis, etc)? 13. Do you keep in touch with your relatives and / or friends in Russia and / or Israel? If
yes how?
14. Do you take trips abroad? Where?

15. Knowing the goals and the focus of my study, would you add anything you feel might

be important for me to know? Do you have any questions and / or comments?

49

Bibliography

Abella, I. (1990). A Coat ofMany Colors: Two Centuries ofJewish Life in Canada.
Toronto: Lester & Orpen Dennys Publishers. Allahar, A. L. (2001). The Politics of Ethnic Identity Construction. Identity, 1(30),
197- 208.

Al-Haj, M. (2002). Ethnic Mobilization in an ethno-national state: the case of immigrants from the former Soviet Union in Israel. Ethnic and Racial Studies. 25(2), 238- 257. Al-Haj, M. (2002). Identity Patterns among Immigrants from the Former Soviet Union in
Israel: Assimilation vs. ethnic formation. International Migration, 40(2), 452-475.

Al-Haj, M. (2004). Immigration and Ethnic Formation in a Deeply Divided Society: the Case of the 1990 's Immigrants from the Former Soviet Union in Israel.
The Netherland: Koninklijke Brill.

Anderson, A. B. (1998). A diaspora and exile; a Canadian and Comparative Perspective.
International Journal of Canadian Studies, 18, 13-30.

Anderson, A. B. (2001). The Complexity of Ethnic Identities: a Postmodern
Reevaluation. Identity 1(3), 209-333.

Anisef, P., Baichman-Anisef, E., & Siemiatycki, M. (2002). Multiple Identities &
Marginal Ties: The Experience ofRussian Jewish Immigrant Youth in Toronto.
CERIS Working Paper Series. #19, 29 pp.

Avrich-Skapinker, M. (1993). Canadian Jewish Involvement with Soviet Jewry, 1970-

1990: The Toronto Case Study. Thesis for Doctor of Philosophy (History and
Philosophy), University of Toronto.

Basok, T. & Brym, R. (1991). Soviet- Jewish Emigration and Resettlement in 1990s: An

Overview. In Basok T. & Brym R. (Eds.), Soviet-Jewish Emigration and
Resettlement in the 1990s (pp. xi-xxii). Toronto: York Lanes Press Basok, T. (2002). Fragmented Identities: The Case of Former Soviet Jews.
Identity, 2(4), 341-360.

Benifand, A. (1991). Jewish Emigration from the USSR in the 1990s. In Basok T. &
Brym, R (Eds.), Soviet-Jewish Emigration and Resettlement in 1990s (pp. 35-50).
Toronto: York Lanes Press.

50

Berry, J. W. (1997). Lead Article. Immigration, Acculturation, and Adaptation. Applied Psychology: an International Review, 46(1), 5-68.

Brubaker, R. (2005). The "diaspora" diaspora. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 28(1), 1-9.
Brym, R., Shafir, W. &, Weinfeld M, (1993). The Jews in Canada. Toronto:
Oxford University Press.

Csillag, R. (2002, October 24). Immigration Key to Growth of Jewish Community.
The Canadian Jewish News, p.l 1.

Retrieved February 24, 2006 from http://www.cjnews.com/viewarticle.asp?id=6742 Chavez, A. F., & Guido-DiBrito, F. (1999). Racial and Ethnic Identity and Development.
New Directions for Adults and Continuing Education, 84, Winter.

Clifford, J. (1994). Diasporas. Cultural Anthropology, 9(3), 302-338. Cohen, R. (2001). The New Immigrants: A Contemporary Profile. In Klein, R. & Dimant, F. (Eds.), From Immigration to Integration: The Canadian Jewish Experience: A Millennium Edition (pp. 214-221). Institute for International Affairs, Bnai Brith
Canada: Malcom Lester.

Elazar, D. & Weinfeld M. (Eds.). Still moving: Jewish migration in comparative
perspective. Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick.

Elliott, J. (2005). Using Narrative in Social Research. Qualitative and Quantitative
Approaches. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.

Epstein, A. and Kheimets, N. (2000). Immigrant intelligentsia and its second generation: cultural segregation as a road to social integration? Journal ofInternational
Migration and Integration, 1(4), 461-476

Evans Braziel, J. and Mannur, A. (2003). Nation, Migration, Globalization: Points of contention in diaspora studies. Theorizing diaspora: A Reader (Keyworks in Cultural
Studies, 6). Blackwell Publishing.

Franzosi, R. (1998). Narrative Analysis - Or Why (And How) Sociologists Should Be Interested In Narrative. Annual Review ofSociology, 24, 517-554.

Gitelman, Z. (1998). The Decline of the Diaspora Jewish Nation: Boundaries, Content
and Jewish Identity. Jewish Social Studies, 4(2), 112-132.

Glickman, Y. (1996). Russian Jews in Canada: Threat to Identity or Promise of Renewal? In Howard Adelman and John Simpson (Eds.), Multiculturalism, Jews, and Identities
in Canada (pp. 192-218). Jerusalem: The Magnes Press.

51

Glick Schiller, N., Bash, L. Blanc Szanton, C. (1995). From Immigrant to Transmigrant: Theorizing Transnational Migration. Anthropological Quarterly, 68(1), 48-65. Golden, D. (2002). BELONGING THROUGH TIME: Nurturing national identity among
newcomers to Israel from the former Soviet Union. Time & Society, 11(1), 5-24.

Green, D. (2003, November 3). A Culture of Their Own. The Jerusalem Report, p. 34. Retrieved June 18, 2008 from ProOuest Database.

Guarnizo, L. E. and Smith, M.P. (1998). The Locations of Transnationalism. In Smith, M. P. and Guarnizo, L. E. (Eds.), Transnationalism From Below (pp. 3-34). New
Brunswick: Transaction.

Harzigf, C. & Hoerder, D. (2006). Transnationalism and Generational Communications. In Satzewich V. & Wong L. (Eds.) Transitional Identities and Practices in Canada
(pp. 35- 51) Vancouver: UBC Press.

Heitman, S. (1991). Soviet Emigration in 1990: A New "Forth Wave?" In Basok T. & Brym, R. (Eds.), Soviet-Jewish Emigration and Resettlement in the 1990s (pp. 1-15).
Toronto: York Lanes Press.

Hiebert, D. (2000). Ethnicity. The Dictionary ofHuman Geography 4th Edition (pp.235238). Oxford: Oxford Blackwell.

Hutnyk, J. (2005). Hybridity. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 28(1), 79-102.

Kallen, E. (1977). Spanning the Generations: A study in Jewish Identity. Don Mills,
Ontario: Longman Canada Limited.

Kearney, M. (1995). THE LOCAL AND THE GLOBAL: The Anthropology of Globalization and Transnationalism. Annual Review ofAnthropology, 24, 547-565.

Kraft, F. (2000, January 20). UJA Federation Seeks to Integrate Russian-born Jews. The Canadian Jewish News, p. 15. Retrieved June 18, 2008 from ProQuest Database.
Laitin, D. (2004). The De-cosmopolitanization of the Russian Diaspora: A View from Brooklyn in the "Far Abroad". Diaspora, 13(1), 5-35 Lang, B. (2005). Hyphenated-Jews and the Anxiety of Identity. Jewish Social Studies:
History, Culture, Society, 12(1), 1-15.

Levitt, P. and Glick Schiller, N. (2004). Transnational Perspectives on Migration; Conceptualizing Simultaneity. International Migration Review, 38(3), 1002-1039.

Lewin-Epstein, N., Ro'i, Y., Ritterband, P. (1997). Russian Jews on Three Continents:
Migration and Resettlement. London: Frank Cass.

52

Lewis, J. (2003). Design Issues. In Ritchie, J. and Lewis, J. (Eds.), Qualitative Research
Practice. A Guide for Social Science Students and Researchers. Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications.

Lissak, M. and Leshem, E. (1995). The Russian intelligentsia in Israel: Between Ghettoization and Integration. Israel affairs, 2(2), 20-36

Lungen, P. (2003 January 9). Russian Jews in Toronto: a separate solitude?

The Canadian Jewish News, p. 11. Retrieved February 24, 2006 from http://www.cjnews.com/viewarticle.asp?id=594 Markus, R. & Schwarts, D. (1984). Soviet Jewish Emigres in Toronto: Ethnic SelfIdentity and Issues of Integration. Canadian Ethnic Studies, 16(2), 71-87.
Neuman, L. W. (2006). Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches. Boston: Pearson Education.

Packard, R. (1997). The JIAS Toronto 75th Anniversary Community Heritage Book.
Toronto: Jewish Immigrant Aid Services of Canada

Persky, I., Birman, D. (2005). ETHNIC IDENTITY IN ACCULTURATION RESEARCH. A Study of Multiple Identities of Jewish Refugees From the Former
Soviet Union. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 36(5), 557-572.

Phinney, J. S., Horenczyk, G., Liebkind, K., Vedder, P. (2001). Ethnic Identity, Immigration and Well-Being: an Interactional Perspective. Journal ofSocial Issues,
57(3), 493-510.

Portes, A. (1999). Conclusion: Towards a new world - the origins and effects of transnational activities. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 22(2), 463-477.
Portes, A., Guarnizo, L. E., Landolt, P. (1999). The study of transnationalism: pitfalls and

promise of an emergent research field. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 22(2), 217-237

Remennick, L. (2002). Transnational Community in the Making: Russian Jewish Immigrants of the 1990' s in Israel. Journal ofEthnic and Migration Studies,
28(3), 515-530.

Remennick, L. (2003). What Does Integration Mean? Social Insertion of Russian Immigrants in Israel. Journal ofInternational Migration and Integration, 4(1),
23- 49.

Remennick, L. (2003). From Russian to Hebrew via HebRush: Integrational Patterns of

53

Language Use among Former Soviet Immigrants in Israel. Journal ofMultilingual and Multicultural Development, 24(5), 431-453.

Remennick, L. (2003). Language acquisition as the main vehicle of social integration: Russian immigrants of the 1990s in Israel. International Journal ofSociology of
Language, 164, 83-105.

Remennick, L. (2004). Language acquisition, ethnicity and social integration among former Soviet immigrants of the 1990s in Israel. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 27(3),
431-454.

Remennick, L. (2007). Russian Jews on Three Continents. Identity, Integration, and Conflict. Transaction Publisher, New Brunswick.

Safran, W. (1991). Diasporas in Modern Societies: Myths of Homeland and Return.
Diaspora, 1(1), 83-99.

Satzewich, V. & Wong, L., Eds. (2006). Transnational Identities and Practices in
Canada. Vancouver: UBC Press.

Schoenfeld, S., Shaffir, W., and Weinfeld, M. (2006). Canadian Jewry and Transnationalism: Israel, Anti-Semitism, and the Jewish Diaspora. In Satzewich, V. and Wong, L. (Eds.) Transnational Identities and Practices in Canada (pp. 278-295).
Vancouver: UBCPress.

Shahar, C. & Magomet, H. (2005). 2001 Census Analysis Series. The Jewish Community of Canada. Toronto: UJA Federations Canada.

Shahar, C. & Rosenbaum, T. (2006). Jewish Life in Greater Toronto. A Survey ofthe Attitudes & Behaviors of Greater Toronto Jewish Community. Toronto: UJA
Federation of Greater Toronto.

Sheffer, G. (2005). Is the Jewish Diaspora unique? Reflection on the Diaspora's current
situation. Israel Studies, 10(1), 1-25.

Shuval, J. (1998). Migration to Israel: the methodology of "uniqueness ". International
Migration, 36(1), pp. 1-23.

Shuval, J. T. (2000). Diaspora Migration: Definitional Ambiguities and a Theoretical Paradigm. International Migration, 38 (5) pp. 41-57.

Smith, M. P. & Guarnizo, L. E. (1998). Transnationalism From Below. New Brunswick:
Transaction Publishers.

Song, M. (2003). Choosing Ethnic Identity. Boston: Polity

54

Tolts, M. (2004). The Post-Soviet Jewish Population in Russia and the World. Jews in Russia and Eastern Europe, 1 (52), pp. 37-63.  ,

Tololyan, K. (1991). The Nation-State and its Others: In lieu of a Preface. Diaspora, 1(1), 3-7. : ,

Trier, T. (1996). Reversed Diaspora: Russian Jewry, the Transition in Russia and the
Migration to Israel. Anthropology ofEast. Europe Review, 14(1), pp. 1-16

Tulchinsky, G. (1992). Taking Root: the origins ofthe Canadian Jewish Community.
Toronto: Lester Publishing Limited.

Tulchinsky, G. (1998). Branching out: the transformation of the Canadian Jewish
community. Toronto: Stoddart Publishing Go. Limited
United Jewish Appeal (UJA) Federation (2000). UJA Task Force Report. Toronto.

Weinberg, D. H. (1996). Between Tradition and Modernity: Haim Zhitkowski, Simon
Dubnow, Ahad Ha-Am, and the shaping ofModern Jewish Identity. New York: Holmes & Meier. ; . · ; ;.

Weinfeld, M. (2001) Like Everyone Else...But Different. The Paradoxical Success of Canadian Jews. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart Ltd. Wong, L. and Satzewich, V. (2006). Introduction: The Meaning and Significance of Transnationalism. In Satzewich, V. and Wong, L. (Eds.) Transnational Identities and
Practices in Canada (pp. 1-15). Vancouver: UBCPress.

Yeoh, B., Willis, K. and Farkhi, S. (2003). Introduction: Transnationalism and its edges.
Ethnic and Racial Studies, 26(2), 207-217

Zerubavel, Y. (1995). Recovered Roots: Collective Memory and The Making ofIsraeli
National Tradition. Chicago: University of Chicago.

55


