Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

The British Press Agencies Collection At The AGO
Rebecca Streiman
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Photography Commons Recommended Citation
Streiman, Rebecca, "The British Press Agencies Collection At The AGO" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1196.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

THE BRITISH PRESS AGENCIES COLLECTION AT THE AGO
By Rebecca Streiman BA Art History and Political Science, McGill University, 2005

A Thesis project presented to Ryerson University, Art Gallery of Ontario & George Eastman House International Museum of Photography and Film

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Masters of Arts in the Program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Ma ge Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2009

AUTHORS DECLARATION

1hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis project.

I authorize Ryerson University, The Art Gallery of Ontario and the George Eastman House Museum of International Photography and Film to lend this thesis project to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research . I further authorize Ryerson University, the Art Gallery of Ontario and George Eastman House to reproduce this thesis project by photocopying 'Or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

1

The British Press Agencies Collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario Rebecca Streiman Master of Arts Thesis, 2009 Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University/ Art Gallery of Ontario/ George Eastman House

Abstract This thesis project discusses the British Press Agencies Collection ("BPAC") which was donated to the Art Gallery of Ontario ("AGO") in 2008 by the Archive of Modern Conflict in London, England. The BPAC, a collection of 1240 gelatin silver prints, includes works from over 50 press agencies and 70 photographers.

Completion of this thesis project involved researching the images in the BPAC, organizing and re-housing the collection and creating a finding aid.

This thesis project has three parts: 1) an analytical paper, 2) the organization and rehousing of the collection, and 3) the creation of a finding aid.

The analytical paper discusses the methodology of the research undertaken, the choices made in the organization and re-housing of the collection, and the issues surrounding large press collections in museums. The finding aid is intended to be a document available to researchers in the Marvin Gelber Prints and Drawing Study Centre at the AGO.

2

Acknowledgements 1 would like to thank my thesis advisor, Sophie Hackett, whose advice and support has been invaluable in the development of this project and my studies at the AGO. Sincere thanks must be given to the Art Gallery of Ontario for providing access to this collection. I would personally like to thank Maia Sutnik, Curator of Photography at the AGO for her continued guidance as well as of Katharine Whitman, Conservator, Photographs at the AGO. I wish to thank my colleagues in the program who spent the last year at the AGO with me and have supplied inspiration and friendship. Finally, I would to thank Ryan Taylor, for providing his unconditional support.

Rebecca Streiman August 2009

3

TABLE OF CONTENTS Author's Declaration ............................................................................................................1 Abstract ...............................................................................................................................2 Acknowledgements ..............................................................................................................3 Table of Contents .................................................................................................................4
Part 1: Analytical Paper .......................................................................................................6

Introduction ........................................................................................................................6 Methodology........................................................................................................................11 Literature Review: Archival Practices ...................................................................... 11 lnterviews .................................................................................................................13 Literature Review: Cultural and Historical Context ............................................... 15 The British Press Agencies Collection ..................................................................................20 Description ...............................................................................................................20 Organization ..............................................................:.............................................. 25 Housing ...................................................................................................................28 Finding Aid ...............................................................................................................30 Conclusion ............................................................................................................................32
Part 2: Finding Aid ...............................................................................................................33

Descriptive Summary ... ;.......................................................................................................34 Administrative Information .................................................................................................35 Scope and Content ...............................................................................................................36 Historical Sketches and Selected Biographies .....................................................................37 Box and Subject List .............................................................................................................40

4

Appendix A: lllustrations ......................................................................................................59 Bibliography .........................................................................................................................81

5

Introduction

In the fall of 2008 the Art Gallery of Ontario received the British Press Agencies Collection ("BPAC") as a donation from the Archive of Modern Conflict ("AMC") in London, England. The BPAC is a synthetic collection built over a number of years until 2002 from over 50 picture agencies and 70 press photographers. It includes 1240 gelatin silver prints whose dates span the years 1911 to 1986, with a concentration in the 1930s. A large majority of the images in the BPAC include, on their verso, the caption that accompanied the image on its publication. The photographs in the BPAC depict a full range of elements of modern life: British life and industries (Fig. 1 & 2), special events (Fig.3), sports (Fig. 4), the many facets of war (Fig. 5 &6), modern technologies (Fig. 7 &8), and politics (Fig. 9 & 10). They also display a range of photographic press techniques that were applied to the surface of the image such as cropping, applied highlights and shadows (Fig. 11).

In order to construct a framework for understanding the contents of the BPAC, this project includes research into the photographers and press agencies of this collection, and the context in which the photographs were created and viewed. The practical component of this project entails the organization, housing and the creation of a finding aid for this large group of press photographs. This work facilitates the integration of these photographs into the AGO collection, providing a structure, context, and ultimately enabling greater access to the BPAC collection, overall.

6

The BPAC came to the AGO chronologically organized with a detailed index. Keeping in mind that the main users of this collection would be curators, researchers and artists, a thorough assessment of the photographs, photographers and press agencies included in the collection was completed in order to determine the optimal organizational structure for future users of the collection. Three possible

organizational structures were considered: 1) preserving the original chronological order; 2) arranging the images based on the photographer or press agency; or 3) organizing the photographs based on the event or subject depicted in the image. Through considerations of archive and museum theories, users of the collection, and the characteristics of this collection, the second option - classification based on maker of image -- was determined to be best for this collection. This option works well for several reasons. Organizing the works according to press agency or photographer creates smaller groups that make large collections easier to access and more approachable. Additionally, looking at the photographs in these groupings can provide new understandings by making apparent the distinct editorial policies and approaches of different press agencies to their subjects. Finally, using this organizational principle is consistent with the other press collections at the AGO, as well as the museum standard of classifying works by maker.

A preservation assessment reviewing the anticipated use and physical condition of the photographic materials of the BPAC reveal a number of things to be considered when ascertaining the best way to house the collection and minimize the damage from handling. The variations in size (12.7 x 20 em to 28 x 36 em) presented a

7

challenge to creating complete groupings. Questions that arose included: should the small number of large format photographs be housed separately and out of their sequence? Would binder boxes increase the risk of damage? Under the advisement of Katharine Whitman, Conservator, Photographs at the AGO, two housing options were put forth for consideration: 1. to house the collection in binders boxes, which are only available in a limited range of sizes, or 2. to store them loose in drop-front boxes, in sleeves sized to the largest photograph. Ultimately, the latter option was thought to provide the optimal user-friendly solution for the variety of sizes, within the time and budget.

A finding aid providing biographical and historical information of the makers on the photographs and a collection description was created as part of this project and is available to researchers and staff in the Marvin Gelber Prints and Drawing Study Centre at the AGO, as well as on the museum's website. This finding aid can be used as a starting point for researchers of the collection. This document includes
(~)

a

descriptive summary; (2) administrative information; (3) a description of the scope and contents of the collection; (4) historical sketches and biographical information; (5) an inventory of the collection per box; and (6) a bibliography.

The images in the BPAC were chosen by curators at the AMC for their content and aesthetics. As a result, the BPAC is an assemblage of striking images that reflect the AMC's mission to collect photographs and other artifacts that relate to conflict in the broadest sense -- not just physical conflict, but also contesting currents in societies,

8

such as growing urbanization and the resulting collisions of rural and urban life 1 . The photographs in the BPAC reflect this mission: we can see types of conflict in the concentration of images on war, modern technologies, gender issues , and social movements, as well as images of daily life, that were chosen for their aesthetic qualities (Fig. 12).

Though the BPAC has a broad historical spectrum (its first photograph has been dated to 1911 and its last to 1986) the collection does not attempt to present an encyclopedic archive of British photojournalism, but rather sets out to present genealogies and examples of the role the British press photographs played in documenting British life and the subjects of interest to the British public within the specific frame of the AMC's judgment of selection and mission. Further, more than half of the collection (680 photographs) is from the 1930s, resulting in a concentration that reflects a particular period of turmoil as well as an important time in the history of press photography. This collection is a rich resource that sheds light into the ways subjects were depicted by several British press agencies.

The preservation and organization of the BPAC follows the AGO photography collection's mission to build upon mainstream modernist traditions while exploring alternative traditions of vernacular, or amateur, photography to creatively explore

1

Maia Sutnik, November 14, 2008.

9

the ways photographic imagery has become increasingly important

2

·

This project will

reveal the optimal method for structuring and reorganizing the BPAC is achieved in an effort to preserve, contextualize, and make available the richness of the BPAC for exhibition and research at the AGO.

2

The Art Gallery of Ontario, "About the Photography Collection," http://www.ago.net/photography-collection.

10

Methodology

Literature Review: Archival Practices

The BPAC has great breadth in terms of subjects, makers, and materials, offering a number of directions for research and interpretation. For the purpose of this project, the history of British press photography, press agencies, and information on the photographers included in the BPAC were determined as the focus of study. This aim seeks to present a frame of reference for the collection as a foundation for a deeper understanding of the BPAC.

The volume of material in this collection led to a consideration of resources on archival practices, specifically those for large collections. Sue Breakell, Archivist at Tate Archive, authored the 2008 article, "Perspectives: Negotiating the Archive", which presents a relevant discussion on contemporary archival theory questioning whether the core principles of archival practice -- e.g. seeking to be as objective as possible and describing material neutrally, documenting what is in a collection, and intervening as little as possible if an original order is discernible at the start -- need to be followed. 3 She presents a view that, within Western capitalist societies, we are surrounded by a great deal of things but we remain uncertain about which of these things are significant. Besides making a challenge, she calls for new, fertile readings of the relationship between archivist, artist and researcher. Where boundaries are

3

Sue Breakell, "Perspectives: Negotiating the Archive," Tate Papers,(Spring 2008), http://www.tate.org.uk/research/tateresearch/tatepapers/08spring/breakell.shtm.

11

less defined, information and practices must and should be exchanged. Breakell's mindset is pertinent to this project because the meaning and implications of future activities related to the BPAC, as well as the needs and interests of its researchers, are not rigid but flexible. Creating a functional collection management process means ensuring that the resultant structure does not limit the BPAC or confine it to only a limited set of uses or users.

Terry Cook's article, "Archival Science and Postmodernism: New Formulations for Old Concepts" offers a number of exciting possibilities for the organization of the BPAC.
4

It describes the archivist's objective to be active in deciphering meaning from a collection. Cook argues that the objective of structuring special collections should be to reveal the mind behind the matter, the intelligence behind the fact, the function behind the structure - in short, the rich context. Contemporary archivist theory analyses the language, metaphors, and discourse patterns of the words, or the document, or the entire information system, in the context of its time and place, to reveal the underlying mind, motivations, and power structures of the records creator using these patterns. Cook's advice, in part, inspired the organizational structure of the BPAC collection. The collection's organization is structured to represent the past with the luxury of hindsight.

4

Terry Cook, 'Archival Science and Postmodernism: New Formulations for Old Concepts,' Archival Science 1, no. 1(2000}, http://www.mybestdocs.com/cook-t-postmod-p1-00.html.

12

Interviews

While the Breakell and Cook articles were useful for some of the structuring considerations, in building an effective finding aid, the best resources were not texts, but rather the people who create them in museums and archives, as well as those that use them, such as curators and directors of galleries. An interview with Andra Darlington, Head of Special Collections Cataloging and Metadata at the Getty Research Institute, provided examples of finding aids and advice on how to tailor these documents to the BPAC. Ms. Darlington also pushes for an organization of the collection based on maker/photographer or press agency in order to provide insight into the photographs' context and the ability to trace how and by whom subjects were depicted.
5

Another important resource was Doina Popescu, Director of the Ryerson Gallery and Research Centre, which houses the Black Star Collection
6 .

The Black Star Collection

was assembled over a period of eighty years at the Black Star photo agency in New York City. In 2005, the collection was gifted to Ryerson by an anonymous donor. Ms. Popescu offered the perspective of a curator and manager of a large press collection. She stressed and reinforced the importance of research on how to best organize large press collections and finding aids. It is important to create an organizational structure for such a collection before curators, researchers, or artists begin to explore the collection for their purposes. How large collections are organized determines what
5

6

Andra Darlington. Interviewed by Rebecca Streiman. March 20, 2009. Doina Popescu. Interviewed by Rebecca Streiman. Dec 10, 2008.

13

the history depicted means for us today. The organization re-contextualizes and is an important part of how curators, artists and critics can approach the material and work together.

Peter Higdon,

Curatorial

Manager,

and

Valerie

Boileau-Matteau,

Exhibitions

Coordinator of the Mira Godard Study Centre provided further insights as users and organizers of the collection. Both Higdon and Boileau-Matteau have been part of the theoretical decisions of the organization of the Black Star Collection and its implementation. The 300, 000 photographs in the Black Star collection create a near complete archive from a single press agency. It is the largest collection at the Ryerson Gallery & Research Centre and Higdon and Boileau-Matteau are actively cataloguing and digitizing the photographs in order to preserve the images while providing online access to them. Although there are fundamental differences between the BPAC and the Black Star Collection, the Black Star Collection is an important case study in the discourse of press photography collections' organizational structures.

Higdon

and

Boileau-Matteau

believe that when

processing collections and

determining the physical arrangement one should adhere to the principles of provenance and original order.
7

This means that a collection should not be mixed or

combined with a collection created by another, and material should be kept in the same order as when it was actively used. By not mixing or reorganizing collections,
7

Peter Higdon and Valerie Boileau-Matteau. Joint- Interview by Rebecca Streiman. February 20, 2009.

14

the archivist preserves information and original connections between materials. This information was contrary to Andra Darlington's advice and the two different approaches embody a common divide between theories of collections management in museums and archives. Higdon and Boileau-Matteau's advice is important and although the BPAC
1

S

organization is not based on the principle of provenance, this

principle is respected through the documentation of the original order of each photograph in the museum database and physically on its sleeve.

Literature Review: Cultural and Historical Context

As the BPAC is rooted in the history of press agencies in Britain, world events, and photographers, it was necessary to consult many resources on these subjects. Books on the history of photojournalism, specifically in Europe, were an important source for analyzing this collection. Robert Lebeck and Bodo Von Dewitz's 2001 book, Kiosk:
A History of Photojournalism, is an exhibition catalogue that offers an illustrated

survey of photojournalism in Europe and America from 1839-1973.8 This resource proved very useful, offering relevant information regarding the history of illustrated news coverage. Each chapter contains ten illustrated pages of press photographs in the original newspaper publication. These illustrations provided a unique perspective tracing the variety of ways in which press photographs were laid out and interacted with captions in their original publications. Focusing specifically on the 1930s and events represented in the BPAC, it became clear how vital it is to understand the
8

Robert Lebeck and Bodo Von Dewitz, Kiosk: A History of Photojournalism (Koln, Museum Ludwig/ Agfa FotoHistorama, 2001)

15

original framing of these images in a newspaper, how it interacts with a supplemental story, who the photographers were, how they were trained and what inspired them, and the ways in which photography was used as a political tool during this period. The most respected and highly published press photographers, such as Alfred Eisenstaedt were not trained in the medium but had an academic background and mostly acquired their photography skills as amateurs. The beginning of the Nazi

dictatorship forced many photographers to leave Germany and some had fruitful careers in exile. During the 1930s, press photography and photographic reports were important for the dissemination of political ideas, bringing the reader closer to these ideas and events on a scale not previously possible.

Reviewing the historical framework for the collection, specifically literature on the British cultural context and press photography revealed additional dimensions to the BPAC. With the bulk of the images from the BPAC dating from the 1930s, the exhibition and catalogue Thirties: British art and design before the war, in particular, proved useful. This catalogue, published by the Arts council of Britain in collaboration with the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, documents an exhibition presented at the Hayward Gallery in 1979-1980 and offers a study on the visual arts produced in Britain through the 1930s. 9 The exhibition and its catalogue explore a number of subjects, including one titled "Society Observed" which includes a sub-section on "Pictures from the Press." This sub-section offers a valuable discussion and

9

Thirties. British Art and Design before the war, exhibition catalogue (London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1979).

16

connections into how the press depicted personalities, British people, labour and industry, the Depression, new forms and patterns, fashion, sport, entertainment, leisure, and occasions.

Included in the catalogue is an essay on British photojournalism in the 1930s by lan Jeffrey, entitled "Feeling for the Past: Photojournalism." This essay proved an invaluable source of information on how the British Press evolved and shifted during the 1930s. In that essay, Jeffrey explains that in the early 1930s press photographs were expected to be -and were - heavily cropped and retouched to enable them to serve as emblems at the head of a story or essay. Photographers were felt to be contributors to a work completed elsewhere by writers and editors. The fact that newspapers often printed multiple photographs on a double centre page motivated photographers to compose images isolating figures against largely dispensable, blurred backgrounds, which left space for words and titles to be inserted.
10

Advancements in transportation and photographic technologies in the 1930s enabled press photographers to travel the world in an unprecedented way. Press

photography from that era provides a stark account of international affairs. Pictures of these events became commonplace first with the onset of the Spanish war in 1936,

Ian Jeffrey, " Feeling for the Past. Photojournalism," in Thirties. British Art and Design before the war, exhibition catalogue (London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1979), 111.

10

17

and then moreso with the intensification of fighting between Japan and China a year later. Jeffrey describes the style of the photographs from these conflicts as

pantomimic images that dramatically convey emotions and actions as opposed to communicating a sense of urgency or appeals for immediate action or attention.

He argues that the turbulence overseas made the British public crave British traditions more than ever. As a result, while overseas photographers reported on international turmoil photographers working in Britain took pictures of traditional communities of fishermen and coal miners to support and celebrate these industries as symbols of stability in British life. Newspapers at this time celebrated the changing seasons, each one associated with a particular kind of work or activity in an effort to support the industries. After 1935, when political and economic situations worsened, both internationally and in Britain, the emphasis moved to people under pressure.
11

Jeffrey's statements are reflected in the BPAC. International crises are reflected in the large number of powerful photographs of war and its consequences (Fig. 13, 14, 15, 16). British life is recognized through images of the nature of the British countryside through the seasons and the celebrations associated with these (Fig. 17), and British industries and workers.

Ian Jeffrey, 11 Feeling for the Past. Photojournalism," in Thirties. British Art and Design before the war, exhibition catalogue. (London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1979), 118.

11

18

Further readings on the subject of the British press included, British Society Since

1945 by Arthur Marwick from 2003.

12

Marwick offers a survey of Britain's society and

lifestyles since the Second World War, which proved helpful in understanding the undercurrents of politics and tastes of the British press -- a key factor in providing a context to the BPAC. Marwick writes about the relationship between high and popular culture, gender and class relations, and science and technology and the evolution of these aspects in British society. The author also gives extensive background information on The Times and Daily Mail, specifically descriptions of how newspaper publications came to be classified as either 'quality' or 'popular' papers after censorship restrictions were lifted in the 1950s. At that time, the British were the largest population of newspaper readers in the world, reaching seventeen million in 1950. Photographs were used to sell newspapers marketing popular interests such as celebrities and science.
13

An investigation of the press agencies comprising the BPAC proves challenging because of the lack of information on the subject. The BPAC photographs -specifically, the stamps on the verso and accompanying index -- provide clues. These records help form time lines when the agencies were active and how the photographs were disseminated among multiple publications.

12

13

Arthur Marwick, British society since 1945 (London: Penguin Books, 2003). Ibid., 70.

19

British Press Agencies Collection

Description

The collection arrived at the AGO organized chronologically. The prints were contained in sleeves found in ten boxes, numbered 1 through 10, with approximately 120-125 photographs in each box and two prints in each sleeve. The AMC provided an index that numbered the photographs, attributed a press agency or photographer to each image and recorded the caption from it publication.

There are over SO press agencies represented in the BPAC, but the largest representations are from The Associated Press, the Central Press, The Daily Mail, Fox News, Keystone View Co., London News Agency Photos Ltd., Photographic News Agencies (PNA), Planet News Ltd., The Topical Press Agency Ltd., and Wide World Photos.

The photographs were produced by press photographers, some working as staff of British press agencies and others as freelance agents. There are 71 photographers identified by the index. Some notable photographers include Cecil Beaton, E.O. Hoppe (Fig. 18), Brassa·i ( Fig. 19), Willi Ruge (Fig. 20), and Charles E. Brown ( Fig. 21). A complete listing of all press agencies and photographers as well as selected biographies and historical sketches are included in the finding aid.

The images that make up the BPAC range in size from 12.7 x 20 em to 28 x 36 em and are all in good condition, though some display damage from poor and/or excessive

20

· handling. The damage includes tears, cracks, emulsion losses, abrasions, fingerprints, and stains.

The versos of the prints provide a great deal of information. Most images were published at one point and reproduced, a large majority of the prints have either the caption from its original publication on the verso printed by hand or on a typed paper label. Stamps from press agencies, newspapers, and government censorship agencies, and editorial inscriptions are found as well. Press prints of important events carry multiple stamps and inscriptions that indicate they were printed repeatedly, sometimes over the course of years. Whenever an image is reproduced, its verso is dated and stamped by the publication (Fig. 22). The advantage for study of original press photography prints, such as in the BPAC, is that the stamps, inscriptions and captions on verso, provide critical context about the subject and published image. The relationship between the image and caption is vital because it offers essential information that is not always easily ascertained from the photograph alone about what is pictured and why it is important. It also demonstrates how image and text worked together to create a news story. The interpretation and understandings of the events presented in the images are not static, evidence of the initial ideas tied to an image supply an important contextual framework.
14

14

Michael Carleach. The Origins of Photojournalism in America ( London : Smithsonian Institute Press, 1992), 114.

21

The photographs in the BPAC date from 1911 to 1986 but most of the images were taken between 1931 and 1939. The photographs were mostly taken in Britain and Europe with a component of international news images largely from Germany, Spain, China and Japan. There are a variety of subjects included: British life and industries, special events, sports, war, modern technologies, gender issues, and politics. The 1930s were a time of societal transformation for the British following the shadow of the Great Depression and the abandonment of the gold standard.
15

British society

shifted in that decade and became consumer-oriented with new industries and suburbs developing, signaling prosperity and a shift of population and businesses. The prints in the BPAC reveal representations of both traditional stability and modern dynamism as a result of the changes in society.
16

Tensions between new and old are

evident in the photographs as one goes through them in chronological succession: a portrait of a chimney sweeper; Rupert the Robot looking almost human as he pours himself a drink; and a rural scene in the depths of Islington as pigs were prepared for Caledonian Market.

The press photography form of the 1930s is directly linked to the character of the press photographer's equipment, and the manner of working that this equipment dictated. In 1935, the Wirephoto network was inaugurated by the Associated Press, allowing images to be sent by electronic means over telephone lines from remote

15

Thirties. British Art and Design before the war, exhibition catalogue( london: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1979), Ibid., 7.

5.
16

22

locations to picture agencies and magazines.

17

The negatives moved from glass

negatives, mainly 25.4 x 38 em and 29 x 30 em in size, to celluloid roll film with the introduction of portable high-speed cameras such as the Ermanox in 1924, and the hand-held versatile Leica in 1925 using 35 mm film.
18

Roll film cameras came

equipped with faster lenses and shutter speeds that enabled the photographer to take pictures unobtrusively to accompany news stories in print as well as improving sport pictures. The flashbulb used for photographing at night threw such an intensity of light that it required photographers to stand at a particular distance (about 12 feet) from the subject. This pre-determined a photographer's depth of field and also created photographs of high contrast with the subject ultimately brightly lit and the background in deep shadow. These technical limitations created a theatrical photograph that tended to foreground and heighten the importance of the subject in the brightly lit scene. The centered subject is exaggeratedly highlighted and prioritized as the dominant point of the photo. By 1940 photographs occupied roughly one-third of news space in the average American and British newspaper.
19

Photojournalism during this time moved away from staged scenes and became increasingly informal and candid.
20

Technological

advancements

allowed

photographers to create more spontaneous, action-filled images that have to become characteristic 1930s press photography.
17

Newspapers printed behind the scenes

Brett Abbott, Pictures for the Press, (Los Angeles: The J Paul Getty Museum, 2005). John. Szarkowski, Ed. From the Picture Press (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1973), 5. 19 Brett Abbott, Pictures for the Press. Los Angeles: The J Paul Getty Museum, 2005. 20 Thirties. British Art and Design before the war, exhibition catalogue (London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1979), 116.
18

23

stories to get the attention of readers and press photographers responded by going to new lengths to please editors and readers, leaping into the stories or depicting events from creative and surprising angles.
21

The BPAC is an invaluable historical resource that enriches the Art Gallery of Ontario's photography collection. British press agencies are one of the oldest news photography sources and this collection contains photographs that span the 20th century's conflicts and changes, showing how societies and citizens live under and cope with social and political pressure, as well as in day-to-day life. Specifically, this collection sheds light into the depiction of world events and British life, press photographs, and agencies in the 1930s. There is huge potential for this collection to be exhibited, researched and published through the AGO. Staff at the AGO, artists, and researchers will have better access to this collection which continues the AGO's Photography Department's commitment to allow visitors to experience the evolution of photographic style and reveal how we increasingly use photographs to communicate ideas in contemporary life. Collecting and researching press

photography collections establishes an argument that conveys the strength of these images and the necessity to preserve them.

21

Bodo von Dewitz and Robert Lebeck, Kiosk: A History of Photojournalism, exhibition catalogue(Koln, Museum Ludwig/Agfa Foto-Historama, 2001.), 112.

24

organization

After assessing the BPAC and researching possible organizational structures, it was decided that the collection would be best organized by maker- that is, photographer or press agency. There are two main reasons for this: the first is that this order is consistent with the other press agency collections' arrangements at the AGO; the second is that such an organizational structure offers insight into the ways the press agencies and photographs depicted their subjects. Breaking the BPAC into smaller groups allows future users- AGO staff, researchers, curators, students - an optimal way to navigate the collection, which will bring new information and interpretations to light.

The photographs were re-ordered by maker using the spreadsheet provided by the AMC and through examination of the photographs themselves and the information on the verso of each photograph. The old identification number (OIN) for each photograph that notes it place in the chronological order in which the BPAC arrived in the AGO database and is labeled physically on each sleeve.

Two alternative options were explored and should be noted. The first option was preserving the original chronological order, and the second was organizing the collection based on event or subject. The original chronological order was attractive because of time constraints and this interfered as little as possible with the order in which it was received. However, this option was not chosen because it was not

25

consistent with the other press collections at the AGO and it is known that the AMC motivation for this sequence was functional as opposed to optimal interpretation. Traditional archival theories argue for the principle of provenance, meaning that original orders should not be broken, maintaining a sense of its original conception. Contemporary theories call for considerations of the variety of users and how to use the luxury of hindsight when arranging a large collection to encourage a variety of understandings and uses ofits components. Taking these theories into account it was decided that the chronological order presented by the AMC is able to be respected within a new order by documenting the original order in the database and by assigning a label with the AMC number on the sleeve of each photograph. The BPAC has now been organized based on photographer or press agency because it is a fruitful way to make the images and subjects of the BPAC more accessible, and reveal more about the many aspects of the photographs, press agencies and photographers.

The second option, organizing the collection based on subject or event was appealing because it could be helpful if users were looking for information or an image of a particular event or subject. As well, grouping photographs depicting the same event or subject can discern trends and provide information on how an event or subject was portrayed in the press. However, this option was not well-suited for this project because there are not significant concentrations of particular events or subjects. However, to reflect the value of this option the finding aid includes a listing of

26

subjects and events with image numbers in each box to facilitate users looking for specific information.

The present organization of the collection (i.e. the organization based on photographer or press agency) emphasizes both the similarities and differences of the different press agencies and photographs. This organizational structure allows for ready comparison between the subjects and style of the photographs and how and which subjects were represented by the different press agencies.

The photographs share certain elements of their function and use: almost all of them contain multiple stamps on the verso, editorial markings, and attached captions. The main differences between the photographs from different press agencies or photographers in this collection are which and what types of events and subjects are significantly depicted by each agency or photographer moreso than others. For example, the photographs from the Daily Mail focus on rural and agricultural industries, life in London, British Fascism and shifting roles of women. Also, the BPAC contains a large number of original newspaper captions that were published with the image of the Daily Mail photographs. The Central Press agency has a large British content with a focus on the army and night scenes; also found in this group are a number of images of German war plane crash sites. The Keystone agency and The Associated Press has a large American and International politics quotient along with a number of photo essays. The photographs from the Fox Photos agency contain a

27

significant number of portraits of British workers such as chimney sweeps and British soldiers as well as images tracing the development of energy sourced from electricity, coal and gas within Britain. The group of images accredited to the Photographic News Agencies (PNA), which was affiliated with the British government, is exclusively comprised of photographs of and relating to war. These photographs present the British army as heroes as it depicts refugees and war prisoners are saved and the German enemy is defeated. There is much more to be learned from the photographs in the present organization in future projects and cataloguing.

Housing the Collection
The BPAC was acquired with the photographs of various dimensions, housed two photographs per sleeve. Boxes 1-3 had a variety of sleeve sizes and types while boxes 4-10 all had 28 x 36 em sleeves. This is not an ideal situation for long-term storage, and so the contents of the BPAC required re-housing. The fact that the BPAC photographs vary in size but should be housed together to keep the order was taken into consideration. The BPAC is a collection that is intended for use, so the ideal housing would allow a viewer to go through the collection easily while protecting the images from (further) handling damage.

Examples in museums and archives of press collections were searched for as a precedent of the best housing solution, but there was no precedent that was appropriate for this unique collection. I looked to Katharine Whitman, Conservator,

28

Photographs at the AGO, as well the AGO's curators of photography, Maia Sutnik and Sophie Hackett, for advice. Ms. Whitman advised that the photographs should be housed in acid-free drop front print boxes in sleeves that are sized to the largest photograph per box. This would allow for a chronological order to be maintained while protecting the photographs from damage. Ms. Sutnik preferred that the BPAC be placed in binders to allow viewers to go through the collection with ease. Ms.
/

Sutnik also stated that, in her experience, viewers are more cautious while viewing the photographs when they are presented in binders. Both Whitman's and Sutnik's advice is important and may be implemented in the future. However, archival binders are not available at a 28 x 36 em size and would have to be specially ordered, which was not possible because of time and financial constraints.

The end result is that the photographs were all placed in 28 x 36 em clear polypropylene sleeves and housed in 30 x 40 em boxes. This allows for the various sized photographs to be housed in a way that prevents damage from handling. The boxes have the Press agency and/or photographer listed on the spine. The Associated Press, BIPPA, Central Press, The Daily Mail, Fox News, Keystone View Co., London News Agency Photos Ltd, Planet News Ltd., Sport & General Press Agency, Ltd., The Topical Press Agency Ltd, and Wide World Photos all have their own boxes while all other press agencies and photographers have been housed alphabetically and labeled on the spine of the box in which they are contained.

29

Finding Aid

A finding aid is a document that places materials in context by consolidating information about the collection, such as acquisition and processing; provenance, including administrative history or biographical note; scope of the collection, including size, subjects, media; organization and arrangement; and an inventory of the series and the boxes
22 ·

The finding aid will provide users with an easily

discernable structure, organization, location and relevant background information on the BPAC. This document will be kept with the collection as well as be available online through the AGO's web site in the section dedicated to the Photography Collection.

This finding aid comprises six sections:
1. Descriptive Summary- Describes the collection at a basic level, including inclusive

dates, accession number, creator, abstract, and language of collection material. 2. Administrative Information- Includes access, publication rights, preferred

citation, acquisition information, and copyright information. 3. Scope and Content of the Collection- A brief overview of origins of the collection material and what is included and how it is arranged. 4. Historical Sketches and Biographical Information - Notes on the makers of this collection. Includes brief biographies of Brassa'i, Cecil Beaton, E.O. Hoppe, Willi Ruge, and Charles E. Brown, as well as historical sketches of The Associated Press, Central

22

Richard Pearce-Moses, "A Glossary of Archival and Records Terminology", The Society of American Archivists, http://www.archivists.org/glossary/term_details.asp?DefinitionKey=66.

30

Press, The Daily Mail, Fox News, Keystone View Co., London News Agency Photos Ltd, Planet News Ltd., The Topical Press Agency Ltd, and Wide World Photos. 5. An Inventory of the Collection per box- A detailed Inventory of the photographs contained per box which includes indexing terms per box. 6. A Bibliography - Lists some essential resources relating to the BPAC and its makers.

31

conclusion
Press photography plays a significant role within the AGO photography collection, which is built upon mainstream modernist traditions while exploring alternative traditions of vernacular, or amateur photography. Through donations such as the BPAC the Photography Department at the AGO investigates the ways in which photographic imagery has become important in society and its uses to communicate ideas in contemporary life.
23

This thesis project on the BPAC fulfills the AGO's mission

of bringing art and people together and contributing to the development and communication of new ideas about art, artists and museum practices
24 ·

As well, this

project broadens our understanding of British press photography and practitioners, while working to build an understanding of the issues related to managing a large synthetic collection. It is important to open press photography collections to interpretation through diverse scholarship, exhibition, and artistic inspiration.

The work done on the BPAC, and detailed in this paper, will lay a foundation for further work by staff at the AGO and others. The organization and structure of the finding aid, the components of which form the second part of this thesis, provide users with the background information they require to make working with the collection a useful and rewarding experience and act as a template for future finding aids for photography collections at the AGO.

23

24

Art Gallery of Ontario," NEW ART: Photography." http://www.ago.net/new-art-photography. Art Gallery of Ontario, "AGO Strategic Plan", 2008.

32

Part II: Finding Aid TITLE PAGE

THE BRITISH PRESS AGENCIES COLLECTION, 1911-1986 AGO accession no. _ _
Finding aid prepared by Rebecca Streiman Art Gallery of Ontario Contact Information The Art Gallery of Ontario 317 Dundas Street West Toronto, Ontario Canada MST 1G4 Reference Desk Phone: (416) 979-6660 x 250 email: URL: http://www.ago.net/1538

Date Completed: July 2009

33

DESCRIPTIVE SUMMARY Title: British Press Agencies Collection ("BPAC") Inclusive Dates: 1911-1986 AGO accession numbers:

Author or creator: The Archive of Modern Conflict, London, England.

Extent: 1240 gelatin silver prints including the majority of captions

Abstract A collection of photographs with accompanying captions dating from 1911 to 1986, produced by more than 50 British press agencies and 70 photographers. The PAC presents a range of photographs of important historical events and daily life and attests to the ways these images were used by the British Press. Language Collection material in English

34

ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION Access
Qp~n

for use in the Marvin Gelber Print and Drawing Study Centre at the Art Gallery of Ontario.

Walk-ins Wednesdays 1-4 pm, and by appointment Fridays 1-4 pm To make an appointment: By phone: 416 979 6660 x 250 By email: Brenda_Rix@ago.net
Publication Rights

Permission of the Art Gallery of Ontario is required for publication.
Preferred Citation

British Press Agencies Collection, The Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO accession numbers_-_.
Acquisition Information

Assembled by the Archive of Modern Conflict over a number of years until 2002 and donated to the Art Gallery of Ontario in 2009 by an anonymous donor.
Processing History

Rebecca Streiman arranged and described the collection from fall 2008 to July 2009. She completed this finding aid in July 2009 as part of the Photography Preservation and Collections Management MA thesis requirements.

35

SCOPE AND CONTENT OF COLLECTION
A collection of 1,240 press photographs from various British Press agencies from 1911 to 1986, with a concentration in the 1930s. The collection has symphonic range, documenting war and conflict in many countries including Hungary, Russia, Britain, China, and Japan, as well as modern technologies, urbanization, consumerism, sports, politics, and celebrities.

ARRANGEMENT The collection is arranged by maker- photographer or press agency- contained in 10 boxes;
Box 1- The Associated Press Box 2- The Daily Mail Box 3- Fox News Box 4 - Keystone View Agency Box 5- Planet News Box 6- BIPPA., Photographic News Agencies (PNA), Sport & General, Topical Press Box 7- Central Press, Wide World Photos Box 8- General Photographic Agency, London News Agency, Photo Press Box 9 - Press Agencies A- U Box 10- Photographers B- V, Unknown

36

Historical Sketches and Biographical Information

Please note that several sources were used to compile these biographies. Please See the Bibliography for the references.
PRESS AGENCIES Alfieri (1914- 1939) Associated Press (est. 1846) Established in New York in 1846 as the American Agency by an

organization of publishers led by Moses Yale Beach, the Associated Press is the largest agency in the world. In 1931 the Associated Press expanded internationally opening subsidiaries to serve newspapers in Europe-- the Associated Press GmbH in Berlin and Associated Press Ltd. in London. In 1979, AP was the first news organization to introduce an "electronic darkroom," a computer that not only transmits photos but also handles many tasks of the conventional chemical darkroom, such as cropping and adjusting brightness and contrasts. The agency's writers and photographers have won numerous accolades, including the Pulitzer Prize, and holds a sterling reputation for providing high quality press photographs.
The Daily Mail (est. 1896) Alfred Harmsworth, later Lord Northcliffe established The Daily Mail

in 1896 as Britain's first daily newspaper aimed at a working middle class market. The paper was the first popular daily newspaper in Britain and Lord Northcliffe decided it should be printed in the north as well as in London, and in 1898, the Mail's office opened in Deansgate, Manchester, with a circulation of over 1million readers. For a time in the early 1930s at The Daily Mail was sympathetic to some degree with Oswald Mosley and the British Union of Fascists. However, after the violence of the 1934 Olympia meeting involving the BUF the Mail withdrew its support. The paper also published articles lamenting the number of German J~ws entering Britain as refugees after the rise of Nazism. However, after the Nazi invasion of Prague in 1939, the Mail changed position and urged Chamberlain to prepare for war, not least perhaps, because it had been threatened with closure by the British Government for its political stance. Up to this point, The Daily Mail had been the only British newspaper to consistently support the German National Socialist Party. Currently published in a tabloid format, the paper is staunchly conservative and often critical of the Liberal Party. According to the Audit Bureau of Circulations, the paper sells over 2 million copies a day. The Daily Mail has had multiple editions in India and throughout the UK.
Fox Photos ( 1920's- 1980's) Active from the early 20th century Fox Photos was a major London

Fleet Street press agency that covered news of the day as well as transport, industry and human-interest features. Information was entered daily into daybooks as events unfolded and Fox photographers returned from assignments. Each negative was assigned a consecutive number in addition to a caption, the date and any photographer details, providing an invaluable catalogue of the Fox Photos archive. This archive is held at the Getty Images Archive in New York City.

37

Planet News (1928- 1970)

There is little known about Planet News. Topfoto in Italy currently holds the negative archive.
Pictorial Press (1938- 1960) based in London, England. Topical Press {1910's- 1957) Topical Press emerged in the early twentieth century and by 1929

the agency had 1,450 agents and representatives based all over the world, as well as staff photographers in its London headquarters. In 1957 when the company went bankrupt, London Transport made an important decision to buy all the negatives and the copyrights for most of the London Transport photographs. The negatives had been stored by Topical up to this point, while the prints had been kept in the London Transport archives. Hulton Getty now owns the rest of the Topical archive. The demise of the once-great company stemmed from competition from the new medium of television, and from independent photojournalists.
Keystone View Company (1886-1978) Founded in 1886 in Southern Pennsylvania by Benneville Lloyd Singley, this agency was established after Singley photographed the damage of the overflow of a flood in Meadville and sold the prints. The Keystone Company is known for its press photographs as well as its sale of education photographs in the form of sterographs and lantern slides. Throughout its history there have been offices in the United States, Canada and London. The California Museum of Photography at the University of California Riverside acquired the company's records and inventory of negatives, which is now known as the Keystone-Mast Collection. Wide World Photos (1920's-1940's) based in London, England. PHOTOGRAPHERS Emil Otto ('E.O.') Hoppe (German born, 1878-1972) An English citizen born in Germany in 1878,

Hoppe worked actively from 1910- 1945. He was a celebrity photographer and well known for his portraits of the rich and famous and later for his portraits of America. His work was widely exhibited in his lifetime and the largest collections of his work are at the National Portrait Gallery and the Victoria & Albert Museum in London.

Willi Ruge (German, 1882-1961) A photojournalist who specialized in images of aircraft and

was known to risk his life to produce aerial views. His most famous of photographs, "Der Fotograf" ["The Photographer"], 1931, was published in the Berliner 11/ustrierte Zeitung. A German photojournalist and agency proprietor, specializing in sports and aviation, he started photography in 1910 and between the wars, working mainly for the Berlin illustrated press. Ruge typified the new breed of modern daredevil photojournalist, taking spectacularly composed pictures from parachutes, or from aircraft performing aerobatics or in combat. He was an official air force photographer in both world wars and after 1945 worked with

38

magazines like Weltbild and Quick. A fire in 1943 destroyed all the work he had produced in the years prior.

cecil Beaton (English, 1904-1980) Cecil Beaton is one of the most celebrated British portrait photographers of the 20th Century and is renowned for his images of elegance, glamour and style. His influence on portrait photography was profound and lives on today in the work of many contemporary photographers. Beaton acquired his first camera at age 11 and held his first exhibition in 1927, at age 23. Beaton's position as the most fashionable young photographer of the day and led to a number of exciting commissions, including a contract with Vogue, with whom Beaton was associated for over 50 years. Beaton received the ultimate establishment seal of approval when he was commissioned by the Royal Family in 1939. The Royal project includes two studies of HM Queen Elizabeth, later the Queen Mother, at Buckingham Palace, taken in dappled light.
With the outbreak of the Second World War, Beaton devoted himself to his work as an official war photographer. In the post-war period Beaton produced many of his most famous portraits of artists and celebrities. In 1956 Beaton started work on the costume designs for the first version of My Fair Lady for the American stage with Julie Andrews and Rex Harrison and was to continue with the production in its various forms until his own Oscar-winning work for the film version starring Audrey Hepburn in 1964. In the midst of this he also won an Oscar for his work on another great film musical, Gigi (1957) with Leslie Caron.

Brassa"i (French, born Transylvania, 1899-1984) Gyula Halasz moved to Paris in 1924 where he took the name Brassa·i after his Hungarian hometown of Brass6. Formally trained as a sculptor and painter, Brassa·i began working as a journalist. In 1933, he published Paris by Night, a book of nightlife and street scenes that cemented his reputation for producing a style of documentary photograph with a surrealist edge. He went to publish many more books on graffiti, nudes, and portraits of artists. Brassa"i was also a founding member of the Rapho agency, created in Paris by Charles Rado in 1933. Charles E. Brown (1896-1982) Charles E. Brown is known as one of the finest aviation photographers. He was an active photographer from the 1920's to the 1960's and his collection of aviation photographs is one of the largest compiled by a single photographer. Having begun his career as a society photographer he gradually produced more and more work for the Admiralty, War Office, Air Ministry and aircraft manufacturers until this became his main body of work. He retired in 1965 and the RAF Museum in London, England acquired his collection in 1979.

Box & Subjects List
Box 1- The Associated Press (1917-1967)

39

118 128 149 153 159 166 183 188 218 240 244 245 249 277 279 283 290 295 299 300 307 308 309 310 311 312 314 316 320 322 324

330 332 342 373 397 398 399 402 411 413 421 427 449 464 481 486 496 519 546 556 584 582 587 612 623 613 626 631 632 681 685

692 700 705 724 735 761 844 868 942 955 966 969 973 974 986 987 988 995 1001 1029 1043 1046 1055 1057 1061 1064 1066 1079 1084 1092 1094

1120 1123 1124 1125 1127 1133 1134 1143 1151 1152 1158 1159 1160 1161 1162 1165 1180 1183 1184 1185 1190 1194 1196 1200 1201 1202 1205 1206 1211 1222 1237

Indexing Terms · Editorial Markings : 181, 249, 397, 399, 587, 735, 969, 1180 · Original Newspaper Printed Caption Attached: 181, 321, 373, 397, 399 Subjects- Britain · Army:316,322,373,844,973,1001,1029,1124 · Daily Life: 153, 575, 587, 735, 1046 · New Technologies: 342, 564, 1161 Subjects- Gender Roles · Women: 631, 632

40

subjects- Politics · British : 118, 183, 188, 320, 449, 587, 700, 705, 1079 · Ethiopia : 307, 312, 330 · China : 128, 1092, 1094, 1125, 1194 · Germany:724,868,955,966,969,974,995,1043,1057,1061,1066,1127 · Hungary: 582 · Italy : 307, 1180 · Japan: 149,1143,1158,1159,1165,1183,1184,1185,1190,1202,1205,1222 · Russia : 166, 324 · Spain: 397, 427 · Vietnam: 1123, 1124, 1155, 1206 Subjects- Series · "Roger Bannister" : 1151, 1152 · "Russian Slave Labourers Settle a Score with German Police": 986, 987, 988

41

Box 2- The Daily Mail (1917-1967) 3 6 8 12 28 51 65 67 69 74 76 80 81 84 93 94 95 96 103 104 105 108 117 133 151 170 189 190 195 200 202 215 225 234 237 243 251 271 273 292 313 314 326 327 328 376 389 425 471 472 473 474 477 479 503 535 555 563 576 577 610 611 633 635 646 652 660 661 662 670 672 674 678 699 703 709 719 725 734 741 745 756 778 782 789 793 802 808 811 825 826 839 893 929 971 984 1019 1022 1028 1041 1042 1056 1060 1071 1072 1073 1074 1075 1076 1078 1093 1096 1098 1100 1102 1106 1112 1122 1129 1135 1136 1137 1170 1178 1191 1193 1207 1215 1224 1225 1232 1233

Indexing Terms · Editorial Markings : 6, 80, 89, 95, 200, 234, 243, 364, 474, 535, 575, 611, 678, 1106,1112,1119,1233 · Original Newspaper Printed Caption Attached: 3, 8, 12, 189, 195, 200, 479, 364, 535,576, 577,670,678,725,789,793,1019,1093,1119,1233 Subjects- Britain · Arts: 660 · Army:6,313,535, 756,929 · British Fascism: 200, 202, 273, 1096~, 1112 · Daily Life: 3, 12, 74, 122, 611, 1019, 1041, 1042 · Fashion: 28, 215, 611, 1019 · New Technologies: 28, 81, 93, 108, 189, 190, 327, 328, 633, 635, 672, 674, 709, 745,778,1022,1085,1102 · Personalities: 67, 151, 195, 662, 674, 1215 · Politics: 3,8, 84, 105,151, 193, 929, 961,971, 1027, 1093

p

OF

R . ,NlM'tm1TY LJBAAR)

subject- Gender Roles · VVomen:S1,273,314,326,376,479,670, 719,725,1019,1028,1056,1135, 1233 Subjects- Politics · Africa: 51 · China : 1224 · Germany : 151, 929 · Japan : 1088 · Spain: 313 Subjects- Series · {/Diners Out in Budapest": 471, 427 · {/Punch and Judy show owners splitting earnings": 576, 577 · uoevil's Island": 93, 94 · {/Royal Mail Traveling Post Office": 1071, 1072, 1073, 1074, 1075, 1076

43

Box 3- Fox News (1927-196S) 24 38 40 201 203 210 211 213 220 224 226 230 231 236 239 2SO 262 288 289 297 318 323 329 337 3S3 3S8 362 363 36S 367 369 377 384 386 388 392 401 404 407 408 417 418 420 423 424 434 436 437 470 483 490 491 S04 S08 S21 S41 S47 SS8 S66 S68 S99 601 604 616 622 62S 638 639 641 644 6SS 6S6 6S9 671 673 686 696 697 702 704 706 708 714 718 722 727 733 737 738 748 760 762 764 76S 768 770 77S 783 799 803 804 809 823 824 82S 831 840 849 8S8 8S9 860 86S 866 869 871 873 874 876 886 888 891 892 913 920 923 924 92S 926 967 102S 10S1 1117 1219

so
100 101 102 110 113 114 120 123 124 129 130 131 138 140 1SO 168 169 176 177 178 194 196 197

Indexing Terms · Editorial Markings: 110, 130, 1SO, 201, 77S, 799 · Original Newspaper Printed Caption Attached: 38, 110, 130, 239, 289, 470, S47, SS8, 77S, 799,82S Subjects- Britain · Army:40,168,220,417,S08,62S,638,639,641,6SS, 733,768,770,783,803, 82S,849,8S8,8S8,860,866,869,876,886,888,913,920,923,924,92S,967 · Chimney Sweeps: 38, 123, 236, S41 · Daily Life: 38, SO, 140, 196, 297, 327, 3S3, 369, 377, 384, 386, 388, 404, S04, S66,S99,601, 708,748,891,892, 102S · Energy Sources (Coal, Electric, Gas) : 491, 708, 727, 737, 70, 102S · New Technologies : 102, 110, 123, 124, 129, 138, 226, 230, 262, 289, 323, 329, 361,362,36S,367,392,401,418,420436,616,622,6S9, 708,764,873,967

44

Politics: 131, 423, 424, 656, 686, 702, 704, 705, 738, 803, 804, 809, 823, 861, 892,926 · Railway: 178, 194 · Rural:100,101,178,210,211 Subjects- Gender Roles · Women: 50, 203, 224, 239, 470, 718, 720, 762, 764, 765, 831, 858, 866, 869, 871,876,886 Subjects- Personalities · Martin Luther King: 1219 Subjects- Series · "14 Young Men- Reaching For The Moon": 407, 408 · "A New Face in 24 Hours": 113, 114, 120 · "Famous Poplar Avenue Sacrificed": 100, 101 · "Keeping Calm": 704, 705 · "Nazi Aircraft Drop Time Bomb in the Grounds of German Hospital in London": 823,824 .· "One Man Anti-Gas Ambulance and Resuscitation": 873, 874 · "Schooling Britain's Future Army Officers" : 168, 169

·

45

Box 4- Keystone View Company {1917-1967} 10 25 75 82 135 152 167 174 175 212 235 241 270 275 280 287 291 293 301 303 304 315 335 344 357 378 380 382 383 390 391 403 406 433 438 439 460 461 462 463 467 468 476 487 490 499 513 517 523 527 531 532 536 544 565 569 572 592 593 594 595 615 627 637 640 643 668 716 717 736 744 749 752 771 792 818 827 828 843 846 863 880 882 900 908 909 919 922 944 970 989 991 992 993 994 1011 1016 1037 1040 1044 1045 1054 1062 1069 1070 1081 1115 1145 1149 1150 1168 1169 1171 1177 1182 1192 1199 1212 1216 1218 1235

Indexing Terms · Editorial Markings:270, 315, 382, 439, 461, 499, 513, 527, 627, 882, 944, 1069, 1070,1216 Subjects- Politics · British : 717, 818, 827, 909, 922, 1040 · China : 1115, 1145 · Ethiopia : 301 · France: 615, 627, 792 · Germany:640, 749,846,970,989,1054

46

· Greece: 335 · Italy : 287, 615 · Japan: 1177 · Spain:378,382,390,391,627 · Sweden: 752 Subjects- Series · "Romania seeks to control its 'Vagabonds'": 593, 595

47

Box 5- Planet News (1927 -1963) 27 53 57 109 116 119 126 137 161 172 173 199 206 217 221 227 229 238 242 254 259 265 269 272 285 296 231 366 379 400 415 430 432 435 443 444 451 453 455 456 457 458 459 484 497 498 500 505 506 510 512 518 520 522 524 528 529 551 553 554 567 570 578 580 581 589 590 591 598 602 605 606 607 608 609 614 617 619 620 629 630 636 642 653 654 658 663 664 675 677 680 688 693 695 707 721 731 732 739 740 757 758 769 776 777 788 797 805 815 816 833 838 841 848 856 890 899 902 917 931 932 933 945 946 959 972 975 983 998 1006 1035 1036 1048 1049 1052 1053 1058 1059 1065 1087 1163 1164 1118 1121 1138 1144 1147 1148 1156 1157 1166 1172 1176 1181 1186 1195 1198 1213

Indexing Terms · Editorial Markings: 242, 254, 272, 331, 430, 606, 959, 998 · Original Newspaper Printed Caption Attached: 119, 242, 254, 331, 430, 529, 551,606,663,998 Subjects- Britain · New Technologies: 121, 122, 161, 206, 221, 432, 497, 498, 602, 1087, 505, 510, 520,567,1163,1138,1147,1156 · Politics: 653, 654, 675, 721, 841, 1035, 1036 · Sports: 109,435,456,455,457,591,972 · Special Events: 119, 217, 227, 265, 269, 366 Subjects- Gender Issues · VVomen:272,443,451,675,805,902,1048,1157
48

Subjects- Politics · France:554, 788 · Germany:242,296, 797,848,899,931,932,959,983,989,1049,1052,1053, 1164 · Russia :2~53,57, 137,20~415,430,451,458,553,578,693,833,933,945 · Spain:254, 379, 400, 453, 551 Subjects- Series · "How Plastic Surgery": 607, 608, 609 · "Railway Reptile": 172, 173

49

Box 6- BIPPA. (1940-1945), Photographic News Agencies (PNA) (1939- 1945), Topical Press (1911-1945), Sport & General (1933-196

BIPPA. (1940-1945) 784 785 786 817 854 878 879 881 930 936 937 951 956 957 960 963 996 999 1007 1008 1009 1012 1013 1014 1018 1030 1067 1095

Indexing Terms · Editorial Markings: 1018, 1067 Subjects- British Army · Aviation: 878, 879, 881, 930, 951, 956, 1030 Subjects- Second World War · Concentration Camp: 1008, 1009

50

Photographic News Agencies (PNA) (1939- 1945) 730 766 767 773 780 781 787 822 834 837 850 864 867 870 872 875 912 921 927 939 940 941 943 947 948 952 953 954 964 968 976 977 978 979 980 981 982 985 990 997 1000 1004 1015 1017 1020 1023 1024 1026 1031 1039 1050

Indexing Terms Subjects- British Army · Royal Air Force: 730, 767, 781, 787, 834, 837,864, 872, 875,939, 941, 948, 952, 964,968,1017 · Navy:780,943,976,977,978,980,981,982,990, 1000,1004,1008.1009,1023, 1024, 1031, Subjects- War · Refugees/War Prisoners: 780, 943, 976, 977, 978, 980, 981, 982,990, 1000, 1004, 1008. 1009, 1023, 1024, 1031,

51

Sport & General (1933-1964) 66 148 286 325 405 429 538 539 557 583 588 657 682 Topical Press (1911-1945)
1

683 689 691 750 772 819 832 857 883 885 910 1214

37 49 97 107 155 158 192 198 205 207 263 264 282 336 372 375

431 440 441 542 711 746 751 830 847 862 894 896 916 928 1021 1038

Indexing Terms Subjects- Britain · Daily Life: 49, 97, 107, 205,207, 282, 441, 751, 847 · New Technologies: 37, 192, 263

52

Box 7- Central Press {1914- 1969}, Wide World Photos (1929- 1942) Central Press (1914-1969) 2 4 14 45 98 143 185 187 209 222 248 253 302 321 333 338 356 368 387 396 469 559 586 597 621 669 676 701 710 715 723 742 774 779 790 796 810 812 813 821 851 887 897 898 901 912 914 918 935 1034 1128 1140 1146 1153 1167 1229 1230 1231 1234

Indexing Terms · Editorial Markings: 143 · Original Newspaper Printed Caption Attached: 143, 209, 898 Subjects- Britain · Army:559,679, 710,715,774,779,790,813,821,851,887,898,912 · Arts: 701 · New Technologies: 45, 98, 187, 209, 222, 396, 621, 679, 701, 935, 1140, 1167, 1234 · Politics: 185, 248, 321, 586, 701, 715, 851, 901, 1034, 1128 Subject- Gender Issues · Women:302,597, 779,887,897,918 Subject- Politics · German Plane Crashes: 723, 796, 810, 812

53

Wide World Photos {1929-1942) 43 67 86 121 122 127 141 184 216 219 228 232 233 255 258 266 278 352 381 385 394 416 426 465 488 495 511 548 585 596 603 628 667 726 729 794 835 836 853 905

Indexing Terms · Editorial Markings: 86, 255 · Original Newspaper Printed Caption Attached: 43, 86, 628 Subjects- Britain · Army:127,628, 726,724,835,836,858 · Arts: 43, 219, 585 · New Technologies: 67, 127, 232, 233, 381, 385, 416, 603, 794, 667, 905

54

Box 8- General Photographic Agency (1928- 1940), London News Agency (1917-1945}, Photo Press (1925- 1938) General Photographic Agency {1928-1940} 29 30 31 32 33 36 41 136 146 257 294 305 London News Agency (1917-1945) 7 64 85 142 179 180 193 223 247 284 339 343 351 371 409 412 445 507 525 543 549 552 584 624 645 679 684 687 690 755 763 791 800 814 820 829 842 845 855 877 884 889 903 904 906 907 915 949 950 958 965 1003 1005 1007 306 345 346 347 348 349 350 355 494 482 1097

Indexing Terms · Editorial Markings:142, 800 Subjects- Britain · Army:791,549,829,845,855,877,915,949,950,958,965,1003,1005 · New Technologies: 179, 180, 247, 339, 552, 207, 814, 842, 903, 904, 906
55

Photo Press (1925-1938) 15 43 79 106 134 145 147 162 182 214 256 276 319 334 340 359 360 370 393 419 442 448 485 493 501 540

Box 9- Agencies A-u, Unknown ASSOCIATED AGENCIES: 87 ALFIERI PICTURE SERVICE: 132, 160, 267, 492,545 ART PHOTO SERVICE: 16 BARN ADO PRESS ROOM: 801 BARRATS PHOTO PRESS AGENCY: 298, 354, 533,666,698 BRITISH INTERNATIONAL PHOTOS: 634 BRITISH COMBINE PHOTOGRAPH: 1032 BUF PHOTO AGENCY: 204 CAMERA PRESS LTD.: 1116, 1126, 1187, 1203,1221,1224,1226,1228 COMET ZURICH: 1173 DAILY HERALD: 759 DAILY PRESS: 83 DAILY SKETCH: 795, 798, 1188, 1189, 1208, 1209,1210 DORIEN LEIGH LTD.: 534, 560, 561, 562, 563 EDITORIAL SERVICES LTD.:39, 745 Eigentum der Reichsbahnzentrale fur den Dutschen Reiseverkehr, Berlin. : 92, 171 EVENING NEWS: 71, 139, 156 EVENING PHOTOS: 895 EXPRESS PHOTOS: 34, 281 GENERAL PICTURE NEWS: 77, 115, 728 GENERAL PRESS SERVICES: 111 GRAPHIC PHOTO UNION: 99, 579, 806,807, HAMSWORTH PHOTO LIBRARY: 1239 HONG KONG GOVERNMENT INFORMATION SERVICES: 1220 INTERNATIONAL GRAPHIC PRESS: 65 INTERNATIONAL NEWS PHOTOS: 1077, 1082,1091,1114,1174,1175 KOSMOS PRESS BUREAU (LONDON) LTD.: 712, 713 LEONARD AGENCY: 573, 573, 575 MAIL PHOTO: 59, 60, 61 THE NEW YORK TIMES: 1002, 1068, 1113 NEWS OF HAWAII: 452 NEWS PHOTOS (LONDON) LTD.: 181 NORMAN SMITH'S FEATURE SERVICE: 647, 649 NORTHCLIFFE NEWSPAPERS: 154 P.A. REUTER: 1086, 1139, 1142 PHOTOCROM Co. LTD.: 112 THE PHOTO SERVICE LTD.: 144, 502, 600, 720 PACIFIC & ATLANTIC: 17, 19, 21, 26 PICTORIAL PRESS: 1108, 1109 PRESS ASSOCIATION PHOTOS: 1236 PRESS ILLUSTRATED SERVICE: 743 PRESS PHOTOS LTD.: 1083 PRESS TOPICS: 509 QUICK PICTURES LTD.: 22 RACING & SPORTS PICTURES: 466 SELFRIDGE: 618 SOCIETY & SPORTS PRESS LTD.: 78 SOUTHERN RAILWAY ADVERTISING DEPARTMENT: 89 SPECIAL PRESS: 13, 47, 48 SPORT & GENERAL PRESS AGENCY: 66, 148, 286,325,405,429,538,539,557,583,588, 657,682,683,689,691 STUDIO DORIC PHOTOGRAPHY: 428 THE TIMES LONDON: 1141 UNDERWOOD PRESS SERVICE: 1103 UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL: 1217 UNIVERSAL: 274 Unknown: 20, 35, 42, 46, 55, 70, 72, 73, 157,193,246,252,317

57

Box 10- Photographers B- V BEATON, CECIL: 1204 BARKER, EARNEST: 5 BRENNAN: 1238 BRASSAI: 454 BROOKS: 186 Brown, Charles E.: 747, 962 BUCHLER,VVALTER:88 CONSOLE:163,164,165,364,475, 1105 DAVIS, VVILLIAM: 261,478 DAVVSON GEOFFREY: 18 DELIUS, CARL: 90, 91 FELTON, HERBERT: 1111 GASKEL: 450 GOLDSACK, JACK: 1197 GULLILAND, A.A.: 61 HORDOZY, L.: 446, 447 HOPPE, E.O. : 9, 58, 550 IMPEY: 191 JOHNSON, VV.E. :208
LORAN~MICHAEL:64~64~65~651

LEBENSTEIN, VVALTER 0.: 515, 516 MANUEL, HENRI: 23, 63 MARSHALL, B. H.: 52 POPPER, PAUL: 526 QUINN, HERBERT: 268 RUGE, VVILLI: 374 RUSH: 54 SCHUCK, LOUIS: 413 TATE, VVALTER: 11 TOVVNSEND, JOHN: 1240 TOPHAM, JOHN: 480, 665 LOUSADA, SANDRA: 1227 PRINCE, ERNEY: 530 VAUGHN, KAY: 125

58

APPENDIX: Illustrations
Figure 1.

Daily Mail (est. 1896) Happy Crowds in Oxford St. The Christmas Spirit. December 16, 1922 Gelatin Silver Print.

59

Figure 2.

ART-PHO Service

"The Romance of Broadcasting". An interesting film showing the inner work of the BBC. Capt. Eckersly, the Chief Engineer of the BBC. Being "shot".
December 9, 1925 Gelatin Silver Print

60

Figure 3.

The Associated Press (est. 1846) The "GAPA" being tested. A ground to air pilotless aircraft. New Mexico. January 11; 1953 Gelatin Silver Print

61

Figure 4.

Planet News Ltd. (1928- 1970) U.S. Hockey team loses to Canadians. Canada defeated the U.S., two goals to one, in an overtime match. The first hockey contest of the Winter Olympics at Lake Placid, NY. February 4, 1932 Gelatin Silver Print

62

Figure 5.

Keystone Press Agency (1886-1978) Driving into action in Budapest. At the corner people stand watching. Smoke rises in the background. October 27, 1956 Gelatin Silver Print

63

Figure 6.

Daily Sketch

British Forces in Jordan. Middle East Crisis. Tension mounted among the Amman population - when British troops carried guns into the town whilst off-duty tonight.
July 21, 1958 Gelatin Silver Print

64

Figure 7.

Central Press (1910's-1970's)

The interior of one of the "Golden Ray" air liners, in which meals can _ be served. It has a cruising speed of 110mph., and is faster than anything yet used on the Paris-London route.
April 9, 1929 Gelatin Silver Print

65

Figure 8.

Planet News Ltd. (1928-1970)

World's most lifelike robot completed after ten years. Sabor the robot undressed to show astonishing mechanism. With inventor Herr August Huber.
December 13, 1938 Gelatin Silver Print

66

Figure 9.

Camera Press Ltd. China's "Cultural Revolution": National Day Celebrations. The Mao-Tse-Tung cult is growing in Red ChinaJ and Mao's thought dominates every sphere of life. October 12, 1966 Gelatin Silver Print

67

Figure 10.

Fox Photos (1920's- 1980's) M.P's Earl Winterton (right} and Sir John Gilmore reading the news outside Parliament today. September 4, 1939 Gelatin Silver Print

68

Figure 11.

Paul Popper

Czechoslovakia's training in National defense now starts at the age of six. Running for safety during air raid.
March 20, 1938 Gelatin Silver Print

69

Figure 12.

Photo Press Reproducing Beauty. A clever study indeed~ portraying intensive· concentration by pupils of the LCC. February 24, 1933 Gelatin Silver Print

70

Figure 13.

Keystone Press Agency {1886- 1978) Czech refugees pouring into the Masaryk stadium in Prague~ looking for safety. September 20, 1938 Gelatin Silver Print

71

Figure 14.

Planet News Ltd. (1928-1970)

Anto-Red troops pouring into Malaga after Franco's army had liberated the city from its reign of red terror.
February 18, 1937 Gelatin Silver Print

72

Figure 15.

Keystone Press Agency (1917-1967) A young boy cries amongst the wreckage of Hiroshima where the clean up operation continues a year after the bomb exploded. · August 6, 1946 Gelatin Silver Print

73

Figure 16.

Planet News Ltd. (1927-1963) Nazi raider crippled by R.A.F fighters crashes. A Heinkel bomber crashes on the north-east coast. March 1, 1940 Gelatin Silver Print

74

Figure 17.

The Photo Service Ltd.

Ramsgate hair contest.
July 10, 1937 Gelatin Silver Print

75

Figure 18.

E.O. Hoppe

The Minocle Mode. The eyeglass, the wearers of which were once regarded as "superior persions", has staged a succesful return to social life without the stigma of superiority attached to its use.
December 21, 1929 Gelatin Silver Print

76

Figure 19.

Brassa·i .. Bicycle day" Bois de Boulogne, Paris. June 13, 1937 Gelatin Silver Print

77

Figure 20.

Willi Ruge German women preparing for Olympic Games. June 21, 1936 Gelatin Silver Print

78

Figure 21.

Charles E. Brown Ancient and Modern. 'Valentia' bombers flying over the Pyramids near Cairo on their way with urgent supplies to quell the riots in Palestine. 1930's Gelatin Silver Print

79

Figure 22.

-

Verso of selected images from the BPAC.

80

Bibliography

Abbot, Brett. Curator of Photography, J. Paul Getty Museum. Interview by Rebecca Streiman. 26 February 2009. Abbot, Brett. Pictures for the Press. Los Angeles: The J. Paul Getty Museum. 2005. Published in conjunction with the exhibition, "Pictures for the Press" shown at the J. Paul Getty Museum. Associated Press. History of the Associated Press. http://www.ap.org/pages/about/history/history.html (accessed on Feb 13, 2009). Art Gallery of Ontario. AGO Strategic Plan, 2008. Art Gallery of Ontario. NEW ART: Photography. http://www.ago.net/new-art-photography (accessed on April12, 2009) Bodo von Dewitz and Robert Lebeck, Kiosk: A History of Photojournalism, exhibition catalogue. Koln, Museum Ludwig/Agfa Foto-Historama, 2001. Breakell, Sue. "Perspectives: Negotiating the Archive." TATE PAPERS, Spring (2008), http://www.tate.org.uk/research/tateresearch/tatepapers/08spring/breakell.shtm Brennan, Michael. "Dangermen. Press Photography at the Sharp End." British Journalism Review 19, no. 2 (June 2008): 66-71. Buckland, Gail. Reality Recorded, Early Documentary Photography. London: Little Brown & Company, 1974. Carleach, Michael. The Origins of Photojournalism in America. London/Washington: Smithsonian Institute Press, 1992. Collins, Michael. Brief Encounter. Curated by Michael Collins and Julian Germain. Salford: Viewpoint Photography Gallery & Artbase Studios, 1995. Cook, Terry. "Archival Science and Postmodernism: New Formulations for Old Concepts." Archival Science1, no. 1 (2000): 3-24. Darlington, Andra. Special Collections at the Getty Research institute. Interview by Rebecca Streiman. March 20, 2009.

81

Evans, Harold. Front Page History, Events that Shook the World. London: Penguin Books, 1985. Gallasi, Peter and Susan Kismaric. Pictures of the Times, A Century of Photography from the New York Times. New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1996. The Getty Research Institute. Special Collections. http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/special_collections/ Harrison, Martin. Young Meteors. British Photojournalism: 1957-1965. London: Jonathan Cape, 1998. Mackinnon, Steve. Archivist at the Toronto Archives. Interview by Rebecca Streiman. February 25, 2009. Manchester, William. In Our Time: the world as seen by Magnum photographers. New York: American Federation of Arts, 1989. Mary Panzer, "Introduction", In Things as they are. 8-33. New York: Aperture Foundation/World Press Photo, 2005. Marwick, Arthur. British society since 1945. London: Penguin Books, 2003. Newspaper Society of Britain. "The History of British Newspapers". http://www.newspapersoc.org.uk/Default.aspx?page=304 (accessed on January 14, 2009). Pearce-Moses, Richard. "A Glossary of Archival and Records Terminology", The Society of American Archivists, http://www.archivists.org/glossary/term_details.asp?DefinitionKey=66. (accessed on June 19, 2009).

Pierre Albert and Gille Feyel, "Photography and the Media", In Michel Frizot ed, A New History of Photography. Koln: Konemann, 1998, p. 358-369. Popescu, Doina. Director of the Ryerson Gallery and Research Centre. Interview by Rebecca Streiman. February 17, 2009.

Prodger, Phillip. £.0. Hoppe's Amerika. Modernist Photographs from the 1920's. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2007.

82

