Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2010

"Walk Like the Heroes": The Performed Identity of Bruce Springsteen and the Relationship to Contemporary Popular Music Performance
Ashley Petkovski
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Communication Commons Recommended Citation
Petkovski, Ashley, ""Walk Like the Heroes": The Performed Identity of Bruce Springsteen and the Relationship to Contemporary Popular Music Performance" (2010). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1493.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

 

"WALK LIKE THE HEROES":    THE PERFORMED IDENTITY OF BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN AND THE RELATIONSHIP TO  CONTEMPORARY POPULAR MUSIC PERFORMANCE 
  by    Ashley Petkovski  Bachelor of Journalism (Hons.)  Ryerson University, 2008  Toronto, Ontario, Canada      A thesis presented to Ryerson University and York University  in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of  Master of Arts   in the Program of  Communication and Culture      Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2010  © Ashley Petkovski 2010      

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.       I authorize Ryerson University and York University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals  for the purpose of scholarly research.             Ashley Petkovski       I further authorize Ryerson University and York University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or  by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of  scholarly research.           Ashley Petkovski                          

ii 

 

"Walk Like the Heroes":   The Performed Identity of Bruce Springsteen and the Relationship to Contemporary Popular Music  Performance    Ashley Petkovski  Master of Arts, Program in Communication and Culture  Ryerson University and York University  2010      Abstract: This thesis examines the trend of contemporary popular musicians referencing and being  compared to Bruce Springsteen. To do so, the work analyzes the performed social identity of  Springsteen and its relationship to popular music performance, particularly in terms of understanding  and assessing the motivations behind comparisons with Brian Fallon of The Gaslight Anthem, a band  frequently thought to represent Springsteen's influence. Two case studies were conducted to examine  the performed personas of both artists, informed by theories of the communication of meaning and  identity. Springsteen is found to portray a traditionally American, White, working class male,  representative of the idealized image of early American republican philosophy. Alternately, Fallon is  found to perform a similar social identity without the significant evocation of this republicanism.  Comparisons between these artists are theorized as emerging from their use of similar identity  representations and indicators of meaning, particularly in their communication of authenticity. 

iii 

 

Acknowledgments 
     

Countless thanks to Dr. Jennifer Brayton, Dr. Steven Bailey and Dr. Michael Murphy for your  input, support and enthusiasm. I lucked out and am grateful for the chance to have worked  with all of you.   
                  to those who stayed.                                                         
iv 

 

 Contents 
     

Declaration  Abstract  Acknowledgments  Contents  Chapter 1: Introduction  Chapter 2: Social Identity Performance  2.1. Theories of Identity          Erving Goffman and The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life  2.2. Social Construction of Identities: Masculinity  2.3. Social Construction of Identities: American National Identity  2.4. Social Construction of Identities: Whiteness and Racialized Identity  2.5. Social Construction of Identities: Economic Class  2.6. Intersections of Social Identities  2.7. Popular Music and Authenticity   2.8. Rock and Roll Social Identities  Chapter 3: Methods  3.1. Research Questions  3.2. Data Collection  3.3. Framework for Performance Analysis  3.4. Limitations  Chapter 4: The Performed Identity of Bruce Springsteen  4.1. Clothing  4.2. Physical Body  4.3. Physical Performativity  4.4. Instruments  4.5. Band Interactions  4.6. Language and Speech  4.7. Intertextuality  4.8. Lyrical Themes          Faith          Geography          Car and Road Imagery          Characterizations of Men         Characterizations of Women         Class  Chapter 5: The Performed Identity of Brian Fallon  5.1. Clothing  5.2. Physical Body  5.3. Physical Performativity  5.4. Instruments  5.5. Band Interactions 
v 

                                                                                 

ii  iii  iv  v  1  3  3  6  10  15  20  24  27  31  34  40  40  40  41  43  44  44  48  50  54  55  61  67  68  69  70  72  74  76  77  82  82  84  85  88  88 

 

       Gender and Band Interaction         Band Organization and Brotherhood  5.6. Language and Speech         Connection to Springsteen in Language and Speech  5.7. Intertextuality  5.8. Lyrical Themes          Faith         Geography         Car and Road Imagery         Characterizations of Men         Characterizations of Women         Class  5.9. Section Conclusion  Chapter 6: Conclusion  References  Videography   

                               

89  89  90  93  96  99  99  100  101  101  103  105  108  109  114  120 

vi 

 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
In a 1998 study of Bruce Springsteen fans, Springsteen is described as the "last great white, male  hero" (Cavicchi, 1998). While few know the "real" Springsteen, his public image ­ the figure of  Springsteen ­ is a Western icon. He serves as a symbol of a particular kind of man, communicating a  particular identity ­ a "regular guy," a figure that is politically and socially aware, spiritual, idealistic,  authentic and ultimately conventionally masculine, American, White and working class.   Since permanently reforming the E Street Band, his most acclaimed group of longtime touring  and recording musicians, in 1999, Springsteen's performance identity ­ the white, American, working  class male he symbolizes ­ has become part of a trend in modern rock and punk music. Contemporary  artists have begun publically displaying an appreciation for Springsteen by commenting on his influence,  referencing his work in their own, covering his songs and displaying similar aesthetic and behavioural  gestures onstage, a trend that has most concisely been referred to as a Springsteen renaissance  (Barclay, 2007). These bands, including The Hold Steady, The Constantines, The National and The Killers  are embedded ­ or in the case of The Killers, have attempted to be embedded ­ in North American  music cultures rooted in punk and rock values, particularly musical integrity, authenticity and the  sharing of the life experiences of ordinary, working class American men. Generally, these bands are  often more recognized for their echoing of the Springsteen figure than for their original music. The most  obvious and recently recognized example of such a band may be The Gaslight Anthem, a New Jersey  quartet fronted by Brian Fallon.   The band have been followed by constant comparisons to Springsteen particularly after  releasing their second fulllength album, The '59 Sound, in 2008, arguably more so than any other band  in recent memory. As they prepare to release their third fulllength, American Slang, on June 15, 2010,  associations with New Jersey's favourite son continue, with much recent press coverage seeking out the  band's reactions to the comparisons and questioning if The Gaslight Anthem can break out of the  Springsteen shadow.   Arguably, Fallon has deliberately brought on some of the overwhelming comparisons himself.  The singer and sole lyricist quotes Springsteen's lyrics in his songs, has covered Springsteen's material  both with his band and in solo performances, has spoken about Springsteen's influence on his music and  his personal life, recently performed with him at two U.K. music festivals and as of June 22, 2010, will be 

1 

 

the first guest musician to appear on an official Springsteen DVD, singing "No Surrender" with  Springsteen and the E Street Band in London, England's Hyde Park.   However, Fallon is hardly the first musician to demonstrate a debt to Springsteen, his band only  having released their first album less than six months before Eye Weekly gave the "Springsteen  renaissance" a name. Other artists have sought the comparison, sometimes subtly and sometimes by  declaring it themselves. None, however, have connected with the icon of Springsteen in the public  imagination with as much intensity as The Gaslight Anthem.   This then begs the question of why such comparisons exist. Moreover, the relatively recent  resurgence of Springsteen comparisons in popular music prompts an examination of what the social  identity of Springsteen ­ the figure of Springsteen ­ represents, how it was created, what it symbolizes  and how it has manifested in contemporary music.   As The Gaslight Anthem are the most recently notable band being cited as bearing Springsteen's  influence, this analysis will examine and compare the social identities of both Springsteen and frontman  Fallon in order to make these conclusions. In addition to attempting to identify the figure of Springsteen,  this thesis will look to articulate the performed identity of Fallon and how the figure of Springsteen is  echoed in his performance, in order to reveal the root of comparisons of the two artists.   To do so, this thesis will look to live concert performances in order to understand how social  identities are constructed and communicated to an audience. Informed by performance and identity  theory, this thesis will determine the kind of gender, class, national and racial identity being represented  in Springsteen and Fallon's performances, demonstrate how performed expressions and actions are  coded with this status information, and reveal how meaning about identity is communicated during a  live music performance. Only information conveyed through the nonsonic elements of performance will  be considered, including clothing, personal aesthetics, gestures, instrument choices (for their visual  impact), speech and lyrical content. Additionally, only information available in live performances will be  studied. Personal biographies, sound and song titles will not be included.  

2 

 

Chapter 2: Social Identity Performance 
 

2.1. Theories of Identity  
This project is an examination of how identity is created and made interpretable. It is therefore  rooted in studies of identity, social performance, popular music studies, and the perspective that  identity is a kind of enacted performance as articulated in sociologist Erving Goffman's The Presentation  of Self in Everyday Life.   In an examination of theories of identity during the last century, Peter James Burke and Jan E.  Steets (2009) broadly define identity as the set of meanings that define who one is when they occupy a  social role or position in a group. This is more specifically referred to as cultural or social identity, and  serves to provide or project a sense of the individual's place in society, often based on the individual's  relationship to power hierarchies (Akindes, 2004; Bornstein cited in Akindes, 2004). As people occupy  multiple social positions, they have multiple identities (Burke & Steets, 2009; Fong, 2004b), which are  employed based on the nature of varying interactions. Burke and Steets (2009) also define identity as  the set of characteristics that mark a human as a unique individual  their personal identity. Studies of  identity often follow one of three purposes: to examine internal self dynamics influencing behaviour, to  examine how identity is shaped by society and to examine how identities are maintained in facetoface  interaction (Burke & Steets, 2009). This thesis is concerned with the last two approaches, looking at how  social identities ­ gender, class, race and national identity ­ are demonstrated and where they derive  their meaning.   This project approaches identity as coming from the outside, as conceptualized by Simon Frith  (1996, p. 237). Social identities are discernable in interactions with others and are made available  through a person's physical, verbal and visual expressions. In the social sciences, popular music studies  and varying cultural theories, identity is conceptualized as a performance (Alexander & Mast, 2006;  Goffman, 1959; Kirby cited in Pattie, 2007; Osborne & Wintle, 2006; Palmer, 1997). The display of  identity is a social and communicative process, described by Frith as a rhetoric of gestures (1996).  Individuals intentionally and inadvertently control how they are seen through interpersonal prompts  that guide others' reactions and responses. This is done by associating with certain social groups or  socially marked individuals, and by displaying signs and symbols of who they are (Burke & Steets, 2009).  All of this activity is a matter of performance. Individuals who display their identity are described as  actors, orienting towards others as if they are onstage (Alexander & Mast, 2006, p. 2). Identity 
3 

 

performances may also be described as a matter of persona, particularly in studies of literal onstage  activity. Personas are not necessarily demonstrations of the real personalities of their performers, but  characterizations and/or representations of constructed, socially and culturally situated identities often  meant to be discerned by an audience. Individuals onstage enact personas and this process of exhibiting  an identity is considered a sustained piece of acting (Kirby cited in Pattie, 2007, p. 33). This project  ultimately concerns itself with identities that can be considered personas: the identities musical  performers assume when they are onstage in front of an audience, without concern for motives or  possible connections to the performer's offstage identity.      The literal performance of identity is structured by physical traits, markings, and expressions 

and gestures including language and speech. More significant, however, is the role of the body. Frith  (1996) describes performance as a communicative or social process where bodily signs and movements  are the dominant sites of meaning (p. 205). In literal onstage performances, audiences are expected to  see bodies objectively, in terms of their aesthetic qualities and capabilities, and as subjective, where  bodies are intentionally willed to communicate and their actions are used to convey meaning (Frith,  1996, p. 205). These signs and movements include overt and minor physical gestures, body size, stature,  age and physical appearance, particularly in terms of sex and race characteristics. Frith (1996) offers a  more specific model of the kinds of body language composing identity, citing the work of Paul Eckman.  Eckman divides body language in to four categories (cited in Frith, 1996). The first is the direct physical  expression of emotional states, which involves human expressions. These emotional expressions are  influenced by cultural constraints on expressiveness and therefore differ situationally. The second is  illustrative movements, which are tied to the narrative or verbal content of the performance. This  category involves consciously using gestures to mimic emotions. Body manipulations is the third  category. These are unconscious and sometimes nervous movements that occur during a performance,  having the potential to negatively impact the impression.1 The final category is emblems. These are  specifically symbolic body movements that have no connection to emotional states.     Generally, symbols or symbolic activities work to anchor the visible in the invisible (Giesen, 

2006, p. 331), providing names and shared meanings for objects and categories involved in social  interaction (Burke & Steets, 2009). They are indicators of meaning in a performance, and only  understood by those familiar with the interpretive rules and codes of a culture (Eckman cited in Frith,  1996). In identity performance, verbal and physical expressions and presentations all ultimately serve as                                                               1  Goffman (1959) refers to the most disruptive of these gestures as faux pas.
4 

 

signs and symbols, which are used to articulate the self (S. Smith, 1999, p. 104). All of the actions and  presentations considered here make up a performance's means of symbolic production. These are the  materials an actor uses in order to dramatize what is they want to present (Alexander, 2006).   Ultimately, these performance gestures and expressions communicate messages about an actor's  demeanor, values and social position or status. These materials are made readable through relations to  larger social structures, which imbue them with familiar meanings (Burke & Steets, 2009). Performances  follow culturally specific rules and scripts (Alexander & Mast, 2006; Giesen, 2006, pg.338339), and the  understanding of a performance is thought to be culturally based (Alexander, 2006a; Alexander & Mast,  2006; Frith, 1996; Mast, 2006; Taylor cited in Alexander & Mast, 2006). Actions, gestures and images  contain explicit meanings as well as background structures of meaning, which code these elements with  other culturally specific connotations (Alexander, 2006b, p. 94; Westerfelhaus, 2004). Performances are  all suffused by preexisting and active symbolic systems, which are invested with meaning at particular  times for particular purposes (Conquergood cited in Dimitriadis, 2001, p. 10). Performers rely on  audiences to come to a performance with a certain amount of preknowledge, particularly when it  comes to interpreting gestures (Alexander, 2006a; Alexander, 2006b; Alexander & Mast, 2006; Frith,  1996; Goffman, 1959; Ore, 2003). This preknowledge is a familiarity with social categories, behavioural  expectations, and the common meanings associated with varying expressions.  According to Stuart Hall, social life is made intelligible and meaningful through connotative  codes (cited in Hebdige, 2005). These codes contain information about a society's norms and values, and  more broadly, its definitions of status categories such as gender, race, class and national identity. More  specifically, the physical, verbal and aesthetic elements of a performance are where these codes are  expressed (Shumway cited in Pfeil, 1995, p. 80). These codes inform identity conceptions, such as what  it means to be "masculine" in a particular society, or what it means when someone's actions do not  match the familiar, widely understood expectations of their social position.     Though there are a variety of understandings of where these cultural codes are derived, identity 

and performance theory are concerned with how these codes enter society and come to be used in  identity construction. It is suggested that these codes are expressed and understood through  representations (Alexander & Mast, 2006; Dyer, 1997; Hall cited in Maingard, 2006; Hebdige, 2005; M.  Smith, 1992; S. Smith, 1999). According to Jeffrey C. Alexander (2006a), performances are informed by  the collective representations that compose culture (p. 58). Every performance is based on systems of  collective representation, the body of physical, social and natural referents a performance draws from 
5 

 

(Alexander, 2006a). Ultimately, representations both precede and determine performance (Pattie, 2007,  p. 22). These representations may include narratives, discourses, icons, symbols, images and other  performances. These representations are in and of themselves locations of identity, the place where  identity is enacted or displayed. All of the actions and expressions discussed previously are elements of  representation, gaining their meanings by symbolically referencing previously existing representations in  a culture. Any performance, therefore, can be read as a representation of an identity. At the same time,  representations serve as the basis for identities. New representations are built on previously existing  ones. In terms of identity, ideals and prototypes are particularly important. These tend to be common,  familiar and clearly understood depictions of particular values and behaviours that become reference  points for members of a social group ­ as suggested by Frith (1996), identity is already an ideal (p. 174).  Any emerging performance of identity may be inspired by and understood through its displayed  connections to previously existing representations. As well, representations are considered the means  by which outsiders form their feelings towards that being performed (Dyer, 1997). These ideas of  understanding and response are particularly important in considering social positions, which are  constructed concepts (Fong & Chuang, 2004). These positions become intelligible to a culture through  representations which then guide public responses so that they are accepted and willingly reproduced.  Social attitudes, perceptions and stereotypes are expressed in identities (Osborne & Wintle, 2006),  particularly in ideals and prototypes, and shape how performers conduct themselves and how audiences  react to them. Idealized or prototypical images of masculinity, Whiteness, and of being working class  and American inform members of a group about how they are expected to act and appear in order to be  accepted into any social status position. Elements of these representations can be borrowed in other  performances in order to demonstrate one's social position and location within social norms and  expectations, or be manipulated and modified in order to demonstrate alternative or ideologically  differing identities.   

Erving Goffman and The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life 
This project is largely informed by the work of sociologist Erving Goffman in 1959's The  Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, where he considers the concept of identity performance and  explains how such performances are structured and carried out. Goffman prefaces his work on the  statement that in interactions, people look to define their situation. They seek information about the  individuals they are interacting with, and information about how they and the others are expected to 
6 

 

act in that situation. Goffman (1959) defines all identity as a performance ­ information about the self  that is presented by an individual in interactions with others. This information includes all of the  categories that comprise one's social identity: their social class, gender, race and sense of national  belonging and background. This information is, itself, conveyed by more general, interpretable cues  about occupation, authoritativeness, personal morals and values, the exhibition of particular social and  cultural norms, and regional backgrounds and identities. Goffman (1959) theorizes that in interaction,  individuals ­ or actors, as he refers to them in the text ­ convey identity information through "sign  vehicles." These are cues carried by both conduct and appearance. Sign vehicles are often familiar  expressions that allow audiences to apply their previous experiences or preexisting knowledge and  stereotypes to what is being communicated (Goffman, 1959). This allows audiences to contextualize the  performances of any individual in their existing understandings of different identities.   This preknowledge has an individual component, in that it can come from personal experiences  or from information one has deliberately collected on a particular subject. Generally, however, pre knowledge refers to common stereotypes, norms, codes, characterizations and representations ­  meaningmaking elements which are shared by a culture or social group that inform how its members  come to understand situation. As such, no social position or status is material ­ they are solely created  through patterns of conduct and representation (Goffman, 1959).  According to Goffman (1959),  performers act within the traditions of particular social groups or statuses, either consciously or  unconsciously. Performers are said to offer familiar, idealized impressions, presenting and reaffirming  the accredited values of society (Goffman, 1959). Being is a matter of acting out and sustaining  particular codes of conduct (Goffman, 1959). In this case, preknowledge informs the definitions of  status categories and, therefore, individual identities. Goffman further explains that sign vehicles are  part of impression creation. Actors continually give and give off information that creates an overall  impression of their identity (Goffman, 1959). He distinguishes the information that an actor gives as the  verbal symbols or their substitutes, including symbolic gestures, clothing choices and so on. These are  used specifically to convey the information that is commonly known to be attached to these symbols.  What is given off, then, are actions performed for reasons other than the communication of specific  symbolic information. These actions can appear neutral, unintentional or accidental, though Goffman  (1959) asserts that both that which is given and given off may involve misinformation, pretending and  deception. In order to achieve the sense of an identity as being real or true, the performance must seem  to be actively declaring the truth, or be read as an involuntary expression of the person's supposed self.  
7 

 

 

Part of the goal of a performance is to maintain some control and attempt to ensure that the 

audience understands the impression being made. Action must be conducted in such a way as to  present the kind of impression that will lead the audience to act voluntarily with the impression's  intention (Goffman, 1959). Such statements seem to assume a degree of intentionality and motivation  in the performance of identity. However, a performance may be entirely unmotivated, and may be  intentional or unintentional. The external representation of a self may be entirely performed ­ in no way  connected to one's personality, or to the impressions made in other interactions. However, it may also  be informed by one's actual self, made up of automatic mannerisms, or learned or deliberately  employed mannerisms meant to communicate actor's sense of their "true self" and their actual  membership to particular social groups.     Audiences expect a sense of coherence in a performance (Goffman, 1959). Indicators of social 

status must somehow be present throughout the entire performance in order for them to be  understood as an indication of identity rather than as an inconsistency or error. Audiences often expect  there to be connotative consistencies in a performer's manner, appearance and the setting of the  performance. Additionally, a performer is expected to appear as though their performance is not  calculated or a routine, and appear as though they give the same impression to difference audiences.  Performances are expected to seem spontaneous, and the interactions between performer and a  particular audience are expected to appear "special" (Goffman, 1959). This idea applies particularly to  those in a position of fame.   Goffman's conception of performance involves what he refers to as the "front." This is  otherwise defined as the expressive equipment that forms a performance ­ the geographic, physical,  visual and status information that creates identity impressions. The most significant of this information  is what Goffman (1959) calls the "personal front" ­ an actor's clothing, sex, age, race, size, speech and  bodily gestures. The personal front has two elements. The first is appearance, which conveys social  status and the activity being done, be it work, recreation, or otherwise. The second is manner, which  involves action and behaviour, both as performed by the actor and as expected from the audience.     Preknowledge directly influences the creation and comprehension of the front. Fronts are often 

not unique and are, themselves, an element of an audience's previous experiences or existing  understandings. As well, performers possess a limited range of sign equipment, and the roles a  performer may demonstrate are often predetermined (Goffman, 1959). Most identities are interrelated 

8 

 

and based on common tropes. Fronts as a whole are often similar, allowing audiences to easily mobilize  their preknowledge and understand the overall impression of the performance (Goffman, 1959).     Earlier, it was noted that geographic setting is an element of the front. Setting is also an 

important element of the regional nature of performances. Goffman (1959) theorizes that performances  are bounded by regions and the barriers to audience perception they entail. The most significant region,  and the only one of concern in this thesis, is the "front region," the location where the front is enacted.  Front regions have their own set of fixed sign equipment, known as the "setting," which can serve to  contextualize the performance. Goffman (1959) notes the performance of an individual in the front  region may serve to create the appearance that the actor is maintaining or embodying certain  standards. In short, this is where the interpretable impression of identity is made. It is through the  actions and presentations taking place in the front region that an audience can come to understand the  performer's persona.     Impressions, as suggested, need to be managed in order to be effective. The elements given in a 

performance are usually done with some purpose and may be influenced by the situation. However, an  individual never stops giving off information, and much of what is given off is done so unknowingly and  constantly (Goffman, 1959). Due to such uncontrollable elements of performance, controlling and  defending impressions is important to actors, particularly when invested in demonstrating and  maintaining a particular identity. This is accomplished through both defensive and protective measures.    Defensive measures involve a variety of dramaturgical methods: loyalty, discipline and 

circumspection (Goffman, 1959). Dramaturgical loyalty may also be defined as group solidarity. The  performer's impression is managed by a team, who must make sure to support the performer. The  performer too must remain loyal to their team and maintain distance from the audience where there is  risk of disturbing the performance impression. As well, dramaturgical loyalty is maintained by  occasionally changing audiences to make consistency more achievable and keep audiences from  overanalyzing performances. Dramatalurgical discipline is also necessary in order to defend a  performance. This involves making sure a performer remembers their role and avoids faux pas, defined  here as inopportune gestures or intrusions in the performance. As well, it involves being prepared to  account for disruptions and suppress any spontaneous reactions or feelings that may become  interruptive. Dramatalurgical circumspection involves using prudence in how to best stage a  performance, choosing the right team members, controlling the length of a performance, and being  aware of what an audience already knows about the individual, as this will determine what actions are 
9 

 

inappropriate and which are already familiar. Circumspection also involves rehearsing, scripting,  ordering and establishing audience behaviour expectations before the performance takes place ­ self defence through defining the audience. The performer and team have to ensure that the audience or  outside observers are able to use protective measures for themselves in interaction.  This element of  audience consideration allows the performers and their team to not only assure a familiarity with the  audience, but to actually shape the audience's reactions through particular cues. These cues establish  the behavioural norms for the performance, telling the audience when and how they are supposed to  conduct themselves and respond during the interaction.     Protective measures are those taken by the audience in order to assist a performer in making 

the desired impression. Audiences deliberately recognize boundaries and use tact in interactions  (Goffman, 1959). Audiences are expected to read the behavioural cues given to them by the performer  and the performance situation and react accordingly, and agree to disregard or accept explanations for  any errors or inconsistencies that do not fundamentally damage performance coherence. The performer  also has a particular role in aiding protection, in addition to providing behavioural cues. Actors need to  be aware of any signs that the audience is not accepting of the performance, and assure that any  deliberate inconsistencies have a defended reason within the interaction.      

2.2. Social Construction of Identities: Masculinity 
Currently, research into gender is concerned with history and ethnography, looking into the  relationship between gender differences and institutions, historical changes and economic structures  (Connell, 1995). This is where much of the research on gender consulted for this thesis is based. R.W.  Connell (1995) states sociological research views gender as being constructed in interaction, as do  selected works in the more specific disciplines of performance studies and popular music studies. The  body is considered an important site of creating, explaining and inscribing social difference (Dyer, 1997).  Gender is dependent on the way bodies function and appear. Bodies are mapped to show what are  conceived of as the essences of social identities (S. Smith, 1999, p. 4). Gender is thought to be inherent  in, or express something true about the male or female body (Connell, 1995). However, bodies do not  actually predate gender (S. Smith, 1999), and discourses create status positions and apply them to  bodies. Gender is also conceptualized as a mechanism that works to maintain patriarchal order, dividing  society and assembling status categories in a hierarchy of power and influence (Connell, 1995, p. 42).  Therefore, bodies are responsible for demonstrating their social identities, serve as a basis for identity 
10 

 

types, and are used as a justification for how status categories are defined and the inequality they  produce.   Social statuses function to assign rights and responsibilities to members in varying situations  (Lorber, 2003). Gender types are thought of as subjectivities organized within systems of authority and  control, meant to maintain those systems (Chapman & Rutherford cited in Pfeil, 1995, p. 18). Gender is,  therefore, a social position or category that serves to guide and evaluate behaviour and appearance,  based on a set of norms established to serve the interests of a particular social order (Kokopeli & Lakey,  2001). These norms dictate what is considered masculine and what is considered feminine in a society.  They are relational definitions: that which is masculine implies what is not feminine and vice versa  (Connell, 1995; Kimmel, 2003; Zinn, HondagneuSotelo & Messner, 2001).    As gender is a matter of the body, it is made in social practice (Connell, 1995). Gender is 

articulated through languages, positions, institutions and apparatuses (Berger & Watson, 1995). It needs  to be produced through physical or visual signals in order to exist and be meaningful. Gender  performances need to draw on preexisting, coded representations of gender in order to be discernable  in a given situation. This system of identity production creates the models of masculinity that are to be  emulated (Wallace, 2000). Differing situations demand different things of gender performances, and  therefore, enactments of gender identity will vary depending on the context (Epstein, 2003). Theories  about the social construction of gender may consider the body a neutral surface, where social symbols  are displayed. Connell (1995) disagrees, stating these theories ignore the importance of sex and bodily  materiality. Masculinity is at once a gender position, a set of practices used to identify oneself with that  position, and the produced effect of these practices on the body, personality and culture (Connell,  1995). Some of masculinity's meaning is defined by how male bodies move, their possibilities for sex and  muscle shapes. The social symbolic is therefore dependent on the body and vice versa. The body helps  make some of what we think of as masculine through physical performance, and some of the  characteristics of and norms about masculinity stem from the properties of the male body.     There are a number of traits that compose the norms of masculinity. These traits ­ the body of 

behaviours, dispositions and values that make up what it means to be a "true" man ­ are elements of  what is referred to as hegemonic masculinity. This is the masculinity that is idealized in a society,  securing the dominant position of men and the legitimacy of patriarchy (Connell, 1995). Additionally, as  hegemonic masculinity is the most powerful social position, it is also the most normalized category, the  standard against which all social difference is measured (Epstein, 2003; Haynes & Sussman cited in 
11 

 

Bhaba, 1995). Through exclusion, hegemonic masculinity creates subordination and marginality and  defines who in a society has the "right" to authority (Connell, 1995). Gender needs to be constantly  demonstrated and is affirmed and monitored by other men (Kimmel, 2003). Respect, credibility and  authority are resultantly granted on the basis of meeting the established expectations physically,  aesthetically and behaviourally. Any failure to do so forces men to either find other claims to respect, or  to negotiate their way through the gender system (Connell, 1995).      Hegemonic masculinity has been defined as being based on a variety of characteristics and 

values.  Hegemonically masculine men are envisioned to be White, heterosexual and of the professional  class. They are thought to be, and therefore expected to be enterprising, controlling, willful, physically  strong, employed, independent, resilient, in control of their emotions or unemotional, rational, active, in  positions of authority, powerful, tough, competitive, dominant, productive, virtuous, natural drivers,  patriotic and hardworking. Hegemonically masculine men have also been described as violent, evil,  defined by a lust for power over others, gain access to power by degrading others, unrecognizing of  their social advantage, racist, homophobic, defined by conquest, desiring of recognition, having a  possessive, predatory sexuality, and mistrustful of women. These men draw strength through  dominance, actively deny their sexuality by promoting reason and the mind over the body, exhibit  musical, technical and intellectual mastery, and are thought to have different leadership styles than  women (Connell, 1995; Dyer, 1997; Epstein, 2003; Fox, 2004; Garman, 2000; Gilmore cited in Connell,  1995; Goffman cited in Kimmel, 2003; Jakle & Sculle, 2008; Kimmel, 2003; Kokopeli & Lakey, 2001;  McIntosh, 2001; Palmer, 1997; Pfeil, 1995; Pfeil, 1997; Riley, 2004; Seidler cited in Connell, 1995; Sinfield  cited in Simpson, 2004;  Thompson; 2001). These traits are embodied in idealized representations of  hegemonic masculinity, and create the expectations that inform how masculine identities are  recognized in American society.     Male homosocial interaction is also important in communicating and reading hegemonic 

masculinity. Masculinity itself has been said to be built on competitiveness and is performed to and  judged by other men (M. Kimmel cited in Flood, 2007; S. Bird, 1996). According to Jean LipmanBlumen,  homosociality is based on female exclusion and intended to maintain male dominance (cited in Kimmel  & Aronson, 2004). A homosocial environment, therefore, serves such identity practices, providing a  space where patriarchy can be reinforced and masculinity can be created and affirmed. In a homosocial  environment, members of the same sex are the most important, and those of the opposite sex are 

12 

 

usually excluded and/or devalued2 (Menser, 2004; Flood, 2007; Nye cited in Flood, 2007). Additionally, a  homosocial environment is marked by a union with others of the same sex, where individuals can feel as  if they are being "themselves" and having "fun" (Menser, 2004). Male homosociality supports identities  that fit into hegemonic ideals (S. Bird, 1996). It serves to demonstrate solidarity, power, dominance and  prowess, and can provide an environment where unappealing demands of patriarchy such as families  and marriage can be avoided without compromising hegemonic male identity (Flood, 2007; Gerson &  Reiss cited in Menser, 2004; Horrocks, 1995). Male friendship, specifically, is thought to affirm  masculinity through associations with virility and manhood (Flood, 2007). Homosociality, then,  reinforces hegemonic masculinity, male social power and gender divides (Menser, 2004) and can  provide an impression of masculine identity in performance.     Masculine identities are ultimately formed around wage earning abilities, mechanical skills and 

the patriarchal order (Connell, 1995). Work is considered a major basis of masculine identity (Morgan  cited in Palmer, 1997). The cultural imagery of masculinity is concerned with work ­ men are motivated  to concern themselves with work as, ideologically, this is what men are supposed to do and where they  are supposed to succeed (Connell, 1995). Work offers men the opportunity to demonstrate mastery and  authority, but this is not available to all men in all positions. Certain types of work are defined as  masculine based on patriarchal ideology's construction of men as rational and women as emotional  (Connell, 1995). Hegemonic masculinity claims to embody rationality, casting itself as the position that  represents the interests of society. Rationality is also a key value of capitalism, and it is thought that  masculinity defines itself in accordance to corporate economies and their cultures (Winter & Robert  cited in Connell, 1995, p. 1645). Resultantly, positions in law, politics, defence and, increasingly,  technology are thought of as masculine jobs, and being in these positions transfers their authority onto  the employee. However, men working in postindustrial, capitalist societies often work for wages and  hold manual labour positions, where they are not allowed the same kind of power as other men. These  workers often lack the control and financial superiority of other job positions, and are faced with the  pressure to reassert their masculinity in alternative ways (Palmer, 1997). This leads men to engage in  what is referred to as "face work" ­ the exaggerating of claims of masculine potency to compensate for  their inability to acquire hegemonic masculinity through work (Palmer, 1997).  

                                                            
 In a male homosocial environment, women may also be included if they perform as an are treated as "one of the  boys" (Fine cited in Kimmel & Aronson, 2004).  13 
2

 

 

Changes in industry, economic conditions, wages and the organization of national power all 

contribute directly to ideas about gender and distinguishing gender categories. The varying masculine  archetypes that have emerged throughout the last number of centuries have often been influenced by  power distribution and accumulation. These male types were often structured around a perceived need  to protect patriarchy and capitalist practices (Connell, 1995).     Several archetypal masculinities from the 18th and 19th Century are identified as having 

established the ideal masculinities of the present (Connell, 1995; Kimmel, 2003). Significant to this thesis  are heroic artisan masculinity and the 1830s marketplace man. Heroic artisan masculinity is based in  republican virtue, and is depicted as physically strong, economically autonomous, a good father, and a  participant in both community and democracy (Kimmel, 2003). 1830s marketplace man masculinity was  defined by success in the capitalist marketplace and the accumulation of wealth, power and status  (Kimmel, 2003). This ideal was a businessman or an entrepreneur, devoted to his work rather than  family, engaged in homosocial competition and interaction, and validated through the demonstration of  acquisition and exclusion of others (Kimmel, 2003). The marketplace man remains the ideal form of  masculinity in North America, a masculinity defined by a presence in the public sphere, capitalist  accumulation and displays of homosocial competitiveness (Kimmel, 2003).    In the latter half of the 20th Century, hegemonic masculinity based on the marketplace man 

began to undergo scrutiny and reconceptualization brought on by queer and women's movements,  economic changes that saw more men entering the service industry, and an increased focus on male  bodies in media and entertainment (Simpson, 1994). The 1980s were marked by what Simpson (1994)  calls a fashionable "crisis of masculinity," the result of social, political and economic developments  altering many of the positions and values hegemonic masculinity drew from in order to construct itself  (p. 1). Political and social movements began in order to "defend" men from this instability and reinstate  or reinforce the masculinity that propped up the authority and dominance of patriarchal institutions.  During this period, representations of hegemonic masculinity began focusing on the action hero and the  bodybuilder (or, often, the bodybuilding action hero), both masculine types that inverted the position of  the male figure on display. These representations of masculinity cast the exaggeratedly muscular White  male as a hero, a patriot or true American and a warrior, disavowing the passive qualities of the male  body on display (Simpson, 1994). These bodies were also representative of thenU.S. President Ronald  Reagan's discourse of personal responsibility and individual liberty (Simpson, 1994). Action (and  Western) narratives are centered on the powerful masculine body, initially showing it as a spectacle or 
14 

 

object of display, threatening it to show its fallibility and ultimately redeeming it by showing the  powerful body's ability to regenerate (P. Smith, 1995). The built body of these popular representations  also indicates achievement, the demonstration of mind and will to create these powerful, hyper masculine bodies without interference from physical limitations (Dyer, 1997).    

2.3. Social Construction of Identities:  American National Identity 
  Nations are, in Benedict Anderson's oftcited definition ­ imagined communities (Gilbert, 2006;  Lopez, 2006; S. Smith, 1999; TheissMorse, 2009). They are sovereign, selfgoverning and have  limitations and boundaries (TheissMorse, 2009). National identity is therefore a social situation about  feeling a part of a particular group (TheissMorse, 2009). Community itself is based on the belief of  group members that a community actually exists, and that people are bound by common characteristics  (Miller cited in TheissMorse, 2009). Generally, a sense of community can bring with it a sense of  common fate or destiny, common history, and a common cultural and political consciousness (Fong,  2004b; Miller cited in TheissMorse, 2009).  These national communities are marked by a common  cultural legacy and history, a willingness of its members to share a future, and a defence of shared social  customs, practices, norms and values (Lopez, 2006). These shared values are not necessarily shared in  reality, but are subjective, dependent on the power structure of a nation. These are values meant to be  internalized as representations of the "national character" of a community (Gilbert, 2006). Generally,  cultures are conceptualized as having specific, coded models of personhood which are themselves  aspects of that culture's identity (Fong, 2004a). Nations ­ and more specifically, the group members of  nations ­ are expected to display particular identities that display national values. National identity is  defined by social forces, from what it means to be a member of that group, to how that identity is  enacted, to how important national identity is to that group (TheissMorse, 2009). It is also important to  note that identity is not only nationspecific but regionspecific. Regions, like nations, are also discursive  constructs (Dimitriadis, 2001), sharing geographical and cultural bonds. These regions often have their  own histories that influence identity performance, providing specific values and differing  representations that define and typify identities (Dimitriadis, 2001).     America is thought to identify as a country valuing individualism, personal courage and 

exploration (related to a greater national interest in and history of discovery and expansion), hard work,  mobility, progress, change, success, wanderlust, independence, freedom, social equality, patriotism,  utilitarianism and the drive for perfection (Bird, 1994; Jakle & Sculle, 2008; Langston, 2001; Ortner, 
15 

 

2003; Riley, 2004; TheissMorse, 2009; Zalinsky cited in Jakle & Sculle, 2008). Ultimately, though, there is  little formal consensus on the true meaning of American national identity. However, it is known that  national identities are often connected to the characteristics of dominant group members and their  stereotypes (Sidanius & Pratlo cited in TheissMorse, 2009). Moreover, group members are constantly  surrounded by symbolic systems and norms that create national consciousness (Billig cited in Theiss Morse, 2009). These things suggest ­ overtly or otherwise ­ that Americans should love their country,  respect American values, and uphold the political and historical structures that established the nation  (TheissMorse, 2009). Elizabeth TheissMorse (2009) ultimately identifies four primary understandings of  American national identity, informed by the theorized substance of general national identities: identity  as historically ethnocultural, identity as a set of beliefs or principles, identity as community and identity  as patriotism.     Historically ethnocultural American identity considers nation to be defined by ancestry, 

language, religion and principles of government, and believes its people are similar in manners and  customs. This view is where the United States gets its racial and religious identity. Historically and  ethnoculturally, America is thought to be built on AngloSaxon Protestant culture. It is argued that  Americans don't have to be Protestant to be American, but that undermining this culture is detrimental  to one's perceived status as an American (Huntington cited in TheissMorse, 2009, p. 17). Currently, this  form of identity is reflected in the definition of Americanness as White and Christian.     The idea that identity is formed by a set of beliefs or principles looks to the ideas articulated in 

the writings of the founders of the United States. They outline a common set of principles referred to as  the "American Creed" (Huntington cited in TheissMorse, 2009, p. 18). These include liberty, equality,  democracy, constitutionalism, limited government and private enterprise.     Identity may also be understood in terms of community. This perspective prioritizes an interest 

in the group as the source of American identity, grounded in ideas of civic republicanism. Therefore,  American identity is represented by active, participatory citizenry, a commitment to the common good  and to community (TheissMorse, 2009). This does not necessarily mandate political action in order to  identify as American, but instead indicates a more general feeling of obligation to other Americans.     The final understanding sees identity as patriotism. Patriotism is defined by an attachment to 

American symbols, history and forms of government, more so than an attachment to its people (Theiss Morse, 2009). Patriotism demonstrates attachment to one's country, and the prioritizing one's country 

16 

 

over oneself (TheissMorse, 2009). ThiessMorse (2009) argues that patriotism is more a norm than an  identity and may even be interchangeable with identity itself.      An encompassing definition of what it means to be an American may be the most effective in 

addressing all of the representational elements that compose national identity. Despite a lack of  defining statements regarding American identity, several ideas exist about such a position. TheissMorse  (2009) states that national identities are structured by group dynamics and levels of personal  identification. America has strong identifiers ­ those who believe themselves to be prototypical  members and have strong, exclusionary opinions on who that prototypical member should be ­ and low  identifiers, who feel less connected to the community as a whole, prioritize different values from strong  identifiers, and are more inclusionary as to who should or can be a member. ThiessMorse (2009) finds  that the prototypical American is thought of as White, Christian, born in America and individualistic (p.  80). Strong identifiers tended to identify as older, Christian, less educated, less politically  knowledgeable, generally trusting of others, likely to identify with a variety of other social groups, aren't  usually Black or extremely liberal in their values, and believe "true" Americans should be nativeborn,  hold citizenship, speak English, live in the United States for most of their lives and hold a similarly ethno cultural view of belonging. They are also less inclined to dismiss the need to be White in order to be  American, and believe Americans ought to identify as Christians, value freedom and support national  institutions (TheissMorse, 2009).     As with every social category, national identity and its attributes are created. Americanness is 

artifactual and reproducible (Wallace, 2000), communicated and created through symbols and  performances. Symbolism is required to create a national identity (Lopez, 2006), in order to provide  representations that can later be incorporated into identity performances to define oneself as an  American. These performances may include direct representations of the values that compose national  identity, symbolic representations of the nation as a whole ­ specifically seen in colours, flags, anthems  and other American national symbols ­ or representations of a prototypical member of this identity  (Bird, 1994; Billig cited in TheissMorse, 2009; Osborne & Wintle, 2006; Roediger, 2007; Samuels, 2000;  Sidanus & Pratlo cited in TheissMorse, 2009; S. Smith, 1999; Wallace, 2000). Visual images and the body  have been central in defining American identity (S. Smith, 1999). The images of the Founding Fathers are  heavily embedded in both American ideology and visual identities: the Founding Fathers are America  and its cultural values, and are also White, male, Protestant, Northern European and Englishspeaking  (TheissMorse, 2009). As suggested here, much of national identity ­ the demonstration of being 
17 

 

American ­ is at once composed of both "looking" American and "acting" American. Many values in  America's national ideology are demonstrated through performative rituals, the acting out of one's  patriotism, independence, and so on (S. Smith, 1999), while others are in and of themselves social  positions that are visually symbolized through sex, class and race characteristics. In addition to images of  prototypical, "average" Americans, this national identity is also represented by a variety of popular  icons. Though these will be discussed more specifically at other points during this project, it should be  noted that the icons that represent idealized Americanness also represent North American hegemonic  masculinity and Whiteness, demonstrating the interconnectedness of these categories. These icons  represent strength, simplicity, enterprise, (Connell, 1995; Dyer, 1997, Limón, 2000; Simpson, 1994; P.  Smith, 1995) and usually have some connection to images of the frontier, particularly in Western novels  and films. To be defined as American, an actor may show one or all of these types of representations in  identity performance.      In researching the concept of American national identity with regard to American popular music 

and the artists considered in this thesis, several sources of representation emerged as particularly  significant. Integral to the identities of Springsteen, and to some extent, to the social identities of Fallon  is the philosophy of early American republicanism. Though Springsteen employs some of the  representations of working class people to be discussed in section 2.5., Springsteen's performed identity  is largely rooted in republican values.3 Republican philosophy and its art tradition, and the related myth  of the American Dream and the construction of the American work ethic have all provided a basis for  Springsteen as well as a significant number of other musicians to be able to display themselves as  American, as well as White, working class and masculine.     Republicanism played an important role in shaping American national identity (Cullen, 1997) 

since the American Revolution in the 18th Century. Colloquially referred to as modern "small `R'  republicanism," this is the philosophical position of the figures considered responsible for founding the  United States of America (Cullen, 1997). It is, in essence a philosophy driven by a desire to instate what  this group of men and their supporters believed to be a realistic, appropriate system of democracy.  Republicanism argued against capitalist distributions of power and fought conceptions of entrenched  privilege, instead promoting individual aspiration and achievement (Cullen, 1997). Republicanism valued  mobility. It conceptualized the American people as being free to move from one social position to  another through tenacity and hard work, and sought to represent the interests of the working class. As                                                              
3

 As has previously been argued in works by Jim Cullen (1997) and Bryan K. Garman (2000).   18 

 

well, republican philosophy believed humans were to be accountable for their actions (Cullen, 1997, p.  19). As such, republicanism was informed by several ideals, including meritocracy, serving the public  good and fundamental social equality (Cullen, 1997, p. 67). Republicanism envisioned an America  defined by equality, mobility, optimism, community, social responsibility and at the same time, a  concern for the individual's best interests. Republicanism was also marked by its own paranoia, a fear of  failing to succeed in making America a society of independent workers which would eventually  contribute to the consciousness of its working class and give due to racial segregation in early America4  (Roediger, 2007).    Republicanism birthed its own art tradition, rooted in the ideas of Ralph Waldo Emerson and 

Walt Whitman. Republican art products were interested in connecting individual's personal stories to  greater society and the daily lives of "average" Americans, and identified simplicity as the core of  American life. These artists were inspired, as well, by the music of their time. Musicians creating within  the republican tradition were also telling stories of everyday life in the postCivil War period (Cullen,  1997, p. 30). Their music displayed some awareness of class distinctions and referenced traditions from  Black music (Cullen, 1997). These traditions were thought to produce songs meant to be shared and  easily appreciated, and represented a technical simplicity valued by republican artists as these  performers were often enslaved people with no access to formal musical training (Cullen, 1997).  Republican artists also worked with the philosophy's prioritization of movement, identifying movement  as a representation and value of freedom and travel as the way to experience idealized freedom and a  sense of boundlessness (Cullen, 1997).    The values of hard work and achievable mobility promoted in the philosophy of republicanism 

connect to and inspire the ultimate mythologizing of American social mobility. In nearly every discussion  of American society and identity, the idea of the "American Dream" ­ a term coined by historian James  Truslow Adams in 1931 ­ emerges (Cullen, 1994).  The American Dream is based on the idea that  anything is possible if it is wanted badly enough (Cullen, 1997). American Dream ideology glorifies  mobility and opportunity, representing individual achievement as inevitable, despite reality (Ortner,  2003). The mythologized legacy of The United States itself is based on such an ideology ­ one of fulfilling  desire through tenacity and determination ­ as it continually imagines itself as an imperial power and  place of unlimited progress. In popular conception, America's history is a one of victory that glosses over                                                              
 Republicanism is also recognized for its connections to Whiteness and hegemonic masculinity (Garman, 2000;  Roediger, 2007) ­ while the philosophy promoted equality, real republicanism was marked by male exclusivity and  maintenance of the interests of the White working class.   19 
4

 

or reinterprets negativity and positions loss or error as something that is transcended, with few  exceptions (Cullen, 1997). Leslie Fielder stated that to be American is to imagine a destiny rather than  inherit one, to be the inhabitant of myth rather than history (cited in Cullen, 1997, p. 164). America itself  is built on this American dream, its myth of its own greatness inspired by a history and common imagery  of its people ­ in the words of TheissMorse (2009) ­ pulling themselves up by the bootstraps (p. 138).  Ultimately, the American Dream is inspired by Christianity. It is a largely Protestant ideology, one based  on the tenet of perfectionism, a religious conception of personal freedom and agency in controlling  one's destiny (Cullen, 1997).    America has also long mythologized a strong work ethic. Hard work ­ the process of 

achievement and the true marker of achievement in republican terms ­ is considered a core value of the  American identity, a value that characterizes its people. Jim Cullen (1997) defines this portrayal of work  in terms of Max Weber, who argued that work during the emergence of capitalism was branded as a  calling rather than a necessity. This idealized view of work that underlies the American Dream has,  however, proven to be just that  an idealization of what, for many, barely provides survival. Perhaps  unsurprisingly, it has been demonstrated that the upward mobility promised through the internalization  of the American work ethic is impossible. Those who experience the fallibility of America's mythologized  work ethic, then, could align themselves with another ethic, one that could offer some kind of  fulfillment (while still ensuring their position as contributors to the economy) (Cullen, 1997). This is what  Cullen (1997) describes as the American "play ethic," another ideology that promotes a focus on a  commitment to leisure as an end in itself. Leisure is thereby offered as a means for some to enrich their  lives and find a sense of community, and would ultimately come to structure entertainment forms.      

2.4. Social Construction of Identities: Whiteness and Racialized Identity 
Race is a social concept, an ideological construction with no objective dimensions (Omi &  Winant, 2003; Rodegier, 2007). It exists in a relationship with other social status positions, and is a  foundational concept in power hierarchies. These social relations along with a situatedness in a larger  historical context give racial categories their meaning (Omi & Winant, 2003). Race is as much a  performed identity as class, gender and national identity, with Whiteness in particular being identified  as a distinct, recent historical fiction (Hill, 1997). It is based on particular expectations and norms, which  are actualized and transmitted through representations. The way a society understands race and what  racial identities are supposed to look like serve to shape identity presentations, conduct and categories 
20 

 

of status themselves (Omi & Winant, 2003). Racial codes and identities are created and transmitted  through visuals and moral terminologies (Lott, 2000; S. Smith, 1999). These representations help to  create Whiteness by articulating its other, and rarely through articulating specific meanings of  Whiteness. These representations have not changed significantly over time (Dyer, 1997).     A variety of historical events were active in creating White identity, including colonialism and 

European conquest, slavery, waves of immigration, and associated policies addressing nonWhite and  economically disadvantaged populations (Lipsitz, 2003). All of these things articulated and positioned  Whiteness as dominant  as a criteria for and administrator of power. Popular representations would  resultantly reflect and disseminate these ideas about race, essentially helping to solidify racial  consciousness (or, where appropriate, a lack of consciousness) among American people. There are few  directly articulated explanations of White culture. Likely, this is because of its efforts to naturalize itself  and its racial position. White culture only takes shape in relation to others (Frankenberg, 2003), and  would then therefore be defined by the nature of its relations with other groups. It has been considered  the standard against which all else is defined against, and is itself defined by what it is not (Dyer, 1997;  Rubin, 2001).    NonWhite cultures are, in the American imagination, usually clearly defined. Whiteness and 

White culture, however, claims to be natural and to speak just as human (Dyer, 1997), while other races  are thought to speak for a particular, imagined group. White in and of itself represents neutrality,  lending well to the idea of Whiteness as a norm (Dyer, 1997). Whiteness has often been thought of as a  fact of life, not requiring of public declaration or deliberate characterization (Rubin, 2001). In order for  Whiteness to remain dominant, it needs to be visible and invisible, not monitored or strictly defined.  White identity is based on what has been called "white terror" ­ the struggle to be omnipresent, yet  passive, and indistinct or invisible yet dominant (Hill, 1997, p.2).     Whiteness is most often thought of as cultureless and formless, distinct from being an ethnic or 

regional identity (Frankenberg, 2003). Representations offer White people the impression that there are  an infinite number of White identities to choose from (Dyer, 1997, p.12). It is a fetishized identity, one  that provides its embodiments with cultural capital (Fox, 2004).  To be White is to be granted a kind of  automatic social privilege. White people are seen as individuals, their accomplishments and actions  thought of as personal ones (McIntosh cited in Dyer, 1997). Those who are identified as White are  thought to have the option of disassociating themselves from whatever ethnicity they may have, and 

21 

 

simply being White or American, while those with other racially marked ethnicities are restricted in  terms of where they can live and who they can associate with, among other things (Waters, 2001).     White culture, therefore, may ultimately be defined by its power dynamics rather than any 

particular stereotypes. It is, then, a culture defined as possessing the right to feel and have superiority  over other races, a culture characterized by an industrial or enterprising work discipline, as an ethnic less culture, and as a consumer culture (Pfeil, 1997). Ruth Frankenberg (2003) posits factors that mark  White culture, most significant here being a sense of being ruined by capitalism and a feeling of the  modern industrial condition, and a perspective of power and capitalism as destructive.    Frankenberg (2003) finds White culture is thought to have fully internalized capitalism and its 

perspectives on fulfillment and work. White culture is created and articulated through signifiers of what  Frankenberg (2003) terms the "modern condition." This refers to feelings of alienation and isolation that  became part of daily life for (though not exclusively for) White workers with the onset of  industrialization. White culture is therefore concerned with a longing for the preindustrial, pastoral past,  an idealized vision of what life was (never really) like before the corruptive influence of capitalism.     These elements of White culture defined by Frankenberg are also reflected in and may be 

understood through the work of Richard Dyer. Dyer (1997) identifies three primary elements that help  depict Whiteness as an embodied quality: Christianity, race, and imperialism and enterprise. All of these  discourses provide a definition of Whiteness and White culture.     Christianity itself is not White, but is thought of as the religion of Europe brought to America by 

European settlers, helping to distinguish "American" culture from Native American culture. European  culture was marked with Christianity. Christianity was itself marked by Europe in the depicting of Christ  as White and its invocation in doctrines that claim god created Whiteness. Christianity gives Whiteness a  basis to depict itself as natural and a product of the human body (Dyer, 1997). Christianity provides the  grounding for the idea of the mind as being superior to the inferior, evil body, a dynamic that orders  ideas of race. Race is based on different embodiments of spirit, a distinction that can be seen in popular  music. The White body is thought to have "spirit" ­ aspiration, intellectual power, determination and  aesthetic refinement (Dyer, 1997). Black bodies, on the other hand, were characterized as having soul.  Soul was a quality of the body, based on immediate feeling and pleasure. This relates to a  conceptualization of African people as more natural, physical and sexual (Frith, 1996). Soul was equated  with evil and was at the mercy of the fallibilities of the body, according to some doctrines of White  Christianity (Dyer, 1997). Christianity values aspiration and continued striving for transcendence even 
22 

 

when it is known to be impossible. These values appear in images of suffering, selfdenial, selfcontrol,  material achievement and issues of the superiority of mind and will ­ images that are used to define  White culture and its values (Dyer, 1997). Black culture, because of its perceived relationship to the  body and soul, becomes an Other, constructed in opposition to this idea of White culture (Frith, 1996).     Race is the second formation that created representations of Whiteness. Discussions and 

depictions of race inform what we currently conceive of as Whiteness. Significant here are the  romanticized depictions of Switzerland, North Germany and Scotland that helped to give definition to  the "white character" (Berger cited in Dyer, 1997). These regions were portrayed as cold, harsh,  demanding of enterprise to deal with the land, sublimely beautiful, near to god, and visually White, both  in terms of climate and population. This portrayal came to represent White people, ascribing Whiteness  with the values of discipline, enterprise, energy and spiritual elevation. It also constructed the White  body as one that was suited to facing such elements ­ hard, upright and muscular (Dyer, 1997). This  White body was further constructed against nonWhite bodies, and was meant to represent White  superiority and a national right to conquest (Dyer, 1997).    These ideas of will and determination inform the third element of White representations: 

enterprise. Enterprise is associated with will, defined as the control of the self and others, and with an  ability to lead. Enterprise was cast as a natural, racially motivated need to achieve greatness (Dyer,  1997). Enterprise is best seen in imperialism, a concept dominated in the present imagination by White  men. Whiteness in America has its immediate history in European colonialism. "White" was used to  distinguish European traders, explorers and settlers who would come into contact with African and  indigenous peoples and in some instances, justify colonization (Roediger, 2007). Colonial victory created  the image of the White work ethic ­ White men were thought to have a strong, inherent connection to  work and discipline ­ making it appear as if these White Europeans were more deserving of others' land  because the Native Americans failed to use its resources to their supposed full potential (Roediger,  2007). Enterprise is the key value expressed in classically American images of the Western and the  Frontier, where the purpose is largely to achieve control and bring order to a place and a people thought  of as lacking it (Dyer, 1997). White culture's values of achievement and dominance come from these  images.     Additionally, Ralph Ellison argues that representations of Black people also serve to define 

White identity (cited in West, 2001). The marginalized social positions of Black Americans defined them  as outsiders and symbols of limits, and served as examples of the extent to which someone was or was 
23 

 

not American (Ellison cited in West, 2001). Images of American people during the time of slavery served  to define Black people, nonAngloSaxon immigrants, and resultantly, White people as well. Ways of  seeing that prioritize Whiteness and White superiority are justified by claims of scientific objectivity  (hooks cited in S. Smith, 1999). Race and racial difference are based on a discourse of biological racism,  which made race genetic and natural, and constructed a hierarchy where AngloSaxon identity implied a  scientifically accountedfor superiority (S. Smith, 1999; Thandeka, 2003). This biological racism was often  created and disseminated through illustrations which visualized racial and species differences, alluding  to the inhumanity and immorality of those who were not considered White, and idealized and specified  the image of Whiteness as a stereotypical AngloSaxon subject (S. Smith, 1999).      

2.5. Social Construction of Identities: Economic Class 
Classes are difficult to define, existing as both economic identities and as something more  imaginary or iconic (Newitz & Wray, 1997). Classes are thought to have their own artistic and expressive  practices (Fox, 2004), ones that encode ideas about that class's values and norms, and how that class  position interacts with other categories. These practices, therefore, create a discernable class culture  (Fox, 2004). Class is ultimately a system of categorization, or more accurately, hierarchy, and a cultural  identity demonstrated by how its members look, act, speak and their occupations (Langston, 2001).  These identities are often maintained and adapted to justify and preserve this and other ordering  systems. Class cultures may be constructed in response to economic changes on a regional, national and  economic level (Fox, 2004). In general, class is meant to imply and designate pathology and taste to  particular social groups, more than to reference an economic position (Murray & Gilder cited in Newitz  & Wray, 1997). Class culture is based on marginalization and stereotypes, and is therefore necessary in  justifying the capitalist organization of society (Butsch, 2003).  The identifying mark of social class in a performed identity is based on what Goffman (1959)  calls the "status symbol." This involves the manipulation of one's class in performance, either  downplaying wealth or making certain activities look less profitable (Goffman, 1959). The same can be  said for disguising a working class position by employing performances that give the illusion of belonging  to a different social stratum. In identity performance, articulating class is largely dependent on  representations of status. These range from clothing, regional associations, political associations, speech  and iconic and symbolic representations of "low" or "high" culture.  

24 

 

This project concerns itself with White working class culture, as this is the class category both  musicians' performed identities are associated with (regardless of their "actual" relationship to the class  system). The working class is, in the briefest definition possible, the group of people who are required to  provide labour in order to earn their survival, people whose work is paid as a wage rather than a salary,  and whose occupations are not defined as "professional" (Ehrenreich, 2001). Cultural representations  often depict the working class negatively, but also help direct the narratives of the selfmade man and  the American Dream directly to the working class, an ideological attempt to ensure working class  compliance with their class position.5 Representations of White working men, specifically, identify them  as classcentred, racist, traditionally masculine, populist, inarticulate, loyal to old fashioned values,  reactionaries, irresponsible and requiring supervision, parochial, nationalistic, patriarchal, inscrutable,  territorial, and macho (Butsch, 2003; Ehrenreich, 2001; Fox, 2004; Hebdige, 2005; Pfeil, 1995). The class  distinction thought to be used most in America is that of know and know not, characterizing the classes  as inherently different and in a relationship of superiority, (Ross cited in Ching, 1997), with the lowest  earning classes finding themselves cast as "lower" both economically and culturally.  Working class expressive practices are often centred on the value of ordinariness, which implies  a concern for nostalgia and a longing to return to a past that was less complicated and better, but gone  (Fox, 2004). Representations of Americans not included in the professional classes depict them as talking  for talk's sake, which marks them as a White cultural Other (Fox, 2004). Talk is also identified as the  central value of ordinariness, the way the past is mythologized, momentarily returned to and eulogized  (Fox, 2004). Clothing, too, plays a large part in articulating working class identity (Ortner, 2003). The  working class have a stereotyped costume, based on the clothing most closely associated with labour:  blue jeans, overalls and boots (Hebdige, 2005; Langston, 2001), These clothing symbols, regardless of  the intention behind their being typed as "working class clothing," also display casualness, an alternative  to the sophisticated wardrobe or (certain types of) uniform dress, and therefore, the masculinities of the  corporate or defence worlds.  Representations of the American "poor"6 and working class treat them in ways meant to  marginalize them. They are made invisible or faceless, on account of a need to maintain social difference  and to disguise the failure of any middle class7 myths (Allison, 2003; Mantsios, 2003). The economically                                                              
Compliance is also created by defining class from the outside, reflecting deliberately constructed images of its  members back to themselves through the media (Hebdige, 2005). 6  "Poor" is the term employed by both authors.   7  "Middle class" is the term employed by both authors. 25 
5

 

disadvantaged are characterized as unworthy, unwelcome, deserving of or responsible for their class  status and less sensitive to hopelessness (Allison, 2003; Mantsios, 2003). They are, however, also  offered representations that reinforce the image of America as a classless society, a place where  mobility is not only possible but normal, and a place where the American working class can succeed  through their own labour. The working class is offered images of themselves that perpetuate these  mythologies. Representations of the American Dream achieved occur relatively often, and are visible,  real (or at least seemingly real) stories of success and possibility, employed to both realize mythologies  and develop the sense of false hope and selfdenigration which keeps order in the class system  (Langston, 2001).   Dorothy Allison (2003) summarizes depictions of the working class as being either mythical or  ordinary. Popular images of the American working class casts them in one of two ways, particularly  when there is little prestereotyping of the people being imagined, as the "good poor" or the "bad poor"  (Allison, 2003). The "good poor" are hardworking, ragged but clean and intrinsically noble, the kind of  man's man discussed previously. The "bad poor" are ungrateful, working deadend jobs, drunk, old,  worn, fat, get pregnant young and have no options for mobility or change, even in future generations  (Allison, 2003).8 Allison (2003) also argues that poverty is romanticized in American culture, often  serving as the backdrop for escape narratives. As well, the role of the union in the lives of the American  working class is seen as exaggerated. Historical images of workers show people either mobilized and  engaged in unions, or broken by union failure, and the role of the union is still thought of as a powerful  influence in the lives and struggles of working people (Allison, 2003). However, unions are not  necessarily a part of real experiences, and belief in them and other forms of social or political  organization is considered suspect and futile (Allison, 2003; Fox, 2004).      Aaron A. Fox (2004) suggests that the historical project of working class culture is to respond to  and resist the objectification and alienation of a classbased political economy (p. 42). As such, working  class cultural forms often address their marginalization (Hebdige, 2005), concerning themselves with  dignity and agency because of their lack of access to those qualities in their political and economic  experiences (Fox, 2004).                                                                     
8

 The culturallydefined, negative connotations of these descriptors are implied in Allison's definition.  26 

 

2.6. Intersections of Social Identities 
Social identities are often interrelated in their definitions. American identity is thought to be  White, while American working class identity is thought to create Whiteness. Additionally, classes have  their own particularly gender prototypes. This section looks to highlight some of those significant  intersections.    In considering American national identity, it is important to recognize that this identity is 

interrelated with Whiteness. Though Protestant belief practices, republicanism, the American Dream,  and a glorified work ethic are theorized as allAmerican, and, in some aspects, available to or concerned  with every American, all of these fundamentals are imagined as White. Protestantism is characterized as  a White religion, republicanism and its art are largely the products of White men representing the  interests of their fellow White men, and hard work and the American dream are often depicted as being  accomplished and carried out by White people, with leisure often being associated with Black or other  nonWhite forms. Most of these foundational elements of American identity are concerned with  equality, to the point where it is considered a core American value. Efforts have been made to depict  America as multicultural, accepting, and a place where racial distinctions are invalid. However, early  America was inarguably a raced construct, built on images of "true" Americans as White, and nonWhite  people as disruptive of American social order (Allen cited in Dyer, 1997; Roediger, 2007; S. Smith, 1999).  Today's America is still, ideologically, a White country where power and Whiteness are reciprocal and  the images that created race in early America are still present and active (Martinez, 2001; S. Smith,  1999). As mentioned, White Americans are currently in the unique position of being able to  performatively choose their ethnicity and to identify exclusively as "American" (Waters, 2001).   Whiteness also plays a significant role in the image of the American working class. The industrial  working class identity types considered here are almost entirely imagined as White and communicated  through White prototypes. This is the result of developments during the 18th and 19th Centuries. The  formation of what we know to be the American working class occurred simultaneously with the  development of their sense of Whiteness, a development which came to define the working class as  inherently White and therefore superior to other races, a fiction that, in part, remains (Roediger, 2007).  The American Revolution came to solidify preexisting connections between White as free and  independent ­ and therefore, more American ­ and Black as enslaved and anticitizen (Roediger, 2007).  Revolutionary rhetoric played on the insecurities of working class structure, which was becoming  increasingly stratified and alienated as industrialization spread. Workers sought a republicaninformed 
27 

 

economy and society, one not built on a master and worker (or, according to the rhetoric at the time,  slave) duality, opposed to the inequalities of capitalism, and seeking small producers and less alienation  (Roediger, 2007). However, republicanism still believed in some presence of wage or hired labour, and  feared revolt from both the upper classes and the labouring and enslaved classes. As a result of  encroaching capitalism and the shakiness of republican ideology, Whiteness was constructed as a  compensatory wage. In exchange for serving a labour system that ensured insufficient pay, routinized  behaviour, no recognition and little hope for change, White workers would be rewarded by privileges  associated with their race. Whiteness would allow them to feel superior to those outside of this  category, and be entitled to head their households, use their private property as they pleased and have  access to a variety of other social and psychological privileges (Pfeil , 1997; DuBois cited in Roediger,  2007). These "wages" of Whiteness rewarded participation in the industrial system, developed a class  bond by developing a racial bond, and created a way of controlling the behaviour of those who did not  comply with capitalist labour organization (Roediger, 2007).   Identifying working class Whiteness as privileged depended on a general change in the  definition of both White and Black labourers. Though republican ideology claimed to believe in slave  freedom, there also existed a vested interest in maintaining slavery because of its ability to act as a  threat and as an example of the consequences of straying from republican ideals and failing to become a  labour republic (Roediger, 2007, p. 4647). Wage work was equated with a kind of slavery, and needed  to be ideologically differentiated in order to maintain republican values and avoid the degradation and  dehumanization associated with slavery. PostRevolution America also came to define independence as  an ideal of masculinity. People had to somehow make peace with their labour situation and gender  ideologies praising independence, control and mastery (Roediger, 2007). Due to these developments,  the White worker came to be defined as a "free White labourer," existing in a language system and a  social system that was determined to demonstrate their position as distinct from slavery. Due to the  need to differentiate themselves from slaves, White labourers also needed a new term to address their  employers with, in order to at least superficially avoid becoming cast as White slaves. Certain jobs held  by White workers were reflective of the masterslave order. David Roediger (2007) explains that in jobs  like mechanic and artisan ­ skilled labour positions ­ workers had and could potentially become masters  of their trade. Masters more closely represented capitalism in their identities, as they were the owners  of the materials workers needed in order to produce commodities (Roediger, 2007). Masters, therefore,  were more masters of men than they were of the job ­ this made White slavery seem probable and was 
28 

 

an easily exploited relationship for the purpose of developing protective White superiority (Roediger,  2007). In labour movements, then, "master" became "Bos," a Dutch term that in its Anglophonized  version, "Boss," would remain in use well past the dismantling of slavery (Roediger, 2007). Ultimately,  the distinguishing of White work from Black slave work happened largely through these kinds of  linguistic changes: master to boss, wage work into free White labour, labeling work as hired or help  instead of service, and the shifting of the term servant to slave (which was particularly important in  distinguishing White indentured servitude from, and removing the agency of, Black labour) (Roediger,  2007). These changes in the names of racialized working identities gave White people, specifically  workers, access to different selfconcepts and privileges than enslaved nonWhite populations (Cooper  in Roediger, 2007; Roediger, 2007).  This redefinition of White labour relied on the implementation of racist thinking. Black people,  who were at the time a largely enslaved population, had to become the Other, defined as less masculine  and less worthy of freedom and opportunity than the White worker (Roediger, 2007).   As well, racism served another purpose for the White worker  the reveling in and casting out of  their preindustrial past. As much as republicanism fought for the instilment of its values, capitalist  ideologies were to prevail, and relied on the presence of a strong, productive working class that was  frequently exploited. Through common cultural representations, Blackness was made to symbolize what  had been lost in capitalist culture (Rawick cited in Roediger, 2007). Capitalism had separated workers  from holidays, contact with nature and sexuality, and delayed experiences of gratification (Gutman cited  in Roediger, 2007). Blackness came to represent the past that was lost, demonizing it and yet turning it  into a kind of "pornography" of preindustrial life, open to being viewed vicariously and scorned,  rejecting it through racism and the embracing of a White identity (Rawick cited in Roediger, 2007;  Roediger, 2007). This conceptualizing of Black identity directly influenced how Black music would be  viewed and used in White artistic practices.   In addition to distinct intersection between class, race and nationality, there are also  intersections between class and gender types. The working class is largely defined as male. Working  class women are depicted as being of a higher class position and often excluded from images of working  class life, as their typical occupations are less physical labouroriented (Ortner, 2003). Men are  sometimes cast as the masters of working class social life, responsible for reinstating a male, classed  solidarity lost to an increasingly complex, capitalistic society (Fox, 2004).  

29 

 

Labourers are depicted through the image of the "working man" ­ the primary identity available  to working class labouring men. The working man is a literal worker, whose worth and skill comes from  hard, physical labour (Halle cited in Ortner, 2003). A working class man is also often categorized as a  "man's man," someone whose identity is based on duty and discipline, a representation of an authentic  or "real" man (Simpson, 1994). Working class men were sometimes seen as a myth in themselves, a  harkening back to a fantasy of preconsumer America's definitions of masculinity (Simpson, 1994). The  body, again, plays a significant role for working class men, here. The social self is often created through  labour (Gilroy cited in Wallace, 2000). For working class people, work is a matter of survival rather than  of choice or taste (Langston, 2001). The working body is conceived of as the only resource these men  have to demonstrate power and stake a claim to hegemonic masculinity, as their work denies them the  opportunity to show independence, success and authority. The working class male body is thought of as  "fully armoured," displaying the kind of muscle structure that shows male physical superiority (Pfeil,  1995). These men are defined as possessing force alone, particularly when working in unskilled labour,  or when their labour is redefined by being deskilled and casualized (Donaldson cited in Connell, 1995).  Authenticity in labour is shown as masculine, hard and productive, and these highly masculine bodies  are a reflection of that conceptualization (Simpson, 1994, p. 266). Their bodies are their only capital,  both in terms of being an asset and source of albeit limited power in the labour market, and in terms of  being a tool to articulate their masculinity (Donaldson cited in Connell, 1995; Dyer, 1997; Pfeil, 1995).   Allison's image of the "good poor" is also worked into many of popular culture's representations  of male working class identity. The American working class male is often represented by the image of  the blue collar man, thought to be a reformulation of stereotypes long associated with American  southerners (Watts, 2008). The blue collar man has the sense of feeling familiarly Southern, suggesting  mischievous, youthful good old boy masculinity and ties to male leisure activities. The blue collar man is  distinct from the intellectualized, upper class North, but is devoid of any of the threatening or  exclusionary elements of Southern identity (Watts, 2008). The blue collar man is the conservative friendly, "humanized," sanitized, authentic American labourer, hardworking, pragmatic, good humoured, patriotic, and distinct from the image of "bad poor" America and of politicized class  solidarity (Simpson, 1994; Watts, 2008).9                                                                  This image is particularly important to discourses of masculinity that sought to reaffirm patriarchy and hegemonic 

9

values. It was also directly employed in Reagan's political rhetoric of hypermasculinity, heroism and (antiunion)  independence targeting working class men during the 1980s, and would therefore influence readings of  Springsteen' s image at the time (Cowie & Boehm, 2006; Pfeil, 1995; Simpson, 1994).  30 

 

2.7. Popular Music and Authenticity  
Springsteen and Fallon, as this project will suggest, are embedded in a number of musical  subcultures, but are both predominantly situated in a culture of rock and roll. Their music and aesthetic  conventions place them both within this established musical tradition, developed in the 1950s. Rock and  roll ­ what is considered the originating or earliest form of what we now more commonly call "rock"  music ­ emerged in postwar America during a period of significant economic prosperity, where the  category of the "teenager" began to emerge as a targeted demographic. Rock and roll, which drew from  the early 20th Century contributions of blues and country ­ primarily told stories of being in and out of  love, the meaning of youth, and the struggle toward adulthood (Riley, 2004). It was and remains a music  of spectacle (Frith, 1996), where the visual was an important way to access and understand the music  and its culture. Rock and roll was, to a certain extent, an inherently social form, prioritizing dancing,  concert performances, and the creation of identities and therefore communities that were built around  common values and images.   Different genres of music are, similarly, marked by different values and different semiotic rules,  which dictate how truth, sincerity and overarching messages are communicated and understood (Fabbri  cited in Frith, 1996, p. 91). Music is heard through a number of discourses, which determine its values  and social functions. These discourses derive from the institutional and discursive practices that  construct them (Becker cited in Frith, 1996, p. 36). These discourses are art, folk and pop. Rock appears  to bridge the discourses of folk and pop. It is a form that is at once deliberately interested in pop's  commercialism, star personas and value of or entertainment for entertainment's sake, and folk's  pursuits of intimacy, separation from (obvious) commerce, and musical truth. The central value of rock  music, or what could potentially be referred to as the discourse of rock, is authenticity. It is difficult to  define authenticity as a fixed term, as anything other than a perceived phenomenon. What it means to  be "authentic" is subject to redefinition. It is highly contingent on developing technologies, changes in  the economic production of music, changes in social values and  the structures of music (sub)cultures  (Pattie, 2007). Ideas of authenticity, truth and realness as they pertain to music and musical identities  are essentially myths. There is no concrete, universal, essential form of any of these elements, only  differing constructions of them (Pfeil, 1995). Judgments about qualities that make up authenticity are  based on performances ­ what is seen and heard (Frith, 1996). In order to be perceived as authentic,  musicians need to perform accordingly, demonstrating either an authentic investment in the kind of 

31 

 

music they are playing, or an authentic investment in the message of their music and persona (Pattie,  2007).   There is a general consensus on the definition of rock authenticity over the last 60 years,  drawing most of its fundamental values from early rock and roll. Frith (1996) defines authenticity as  created through perceived qualities of sincerity and commitment, a term coded with ideological  elements. Authenticity is represented by a close relationship with origins, and in a performer's  relationship with the capitalist production of their music ­ the demonstration of giving primacy to the  creative integrity of the music, and not to its capital potential (Moore, 2002). Rock authenticity is  built  on a romantic ideology (Pfeil, 1995), where both the music and performers, as well as the history of the  form itself, are all built on the praising of energy, passion, freedom, truthfulness and the overall  message of heroic triumph and emergence (Pfeil, 1995, p.7475). Rock authenticity is based on the  notion of what Keir Keighley calls romantic authenticity (cited in Pattie, 2007). It values community,  populism, sincerity, directness, traditions and a continuity of the past (and therefore, embraces change  that is gradual rather than extreme), the use of an "essential" rock sound, and a sense of liveness, both  of which involve reliance on natural sounds and hiding musical technology (Keighley cited in Pattie,  2007, p. 8). Rock also highly values independence and the individual, having originated as a language of  freedom (Pfeil, 1995; Riley, 2004), even though the ultimate goal appears to be the creation of a  community often based on emotion or feeling.  Rock music in and of itself is conceptualized as being authentic ­ as "real," genuine, non commercial, sincere and from the heart. Resultantly, any attachment to this tradition ­ the fitting in to  the tropes and imagery of rock music and culture ­ transfers this sense of authenticity to the performer.  A rock performer's responsibility, then, is to "act realness" (Dyer cited in Pattie, 2007, p. 11), to convey  this sense of authenticity to their audience. Differing modes of expressing this authenticity are available  to performers. A musician can demonstrate what Allan Moore refers to as firstperson authenticity  (cited in Pattie, 2007; Moore, 2002). Here, the audience is made aware of the presence of a creative  musician in the performance of the music ­ the performance is meant to demonstrate the music as a  true expression of the artist (Moore cited in Pattie, 2007, p. 10). Additionally, a musician may display  third person authenticity, where both the performer and audience are aware of their music's  relationship with a preexisting musical tradition (Moore cited in Pattie, 2007; Moore, 2002). In this  instance, the artist's music must demonstrate the kind of relationship that is tributary or at least  seemingly respectful of the traditions they evoke.  
32 

 

 

In rock, demonstrating a connection to the past is at the core of third person authenticity. Frith 

(1996) argues the "past of music" is endlessly experienced in its present (p. 239). Much like other  stylistically distinct, authenticitydriven genres including rap and country music (Ching, 1997), rock music  has a compulsion to display its roots. An understanding of contemporary rock music comes from an  understanding of its history and, resultantly, the musical cultures it references (Frith, 1996).  Contemporary rock music often borrows sounds, textual images, themes, physical presentations,  ideological values and overall identities from its past, elements that have at once come to define "rock"  and become the symbols musicians can use to include themselves in the tradition. In doing so, musicians  can convey specific meanings as well as authenticate themselves by paying tribute to their cultural past.  This is often accomplished through intertextuality and/or appropriation. Music is understood  relationally, and as such, specific nuances of meaning are built into songs and artist identities through  references to other sources. The comprehension of intertextuality comes from an interpreter's  familiarity with the relational texts. As such, every listener will experience music differently based on  their preknowledge, though an artist can usually rely on a common awareness of certain conventions,  including connections to genres and culturally significant popular performers and songs. Musicians may  not be able to guarantee a single, consensual understanding of their music, or bind their music to an  exclusive meaning, but they do have some control over how their music is to be interpreted (Gracyk,  2001). Through using the kind of basic sign equipment that references other music, new music can be  contextualized and new performers allied with particular identities almost instantly. Hearing something  that sounds or looks like punk music, for example, can communicate all of the values associated with the  genre just by presenting a passing resemblance.     The most common methods of creating intertextuality are the use of paradigms and covers. 

Paradigms are, according to Theodore Gracyk (2001), bands or musical products used as common  reference points for later music, that act as signs of greater movements. Newer artists may borrow the  ethics, sounds, or ideologies of these paradigms in order to incorporate the associated meanings into  their performances. Often, these paradigms do not relate to rarelyknown specificities or the personal  lives of their sources, but of culturally familiar representations. The cover is the most deliberate citation  of a paradigm, a band's (re)interpretation of a classic song meant to either allude to the original artist or  to the cultural period of the song, and more rarely, to the meaning of the song itself. Gracyk refers to  covers as having "high level intent" in eliciting emotion and therefore connecting to their reference  (2001). Appropriation, too, is of concern in the meaningmaking process behind music. Appropriation 
33 

 

usually involves the borrowing and incorporation of forms that are considered exotic or markedly  different from the borrower's culture (Gracyk, 2001). This music is borrowed, therefore, in order to  associate the borrower with the cultural or social identity of that music. Appropriation, unlike common  paradigm use, often aims to obscure or manipulate the original content or meanings of the appropriated  music. Though it is not necessarily a matter of putting the values of one culture onto the other,  appropriation is considered a symbolic action which positions the dominant culture's music as the  authority and replacing the practices of the borrowed form (Gracyk, 2001). Appropriation may also  involve a process of authentication. An artist may appropriate music identified as "authentic" in order to  transfer this sense of authenticity (Moore, 2002).          Authenticity is not only in the structure of the music, but marked on the body (Pfeil, 1995). In  order to be recognized, the qualities that comprise authenticity need to be performed. While this is  done in part by paying tribute to the genre, it also involves physical performance. An artist's persona  needs to show coherence with their music, as this is the surface upon which their investment in their  music is demonstrated (Pattie, 1999). To demonstrate this coherence, a performer must, to a certain  extent, perform a rock identity. As suggested previously, rock may be defined as a resource for  displaying and promoting the familiar rather than the new (Gracyk, 2001, p. 193). This relates not only to  its reliance on the musically familiar, but to its representation and dissemination of a rockinformed  social identity, an identity reflecting the values of rock and roll music and built on rock's visual  paradigms.     

2.8. Rock and Roll Social Identities 
Popular culture is a primary site for representations, including images of performers (Goodwin  cited in Pfeil, 1995, p. 73; Hall cited in Maingard, 2006). Musicians often engage in this process of using  representations in their performances, and often become representations of greater social identities  themselves. As with any other cultural product, a musician's performed identity can never truly be  understood outside of the context he/she exists in (Dyer, 1997). These performers have what Fred Pfeil  (1995) describes as a "nest of assumptions and histories packed inside them" (p. 71) ­ a variety of social,  political, national and cultural identities that structure their performance and make them intelligible  (Gracyk, 2001; Pattie, 2007). Musical figures can personalize, embody or otherwise represent a variety  of mythologies and archetypes (Dimitriadis, 2001) and, if their performance identities are accepted and  popularized, become key representations themselves.  
34 

 

Rock authenticity, and therefore rock ideology, is based on the "realest" performer, and that  performer's identity (Pfeil, 1995). The realest performers are thought to be the ones closest to the  genre's archetypes, the performers who either made or echo the music that defined "true" rock and roll.  These performers are usually White, American, working class males who borrow codes from non traditionally masculine and BlackAmerican identities, including Elvis Presley and Mick Jagger. Rock and  roll10 represents its own images and definitions of national, class, race and gender identities. The social  identities represented by rock are coded in both their performers and in the values and history of the  music itself. Not only are the originating archetypes of rock representations of identities that are  transferred with the use of the music, but these identities are coded into the values of rock music and its  historical structure. As such, presenting oneself as a rock musician not only authenticates one's  performance, placing a performer within a particular set of values, but associates that performer with a  conception of identity defined by their genre or subgenre's historical values and prototypical  representations. What follows is an articulation of those identities and how they were formed.   Rock music itself, in being an amalgam of blues and country ­ the supposed origins of much of  modern American music ­ eventually came to mean "America," a representation of a particular national  identity (Hebdige, 2005). Much of rock's sign equipment also comes from the symbols that have come to  mythologize America ­ cars, freeways, alcohol, beaches and parties (Goodwin cited in Pfeil, 1995, p. 73).  It is also directly embedded and representative of American ideologies of work and leisure. Rock began  as the music of working class male youth, an identity category granted access to power through this  music and its values. Rock music is itself a form of leisure and therefore fundamentally tied to the  working class in defining itself as the Saturday night to the working week. However, rock also derives its  authenticity from its exhibition of work. Performances that are seen as authentic are performances that  display physical exertion (Frith, 1996). The American work ethic is demonstrated in the labour of  performance and supported by the performer's status as a star, even if this in no way indicates upward  mobility except in name recognition. This display of work and play simultaneously grounds rock music in  both a working class image and in American values, helping to define it as a symbol of American identity.   Historically, as well, rock is a form of "White" music, a form that openly borrowed music and  performance styles from the "Black" genres. Rock look to elements of R&B, blues and even jazz, and  interpreted them through White musical tropes,11 through White performers, and to White audiences ­                                                              
10 11

 Here generalized and recognized as smallr rock for the sake of clarity in this section.   Specifically country and rockabilly. 35 

 

what Andrew Goodwin refers to as racist/capitalist processes of appropriation and exploitation (cited in  Pfeil, 1995, p.73). Musical styles created and primarily played by Black artists are seen as more  authentic, more meaningful, more organic and less commercial than White music (Hebdige, 2005;  Melnick, 1997; Pattie, 1999; Pfeil, 1995; Roediger, 2007; Wald; 1997). The image of Blackness as being of  the "soul" and body, characterized by different emotional styles than Whiteness, and of Blackness as  informed by noncapitalist values, also came to define Black cultural products. White music's borrowing  of Black forms and identities reified notions of racial difference and romanticized Black musical  achievement and exceptionalism (Wald, 1997).  Representations of Black people also became important to defining particular values in popular  music. Black musical forms were often defined by their prototypical performers who embodied the  values of their genres. In the early 20th Century, Black people were considered "quintessential  subterraneans," representing the values of excitement, adventure and seeking, embodying the jazz era's  view of what was missing from mainstream White society (Goodman and Young cited in Hebdige, 2005;  Hebdige, 2005). When rock music began to develop in mid20th Century America, performers began to  create a new version of Whiteness (Pfeil, 1995). Their music and performances drew heavily from Black  styles. This image is thought to be best captured by Norman Mailer's (1957) idea of the "white negro," a  name given to an identity of existentialist defiance, summarized as hip, rebellious, concerned with  bodily pleasures rather than the rational mind, surviving off of the present, the "frontiersman in the  Wild West of American night life," and subsisting "for his Saturday night kicks" (Riley, 2004; Wald, 1997).  By associating themselves with the identity of the White male rock musician and the White male rock  music fan, they had access to what Pfeil (1995) calls the musicallibidinal resources of Blackness. Rock  music's racialized structure allows rock performers to borrow from the bodily, "soul"oriented Black  male image and recast it into a White, unquestioned identity (Pfeil, 1995).   As well, rock has been defined as a masculine form (Gracyk, 2001; Pattie, 2007; Pfeil, 1995) that  has connections to hegemonic masculinity, in that it is defined as White and represents male  perspectives. Rock is thought of as an ideological project interested in the definition and social  placement of White male youth (Pfeil, 1995, p. 74). It is a genre lyrically concerned with the interests of  men who struggle with power ­ in terms of age, social class and position, and in their relationships with  women ­ and is therefore coded as masculine.   Inspired by early blues, R&B and country music, rockabilly and rock forms would eventually  provide their audiences with models of men who valued honesty, intimacy, openness, emotional 
36 

 

expressiveness, tolerance, individualism and social responsibility (Riley, 2004). In rock masculinity, youth  is empowered ­ though one does not necessarily have to be young, in order to meet the ideal  masculinity, one must act "young," both in their physical performances and in their attitudes and values.  This relates to the value placed on a maintained state of arrested adolescence suggested in dominant  masculine codes (Lott cited in Frith, 1996, p.130), already suggesting the relationship between rock and  traditional masculinity. The music's earliest forms were targeted to a new social subject ­ the American  teenager ­ and provided a version of masculinity for their audience, one that previously had relatively  little access to hegemonic masculinity because of their age and social position (Pfeil, 1995).   The identity developed to reach this audience was the White rocker, a male who maintains the  authority and social position of being a White male, defines the male body as sexual and vulnerable ­  something to be looked at ­ and gives these men access to the musical and desirebased resources of  Black cultural forms without ever having to give up their racial privilege (Pfeil, 1995). Rock masculinity in  the 1950s coexisted with an overarching culture that was increasingly integrationist and concerned with  masculine inadequacy (Estes, 2008). Men were being sent messages not to become too domesticated or  feminized in the postwar climate, so cultural representations had to compensate for such anxieties by  reinforcing domestic patriarchal dominance. However, while integrationist culture was elsewhere being  resisted by a push in spreading White ideals and racist rhetoric (Estes, 2008) and male culture  increasingly focused on distributing traditional masculine images, rock and roll was challenging  mainstream culture's direction. It was, in and of itself, a racially hybridized form of music on the surface  (though the politics of appropriation are at play) and its biggest White stars embodied integration  through their clothing and dance styles (Estes, 2008).  While some argue rock and roll gave men an  opportunity to articulate an alternative type of masculinity, one with a different sense of emotionality  and relationship to desire, rock and roll masculinity retained a relationship with hegemonic masculinity.  The use of romanticized Black cultural forms was one way of doing this, particularly for young men who  held little of the economic power and authority it took to be a "true" White man (Beavers cited in Wald,  1997). Borrowing aesthetically and musically from Black popular culture  allowed some males access to a  successful masculinity defined as sexually powerful, aloof, stylish, selfsufficient and street smart (Wald,  1997). By appropriating this view of masculinity and treating these characteristics as if they originate  from the White performer's body ­ while simultaneously helping to define "natural" Black masculinity  by these characteristics through their performances ­ these men performed identities that could be 

37 

 

read as hegemonically masculine (Beavers cited in Wald, 1997). This borrowing remains a key element  of rock identity and continues to connect the form and its performers with hegemonic masculinity.       With the advent of the "teenage" market and subsequently, rock and roll, men were placed into 

the object position, the focus of visual attention. Traditionally, men are not the objects of viewing in a  culture ­ they may be in a photograph or scene, but they are not there to be "looked at." The position  where one is the focus of an investigative, exploitative, or sexualized look is that of the Other, of the  object, the one who is cast in a society as lacking power. A man in this position ultimately contradicts  patriarchal order (Pattie, 2007; Simpson, 1994). In rock music performance, the man is the privileged  focal point, highlighted onstage and made both the object and subject of desire (Pattie, 2007). It is  argued that rock itself is based on an idea of masculinity in crisis, a place where male codes can be  reinterpreted and combined in a variety of ways to a variety of resulting impressions (Pattie, 2007). Rock  music positions men in the position of gazed upon object, but this in and of itself is a part of the music's  power and appeal. Male performers are often meant to elicit desire and rebel against traditional sources  of capitalist power that define hegemonic masculinity. At the same time, they operate within the  discourse of rock ­ a masculine discourse where men are permitted to express themselves and their  sexuality, and gain power through these elements. Men in rock are, however, still bound by some of the  expectations of hegemonic masculinity. To compensate for the nonmasculine elements of their  performances, they are still expected to be armed with symbols of masculinity in the themes they sing  about, in the way they use their bodies and in the instruments they play, and are essentially forced to  demonstrate some degree of traditional masculinity in the physicality of their performance work (Frith &  McRobbie cited in Dimitriadis, 2001; Simpson, 1994). Due to this somewhat unique positioning, male  musicians are held to a slightly different standard of masculinity, which is an oft accepted alternative to  hegemonic masculinity, but not a subordinate or subversive form.  Rock has a builtin way of regarding a  stage performer that accounts for any transgressions of male norms that come from shifts in the visual  position of men. Mark Simpson (1994) describes rock as a kind of male glamour, where men and their  physicality are on display, often made especially showy with the use of culturally feminized symbols and  gestures. Male glamour is constructed as a kind of rebellion against suburban life, its destabilizing  potential removed in the overall misogyny and maleness of the rock form (Simpson, 1994). Pfeil (1995)  also argues that performers present a variety of alternative masculinities, and the most praised is the  one which is deemed most authentic. This allows rock musicians to be on display and not lose their  access to hegemonic masculinity, so long as they present themselves authentically.  
38 

 

 

A discussion of rock masculinity seems incomplete without considering the representation it is 

so closely related to and came to disturb in the 1950s: the American cowboy. The cowboy image is  frequently referenced in American music cultures, often used to connote rebellion or heroism. The  cowboy is a White, American male icon, representing glorified Anglo conquest both geographically and  sexually, particularly in relations with Mexican communities (Limón, 2000), and in its early incarnations,  with Native Americans. Generally, most images of the cowboy are representations of hegemonic  masculinity. The most notable and commonly referenced prototype of American cowboy masculinity  was actor John Wayne, who played characters that established him as the American male ideal in mid 20th Century America (Riley, 2004). Wayne's male ideal was certain of his power, motivated by  vengeance and sadism, in control, deliberately unemotional, distrusting of women, initially requiring to  prove its own power, and invested in silence as a form of protection (Riley, 2004). Wayne's masculinity  was embodied, signaling a selfreliant sense of authority, impatience with complexity and a complete  absence of any female qualities (Willis cited in Riley, 2004, p. 67).     Rock and roll ultimately came to challenge this stoic, prototypical American Western man, 

particularly with its most popular figure, Elvis Presley. He was at once raw, tough, swaggering, secure,  sensitive and sexual. He came to represent not a weaker man but a different kind of man (Riley, 2004).  Presley redefined gender at the time without ever fully disturbing core elements of hegemonic  masculinity, and became the ultimate archetype of rock masculinity that remains the model for much  contemporary rock music.  

39 

 

Chapter 3: Methods 
  3.1. Research Questions 
  This study seeks to examine the performances of Bruce Springsteen and Brian Fallon in order to  answer several questions. This will be approached through a comparative analysis of the two artists,  presented in two case studies (Chapter 4 and Chapter 5). The first case study seeks to answer the  following: What is the figure of Springsteen, and what kind of social identities are being communicated  during his concert performances? This, thereby, will determine what Bruce Springsteen symbolizes or  represents in popular culture. The second case study seeks to understand the identities being performed  by Brian Fallon, and how the figure of Springsteen is reflected in this performance.    

3.2. Data Collection 
  This study is a qualitative visual and textual analysis of the live performances and song lyrics of  both artists. It considers displays of the social status categories of gender, race, class and nationality in  each artists' clothing choices, body presentations, mannerisms and gestures, band interactions,  instrument choices, languages choices and verbal delivery, speech content,  cover song choices and  other intertextual references, and the lyrical content of the songs performed.    This study considers a number of live concert performances from Bruce Springsteen and the E 

Street Band and The Gaslight Anthem for the purpose of studying the performances of their frontmen.  Four12 Springsteen performances were chosen to represent the span of his career with the E Street  Band: Live in Barcelona, a fulllength concert from Palau Sant Jordi in Barcelona, Spain in 2002; Live in  New York, a televised HBO special shot in 2000 over two days (June 29, July 1)13 at Madison Square  Garden; a series of 10 professionally shot videos of individual performances from the Los Angeles  Memorial Coliseum over the last four days of Springsteen's 1985 Born in the U.S.A. tour (September 27,  29, 30 and October 2); and Hammersmith Odeon London '75, a fulllength live concert film shot in  London, England. All of this footage is professionally filmed. With the exception of the Born in the U.S.A.  tour footage, the other performances are on commercially available, official DVD releases, and were                                                              
There are technically eight concerts being considered here. For the purpose of clarity, multiple performances  shot in the same city on the same tour are counted as one unit and denoted by year (1975, 1985, 2000 and 2002).  13  Only the televised portion of this performance is included in this study. The official DVD also included a disc of  songs cut from the HBO special. 40 
12

 

chosen not only to show varying phases of Springsteen's career, but for their clarity and completeness.  As Born in the U.S.A. was a defining album, tour and image for Springsteen, the most complete American  footage available online was used. This footage was also chosen to look for patterns or differences in  Springsteen's home (American) and international performances, though no marked differences were  revealed.     Springsteen's E Street Band performances were chosen for two reasons. The band has been his 

primary touring unit for most of his career, and the somewhat consistent backdrop he has created his  most notable live impressions against. Additionally, footage of E Street Band performances is  significantly easier to access through officially released DVDs and professionally recorded footage than  any of Springsteen's solo or nonE Street Band concerts.    Four Gaslight Anthem performances were also considered in the evaluation of Brian Fallon's 

onstage persona: a full live show from the 9:30 Club in Washington, D.C., U.S.A. on October 22, 2009; a  series of mostly incomplete clips from The Kool Haus in Toronto, ON, Canada on October 13, 2009; a  series of  mostly complete clips from The Opera House in Toronto, ON, Canada on March 20, 2009; and a  full live show from The Annandale Hotel in Sydney, Australia on July 30, 2008. With the exception of the  Sydney concert, none of this footage is professionally filmed, and is all found online. The intention of  this project was to use as complete a set of concert footage as possible. Though the Toronto shows are  only partially available, I was an audience member at both performances and can therefore contribute  some missing information from memory, personal photographs and notes. Again, both American and  international performances were deliberately considered, but no patterns were determined.      

3.3. Framework for Performance Analysis    
  This research into performed identity is based on the criteria set out in Goffman's The  Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. This study looks at the impressionmaking equipment and  techniques outlined by Goffman and applies them to this analysis of specific performers. Performance  was analyzed at face value, based on the perspective of an audience member. Only information  available in an onstage performance was taken into consideration ­ personal biographies and  statements to media are not included. This study makes no claims into understanding the "true"  personal identities of either performer, and does not seek to determine if any identity impressions were 

41 

 

intentionally or unintentionally made. Personal identity is not taken into consideration, nor are any of  the conclusions here meant to be a reflection of this aspect of identity.14  Frith (1996) theorizes that all live performance contains role playing and spontaneous action (p.  207). Musicians have visible, discernable identities or personas when they are playing to an audience.  Frith (1996) states that star personalities in popular music are "double enactments," required to act out  two personas during a literal performance (p. 211). They have the responsibility of performing both their  star image and what he calls the "song personality." They are required not only to perform their  identity, but to enact the identities of their protagonists and to portray the appropriate emotions  necessary to make their songs believable, while also keeping in consideration the demands and  restrictions on appropriate emotional responses mandated by culture and genre conventions (Frith,  1996). This concept of the elements of live performance, the musician's persona and the techniques  required to create and sustain it inform the perspective this project takes, providing the groundwork for  how a performer's identity will be approached and understood.   Also, Philip Auslander's (2004) approach to studying popular music was helpful for approaching  an understanding about the personas of particular musicians in the terms of identity performance  described here. Auslander's (2004) approach has the intention of finding "ways of discussing what  popular musicians do as performers ­ the meanings they create... and the means they use to create  them," which is essentially what this study aims to accomplish. The most important element of a live  performance, to Auslander (2004), is the person's "performance persona," and the influence of songs  and music industry relations. As this project intentionally isolates onstage performances and does not  involve the participation or the detailed biography of those being studied, Auslander's suggested focus  guided this decision to only consider performance persona and therefore only consider the musician's  onstage performance and the meaning of his songs on its meaning. The influence of music industry  relations will not be considered, as they are not obviously apparent during a performance and would  require far more personal information about the artist in order to draw any justifiable conclusions. This  would alter the intention of the project, which is to analyze two performer's social identities by way of  their onstage performances, with the intention of understanding how performance works to create  meaning and impressions of identity.                                                                
 Conclusions about artist identities drawn here do not take into account any personal information that may be  public knowledge. Therefore, when this study asserts that Springsteen is working class, it is only making such a  statement about the persona he performs, rather than his actual economic status.   42 
14

 

3.4. Limitations 
  There are several limitations that influence this study. The first is the availability of professional  or clear, highquality footage for Gaslight Anthem performances. Though the band has an international  profile, a significant following and considerable media attention, The Gaslight Anthem are still,  relatively, a small, independentlysigned touring act. There is no bandsanctioned commercially  available, professionally shot footage, and the network of people who film their performances is very  small. Footage is mostly accessible through online videohosting website Youtube, and at the time this  research was conducted, no audienceshot full band shows were available uncut and in full on this or  other popular video sharing sites. Many of the clips available begin several seconds into the start of a  song, often omitting Fallon's talking to the audience or betweensong band interactions.  Additionally,  no full (or nearing full) performances predating 2008 are publically available online, though the bad had  been actively touring for some time already. As such, only performances from around the time of the  band's The `59 Sound period are available for study. It is possible, then, that full performances from  before or around the time of their band's 2007 debut album release are markedly different.     Additionally, though The Gaslight Anthem's live concerts include all but one song from their 

recorded repertoire, Springsteen's performances only cover a small portion of his recorded output. Due  to the study's exclusive focus on four live performances, the analysis of major themes in Springsteen's  music is limited by the songs included in this footage. A broader study of Springsteen's lyrics may reveal  different dominant themes.      

43 

 

Chapter 4: The Performed Identity of Bruce Springsteen 
 

4.1. Clothing 
According to Goffman (1959), clothing gives off the information attached to it during a  performance, and audiences use this information to discern the performer's identity. Individual items of  clothing, fabrics and more general ways of putting clothes together may all act as symbols for identity  information. In this case, the information clothing connotes is largely derived from representations and  popular images that carry information about class, race, nationality and gender.    Springsteen's clothing serves to create an impression of his identity as hegemonically masculine 

both by the standards of Western capitalist society and rock and roll culture. It also creates an  impression of Springsteen's class, and establishes him, somewhat indirectly, as American and White. His  clothing creates his identity in the tradition of the 1950s teen rebel, the industrial and postindustrial  physical labourer, soul and rock musicians, the American fantasies of the working man and the blue  collar man, and the American Western cowboy.    Springsteen's early shows reflect an image almost identical to the iconic album covers of Born to 

Run and Darkness on the Edge of Town. In 1975, he takes the stage wearing a zippedup black leather  motorcycle jacket, widelegged, baggy black slacks worn low on his hips and a white or possibly light  blue shortsleeved buttonup work or uniformstyle shirt,15 and a thick knitted tuque with an upturned  brim. The rest of his band appears more "dressed up," most of them wearing lightcolored suits or long sleeved pressed shirts and hats. The band and Springsteen look as though they are from different eras,  with the band wearing periodspecific white suits with wide lapels, shirts with exaggerated, pointed  collars and white fedorastyle hats.    During the final concerts of his over $200 milliongrossing Born in the U.S.A. tour in 1985 (Bird, 

1994), Springsteen looks like a different man than the Springsteen of the 1970s. In the 10 different clips,  shot over four days, Springsteen wears either the same or similar light blue, worn, tight jeans, worn  hitched up above his waist and tightly belted. He wears three different shirt combinations tucked into  his jeans. The first is a white vneck Tshirt, again with slightly rolledup sleeves, exposing most of his  arms. The shirt is entirely sweatsoaked and stretched out. Springsteen also wears a black buttonup  Western shirt with white embroidery. The sleeves of this shirt are either cut off or rolled up to bare his                                                              
15

The lighting quality of the video makes it difficult to determine its color or fabrication. 44 

 

arms. Springsteen is also filmed wearing this shirt with a red shirt underneath. Both shirts, in both sets  of footage, are unbuttoned to the chest and sweatsoaked. The third outfit consists of a blue plaid  buttonup with cut off sleeves, its sides cut open to expose Springsteen's ribcage. Underneath, he wears  a black undershirt or another cut off Tshirt. The plaid shirt is loose and far away from his body.  Springsteen also sometimes wears a blue baseball cap. Springsteen's band is no longer outfitted as a  cohesive unit. Their clothes are casual and current for the period. Springsteen's clothes are less period specific in terms of fabrication and pattern than the rest of his band, though they are still styled in a  decadespecific manner.     Springsteen's 2000s wardrobe is his least connotative. Springsteen and his band now wear dark

toned ensembles, all suiting up for the performance. For his New York City appearance, Springsteen  wears black boots, a black buttonup shirt with the sleeves rolled up to his elbows and tucked into black  Levi's jeans. In Barcelona, Springsteen wears a brown buttonup with a subtle paisley pattern and a  black vest, which he removes (off camera) 10 songs into the concert. His shirtsleeves are again rolled up  to the elbow and tucked into black jeans. After returning to the stage for the encore, he returns in a  dark gray Tshirt. His clothing is significantly dressier now than during any of the previous footage  considered, and is relatively close and betterfitted than in London and Los Angeles.    Springsteen's 1975 clothing clearly references the 1950s teen rebel or greaser. Springsteen's 

closecut leather jacket channels Brando in 1953's The Wild One, while also suggesting other pop culture  teen rebels, including James Dean in 1955's Rebel Without a Cause. Springsteen wears the iconography  of American rock and roll and teenhood. This image is associated with values of vulnerability, insecurity  and youth, traditionally masculine expressions of toughness, and a sense of needing to test and affirm  one's masculinity. Though the teen rebel addressed decidedly unmasculine insecurity in 1950s popular  culture, it also existed to reaffirm the importance of hegemonic manhood. Springsteen is presenting to  his audience an impression of his masculinity as being at once sensitive and hard. This is a direct  reflection of rock and roll identity. Rock and roll masculinity concerns itself with the same feelings of  vulnerability and powerlessness, and is now often popularly associated with the same image of narrow  blue jeans, white Tshirts and motorcycle jackets. Springsteen's masculinity is therefore also  communicated as a rock and roll identity, which shares a similar conceptualization of masculinity as the  1950s teen rebel. It also serves to embed him in rock music culture, therefore granting him an  impression of innate authenticity through genre. Additionally, these referenced archetypes are of  working class young men, thereby transferring this working identity to Springsteen.  
45 

 

 

Springsteen's 1975 appearance defies the denimclad image he is defined by in America's 

collective pop culture memory. He wears what appear to be oversized dress slacks, a distinctly different  kind of pant than in his other concerts. Pfeil (1995) theorizes this image of Springsteen dressing up (as  well as his band's suits) tie in to a tradition of performers playing to working class audiences, who are  thought to appreciate the performer's effort in presenting himself for them. As well, Springsteen's slacks  and his band's coordinated dressed up appearance may be a tie to the suitedup early soul performer  image. Early soul music was concerned with meaningful adult relationships and equality, and used a  mode of masculinity seen as sexually powerful and selfsufficient (Riley, 2004; Wald, 1997).16  Springsteen reprises this image of presenting a dressedup band in the 2000s, again presenting these  symbols of working class and musical identity.      Springsteen's other major visual connotation is the image of the industrialera worker, and the 

blue collar and working man identities it has informed. Springsteen's torn, sweatsoaked shirts and his  worn jeans, present an image of the performer as a worker, both in the sense that they show the wear  and tear potentially created by his performances ­ particularly as he wears the same wornout jeans ­  and in their representation of casualness and visual association with manual labour. Springsteen became  associated with wearing denim throughout his career. Denim itself is a symbol of American culture and  work. Though not originally an American invention, indigo denim would become the unofficial uniform  for American labourers in the 19th Century (Ashby, n.d.). Denim was a mark of workers, particularly in  the trades and in farming ­ occupational sectors characterized then, and now, as male. Plaid, as well,  has been ingrained in the popular imagination as a fabric worn by workers, and therefore has become  an element of images of workers.    The loosely knitted tuque Springsteen wears in 1975 is an article of clothing commonly seen in 

representations of dock workers, therefore acting as another symbol of working class identity  particularly when presented in a context with other class associations. The baseball cap Springsteen  wears in 1985 symbolizes a similarly classed identity. The cap is most commonly associated with sports  memorabilia, and therefore stands as a symbol of recreation and an appreciation of athletics ­ an  interest and pursuit defined as male. The baseball cap is also commonly associated with youth, outdoor  labour and trucking. However, unlike the knitted hat, Springsteen's 1985 baseball cap is a more  common, blatantly connotative symbol of the working man and the blue collar man, images also created  in Springsteen's wearing of denim, white and torn Tshirts and plaid. These images are American                                                              
16

Soul identity will be revisited in section 4.7..  46 

 

representations of idealized working men ­ hegemonically masculine and embedded in the American  ideologies of independence, hard work and perseverance.   These associations with blue collar and working man identities created an impression of  Springsteen, particularly in the 1980s when these representations were most blatantly apparent in his  wardrobe and body, as a member of the "good poor," (Allison, 2003) a symbol of American Dream  ideology and hegemonic masculinity. During this period, masculinity was perceived to be "in crisis," and  Ronald Reagan's rhetoric and policies were attempting to target working American men (Cowie &  Boehm, 2006). Springsteen's physical presentation would therefore feed into an impression of his  identity as fitting into Reagan's preferred image of the blue collar conservative male ­ patriotic,  pragmatic, hardworking and entirely American. Springsteen's Western shirt, also worn in 1985, is subtle  enough not to present a strong connection to country music and style, instead referencing images of  cowboy masculinity and American popular culture's image of the frontier West. This connoted  representation, then, drafts an impression of Springsteen as White and American, while also connecting  him to a working class identity that is also at the core of definitions of hegemonic masculinity ­  powerful, enduring, silent and composed, and heroic.     Springsteen's class identity is also demonstrated in his use of status symbols in his wardrobe. 

Goffman (1959) theorizes status symbols are used to represent a person's class, either by intentionally  using symbols of wealth to present an impression of owning such wealth, or by intentionally  downplaying one's actual class position through presenting symbols of lower economic status positions.  Springsteen's wardrobe is a specific example of demonstrating working class status symbols ­ here,  denim, plaid, specific hats, white Tshirts and motorcycle jackets ­ an impression that remains  consistent throughout his career, even though the symbols differ.      Ultimately, Springsteen's clothing symbolizes identities that are markedly American. The 

identities he draws from are all important images in American history and cultural iconography. The  archetypes Springsteen's clothing performance reflects are popularly conceived of as White, and in the  case of the working class identities he resembles, were created with the specific intention of creating a  sense of Whiteness in a social group. Though he may be read as referencing soul musicians in his  clothing and therefore Black identity, Springsteen's identity is built upon and in a White image ­ an  impression of race further compounded when Springsteen is thought of as an American.      
47 

 

4.2. Physical Body 
Springsteen's 1980s body has been the subject of much of the academic work on his identity  and status as an American icon, and with significant reason. His 1980s body is among the most  connotative elements of Springsteen's performed identity. Springsteen's 1985 frame is significantly  more muscular than in the 1970s and best described as "jocked" (Riley, 2004). While his physique is not  that of a bodybuilder, his body has been compared to that of 1980sera action stars, particularly  Sylvester Stallone in Rambo (Garman, 2000), largely thanks to his hypermuscled arms, developed chest  and the comparative narrowness of his lower body, all exaggerated by his closecut clothing and his  tendency to maintain a tensed upper body.    Springsteen's body, here, is both the body of the idealized masculine man ­ defined entirely 

apart from a woman's and reflective of ideal representations of masculine strength and power ­ and the  industrial worker, who possesses and gains access to hegemonic masculinity through a body built by  hard labour.  Significantly, Springsteen's "jocked" body was revealed on tour in the mid1980s, a time  where such a body was culturally conceived as representing true, authentic, unambiguous hegemonic  masculinity. The albeit realistically muscled body of Springsteen was another in a line of famous bodies  meant to communicate the period's hegemonic masculinity (Simpson, 1994), bodies therefore meant to  represent White male power.    Springsteen's body appears shaped by labour, again reinforcing the representation of the 

working man and the blue collar man. His onstage performance is one of constant hard work, literally  demonstrated through visible sweat, grueling pacing and body tension. His body represented the values  of American and White culture, as therefore reperformed the impressions of the working man and the  blue collar man already denoted in his clothing. This exertion of physical power is thought to be the only  way many working class men may access hegemonic masculinity. In presenting himself as both working  class and as having a body with considerable physical power from 1985 onward, Springsteen  demonstrates a hegemonic male identity, the version of acceptable, normative traditional masculinity  awarded to those of his performed class status.      As Springsteen has aged, his body, in a sense, has mellowed. He still appears muscular, broad

shouldered and strong, though not nearly as obviously as in 1985. His body in the 2000s does not  change the impression of his masculinity. Though Springsteen turns 61 in 2010, he appears to have the  idealized body for a man of his age. As such, Springsteen retains the impression of looking physically  strong and useful, while also looking younger than his biological age and therefore, appearing more 
48 

 

physically powerful than the norm. His masculinity as created by his physical body is, again,  unambiguous and reflective of hegemonic cultural values. His age ultimately helps to make him appear  more masculine, as it gives him an impression of maturity and wisdom while also serving to exaggerate  his physical potency.    Springsteen's body has also come to display an American identity. It is thought that 

Americanness is achieved by "looking American" ­ that is, American identity is communicated through  the physical manifestation of American values, including strength and enterprise. In 1975, Springsteen  presents himself as American in ways that did not include the size and shape of his body. Beginning in  1985 and to a lessened extent in the 2000s, Springsteen's body begins to show these values of strength  and enterprise in his presentation of physical strength. His is a body that is built, and possibly built by  onstage labour rather than private exercise, and therefore representative of exerted will and a  successful work ethic. At the same time, it is a body that appears strong as a result of enterprise. As  such, Springsteen's body looks American and therefore creates an impression of his national identity.    This bodily display of strength and enterprise also serves to identify Springsteen as White. As 

Dyer (1997) argues, representations of Whiteness are demonstrative of the same kind of will and  enterprise for men. White bodies are thought to appear hard and upright, and to display a sense of  perseverance and dominance (Dyer, 1997). Springsteen's body as of 1985 does just this, and therefore,  connotes the visual ideal of Whiteness. His image is that of an industrial, urban American male worker, a  social category that was defined as White in its inception (Roediger, 2007), and therefore remains White  in popular consciousness. Springsteen's Western and worker presentations both reflect masculinities  that were almost exclusively created and depicted as White, and helped in and of themselves to create  Whiteness.    Springsteen's body also prompts a discussion of the role of desire and display in the creation of 

his somewhat contradictory gender impression. Springsteen is a man in front of an audience and  therefore a man on display, meaning he may be subject to the feminization that occurs when male  figures are the focus of attention and the creators of desire. Music and the field of live performance,  however, gave men a certain kind of power in being seen. The male rock body is a body already defined  as being on display ­ a sexualized body and a body meant to be looked at (Pattie, 2007; Simpson, 1994).    Springsteen's 1975 performance is one of emotional expressivity and looseness, channeling the 

frenetic sensuality of early rock and soul performers. Though his 1970s body was considered masculine  and attractive by the decade's standards, it wasn't on blatant display, not overtly soliciting the 
49 

 

audience's gaze. Springsteen's 1985 body was presented differently and fed into a different kind of  desirability. Springsteen's appeal was traditional, satisfying the social norm dictating that men ought to  possess a hard, taut, outwardly fit body, and the imagining of this body as desirable. Springsteen was  now presenting himself as a conventional sex symbol. Springsteen seemed to fully embrace his position  of masculinity on display, particularly when he bends completely forward at the waist and shakes his  nowinfamous posterior at the camera and at the crowd. Ultimately, Springsteen's image seems to  deliberately target his female fans, particularly considering his address of women in his songs, and  therefore verifies his masculinity.17      In the 2000s, Springsteen seemingly remains aware of and emphasizes the desirability he played 

upon in the 1980s. His displays of his body as sexualized and desirable continue ­ evidenced in hip  thrusts, more buttshaking, and kissing female audience members  though they are now performed  with some selfknowing humour. He also engages in some sarcastic posturing, his hands on his hips and  behind his back, chest puffed out, in full, stagecrossing strut, aping what brings to mind a typical Mick  Jagger stance. His sexuality is considerably more coy and more a wink to his former image. This may be  another way of masculinizing his visibility, by demonstrating awareness of his position and therefore  suggesting his having control. Though his exaggerated rock star masculinity may be read as a campy joke  to both performer and audience, it still manages to deliver what some of his audience wants and  maintains his position as a masculine figure who elicits heterosexual desire.      Ultimately, Springsteen's physical aesthetics and related sexual expressions are never feminized 

as masculinity on display is expected to be. They are structured so that they can be read within cultural  conventions of attractiveness and accepted norms of musicculturebased sexual display. This,  therefore, makes his being on display and enticing desire from the audience appropriate to and  affirming of his masculinity.    

4.3. Physical Performativity 
  Springsteen's onstage mannerisms ultimately serve to communicate his belonging in rock music  culture and to communicate the values in his music. This performance style affirms Springsteen's first person authenticity (Moore cited in Pattie, 2007) and reflects his visual relationship to the prototypical                                                              
 Springsteen's physical display has also been read as being a point of homosexual desire (M. Smith, 1992), though  this thesis takes the position that this is largely overridden by the other heterosexual connotations in his lyrics. His  dominant image ­ which is of concern here ­ is therefore heterosexual.  50 
17

 

performances of rock music. This suggests to an audience that he may have a prototypical rock and roll  identity ­ White, young, male, working class, and concerned with leisure and music.     Expressing a belonging to rock and roll culture, significantly, serves to create an impression of 

authenticity. This impression of firstperson authenticity is important in making his songs and his  appearance and performance style seem "real" or true ­ therefore, when Springsteen sings or tells  stories with information about national, class or gender status, it becomes feasible that he sings from  personal experience. A sense of authenticity also suggests to an audience that other visual elements of  his performance are, indeed, to be read as symbols of identity. Springsteen presents an image of  authenticity and it is therefore probable to assume that all the elements of that image ­ if consistent ­  are a result and product of this authenticity of self.     Eckman identifies modes of physical expressions meant to convey authenticity (cited in Frith, 

1996). Most significant in Springsteen's impression creation is the direct expression of emotional states.  Springsteen communicates the intensity, or intended intensity of his music with his posture and his  eyes, using his body to convey the tone of each song. During his more serious songs18 Springsteen often  stands close to his microphone stand. He occasionally sways slightly or shifts his weight from foot to  foot. He sometimes stops playing his guitar and clutches his microphone stand, wrapping his hand  around it from the top. If he raises an arm or reaches out for something, he doesn't necessarily extend  his arm fully, doesn't bring it up or down with any great speed or enthusiasm. Instead, his motions ­ like  his body position ­ are tense, his movements forceful but generally brief and kept close to his body.  During songs like "Thunder Road," his eyes remain closed, though rarely in any tight, exaggerated  fashion. It seems as if Springsteen's demonstrated intensity matches the mood of these slower songs. In  more laidback songs, like "Mansion on the Hill," Springsteen's body is more relaxed even though it  remains relatively still, while in others like "Youngstown" or "Born in the U.S.A." ­ songs that in and of  themselves have more tension and aggression in their sound ­ his body takes on this mood. Springsteen  seethes during these kinds of songs, his face showing strain, his jaw clenched, pronounced veins  appropriately ready to explode. He demonstrates considerable energy but also, as Pfeil (1995) notes,  considerable, visible restraint. During these performances, Springsteen looks as if he could only give  more if he entirely lost control and unleashed whatever force he seems to be holding back. This method  of physical expressivity remains identifiable and present from his earliest show to his most recent.                                                              
 Serious refers to his slower or more dynamic songs ­ songs that "sound" serious   as opposed to his uptempo  rock songs, which may also have serious themes. 51 
18

 

 

In 1975, Springsteen also plays with his hat almost constantly, taking it off and putting it on 

during songs, holding it from hand to hand and once hanging it from his microphone stand. His constant  movement may be interpreted as nervousness, a fidget or a way to occupy his hands when not playing  the guitar. Springsteen seems to take some kind of tension out on the hat, his reactions actually  reflective of some excess of energy building up within, as if he's about to explode. This energy, though,  is ultimately restrained (Pfeil, 1995), his level of seemingly potential mania held back.    In Springsteen's tendency to convey the emotion of a song through his gestures, he shows his 

own commitment to his music and his authenticity, while also creating an impression of his gender.  Pfeil's (1995) identification of Springsteen's tension suggests that his emotional responses match both  the demands of his musical genres and of his gender. As Frith (1996) argues, a performer is expected to  express emotion while adhering to the behavioural norms and demands of their gender. Onstage,  Springsteen clearly adheres to the levels of expressivity granted to mainstream hegemonic masculinity,  performing characteristically White, male emotional restraint and strength while also performing  appropriate gestures of sincerity and commitment to his musical product. Pfeil (1995) sees connotations  of the "heavyduty white male worker" in Springsteen's performance of tension, of "energies confined"  (p. 87). Masculinity is marked by selfdenial and emotional control (Connell, 1995), as is male Whiteness  (Dyer, 1997). Masculinity and patriarchy is defined by the exhibition of control (Pfeil, 1995), and in the  physical performance of Springsteen, the sense of seething and of restraint suggesting the employment  of a strong sense of selfcontrol. This also relates to ideas of enterprise, and of White people needing to  transcend and control their physical bodies in order to perform their racial identity (Dyer, 1997).   Springsteen's performed tension, then, provides him with both a masculine and White identity.     Consistency is an important factor in delivering impressions through performance (Goffman, 

1959). During his more serious numbers, Springsteen is never distracted by the crowd or by what else  may be going on onstage. He commits to the performance entirely, and maintains consistency through  this display of concentration. He even asks for crowd silence at one point during "American Skin (41  Shots)," maintaining his impression of intensity and minimizing distraction that could throw off his  performance and ruin the contemplative effect he is attempting to create.    Even while not singing, Springsteen expresses an emotional connection and commitment to the 

performance, again creating a feeling of authenticity. Springsteen has moments during the 1975 show  where he watches the other musicians onstage, dances along and seems to lose himself in what is being  heard. He keeps his eyes closed and physically responds to the sound around him by swaying and 
52 

 

keeping rhythm with his body. Springsteen seems entranced in the sound, and the band frequently  extends the instrumental sections of their songs throughout the show. All of this situates Springsteen as  a kind of music fan, himself, taken more with the band than with the crowd (with whom his interaction  is minimal in this show).   Springsteen's emotional and physical relationship to the music contributes to an image of youth  ­ of the people targeted by and most deeply emotionally invested in rock music ­ and therefore  suggesting the image of the working class American teen male. Eventually in the 2000s, his physical  gestures come to represent both retention of this early expression of youth and a demonstration of  masculinized physical power. Springsteen slides across the stage on his knees repeatedly, climbs and  jumps off of Roy Bittan's piano, and demonstrates fairly remarkable agility and flexibility by hanging  from his microphone stand with one hand. His other performance gestures, however, represent an  equal commitment to his music, though he does not appear as "lost" in it as in the London show. In both  shows, particularly during his more upbeat, fastpaced songs, Springsteen appears engaged and  entertained by his own spectacle ­ dancing, interacting with his band members and laughing at his own  jokes, again exhibiting an appropriate, authentic emotional state. While the tone of much of these  shows is somewhat sombre or emotional, Springsteen's ability to act youthful keeps the event from  being onedimensional or heavyhanded, keeping the proceedings solidly linked to an authenticating  tradition of rock and roll as leisure and entertainment for entertainment's sake, and maintaining a sense  of youthfulness. Springsteen still sheds blood for his performance, showing the masculinity of hard work  and of rock music culture, as well as a display of masculine physical strength, and retains a sense of  staging an American, working class, leisureethicoriented Saturday night party through his physical  commitment and joy.      Springsteen also uses Eckman's illustrative gestures, the performing of accentuating gestures 

during significant elements of a performer's repertoire. This is often best evidenced in Springsteen's  hand and arm gestures. His hands do not move in loud or exaggerated ways, remaining relatively still  and occupied by his guitarplaying except to emphasize particular parts of the songs. Springsteen's  emphasis comes during the elements in a song that communicate his overall ideological vision,  punctuating lines about community, hope, and love with triumphant punches to the air.     In his 2000s shows, Springsteen begins to incorporate the body language of faith healing and 

evangelical preaching, with one or both arms in the air, his palm upturned and facing in front of him or  facing the sky. This gesture, possibly innocuous, takes on a more clearly religious connotation as it is 
53 

 

most often used to accompany the singing of the word "faith," or when used in songs with other  religious imagery. Springsteen takes on the pose of a preacher communing with his god, or a  congregation communing with their preacher during moments of audience participation. Specifically,  this happens during the portion of "Badlands" in New York, when the crowd is chanting a melody line  while the band plays, before Springsteen delivers the line, "It ain't no sin to be glad you're alive."  Springsteen faces the audience with his arms up and angled slightly forward, his palms open to them  and his head down for the duration of their chant. Significantly more of these motions happen during  the Barcelona show, during songs with distinctly spiritual themes like "The Rising," "Into the Fire," "Land  of Hope and Dreams," "My City of Ruins" and songs about loss like "You're Missing."   

4.4. Instruments 
Springsteen plays only a few guitars during the four performances analyzed. In 1975,  Springsteen appears with his 1950s era Fender Esquire19 ­ the guitar that appears on the cover of Born  to Run. Springsteen only plays one guitar during the show and doesn't have a guitar tech to tune it or  handle it when he isn't playing. This same guitar will appear in his 1985 and 2000s shows, displaying  obvious wear and tear.   Springsteen's old Fender is a symbol of his constructed identity as a 1950s rock and roll rebel, of  his hard work, his authenticity, his sense of grounding and his stability. Springsteen's worn guitars are  thought to represent his working class identity (Rodak, 1996), and symbolize having paid dues in the live  arena (Riley, 2004). Springsteen having used the same guitar since the 1970s and using relatively few  others onstage also reflects a musician who does not show wealth or commercial abundance through  playing with a variety of instruments onstage. Springsteen's dedication to his old guitar suggests a  dedication to his own creative past, suggesting that he's comfortable reflecting his past in his present  performances. It may also symbolize consistency in Springsteen's identity, a consistency that he is the  same artist he was when he first started making music on that same guitar, and that the size of the  arena does not speak to the integrity of the performer. Springsteen only plays with two guitars that look  new (or at least unworn): a black laminatetop acoustic and another black electric Fender. Springsteen's  secondmost used guitar, seen in the New York and Barcelona shows is another Fender Telecaster20                                                              
 The precise year of the guitar itself is a matter of debate, perhaps best described as a "mutt of an instrument"  (Hunter, 2009).   20  A renamed version of the Esquire. 54 
19

 

model, this time with a starburst copper and black face. The camera occasionally picks up a significant  chip on its back, it too looking wellworn.     Springsteen also occasionally plays harmonica in his concerts. In 1975, Springsteen plays a small, 

handheld harmonica, stashing it in his shirt pocket when not playing. In 1985, Springsteen strikes a  resemblance to images of early American folk journeymen, appearing with a larger harmonica with a  holster worn around his neck. Already having forged a popular reputation as a secondcoming of Bob  Dylan, his harmonica and acoustic guitar image only emphasized this folk balladeer association, as did  his Woody Guthrie cover and his reworking  "No Surrender" into an acoustic ballad. Springsteen repeats  this image in his later shows, playing the harmonica in his hands without a guitar on during "The River"  in New York, and wearing it on a holster with a lowslung acoustic guitar in Barcelona for "Empty Sky."  His image here is still connoting folk and country singers, but the position of his guitar modifies the  image to be a little more rock and roll and a little more original.    

4.5. Band Interactions 
  The interactions Springsteen has onstage with his band members speak to the values articulated  in Springsteen's live performance and to his social identity. It establishes a sense of Springsteen as  traditionally male, affirms the value of homosocial interaction in a Springsteen performance, expresses  ideas about race and presents Springsteen as working class.    In 1975, the E Street Band was entirely male. Springsteen played off male figures, and even 

when backup vocalist and guitarist Patti Scialfa joined the band in the 1980s, or when Springsteen added  a female violinist ­ Soozie Tyrell ­ to his live show in Barcelona, Springsteen primarily interacted with  the men in his band. More specifically, Springsteen interacts most with the two performers who occupy  the front third of the stage with him, guitarist Steven Van Zandt and saxophonist Clarence Clemons (with  the exception of the 1985 show where Nils Lofgren took Van Zandt's place). Even then, Springsteen  interacted significantly less with Lofgren and more with Clemons. Springsteen eventually married Scialfa  and continued playing music with her after disbanding the E Street Band, but even after her personal  relationship with Springsteen changed, Springsteen still connected most with his original front line, Van  Zandt and Clemons.     What Springsteen really seems to be suggesting in his interactions with fellow band members is 

the creation and value of a brotherhood, something he himself declares the band to be when he calls  Clemons the "secretary of the brotherhood" in New York. In 1985, Springsteen introduces "No 
55 

 

Surrender," as "one for friendship," dedicating it to Van Zandt, who by that time had departed the band.  "No Surrender," with its imagery of "blood brothers" reflects a value of community, of permanent  bonds. Not only are men prioritized in Springsteen's narratives, but the value of the male relationships is  integral in his performances. Springsteen's most meaningful, valuable bonds are demonstrated to exist  with other men. This accomplishes several things in terms of creating Springsteen's social identity.  Springsteen's best friends onstage are part of his history ­ through his relationship with them he  demonstrates a connection to his personal history in Asbury Park, a working class town. He also  demonstrates an importance of male friendship, of forging meaningful, lifelong bonds with other men,  and through them, with your roots. Male homosocial interaction is considered a mark of capitalistera  masculinity (Kimmel, 2003). As established with the emergence of the capitalist masculinity of the 1830s  marketplace man, it became increasingly important to define masculinity through interactions with  other men. In mainstream American culture, masculinities are tested in interactions with other men and  are often performed for the purpose of meeting the standards set by peer groups and larger social  structures. In presenting himself in an allmale environment, articulated as a brotherhood, Springsteen  is performing to and acknowledging the traditional importance of male homosociality. Therefore,  Springsteen's performance of the band as a brotherhood ­ a male environment demonstrative of male  bonds and focused on telling the stories of men ­ communicates his hegemonic masculinity. However,  male homosociality is also defined as promoting heterosexual friendship and love (Sedgwick in Storr,  2003), which is demonstrated in Springsteen's band interactions. Through his performance gestures,  Springsteen suggests the value of brotherhood is more significant than the bond between those of  different genders. It is a symbolic excision of women and celebration of men. Additionally, this male  reverence and love of other men is a part of the republican artistic tradition (Cullen, 1997), and as such,  the concept of brotherhood is fundamental to the philosophy. Therefore, Springsteen's onstage  brotherhood also binds him to a republican identity, which in turn communicates a working class,  masculine, American and White identity.     Springsteen's interactions with women, specifically his band member and (now) wife Scialfa, are 

limited, and usually take on the tone of a sexual relationship rather than a friendship, also affirming  Springsteen's homosocial brotherhood. Particularly when they perform together, Springsteen will  affectionately take Scialfa's hand, or kiss her on the cheek, calls her "red" and "sweetie" while onstage,  and in New York, introduces her with a few lines from his "Red Headed Woman," a song about a  strawberryhaired woman in a "tight skirt" who can "get a dirty job done." Scialfa has a place in the 
56 

 

band, but is approached with a slightly different vernacular and mode of conduct than the other  members. In treating Scialfa as the token female and sexualizing her presence, Springsteen reinforces  his masculinity through not only his heterosexuality, but by distinguishing genders in his brotherhood  and reaffirming the hegemonic masculinity communicated by his band interactions. Springsteen creates  a visual prioritization of men, while simultaneously feeding into masculine and republican images of  homosocial interaction and idealized brotherhood (Garman, 2000). Tyrell's presence in Barcelona is, as  well, not disruptive to the impression of brotherhood. In referring to her as "Sister" in his introduction,  Springsteen essentially accomplishes two things. In one sense, he affirms her as a member of the  union,21 as "one of the boys" who is otherwise left alone and not made exceptional. In another sense,  "Sister" can be read as an indicator of gender difference, symbolically separating Tyrell from the  brotherhood.     Springsteen's idealized brotherhood is most clearly articulated through his onstage relationship 

with Clemons, a relationship that has also been thought to disturb Springsteen's traditional masculinity  (M. Smith, 1992). In New York, the band enters the stage in pairs, with Springsteen and Clemons  entering together, rather than having Springsteen take the stage last and on his own as in Barcelona. His  particular relationship with Clemons is immortalized both in song and in his stage show. Springsteen  seems to share the greatest number of significant moments with his saxophone player. They dance  together, mockchase each other, sing together and exchange supportive or congratulatory touches.   Two significant moments occur during the 1985 show, during "Thunder Road" and "Growin' Up". During  "Growin' Up," Springsteen launches into a choreographed story about youthful confusion and the  attempt to find a purpose. In his story, the lost young Springsteen decides to go down to the Asbury  Park boardwalk and (somewhat jokingly) contemplates throwing himself in the water. Clemons enters  Springsteen's monologue, appearing as the "big handsome dude" with whom he bonds. In the story, the  two are led to find salvation in their instruments and their bond with each other. Springsteen finishes  the story with, "And as we stood there in the moonlight, we knew that everything was gonna be alright,  because... because... when we touched..." Springsteen and Clemons then raise their arms and press their  palms together for a few seconds, and the band restarts the song. During the last few minutes of  "Thunder Road," Springsteen slides across the stage on his knees over to Clemons, gets up, and kisses  him on the mouth. Springsteen then raises his guitar in the air, facing the crowd at the side of the stage,  and returns to Clemons, his back turned to him. Springsteen grabs his hands and Clemons hugs him from                                                              
21

 To be discussed on page 59.  57 

 

behind, Springsteen eventually collapsing back. It's a strong display of affection between two men  onstage, easily interpreted as a homoerotic gesture, and may be read as destabilizing the hegemonically  masculine impression of identity Springsteen creates in the other elements of his performances.    However, Bryan K. Garman interprets this motion as a masculine invocation of republican 

working class hero masculinity (2000). This kiss may be an enactment of the republican philosophical  position that heterosexual male relations are to be based on love and social respect, and as a display  that symbolically reinforces male superiority by once again shutting out women (Garman, 2000;  Simpson, 1994). One may interpret the kiss as a kind of romantic notion, and to an extent it is.  Springsteen establishes his relationship with Clemons as distinct from that of other band members in its  level of devotion and sense of respect. Clemons and Van Zandt are Springsteen's closest allies onstage,  but while Van Zandt is his musical partner, the person he sings with most, his relationship with Clemons  is something more significant. Their bond ­ and to an extent, Springsteen's bond with Van Zandt, as well  ­ is an example of a classic male homosocial union. Springsteen's band is an environment where men's  relationships with other men are more significant than their relationships with women. The concept of a  male homosocial environment is built on values and intentions meant to protect patriarchy, which is  defined as heterosexual (Sedgwick cited in Horrocks, 1995). Male homosociality is built on the value of  male family bonds (Sedgwick cited in Storr, 2003) and the hegemonically (and therefore heterosexually)  masculine perspective of gender difference and male superiority. Therefore, male homosociality is  thought to dismiss sexual connotations of male togetherness (Horrocks, 1995). Additionally, male  bonding and brotherhood was not considered sexualized in a republican context (Cullen, 1997).  Indications of normative republican masculinity expressed throughout Springsteen's performance ­  heterosexual desire in his lyrics and in his onstage address of Scialfa ­ contextualize his performance and  contribute to a nullification of the possibly queer content of his performances. As Garman (2000)  argues, for the kiss and for Springsteen's male interactions to be read as subversive of normative  masculinity, Springsteen's social message would have to be significantly more radical and defiant of his  White, working class, republican male image.     Springsteen's brotherhood may also be read as being representative of rock and roll culture and 

identity in that it is racially diverse, with the band serving as a symbol of the integrationist nature of rock  and roll music. Springsteen's bond with Clemons ­ the gesture of taking or touching hands that  frequently serves as a symbol of racial unity in popular culture ­ may perform a similar effect here.  Arguments may be made, however, that Clemons racializes the band. He is the literal embodiment of 
58 

 

soul and R&B music onstage ­ a Black saxophone player ­ and brings this racialized genre element and  racialized image to Springsteen's otherwise White rock and roll band. More generally, Springsteen's  tokenism may be an attempt at articulating a sense of acceptance or egalitarianism onstage,  contributing to impressions of his republican and American identity. On the surface, Clemons's ­ and  Scialfa's ­ presence in the band foster the image of a diverse union (Palmer, 1997), reflective of the  supposed intentions of republican philosophy. However, as with early American republicanism,  Springsteen's vision is largely White ­ his lyrics (at least in the concerts studied here) concern White  males22 and in the use of republican ideals, draw from an ideology that was conceptualized as egalitarian  but generally considered only the interests of White working men. The presence of Clemons also has  little to no influence on Springsteen's own immediate racial identity. His performance of racial identity  remains entirely White, deriving from dominant representations of Whiteness and from the "White  rocker" (Pfeil, 1995), a prototype whose image borrows from Black masculinities but is contextualized  within an appropriationbased culture of rock and roll.     Springsteen's brotherhood may also alternately be read for class identity, with the band being a 

different kind of brotherhood ­ a union, as initially identified by Palmer (1997). Springsteen and the E  Street Band reinforce the idea of music as labour, and of rock musicians as working men and women  (Frith, 2009; Rodak, 1996). They are thought of as a gang or union, of men and token women acting out  the industrial fantasy of efficiency (Palmer, 1997). The stage acts as an idealized workplace, presenting  the band as a union with strong community values (Palmer, 1997). Springsteen calls his band a  brotherhood, a word with strong union connections, and even reasserts this union rhetoric when  introducing his violin player, "Sister" Soozie. Springsteen's band represents an idealized vision of  employeremployee relations, with a sense of mutual respect being show by Springsteen to his fellow  band members in the adoring way he introduces and addresses them, and in the way he watches his  own band with pride. A Springsteen concert is, as Palmer (1997) states, built in the idealized image of an  early American labour union, an impression only reinforced by the class politics in Springsteen's songs  and monologues. It shapes Springsteen's identity in the image of the "good poor," but removes  connotations of the Reagan era's version of the blue collar man, who stood for individualism and  rejected class solidarity. It also verifies Springsteen's leadership and therefore affirms his hegemonic  masculinity.                                                              
 Though Springsteen makes no references to the racial identity of his characters, he depicts working men largely  employed in manual labour ­ an identity popularly imaged as White.   59 
22

 

 

Early in his career, Springsteen earned the nickname "The Boss," from his preE Street band 

members. The nickname has stuck, and is even acknowledged during his shows, when Springsteen and  Van Zandt do a staple bit, letting the audience know that while the show is almost over it's still "Boss  time" onstage. Not only does it contribute to the image of the show as a work activity, and of the band  as a union, but of Springsteen as a "benevolent employer" (Palmer, 1997). The role of the employer ­  the Boss ­ is also traditionally male and originally White (Roediger, 2007), a somewhat dominant and  authoritative social position, which therefore contributes to an impression of Springsteen's identity as  hegemonically masculine.    Springsteen, indeed, performs as the "boss" of the show. His leadership is particularly obvious in 

1975, when he spends much of the set with this back to the audience, cuing the band. Springsteen was  almost constantly in control of the transitions and endings of the songs, cuing the band by exaggeratedly  accenting beats and cutoffs by striking his guitar neck downward, alerting certain musicians with his  hands, head or shoulders, counting the band in, and sometimes making conductorlike motions with his  hands while standing in front of the band. Springsteen asserted himself as the leader of the band  constantly, though his leadership style never gave the appearance of being strict or abrasive.     The image of the stage as a workplace, then, also adds to the impression of masculinity being 

made. In American gender ideology, work is thought to affirm masculinity. Men are judged by whether  or not they are employed, as well as the nature of their work and the position of their job in the  workplace hierarchy. The more powerful a man's job position, and the more physical, authoritarian  and/or rational his work is, the more "masculine" he is believed to be. Springsteen's band is a form of  physical labour, as exemplified by the physical exertion demonstrated onstage ­ he and his band move  constantly, sweat visibly, need to take deep breaths and drink water (with Springsteen once putting a  wet sponge on his face presumably to cool down). Therefore, the band performs an impression of  hegemonic masculinity through their performance of physical work, with Springsteen working hardest  and therefore appearing as most powerful and most obviously masculine. Springsteen demonstrates  traditional masculinity because of his role as bandleader. In addition to structuring the band like a  workplace, Springsteen's leadership role is an assertion of albeit subtle dominance. His directing  gestures are displays of masculine control, authority and musical mastery, communicated while enacting  his role as the head of the band.    Springsteen's role as "boss" also presents the impression that Springsteen was in charge of the 

show and therefore of the creative vision of the band. Springsteen's leadership suggests that the songs 
60 

 

being played are his ­ that he has some stake in them and how they come across. This excision of  control could be viewed as a performance that verifies Springsteen's musical authenticity. Springsteen is  engaging in impression management (Goffman, 1959), attempting to assure that the music played  matches his intentions and assuring he looks in control of his own creative product. Springsteen  authenticates himself as the creator of the entire vision, the entire sound, rather than just being the  singer, a hired performer standing onstage to sing someone else's words or play in someone else's band.  Springsteen's tendency to conduct the band throughout the show lessens in later performances (where  it can be argued he has less at stake in terms of his reputation or need to prove his authenticity), but  does not completely cease.   

4.6. Language and Speech 
Springsteen uses language to several effects in his live performances. Ultimately, his manner of  speaking establish his class (and by way of this, his race), and his national identity. Onstage, Springsteen  engages in what Fox (2004) refers to as ordinary talk. Talk is considered the primary mode of  ordinariness, which is described by Fox as the mode of expression where the past is constantly  memorialized, idealized and revisited, particularly through conversation, and thereby creates an  expression of White working class identity. This ordinary talk considered classed because it captures an  idyllic, oftfictionalized past of simpler times, with less conflict, fewer expectations and slower pacing.  This memorializing of the past happens in highly industrialized, alienated working cultures, as evidenced  with the creation of a Black identity for White workers to accept otherwise uncontrollable class  circumstances (Fox, 2004; Roediger, 2007).     Most basically, Springsteen acknowledges the city he is performing in by name when greeting 

the crowd. This acknowledgment of the audience's location during a live performance is significant to  connecting the performer to his audience, and is a kind of ordinary conversation trope that suggests a  working class way of speaking (Fox, 2004). Springsteen also frequently speaks in Spanish to the  Barcelona audience ­ an exaggeration of the similarity of performer and audience (Fox, 2004) that  contributes to his ordinary, working class identity and makes him appear connected and authentic.  Springsteen speaks in a distinctly regionalized manner, both in terms of his use of geographic  identifiers and his dialect. Springsteen identifies himself as a product and representative of New Jersey.  New Jersey is a symbol of the state's historical associations with manual labourintensive workplaces, 

61 

 

extreme urbanization and class disparities ("New Jersey," n.d.), some of which may be the result of  being constructed in opposition to New York ­ the metropolis versus the "suburb" it borders.     Springsteen speaks in his own particular dialect, a regional New Jersey drawl that has him 

dropping the final "g" from certain words and occasionally running them together as if he is mumbling.  His words, though, utilize the grammar of casual, conversational, markedly lowerclass speech, the kind  of wording that makes natural use of terms like "ain't," and "gotta," and improper grammatical  structures. Springsteen is by no means inarticulate, but he borrows the "talk" of New Jersey, of the  working class, and even of early rock and R&B music, where women were "kittens" and men were  "cats." Springsteen's dialect is relatively consistent, coming through regardless of the context and of the  tone of his voice except while preaching and speaking Spanish.   Springsteen positions himself as an ambassador of his home, frequently making reference to  being from the state of New Jersey, and positions Asbury Park as his hometown (though this is more  metaphorical than it is true). Springsteen's performances not only present an image of a New Jersey  resident but suggest a prideful affiliation with his roots. Springsteen visually and verbally accepts and  performs a typical New Jersey image, and has in a sense become a representation of the state, himself.  Springsteen will again refer to the image of (working class) New Jersey in his lyrics, using geographic  references to similarly identify the class positions of his characters, and to indicate his representative  voice of the place and its people. This is initially evidenced in 1975, when Springsteen introduces  "Fourth of July, Asbury Park (Sandy)" with, "This is something for you from Asbury Park." When  Springsteen yells, "Is anybody alive out there?" to the New York crowd, he summons a repeat of their  boisterous response by shaking his head disappointedly then saying, "You gotta let 'em hear you in  Jersey, man." Springsteen also asserts his identity as a Jersey boy ­ differentiating himself from a  California boy ­ on the first night of his Los Angeles shows: "So, you think you can take us, huh? So, you  think you're tough out here in California, huh? So, you think you can put the whammy on those New  Jersey boys, huh? Oh, yeah?" Springsteen relies on New Jersey's national reputation here to jokingly  assert his machismo and create an image of his roots.  Along with his physical appearance, his articulated regional identity, personal gestures and inter band dynamics, Springsteen's onstage parlance has some impact on creating his national and class  identity outside of his relationship to New Jersey. The first time Springsteen speaks to his audience in  1975, he tells them, "This is the first time..." he's seen England. "I've never been here before." Instantly,  Springsteen sets himself up as someone who likely has not done extensive travelling outside of his home 
62 

 

country (not to mention declaring himself as nonBritish), though he later mentions that he and the  band were recently in Detroit. Springsteen creates an image of being an American who has never left  America, suggesting his class position and reaffirming his national identity.     In 1985, Springsteen engages in the kind of presong monologues he is remembered for. 

Essentially, the monologues in this show demonstrate Springsteen's awareness of working class  conditions, and reveal a skepticism about the social order of America. Springsteen presents himself as  equal parts realist and believer in a utopian vision of America, the perspective that ultimately defines  Springsteen's way of seeing and relating to the world around him. In Los Angeles, Springsteen  introduces a cover of Edwin Starr's "War" with the following allusion to his experience with the Vietnam  draft:   "If you grew up in the '60s, you grew up with war on T.V. every night. War that your friends  were involved in. And, uh, I wanna do this song tonight for all the young people out there. If  you're in your teens... I remember a lot of my friend when we were 17 or 18, we didn't have  much of a chance to think about how we felt about a lot of things. And, uh, the next time they're  gonna be looking at you. You're gonna need a lot of information to know what you're gonna  want to do. Because in 1985, blind faith in your leaders or in anything will get you killed."     Here, Springsteen establishes this performance as a communication from a politicallyaware American  speaking to American youth during a peak of the Cold War. "War" serves to present Springsteen's  nationality, political ideology and his position in American political society ­ as a teenager of Vietnam era America watching a new political order continue to support war activities. The introduction of the  song brands Springsteen as a representation of an American who maintains healthy skepticism and  embraces a freedom to disagree with and directly challenge the decisions of those in authority.  Springsteen defines those in power as unconcerned with the interests and safety of those they serve,  taking a position that could be read as reflective of a republican view of democracy and engaged  citizenship. This also aligns Springsteen with a generalized working class perspective on the Vietnam  War, as an unsuccessful plight that saw the American government targeting and exploiting their  population (Fox, 2004). Additionally, this speech defies images of the working class as unintelligent and  apolitical, displaying a class identity that is not built on common stereotypes and instead speaking from  a position of familiarity and respect.   Again in 1985, Springsteen aligns himself with a particular class position, and shows an  awareness of the social circumstances of the working class, introducing his cover of Woody Guthrie's  "This Land is Your Land" with the following:  
63 

 

"I´d like to do a song for you that I guess is about the greatest song ever written about America.  And it´s by Woody Guthrie. And, what's so great about it is, it gets, it gets right to the heart of  the promise of what our country was supposed to be about... If you talk to some of the  unemployed steelworkers from East L.A., or Pittsburg, or Gary, there are a lot of people out  there whose jobs are disappearing. I don´t know if they feel this song is true anymore and I´m  not sure that it is. But I know, I know that it ought to be. So, I´d like to do this for you reminding  you that with countries, just like with people, it's easy to let the best of yourself slip away."    Springsteen's monologues help to establish his personal onstage ideology, one informed by a disbelief in  the capitalist rendering of the American Dream and the valuing of an early republican American form of  community and egalitarianism, which marks his interests and therefore identity as working class and  American by association. Springsteen also relies on the motif of creating an association with Woody  Guthrie, who currently appears to be the foremost modern representation of early American  republicanism in popular culture. Springsteen articulates a loyalty to Guthrie's idea of working class  politics and republican community, and therefore associates himself with the same identity position.  The 1985 performance of "No Surrender" also helps to create an impression of Springsteen's class  politics, or more precisely, his belief in community as a point of solution and salvation. Springsteen  introduces it as "a song about trying to find something to hold onto, I guess." He at once articulates a  sense of hopelessness or of being displaced or lost, and proceeds to propose a song about friendship as  the solution, articulating an understanding of powerlessness and suggesting at his overall republican  vision of brotherhood and community.     Also significant to the performed identity of Springsteen is his now infamous sermonizing. In the 

2000s, Springsteen began using the language and performance gestures of a religious revival to  introduce his band and sermonize about the redemptive power of rock and roll and community. To do  so, he engages in prototypical charismatic preacher posturing, stomping his feet, waving his arms,  proselytizing to his congregation, eyes wild.23 The New York concert captures this routine in full, a  routine that has become a staple in his more recent tours (FriskicsWarren, 2005; Riley, 2004).  Springsteen's speaking to the value of faith in his 2000s concerts proves to be particularly revealing of  Springsteen's class, and of how he looks to the authenticity and values of rock and roll and leisure to  articulate his ideology.    Springsteen begins this portion of the show near the end of "Tenth Avenue FreezeOut," 

launching into a gospelinfluenced improvisation, requesting a call and response chorus of "It's alright"                                                              
23

 Again, Springsteen is using illustrative gestures to communicate his intentions.   64 

 

from the audience. Springsteen then begins singing Al Green's "Take Me to the Water," presenting not  only an image of baptism and rebirth, but of associations with driving down to the water that  occasionally appear in his music (in the case of this show, just a few songs previously in "The River").  Springsteen pounds the floor with his feet and tosses himself around across the platform in front of the  stage, bringing him several feet lower and closer to the audience. Then, Springsteen begins sermonizing:      "That's right. That's where I wanna go tonight. I wanna go to that riverside. I wanna find that    river of life I wanna find that river of love. I wanna find that river of faith. And, that river of    hope. Tonight I wanna go to that river of transformation, where you can go and you can be    changed, but you got to work at it. That's right. I wanna go to that river of sanctification, where    all life's graces and blessings can fall down upon you like rain, but you've got to work at it. I want    to go to that river of resurrection where everybody gets a second chance. But you've got to    work at it. Tonight I wanna go to that river of sexual healing and companionship. I wanna find    that river of joy and that river of happiness. I'm not bullshitting back here. But you just don't    stumble onto those things. You don't find those places by accident. You've got to seek them out    and search after them. And that's why we're here night after night after night after night.    Because you can't get to those things by yourself. You've got to have help. But that's where I    wanna go tonight and I want you to go with me, because I need to go with you. That's why I'm    here. And tonight I want to throw a rock and roll exorcism, a rock and roll baptism, and a rock    and roll Bar Mitzvah. That's right. We're gonna do it all tonight. Everything right here. I want    them waters to fall down on me and set me free, set you free. But I stood one evening as a    young man before a dark room of trees and I was frightened to pass through those trees even    though I knew that on the other side, the river of life was waiting. And there was cold beer at a    reasonable price. And there were no wicked cell phones either... But I stood paralyzed by my    own fears. And then a Gypsy woman called me onward and she said, `Son, come here. Let me    help you. What you need. What's your line?' And I told her what I did for a living and she said,    `Well then, what you need is a band. You need some help.'"     Springsteen's speech emphasizes redemption, companionship and love, and the need to work hard and  seek those things out with the help of others. Springsteen's sermon is significant in establishing his  performance identity, as it essentially summarizes his ideological position directly to his audience.  The  sermon feeds into Springsteen's overall narrative of community, and into an American rhetoric of rock  and roll, hard work, freedom and mobility and ultimately, then, serves to communicate Springsteen's  allegiance to republican ideology.   Though Springsteen does not perform the preacher routine again in Barcelona, he precedes the  introduction of his band with a miniature sermon of sorts. "Well, are you ready for a house party now?"  Springsteen calls near the end of "Mary's Place." "If you're gonna have a house party, the music has got  to be righteous!" In Springsteen's sermon, music ­ his own live show and his band ­ is posed as a path to  salvation. Springsteen speaks to a perceived void ­ a need to find hope, faith, love, sanctification and  rebirth ­ and proposes music (and by way of music, community) as the way to meet this need. Here, 
65 

 

Springsteen poses music as a form of religion, the belief in which will transport the listener to "the other  side." What this effectively does is create the impression of Springsteen's class and nationality, as well  as connect him with the values of rock and roll, and therefore, with authenticity, masculinity and  Whiteness. Springsteen's sermon affirms he finds value in rock and roll. Springsteen is thought to retain  rock and roll as a "path to salvation," possessing a belief in music and its ability to create a vision of  transcending social circumstances (FriskicsWarren, 2005; Riley, 2004), and arguably of creating a feeling  of transcendence itself in providing a momentary feeling of liberation. This embeds him into the  tradition of rock and roll music, suggesting that he shares the genre's values, its sense of authenticity,  and its White, male, working class social identity. Springsteen also uses the value of music to establish  leisure as a coping mechanism, with entertainment often posed as a route to transcendence, a  temporary solution to otherwise inescapable circumstances. Springsteen's valuing of entertainment  feeds into the American working class leisure ethic (Cullen, 1997). This not only suggests Springsteen's  national identity through association, but his demonstrated value for an ethic targeted to the working  class also suggests his own understanding of and therefore position in such an identity.    Springsteen's preaching also equalizes access to freedom, independence and human  connection ­ if someone can connect to the music, they are redeemable, given access to a new way to  see themselves and others, a new way to find satisfaction and ultimately transcend, if only temporarily,  their circumstances. Springsteen presents himself as a voice to those shut out of a more socially  conventional access to power, and therefore creates another allegiance with working class identity.  Music in a Springsteen performance isn't defined as a capitalist product, but as a place to possibly  overcome oppressive capitalist social relations. As well, Springsteen still imparts the concept of hard  work with importance, communicating his fundamental association with American republican  mythology and hegemonic masculinity, but redefines the purpose of that hard work. Springsteen  removes hard work from the context of capitalist accumulation, instead returning to republican notions  of community. Springsteen praises work, but imagines it as the path to community rather than the path  to wealth. Springsteen still appears to value the American Dream of mobility, but imagines it coming  from bonds with other people.   This largely contextualizes Springsteen's sermon into working class republican ideology.  Springsteen's primary values ­ hope, love and community ­ are all at the core of early American  republican philosophy. As he accomplishes in his lyrics, Springsteen's sermon removes the American  Dream from its current capitalist context and preaches a vision of idealized republicanism. This grand 
66 

 

vision of republican community and hope is one deeply embedded in the history of the American White  male working class ­ an ideology meant to promote their interests as a social group and create an  idealized nation not built on capitalist class divisions. In connecting himself to republican rhetoric in his  live performance, Springsteen establishes himself as a White, working class, American male in the  republican artist tradition.    

4.7. Intertextuality 
  Musical intertextuality accomplishes several things in terms of the performance of identity.   Incorporating the voices of other artists is thought to be a way of communicating and therefore  associating oneself with the original artist's identity, paying tribute to past musical traditions in order to  establish authenticity and communicate values. A cover can therefore be read as an exercise in doing  one or all of the previous, depending on context. Intertextuality plays a significant role in creating the  identity of Springsteen. His choice of cover songs and references imbue the figure of Springsteen with a  history which future references to Springsteen will later adopt for themselves.    Many of Springsteen's covers and his only obvious intertextual reference ­ "Roy Orbison singing  for the lonely"24 ­ are all songs representing early R&B and rock and roll.25 Springsteen uses references  to previous generations of rock and roll in order to demonstrate his position in a rock lineage,  demonstrate authenticity, and ally himself with rock and roll social identities, be they vulnerable  underdog masculinities or more typically lusty, leisureoriented masculinities. These covers also place  Springsteen in a lineage of American song, affirming his national identity. Springsteen also  communicates that he is a White artist who shows an appreciation of the sometimes erased history of  Black musicians in creating the genre he is most indebted to and associated with, but can also be said to  be using these songs in order to access Black music's image of quality, expressivity and authenticity.   Springsteen's other frequentlycovered genre is American soul.26 Once again, Springsteen is  embedding his work in a lineage of American music. Here, Springsteen associates himself with legendary  soul artists. As early music was heavily raced in the popular imagination, Springsteen is here again                                                              
"Thunder Road" Mitch Ryder & The Detroit Wheels "Good Golly Miss Molly/Devil With A Blue Dress On" and "CC Rider/ Jenny  Take a Ride," (all songs except "Jenny..." being Ryder's covers of 1950s rock staples), Van Morrison "Moondance,"  Jay and the Americans "Come a  Little Bit Closer," and Gary U.S. Bonds "A Quarter to Three."  26 Marvin Gaye "It Takes Two," Isaac Hayes "Shaft," Al Green "Take Me To The River," Curtis Mayfield "People Get  Ready," Edwin Starr "War." Springsteen also covers Sam Cooke's "Having a Party," and bases his original, "Mary's  Place" on Cooke's "Meet Me at Mary's Place."  67 
25 24

 

allying himself with a tradition of Black music. Soul music is seen to have bridged Black and White  audience sensibilities in the 1960s (Riley, 2004), but in being defined as a Black form, is thought to have  superior access to resources of feeling, expressiveness, talent and sensuality. A White artist citing a  Black artist provides them with access to this musical identity by association, and also provides access to  Black soul masculinity. This was a masculinity drawn from R&B music, which valued meaningful adult  relationships and ideas about love, and represented a more embattled struggle for equality (highly  exemplified in "People Get Ready") (Riley, 2004). It was, at the same time, a Black music masculinity,  thought to be sexually powerful, posed, aloof, stylish, self sufficient, street smart and hip (Wald, 1997).  As such, soul music and its identities are symbols borrowed by Springsteen (and later, Fallon) which  serves to associatively shape interpretations of his own masculinity, authenticity and racial attitudes.    Springsteen also reinvents a gospel standard to articulate his political, classed vision of 

community. Springsteen's "Land of Hope and Dreams," played in New York and Barcelona, is an  interpretation of "This Train (Bound for Glory)."27 Springsteen's version of the train to heaven allows  everyone, regardless of their sins ­ a message that inverts the original intention of the song.28 With this  reenvisioning of the gospel of the old America, Springsteen demonstrates his identity as a voice for the  marginalized, and his awareness of the reality of class and the emptiness of American capitalist  mythology. The song's reinterpretation of gospel doesn't necessarily translate into Springsteen taking on  the identity of a gospel singer (at least, not in this moment), but regrounds the transcendent properties  associated with gospel music, adapting the song to his egalitarian vision and allowing it to provide a  sense of transcendence over circumstance through a different kind of music and a different way of  thinking.     

4.8. Lyrical Themes 
According to Philip Auslander (2004), the way one reads a musician's identity is influenced by  that performer's songs. While a performance persona may be structured to communicate a particular  social identity through its personal front, the audience is also influenced by the meaning of the song.  Goffman does not speak directly about musical performances and therefore about song lyrics. However,                                                              
 "This Train..." is an American gospel standard. It was also covered by Woody Guthrie, whom Springsteen  separately covers in 1985. Guthrie connects Springsteen to a tradition of American republican masculinity and  social values, and to a lineage of sociallyconscious protest music. Guthrie is another common image in the  performances of Fallon and Springsteen.  28  Springsteen reinterprets lines like "This train don't carry no gamblers" to "This train  carries whores and gamblers" to suggest being inclusive of all those cast as having sinned. 68 
27

 

lyrics may be read as speech and therefore have the ability to contribute to impression creation and  disruption. Frith (1996) argues that in order to be believable ­ a core tenet  and responsibility for rock  musicians or performers in contexts where authenticity is a primary value and judgment criteria ­ a  musician is required to enact the identities of his protagonists and perform the appropriate emotions.  This demonstration of emotion, though largely guided by the content of the song, is structured by genre  and culture conventions and their mandates about what qualifies as an appropriate emotional response.     Springsteen's lyrics, then, contribute considerably to his identity performance. Though 

Springsteen often tells the stories of others, he is a particularly successful enactor of emotions and  performs in a way that makes his subject matter come across as sincere and intimate. Due to his  performance style, it is easy to imagine connections between his song meanings and his persona ­ to  assume that Springsteen has a vested interest in the characters and messages in his music.  The personal  front elements of his performance, as well, suggest a connection between singer and songs. Springsteen  sings about working men often from the Northeastern United States ­ characters that he physically  resembles onstage. This connection between performer and repertoire based on identity facilitates  being able to understand one way in which Springsteen enacts his protagonists, while simultaneously  creating the impression that Springsteen's songs may be read as expressions and extensions of himself.  Thereby, Springsteen's performed identity may be comprehended through his lyrics.29    Similar, familiar and consistent themes and images appear throughout the songs played in his 

four performances. They include faith, geographic references, car road imagery, specific gender roles  and particular class circumstances.  

Faith 
Springsteen's 1975 and 1985 performances were, generally speaking, free of any references to  religious or spiritual faith. However, Springsteen's most recent performances have seen an element of  religion enter the content of his songs and concerts. Though he uses some images from other religions,  his dominant association is with Christian imagery, which is also the kind of imagery he performs in  other parts of his concerts. Springsteen addresses the Lord, "prays for the faith,"30 wears the "cross of  [his] calling,"31 acknowledges his lost love being called to a duty "someplace higher,"32 says fate is "in 

                                                            
29 30

 This construction of the relationship between lyrics and identity also applies to Fallon.   "My City of Ruins"  31  "The Rising"  32  "Into the Fire"  69 

 

God's hands,"33 and repeatedly asks for faith from sources outside himself. Aside from specifically  referencing the cross, a Christian symbol, his wording otherwise connotes the popular language of  Christianity. As noted in sections 4.3. and 4.6., 2000sera Springsteen punctuates the religious imagery  in his songs with hand gestures thought to draw attention and communicate emotion (Eckman cited in  Frith, 1994), often by outstretching his arm and pressing his palm outward, a gesture typical of both  Christian worship and preaching. He also performs a preacher routine that draws from images of  Christian religious leaders.     Springsteen also uses the image of water ­ defined directly in his New York sermon as the place 

where he will be reborn as free. Water provides a vivid image of redemption and escape for his  characters, and, as in "The River," a place that draws them back because of the freedom and future it  once allowed them to experience and consider. The image of water as a place of rebirth and  regeneration is symbolic of Christian baptism and therefore Christian identity.    Springsteen's gestures and lyrics thereby symbolically connect him to an image of Christian 

religious identity, an identity that is used to connote Americanness, Whiteness and masculinity. His  recognition and acknowledgment of a (likely) Christian higher power helps to associate Springsteen as  an American. America is conceptualized as a Christian nation, and an "American citizen" is popularly  thought of as someone who identifies as Christian (TheissMorse, 2009), therefore bolstering  Springsteen's identity as an American. Additionally, Christian images are also considered to be images of  prototypical Whiteness and maleness. Springsteen's body and physicality already enact the impression  of Whiteness and hegemonic masculinity in their strength and exhibitions of will. These qualities,  according to Dyer (1997), are shaped, initially, in a Christian image ­ the idealized body of Jesus Christ.  Christ, in the context of most major Christian denominations, is the prototypical representation of what  masculinity and Whiteness are expected to look like. Springsteen not only reflects this expectation in his  body, but in establishing a Christian identity, allows his racial and gender identity can be evaluated  against the identity standards established by Christianity.  

Geography: 
  Springsteen's music uses almost constant references to place, particularly in his earlier songs  where his style was to create scenes as well as narratives. Springsteen uses city names, general regional  and cultural locations, roads and a general sense of being on the border or just outside of mainstream  life. All of these elements help to create impressions of social identity in Springsteen's characters, and                                                              
33

 "Countin' on a Miracle" 70 

 

ultimately in Springsteen himself, reinforcing the message he already began communicating in his  onstage monologues that he belongs to and is a messenger of the working classes.     Springsteen most frequently uses images of the city, particularly its socalled underbelly ­ the  backstreets, the alleys and Lovers Lane.34 Sometimes, streets are explicitly named to create regional  images.35 Springsteen at once acknowledges and romanticizes the ugliness of city life, describing  violence as opera, and looking at places transforming at night into spaces where misfits, vagrants,  criminals, street toughs and good time girls socialize.36 Springsteen tells the story of this side of the city,  himself once cast in the image of one of these rock and roll throwback rebels. This 1975 performance is  where Springsteen sings the majority of these songs about shore brats and backalley dwellers, allowing  for the association between the performer and the Saint in the City dressed like "a Harley in heat"37 to  be made rather easily. Springsteen's unflinching sincerity, too, aids in associating him with the people he  sings about. When Springsteen discusses the working people of America, he names specific cities and  regions ­ Gary, Indiana, east Los Angeles, California, and Pittsburg, Pennsylvania in the 1985  introduction to "This Land is Your Land" ­ providing the audience with a sense of authority and  authenticity in his specificity, and in grounding the 70yearold cover song he plays in a real,  recognizable present. He does the same with Youngstown, Ohio,38 a real American city ruined by the  decline of the steel industry throughout the 1970s and early 1980s.  He also sets many of his songs on the beach ­ on boardwalks, at carnivals, and near the water.39  The beach is, likely, another allusion to Asbury Park, a rundown, working class beachside town on the  Jersey Shore that Springsteen romanticizes as home. The beach brings in the image of youth, of leisure,  of escape and of Springsteen's struggling adopted hometown. This is a space of working class leisure,  again citing the American leisure ethic that will be revisited shortly. Asbury Park and the beach are also  sites of young and working class social life, as well as quintessentially American locations. The stories set  at the beach connect Springsteen to this mythology by association, presenting him as another of the  working class youths in his songs and communicating his national identity.     One thing that is particularly important to note about Springsteen's use of geography is that it is 

largely concerned with borders and unseen spaces. Many of Springsteen's songs are about living in                                                              
34 35

 "Backstreets," "Jungleland," "Incident on 57th Street."   "Darkness on the Edge of Town," "Prove It All Night," "Youngstown," "Atlantic City," "Lost in the Flood."  36  "It's Hard to Be a Saint in the City," "Kitty's Back," "Lost in the Flood," "The E Street Shuffle."  37  "It's Hard to Be a Saint in the City"  38  "Youngstown"  39  "Backstreets," "4th of July, Asbury Park (Sandy)," "For You," "Born to Run," "Atlantic City."  71 

 

these unseen and border spaces, or the efforts to cross over them ­ the night, the hidden parts of the  city, the darkness on the edge of town, and the "dark side of route 88."40 Springsteen being a narrator of  the border spaces not only aligns him with a working class and a rock and roll identity, but allies  Springsteen with an outsider society in general. Though precisely what kind of outsider Springsteen sings  about ­ be it the selfstyled Brandos of his early period, the American factory labourer, the abandoned  veteran, or the criminal who is out of choices ­ changes throughout his career, Springsteen's music gives  voice to those who identify with positions of economic disadvantage.     Springsteen articulates his own regional and national identity through his use of place. He writes 

about American locations or important sites of American life. Springsteen in this sense is an American  singer, a voice for highly particular, recognizably American places. He is affirmed as a messenger for a  particular national identity. Ultimately, though, Springsteen's place references serve to perform class as  they can be defined as symbols of low culture, and are "negative" status symbols. In popular culture,  New Jersey, the beach, carnivals and border spaces carry class connotations and are commonly  imagined as spaces of working class social life. Consequently, then, when Springsteen identifies himself  as a product of these places in his monologues, he creates the impression of his own identity as working  class and feeds into an impression that he is concerned with memorializing the past and with nostalgia.  This concern with one's past ­ an attachment to the old neighbourhood, so to speak ­ is thought to be a  marker of the working class (Fox, 2004; Roediger, 2007).  

Car and Road Imagery 
  The invention and proceeding accessibility of the car in America helped, to an extent, to equalize  the nation, facilitate its mythology and represent its identity. Cars created an egalitarian space,  awarding those who could not show their wealth and status through property the opportunity to do so  in cars, reducing rural isolation, spurning a highway system that would bring rural and suburban areas  some economic benefit, creating its own subcultures, and creating a space of escape and freedom for  both teenagers and adult drivers (Jakle & Sculle, 2008). The car became an opportunity to experience  temporary freedom, independence and escape, a place where one could be isolated from their  surroundings while still experiencing them from afar (Jakle & Sculle, 2008). Early advocates for the car in  American culture initially defined driving as a masculine sport, connecting the values of masculinity ­  independence, control, freedom, leisure and limitlessness ­ with driving and the road (Jakle & Sculle,  2008). Cars also came to represent what are considered fundamental American values ­ the privileging                                                              
40

 "Jungleland," "Night," "Darkness on the Edge of Town," "Mansion on the Hill," "Spirit in the Night." 72 

 

of the individual, mobility and change, utilitarianism and the pursuit of ideals ­ therefore becoming a  symbol of America itself (Zalinsky cited in Jakle & Sculle, 2008). In popular culture, the road became a  temporary home for those displaced and dissatisfied, and served what was thought to be an inherent  need in people to keep moving (Jakle & Sculle, 2008).     Driving, the road and cars are an important site of meaning in Springsteen's music. Springsteen's 

music is built around the image of the car. In 1975, Springsteen's image borrows from the greaser and  the teenager, two subcultures with vested interests in the car and driving. As such, he begins to define  himself in the tradition that helped make the car a symbol of freedom, independence and socialization  for these sometimes marginalized cultures. He also, thereby, defines himself as a figure representative  of these values and therefore of their relationship to hegemonic masculinity. Though his image would  change, his relationship to cars and driving, and his American rock and rollinfluenced view of them  remained the same until late in his career. Though it is thought that Springsteen's depiction of the road  as a place of escape would eventually transform into a view of the road as a place that ultimately offers  no solutions (Riley, 2004) the performances studied here reveal consistency in Springsteen's depiction of  cars, driving and the American road.     Springsteen's music expressed the characteristically masculine and American desire for and 

importance of freedom through car imagery. Starting his 1975 concert with "Thunder Road,"  Springsteen sings a line that effectively summarizes the role car imagery will play throughout much of  his early career, and that will reappear time and time again in the songs he performs to a modern  audience: "these two lanes will take us anywhere." To Springsteen, driving becomes the tool for escape,  the way the compulsion to seek better is satisfied, or as in "The River," the motion the protagonist is  pushed to repeat, even though he knows the escape he once achieved is no longer possible.41 This view  of escape as provided by literal mobility is integral to American ideologies, particularly in terms of the  vision of the American Dream and republicanism. Some of Springsteen's lyrics are built on these  ideologies, not depicting them as successful, but depicting their internalization and a belief in their  ultimate message of class mobility. The attempt to achieve the "dream," so to speak, communicates a  class identity in the adoption of such ideologies and in the articulation of wanting to escape one's  working class circumstances. As well, cars and the road are symbolic regions of social displacement,  again reaffirming associations with the working class. Cars also serve as symbols of traditional  masculinity in Springsteen. They are the tools that allow working class males to compete, be it with each                                                              
41

 "Born to Run," "Thunder Road," "Prove It All Night," "Land of Hope and Dreams," "Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)."  73 

 

other or otherwise, experience independence, engage with women and assert dominance and control  over whether they are branded a winner or a loser.42 Cars and driving are representative of masculine  values, and the celebration and association with cars affirms masculinity and its normative values (Jakle  & Sculle, 2008).  

Characterizations of Men 
  Springsteen's lyrical treatment of the social roles of men communicates elements of  Springsteen's onstage performance of masculinity. The majority of Springsteen's characters are working  men or young people who live primarily in urban rather than rural environments. Springsteen's male  characters often speak from a perspective of disempowerment, articulating their lack of power,  dissatisfaction and desire to escape.43 They are associated with social groups who in a capitalistbased  social order, have little access to or opportunity for power and are embedded in American cultural  mythologies that affirm their hard work or toughness and aggression as masculine, and communicate  employment and work as a source of masculine identity. Springsteen represents people who are at once  reflected in his own identity and for whom he is a voice, and the effects of these mythologies on their  identities,    Many of Springsteen's male characters are depicted as dealing with their place in a social 

hierarchy and looking to test national mythologies of class mobility. Particularly in his early songs,  Springsteen's narrators look to these mythologies of escape and mobility by making promises to their  female companions, often promises to escape their current circumstances of mundanity or oppression.44  In making their promises of escape to women, they are creating themselves in the image of a hero,  looking to access traditional masculinity in whatever way is available to them and change their class,  here through the internalization of American class mythologies.    Springsteen's post1975 work ­ the songs that will appear in his 1985 and 2000s concerts    shows male characters broken by American cultural mythologies of mobility and by capitalist labour  organization. Though they had once attempted escape, and occasionally still try, there is a sense in  these narratives of the realization that the fundamental ideologies of social mobility embedded in  American culture are faulty.45 These characters are working men  labourers, but not of the type  fashioned by blue collar man mythology, or the valorized American worker who gets his dignity from his                                                              
42 43

 "Night," "Backstreets," "Cadillac Ranch," "Stand On It," "Ramrod," "Lost in the Flood."   "Thunder Road," "Badlands," "The Promised Land," "Murder Incorporated," "Dancing in the Dark."  44  "Born to Run," "Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)," "Thunder Road," "Prove It All Night," "Ramrod."  45  "Youngstown," "Atlantic City," "Born in the U.S.A.," "Seeds," "Murder Incorporated," "Countin' on a Miracle."  74 

 

hard labour and awaits fulfillment from inevitable wealth. Instead, these men are ultimately dissatisfied  and have what some may call a pessimistic, others a realistic view of the American class system.  Springsteen, in a sense, addresses the dreaming of his old material and refashions it, envisioning  transcendence as coming from music (as also evidenced in the sermon) and ordinary life, community,  brotherhood and leisure.46 This reenvisioning looks to some of the tenets of republican philosophy,  again contextualizing his social identity as one formed in an early American republican image, and  therefore also White, working class and American.  Springsteen also addresses the cultural conceptions of masculinity available to these working  class figures. His male characters occasionally speak from acknowledged positions of vulnerability ­ "I'm  just a scared and lonely rider."47 Springsteen's male characters are disappointed, apprehensive and  alone. This is an articulation of generally unmasculine emotion and a need for connection, something  that contradicts the standard of masculine independence and stoicism. Somewhat uniquely, Springsteen  offers a depiction of his male characters (and perhaps masculinity in general) as participating in a kind of  "masquerade."48 Being a particular kind of male ­ looking "hard," as he summarizes it in "Born to Run" ­  is acknowledged to require face work. Springsteen's characters embody traditionally masculine  identities ­ working men and macho youth ­ be they mainstream or subcultural. However, the attitudes  and presentations that create their identities are sometimes revealed to be artifice. Springsteen talks of  experimenting, acting and playing, young men testing their hardened identities against their peers.49  Springsteen, therefore, reveals the artifice of masculinity, and his doing so can be read in several ways.  On one hand, Springsteen's expression of the artifice of masculinity can be read as a personal  statement, an effort by a person in a public position to speak to a perceived social reality that  destabilizes the assumed naturalness of masculine machismo, strength and authority. As well,  Springsteen's masquerading man is often depicted in a working class image. These masculinities receive  validation through exhibitions of strength and aggressiveness, often presented on the body, as they do  not possess the material or hierarchical means to access hegemonic masculinity (Donaldson in Connell,  1995; Dyer, 1997; Palmer, 1997). Springsteen's revealing of this type of toughguy masculinity as a farce  may speak to his narratives of working class reality and an understanding of the dynamics of this male  identity, resultantly performing his gender and class identity.                                                               
46 47

 "Countin' on a Miracle," "Out in the Street," "Mary's Place," "Land of Hope and Dreams."   "Born to Run" 48  "Growin' Up," "It's Hard to Be a Saint in the City."   49  "Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)." "Born to Run," "It's Hard to Be a Saint in the City."  75 

 

Characterizations of Women 
  Springsteen's treatment of women tends to reinforce a gender divide, an articulated difference  in the roles and power positions granted to men and women in his songs. In his divisive, somewhat  typical way of depicting and treating his female characters, Springsteen exhibits hegemonic masculinity.  Though his lyrics may question the cultural demands put on men, they accepts and reinforce dominant  representations of women.     Throughout the songs in his set, Springsteen refers to women as "girl," "little pretties," "honey," 

"darling," "baby," "mama," "sisters," "girlie," "babe," and "dolly." This helps establish Springsteen the  narrator as heterosexual through his addressing of women through sexualized terms, a sign of having  internalized the tendency for North American English to subordinate women through language [Wood,  2003], and a sign of speaking the male language of rock and roll. Ultimately, images of women in  Springsteen's songs are traditionally feminized, shaping both performer and narrator identities as  hegemonically masculine in their reinforcement of gender difference. Springsteen's women are also  addressed with a recurring set of names: Mary and Janey, though he also uses Wendy, Little Angel, Kitty,  Sandy, Puerto Rican Jane (also referred to as Janey), Terry and Rosalita.   Springsteen's depictions of women and particularly of female beauty help communicate his  identity as White and American. Though Springsteen rarely describes the physical appearances of the  women in his songs, they are occasionally described as blond50 (a connotation of Whiteness) and  considered ideals of White beauty. As is common in representations of Whiteness, Whiteness itself is  not articulated although it is connoted.51 "Mary," as well, carries some rather obvious connotations,  connecting Springsteen to Christianity and Whiteness. Mary is the ultimate representation of the White  female, and the ideal prototype of White female beauty and virtue (Dyer, 1997). Springsteen also adopts  elements of a Western identity ­ the White, American cowboy. Several of Springsteen's songs allude to  Hispanic women in the use of names: Puerto Rican Jane, Rosalita (who is alternately addressed as  Señorita), and Maria. The image of the White AllAmerican male promising rescue to a Hispanic woman  is a typical element of the Cowboy narrative (Limón, 2000), and reinforces any connotations of Western  masculinity in his wardrobe. Aside from depicting women as being in need of rescue and men as heroes,  the image of the Hispanic woman provides Springsteen with the identity representation of the White  American cowboy and his hegemonic masculinity.                                                              
 "The E Street Shuffle"   Whiteness is mentioned once in all of the songs considered here: "Them boys in their spiked heels/Ah,  Sandy/their skins are so white" ­ "4th of July, Asbury Park (Sandy)."   76 
51 50

 

Springsteen's women are, ultimately, awarded little agency in his writing. His narrators are male,  but they often sing to women. He isn't held down or heavily burdened by these characters (Riley, 2004).  Springsteen's women are usually, as Palmer (1997) states, "good time girls." Sometimes, the good time  is implied, with women playing a role in the liberating recreation of nighttime: Crazy Janey makes "love  in the dirt,"52 Little Angel lines up the boys,53 and Kitty leaves her man for a "top cat" in the city.54  Springsteen asks his women to love him in the moment, often because there is little else to do, because  time is passing, or because their dreams of greater things are failing and love ­ however momentary ­ is  what they have left.     Springsteen's women are passive, never given the voice of primary narrator in these songs, and 

rarely placed in the role of active subject. Women are acted on or reacted to ­ the objects of desire and  longing. He sings to them but not about them. They merely serve as ears for confessions and sounding  boards for the desire for freedom. Springsteen's narrators are often bringers of freedom, making  promises of escape to women and therefore placed in a position of masculine power. When those  promises of salvation begin to fail ­ a failure articulated as the result of circumstance, not personal  failure ­ Springsteen's men return to women to find their personal satisfaction. Springsteen's songs  define that men can find true fulfillment through love, an idea that defies the way male success and  fulfillment are culturally defined. Springsteen's men, however, also realize that the promise of great love  may be fleeting, fruitless or impossible, though this is a perspective far more rarely encountered. During  the New York show, Springsteen performs songs where love fades or never begins. The male character  remains by the woman's side and maintains a sometimes admittedly futile sense of hope in better  circumstances.55 Ultimately, his narratives seem to prioritize a sense of companionship, duty and loyalty  rather than idealized romantic love, another affirmation of republican as well as traditional masculinity  in how they do not articulate dependence on women.  

Class 
Springsteen's music presents working class identities in an almost entirely different manner than  is common in mainstream American culture. Springsteen's music concentrates on the internalization and  inevitable failure of American Dream ideology. Springsteen's performance, in general, embraces,  empowers and redefines American working class images and identities. The working class are given                                                              
52 53

 "Spirit in the Night"   "The E Street Shuffle"  54  "Kitty's Back" 55  "Atlantic City," "The River."  77 

 

dignity in Springsteen's lyrical depictions, and his music and particularly his later live shows, are explicitly  concerned with providing the service of leisure, escapism and opportunities for transcendence.  Springsteen's lyrics question the dignity of embodied labour ­ which is in itself a mark of working class  identity (Fox, 2004)  and question the validity of the American Dream, showing their truer, less idealized circumstances and destructive consequences in his narratives.56 In his depictions of working  people and the nature of the American class system, Springsteen is ultimately dismantling the ideologies  of capitalismdefined hard work and promised reward that the American industrial working class was  built on, and reinstating the republican values of egalitarianism, community, an independent workforce  and class solidarity.   Springsteen's reality grounds dreams of mobility to a certain extent. He acknowledges the  reality of dreams that have failed, rearticulating the American male working class identity discussed in  his representations of men. His famous line, "I got debts that no honest man can pay" from New York's  "Atlantic City" articulates the sense of bondageincircumstances, the inability to necessarily fulfill  fantasies when daily survival is of greater concern. His characters are pushed to bitterness, desperation,  or a general loss of faith. He articulates job loss particularly in the trades, alienation, obligation, corrupt  authority, homelessness and the pattern of inheriting one's social circumstances from their fathers.   These characters find temporary refuge in the life of the city and the night.57 A predominant  theme in Springsteen's work is leisure, a leisure spoken about in opposition to work, as freedom  juxtaposed with bondage (Cullen, 1997). The night is when Springsteen's characters become themselves,  not restricted by the behavioural expectations and social hierarchies of work. Springsteen's value of  leisure does not only help create an impression of Americanness, but of a working class identity. In  country music, as argued by Fox (2004), and as I would argue in rock music, leisure is dominated by men,  in terms of how it is lyrically presented here. According to Fox (2004), men are the masters of working  class social life. Leisure in and of itself is heavily classed. The American pursuit of leisure for leisure's  sake stems out of oppressive, alienating working situations, helping to create the mentality of living for  Saturday night as well as the general national interest in entertainment (Cullen, 1997; Fox, 2004;  Roediger, 2007). Due to this classed, nationalized nature of leisure, Springsteen's treatment of the  theme of leisure in his music helps to communicate his performance identity. His demonstration of a  vested interest in leisure, along with an articulated understanding of the function of leisure in American                                                              
 "Badlands," "Youngstown," "Born in the U.S.A.," "It's Hard to Be a Saint in the City," "Atlantic City," "My  Hometown," "Seeds," "Murder Incorporated," "The River," "Countin' on a Miracle."  57  "Out in the Street," "Prove It All Night," "The Promised Land," "Night," "Mary's Place."  78 
56

 

working cultures help to not only present his identity as working class, but to form impressions of him as  being American, male, and in the connotation of the blue collar man, White. In Springsteen's work,  leisure pursuits do not require much money and allow for independence, passion and the opportunity to  build a sense of respectability. Springsteen's characters find pleasure in driving, dancing, sex and  friendship, as well as more risky pursuits like racing that allow them to compete and affirm their  identities and authority. The things his characters take pleasure in are typically represented as working  class pursuits. Springsteen is drawing from a preexisting image of working people's recreation and  incorporating it, deliberately or not, into his music to further identify his songs as being about the  working class.     Although Springsteen's depictions of class seek to tear down the existing mythology of the 

American Dream, Springsteen doesn't entirely eliminate the concept of dreaming or ideological thought.  Springsteen creates a new kind of idealized vision for the society he sings about. This vision serves to  communicate a sense of Americanness about Springsteen's persona in his associations with American  republican philosophy and in his exhibited concern for and awareness of his place of origin. His values  are built entirely into the tradition of the republican artist hero, praising community, democracy and  ordinary American life ­ an image that serves as the embodiment of a kind of White, working class,  male, American national identity.  As well, this loyalty to an idealized past communicates of the value  ordinariness and therefore of working class identity (Fox, 2004).     Springsteen's class narratives are also escape narratives, arguably read as romanticized 

depictions of working people finding love, faith, community or music in order to transcend or better  their circumstances. These narratives fit into Allison's (2003) image of the "good poor," the kind of  economically disadvantaged people depicted as hardworking and moral, and are the target of American  Dream ideology. As such, Springsteen's working class image may be read as part of this "good poor"  category without embodying the traditional, capitalistinfluenced mythologies of the American dream.  Even though Springsteen's work concentrates on dismantling the fantasy of class mobility, Springsteen's  class image still uses some of the same idealism and value for hard work that connotes this sanitized  image of the American economic working class.     Ultimately, Springsteen reinterprets American mythologies in the songs played during his 

concerts. Springsteen constantly reaffirms the values of faith, companionship, love and a belief in music 

79 

 

in both his lyrics58 and the structure of his live performance. Springsteen's solution to the American  Dream he identifies as faulty is questionable, to an extent. It isn't an overthrow of the system, so to  speak, but a call to reprioritize and to live by a different value system than the one promoted in modern  America. Springsteen doesn't necessarily propose concrete solutions about breaking out of oppressive  circumstances, or directly calling for an overthrow of the national economic order. Instead, he makes  the corruptness of that order apparent through its consequences on the population he relates to, and  gives those affected a way to transcend rather than escape. Springsteen speaks to coping in the present,  and presenting his own ideal ­ the value system that could make life better if only it were enacted. All of  this presents Springsteen as a figure in tune with and therefore identified with the working class. His  working class identity is based in authenticating mechanisms ­ in this case, a sense of being relatable  and of realism, the idea that Springsteen, himself an embodiment of the working class, is familiar with  and willing to articulate this particular set of general social circumstances and their causes. His solution  being a kind of nonsolution, too, may help him appear authentic. He isn't a political reactionary in the  conventional sense, nor is he an outsider speaking for the group. His solution is one that may be  achievable immediately, and one that he himself is able to provide through his own live show.    All of this ultimately positions Springsteen as a contemporary model of the republican artist ­ a 

musician with a particular vision of American social life based on a particular philosophical position.  Springsteen removes the capitalist rhetoric from the American Dream, returning to an albeit idealized  republican vision of America. In both Springsteen's work and in early American republicanism ­ and  more significantly, early republicanism's art ­ working people are celebrated, progress is related to the  ability to build and sustain bonds with others (particularly other men) and ordinary life is a source of  value (Cullen, 1997; Garman, 2000). Though Springsteen may create visual and other gestural  impressions of the hardworking man's man and depoliticized blue collar man identities, his perspective  of class nullifies all of these impressions to some degree. It proves him politically and socially aware and  associates him with a different kind of American Dream. Representations of working class identity are  often intended to promote mythologies about possibilities for social progress and maintain capitalist  social organization. Springsteen's lyrics redefine those mythologies, demonstrating some of the realities  of such a social order and revealing some of the falsities of existing ideas about mobility and class  structure. Springsteen doesn't abandon the idea of the American Dream, instead returning to a                                                              
 "The Rising," "My City of Ruins," "Two Hearts," "Janey Don't You Lose Heart," "Land of Hope and Dreams,"  "Mary's Place," "Dancing in the Dark."  80 
58

 

republican ideal, where mobility and bettered circumstance are prioritized but believed to be achieved  through equality and community, and where hope is a central value. Springsteen's early escape  narratives and later stories of transcendence and coping fit into this ideology, maintaining a critical view  of the current manifestation of American Dream narratives while instead upholding the values of  another White, working class, masculine ideology.        

81 

 

Chapter 5: The Performed Identity of Brian Fallon 
    In order to reach a comprehensive understanding of how the figure of Springsteen is echoed ­ 

be it intentionally or unintentionally ­ in the identities of other popular music performers, this analysis  will now turn to Brian Fallon, frontman for The Gaslight Anthem. It seems that comparisons to  Springsteen become prevalent because of a number of factors apparent in live performance. Fallon's  appearance, his regional background, his performance style, energy and manner of performing  authenticity, and the dominant themes, images and symbols in his lyrics all seem to connect him to  Springsteen in a significantly more obvious way than to any of the other artists he references. The  similarities revealed in this performance analysis conclude that these comparisons are, indeed,  warranted, as their performance personas are structured in a similar fashion. What follows is a more  thorough examination of the performed identity of Brian Fallon, which seeks to understand his  performed persona and how it specifically relates to the figure of Bruce Springsteen.   

5.1. Clothing 
  In Sydney, Fallon wears a patchwork flat cap, a white crewneck Tshirt with a print and dark  jeans. At the Opera House, he wears a black Tshirt, black jeans, and a black flat cap. At the Kool Haus,  he wears dark jeans, a plain white Tshirt and a black motorcycle jacket with an offcenter zipper closure  ­ a different shape than what Springsteen wears in London, but an identical look to the one he wears on  the Born to Run cover. In Washington, Fallon wears another plain white Tshirt and dark jeans. His  clothes tend to be closecut, and with the exception of the jacket, look "modern" in that they don't  borrow too directly from another era in their styling.     Fallon's visual identity initially connects him to classic punk and more modern rockabilly 

cultures, as these musical movements adopted (or returned to) some of the aesthetics of rock and roll ­  narrow denim pants, white Tshirts and motorcycle jackets. More specifically, however, Fallon is most  connected to American punk subcultures concerned with the lives of markedly ordinary men.59 Though  many of these subcultures have disparate sounds (and also lack agreedupon labels), ranging from  Americana influencedpunk to posthardcore, they are typified by allmale bands with performance  styles perhaps most accurately described as passionate and humble or modest and "authentic," in the                                                              
59

 These subcultures are best exemplified by acts like The Replacements, Hot Water Music and The Lawrence Arms.  82 

 

sense that their music and personas are representative of everyday truths and created and delivered  with sincere intentions. The arrogance, bravado, overt showiness, androgyny and sexual expressivity of  rock music, and the rebelliousness and defiance of early punk are not present. Aesthetically and  expressively, The Gaslight Anthem fit best with this group of musicians, which serves to associate the  band's collective identity with a place in a punk community and in a masculine, "everyman" musical  environment.     Fallon's clothing draws from similar representations as Springsteen's, specifically the 1950s teen 

rebel and the industrialera worker. The reflection of these images in his stage clothing serves the same  purpose in Fallon's identity presentation as it does in Springsteen's. In echoing the 1950s teen rebel,  Fallon creates an impression of that particular kind of masculinity ­ young, wild, impassioned, at once  frustrated and concerned with displaying a macho image, and searching for power. This image of the  1950s teen rebel is still read as a rock and roll image ­ an aesthetic identification with hegemonic  American rock and roll masculinity ­ and therefore places Fallon in this context.     Fallon's clothing creates an impression of being working class. His flat cap, jeans and a Tshirt 

look is a working class image, a reflection of visual representations of nonuniformed manual labourers.  It is the same image of the working class that Springsteen employs in his performances using Tshirts,  denim and plaid. Here, Fallon also echoes images of the prototypical working man and blue collar man  with his wardrobe, presenting these visual symbols of a working class identity. Fallon's hat, too, may be  read as a status symbol. The flat cap has, stereotypically, been viewed as a visual marker of working or  lowerclass identity ("Flat cap," 2010). Though it has a history of being worn by men of varying classes, it  appears to be dominantly viewed as a "negative" status symbol and tends to appear in the typical  fashions of lowerclass groups or social movements.     Ultimately, Fallon and Springsteen channel the same classic American images of gender and 

class through their wardrobes. Additionally, it can also be said that Fallon's clothing uses the image of  Springsteen as a representation in and of itself, in order to communicate his identity. By 2007,60  Springsteen had become an icon in American music, and as this project attempts to articulate, a notable  representation of a particular kind of identity that is recognized for one reason or another in a  significant number of popular artists today. Fallon's wardrobe, generally, connotes some of  Springsteen's more iconic, culturally memorable symbols. Springsteen uses this white Tshirt and jeans                                                              
 In accordance with Eye Weekly's article, though the actual emergence of Springsteen as a strong presence in  contemporary music is impossible to date specifically.  83 
60

 

look throughout the 1970s and 1980s, particularly in his most iconic images on the covers of Born to  Run, Darkness on the Edge of Town and Born in the U.S.A., as well as in the 1975 and 1985 concerts  considered here. In the way that both artists can be read as presenting the symbols of American  teenhood and working men through their clothing (and therefore, representing the values and identities  of these images), it can also be said that Fallon presents some of the symbols popularly associated with  Springsteen, and therefore associates Springsteen's identity with his own.  In echoing 1975 and 1985era  Springsteen, Fallon connotes both the rock and roll and soul masculinity of early Springsteen, and the  more traditional working man masculinity of Springsteen's Born in the U.S.A. period. Ultimately, too, this  similarity displays a shared kind of White, American, republican working class identity, created by the  same symbols and connotations.    

5.2. Physical Body 
  Previously, it was noted that Fallon's wardrobe bears similarities to the visual image of  Springsteen in both 1975 and 1985. Springsteen's Born in the U.S.A.era masculinity ­ the most  aesthetically traditional of his performed masculine types ­ is largely based on his body rather than his  clothing, which is more connected to his class status. Springsteen's clothes during this time were cut to  display the hypermasculine, sexualized aspects of his body, and his physique creates the more  prominent impression of the meaning of his gender performance. Though Fallon uses the same white T shirt and jeans working man imagery, his body does not perform the same function in his identity  performance.     Fallon, physically, assumes the part of both the past and present incarnations61 of the 1950s 

rocker, a visual resemblance he shares with Springsteen in 1975. He is similarly small framed, like  Springsteen in the 1970s, and heavily tattooed ­ a typical feature of the personal aesthetics associated  with modern rock, punk and rockabilly (and all the hybrids thereof). This consistent look provides Fallon  with an identity rooted in or at least heavily associated with music, and therefore gives him access to a  kind of "alternative" masculinity, though one that is not necessarily outside the boundaries of traditional  hegemonic masculinity, but derives its authority and legitimacy from a different discourse.     Otherwise, Fallon's physical body cannot be read as performing a significant identity function. 

He does not display any form of physically exaggerated masculinity, nor does his body display obvious  signs of the kind of physical strength and will that are associated with Whiteness and American identity.                                                              
61

 This refers to musical subcultures that borrow aesthetic styles from 1950s rock and roll. 84 

 

Fallon's physical body is left to be read primarily through his clothes, not making any particular  statement in its composition, but rather in how it is used.   

5.3. Physical Performativity 
  Part of the comparison between Fallon and Springsteen, the kind of comparison that argues The  Gaslight Anthem don't so much borrow from him as channel him, likely comes from Fallon and  Springsteen's similar onstage conduct. It is difficult to determine if the mannerisms and gestures  discussed here are intended or unmotivated, and therefore impossible to assert with certainty if any  similarities are intentional or coincidental.       Fallon's engagement with his own music sometimes mirrors that of Springsteen while he is 

performing his more intense, emotionallychallenging material. It is this "version" of Springsteen that  Fallon seems to echo in such comparisons, rather than Springsteen's physical performance in his  "rocker" songs. Fallon follows the same conventions of emotional expression, using the same kind of  direct emotional expressions (Eckman cited in Frith, 1994) to communicate his relationship to his songs  and therefore to create a sense of authenticity and personal connection to the content of his music.     Like Springsteen, Fallon's energy doesn't wane, he never seems to lose interest in the show, and 

doesn't change the mood of each song from performance to performance. Fallon's music is rarely as  grave or dark as Springsteen's can become, and it seems that his level of intensity in performance is  therefore more subtle though equally present. Fallon generally keeps to his post onstage, only taking  the microphone off the stand to roam the stage once during one of the band's more upbeat songs.62  Like Springsteen, he stands close to his microphone particularly when singing. He holds his microphone  similarly, his hands taking the microphone from on top, singing close. His body movements are similar, if  slightly less from the hip. Springsteen tends to tap one of his feet to keep rhythm, holding his head fairly  still, while Fallon tends to keep rhythm by nodding or bobbing his head. Both musicians sway, stand with  one foot braced in front of the other, rock back and forth from one foot to the other, and pump their  shoulders slightly to the rhythm on the song. Fallon's tension level is never quite as apparent as  Springsteen's ­ his face is more relaxed, his shoulders looser ­ and because of this, he comes off as less  restrained, as if he is giving all he has in the moment, without ever defying the limits of masculine  expressiveness set by his dominant music culture affiliations. When not singing, Fallon tends to fall back,  hunching over his guitar. He keeps his eyes closed during his more serious songs, as well, and in slower                                                              
62

"Old White Lincoln," Toronto, October 2009. 85 

 

or more sombre songs, tends to look down and to his right when playing, seemingly not focused on the  pedal board in front of him, but on the floor.    Another somewhat striking gestural resemblance between Springsteen and Fallon that can be 

read as the direct expression of an emotional state involves their hats. In London and in Sydney,  Springsteen and Fallon constantly play with their hats throughout the show. Fallon generally keeps his  on, while Springsteen tends to take his off for entire songs during the show. While wearing it, however,  Springsteen constantly plays with it, shifting it on his head while he plays, tugging at it, doing what may  most appropriately be referred to as mashing it around with his hands. Fallon does essentially the same  thing during the Annandale show, playing with his hat mostly throughout the first half of the show. It  feeds into the impression that both singers have something within them that needs to escape, be it  agony or passion. Again, this, coupled with the general sense of tension Fallon exhibits, communicates  not only a sincere relationship to his music, but speaks to his masculinity and Whiteness, both  performed through a demonstration of selfdenial and emotional control (Connell, 1995; Dyer, 1997).  Striking a comparison on this point seems somewhat obvious ­ intentionally or unintentionally, Fallon  looks and acts a lot like Springsteen in his 1975 show.      Unlike Springsteen, Fallon performs far fewer illustrative gestures with his hands and is not in 

the habit of moving them from his guitar or his microphone except to occasionally accent words or  phrases in his songs. These gestures often mimic the action rather than the emotion. These gestures are  also coyer and less rousing than Springsteen's. Fallon's style is often playful and tongue in cheek, fanning  himself when he sings, "Honey I am on fire"63 or slapping his own hip when singing about "your Monroe  hips."64 Fallon does not have the same tendency as Springsteen to use his hands on particular repeated  words and images, usually relying on the tone of his voice (an element not considered in this study) and  the overall tone of his physical expressions. Generally, Fallon's overall tone is more subtle and consistent  than Springsteen's ­ his levels of intensity rarely reach the same level of tension, and his mannerisms  during more upbeat songs are not as exaggerated or as obviously enthusiastic. Fallon is most gesturally  expressive when talking to the audience, his constantly moving hands suggesting enthusiasm and  casualness in his manner. Fallon's persona, in general, is also more consistently lighthearted than  Springsteen's ­ he is often seen smiling or reacting to the crowd immediately in front of him ­  

                                                            
63 64

 "The Patient Ferris Wheel"    "Film Noir" 86 

 

reinforcing the band's themes of leisure and rock and roll, keeping his performance grounded in working  class values.      Fallon's gestures during "Here's Looking At You, Kid" also serve to create the impression of 

Fallon's identity as working class. In Washington, Fallon sings the line, "drunk off all these stars and all  these crazy Hollywood nights" with one eyebrow raised, a sarcastic smirk on his face as if to say that line  isn't exactly true, the lyrics of a man bragging rather than revealing the reality of his very unHollywood  life. Similarly in the first verse, he laughs to himself when he says, "You can tell Gail if she calls/That I'm  famous now for all of these rock and roll songs" again implying the ordinariness of his life. He also makes  a few particular gestures when singing lines that speak to depictions of masculinity in his songs.  Particularly when compared to Springsteen, whose manner of laughing at himself is generally reserved  for expressions of sexuality and onstage dancing ­ a laughter that comes out of breaking his stoic,  otherwise staunchly male physical persona ­ Fallon's selfawareness comes during moments where he  sings about male identities. Fallon can be caught laughing to himself when he sings, "Call every girl we  ever met Maria,"65 or smiling to himself in what may be read as disbelief or embarrassment when he  says, "We are the last of the jukebox Romeos."66 Though it is impossible to tell what, precisely, Fallon is  laughing at from the vantage point of an audience member, these moments suggest that Fallon may be  rolling his eyes at the macho, 1950s rock and rollstyled identities he portrays and represents through  his songs. While this does not alter the nature of Fallon's own performed masculine identity, it may  mean that the hypermasculinity communicated through his songs is exaggerated and entirely a matter  of superficial image and persona.     What an analysis of mannerisms and gestures serves to point out is that both men communicate 

the authenticity of their music and presence in the same way ­ a major point of validation for  comparisons between Springsteen and Fallon.  Both performers match the nature of the subject matter  and the sound to the way they perform. They employ similar gestures to suggest sincerity and emotional  investment. This visually accessible performance style also serves to bond the performer with the  subject matter of the song. Due to the believability and the connectedness of the performer and the  song, it is feasible that the song may be either a story the singer personally relates to, suggesting that  the characters and circumstances in the song say something about the singer, or their own story.  Demonstrating an emotional investment in, here, songs about working men's issues, suggests that                                                              
65 66

 "Blue Jeans & White TShirts"   "We Came to Dance" 87 

 

Fallon, like Springsteen, may be working class and is embedded in a rock and roll culture ­ an idea  ultimately compounded by the other impressions made.    

5.4. Instruments 
  Fallon, like Springsteen, only uses a few guitars during his performances. Generally, he plays  Gibson Les Pauls. The Les Paul is a typical instrument in rock music, and his guitars have no particular  markings or visible evidence of wear. At the Annandale Hotel, however, Fallon plays a Fender of a similar  model and colour to the instrument Springsteen has been playing since the early 1970s. This guitar  appears on the iconic cover of Born to Run, and is therefore a common, recognizable element of  Springsteen's visual image. Playing a similar make and model of guitar may facilitate comparisons or  reinforce comparisons already being made between the two artists. Again, when Fallon visually  resembles the iconic image of Springsteen in performance, he is, to an audience, fashioning himself to  communicate the social identity the figure of Springsteen represents.     Springsteen uses his instruments to communicate his musical authenticity and his working class 

status, and to present consistency in his persona (a sense of personal authenticity). Fallon's instruments  only serve to connect him to a rock tradition ­ the Les Paul being an iconic "rock" music guitar in  mainstream music culture. This possibly suggests to some audiences a connection to a lineage of  prototypical rock musicians, known to be embodiments of musical authenticity and rock values: Pete  Townshend of the Who and Jimmy Page of Led Zeppelin, among countless others. Fallon demonstrates  Moore's thirdperson authenticity (cited in Pattie, 2007), here, using a symbol of archetypal rock music  to authenticate his own performance.    

5.5. Band Interactions 
  Fallon's stage show operates significantly differently than Springsteen's, and contains less  directly connotative identity information. The Gaslight Anthem are a fourpiece band, with Fallon  standing at the middle of the stage, several feet in front of the drum kit, with lead guitarist Alex  Rosamilia and bassist Alex Levine on his right and left, on the same parallel. Like the early version of the  E Street Band, there are no women present onstage ­ the only compositional similarity between the two  bands. The Gaslight Anthem's interactions with each other are relatively minimal. During a Gaslight  Anthem show, Fallon faces his audience throughout the majority of the show, occasionally moving to 

88 

 

play his guitar facing either Levine or Rosamilia and less often turning to look at drummer Benny  Horowitz, though never spending an extended amount of time facing his kit. 

Gender and Band Interaction: 
  Addressing the crowd near the end of the Sydney show, Fallon encourages the men in the  audience to approach any woman they've had an eye on as the show was almost over, and starts his  speech by saying, "I don't know what you guys call ladies over here... the respectful term... we call 'em  kittens sometimes." What may appear as macho rhetoric on paper is actually said in jest. Despite this,  there is almost no ambiguity in Fallon's masculine identity, as it is created in his depiction of women  when he talks to an audience onstage. Much like Springsteen's 1975 performance, The Gaslight Anthem  does not have any female members, creating the image of a male community. Similarly, Fallon's onstage  dialogue about women achieves a similar effect as Springsteen's interactions with Scialfa onstage.  Women are spoken about in different terms than men, which serves to create difference between the  men onstage and women, and to subtly affirm heterosexual desire and therefore present hegemonic  masculinity. Again, this is a performance of the male homosocial environment, which affirms hegemonic  masculinity in its symbolic and literal exclusion and differentiation of women.  

Band Organization and Brotherhood 
  Springsteen acts as a bandleader, while Fallon remains more of a band member and  spokesperson. Both, however, perform a leadership role. Both men are the sole lyricists in their bands,  as well as lead vocalists and secondary guitar players. As particularly apparent in 1975, Springsteen  controls his band, coordinates their moves and interacts with them constantly. Fallon's leadership is  established almost entirely in his role of being the lead singer and only person who speaks to the  audience onstage rather than in being a conductor, motivator or boss. The band do occasionally come  together in front of Horowitz in order to conference, usually between songs near the end of a set, with  Fallon telling the Washington audience, "Very democratic up here," after stepping back to the  microphone, then joking, "I guess that's appropriate."The band often end together, with no obvious  signals about when or how to stop coming from any one member. Fallon dedicates songs in Sydney and  Washington to the band's friends, and once to an audience member. Springsteen does the same,  dedicating his songs to specificallynamed people and saying others are requests. The same camaraderie  and affection of the E Street Band isn't seen in The Gaslight Anthem. Ultimately, Fallon does not appear  as a domineering leader, not displaying any particularly connotative style of interaction except to display  the band as a wellrehearsed unit. It seems a stretch to look at The Gaslight Anthem as a classed 
89 

 

workplace in the way Palmer (1997) identifies Springsteen's band organization as a union. Fallon's  identity generally comes from his songs and personal front, rather than from his interactions with the  band.     Though the band does not create the same vision of an idealized workplace and a brotherhood 

onstage as Springsteen does, it is important to note, here, that brotherhood is still an important part of  the band's and therefore Fallon's identity. Fallon is, lyrically, concerned with the same values of  brotherhood shown and sung about by Springsteen during his E Street Band performances. Instead of  singing from a singular perspective, Fallon often uses "we" rather than "I" in firstperson narratives,  implying that he at once speaks for a group, or is possibly creating his own, suggesting to those who  relate that they are part of something. Fallon sings about sharing his recreational life with friends,  people with whom he shared late nights and drives. Fallon's friends are described as his brothers. In  hard times, he seeks them out for help ­ "And I'm callin' out for my brothers/But it's so dark in this  night, am I alone?"67 ­ and declares devotion and loyalty, even when they may have disappeared ­  "Were you hard up or broken, man/I would've helped you out."68 Fallon's lyrics in the context of this all male, highly functional (and impliedly connected) environment communicate that brotherhood exists  and is valued. Fallon's brotherhood is structured somewhat similarly to Springsteen's though is more  present in his lyrics rather than in the band's onstage organization. The promotion of brotherhood again  communicates values of masculinity and republicanism. However, Fallon's brotherhood is recognized as  fallible. Though it is idealized in his lyrics, and Fallon's narrators may represent themselves as keepers,  protectors or believers in a brotherhood,69 it is also depicted as unstable. Fallon's lyrics suggest that  brotherhood is unreliable, thereby reinforcing the value of independence and an impression of  hegemonic masculinity. As such, Fallon connects himself to Springsteen's identity, and shapes his own in  the image of American republican and rock and roll, and thereby, hegemonic masculinity and White,  working class identity.     

5.6. Language and Speech 
  Fallon reveals much of his social identity through his onstage speech. He creates impressions  about his class identity, masculinity and the culture with which he identifies. This also creates an  impression about the values he may uphold and provides audiences with an explicit context against                                                              
67 68

 "We're Getting a Divorce, You Keep the Diner"   "We're Getting a Divorce, You Keep the Diner"  69  "Drive," "We're Getting a Divorce, You Keep the Diner."  90 

 

which to read his identity. Most of Fallon's statements during a performance carry class indicators of  one kind or another. In Washington, Fallon introduces their last song with, "We'll be back next year with  a new record.70 Still on SideOneDummy, so nah nah Punknews.71 They always write we're gonna sign to  major labels every week. It's funny." Fallon displays a loyalty to a small record label, suggesting an  affiliation with conceptions of musical authenticity that rely on anticommercialism. This also carries  implications of (authenticating) creative control and not being privy to the financial perks of "getting  signed."  Fallon also performs a class identity while he thanks audiences for attending the show, or talks  about the opening acts. In Sydney, Fallon makes several comments about his band's ability. "They  should show some of these American fools how to play," he says of Eye Alaska, one of the band's local  openers. He continues later saying "Everywhere, they all sound the same. Half of `em don't know how to  play. You see what I'm talking about? Look at us fools." Several songs later, he repeats the sentiment  while mentioning his audience's ability to keep rhythm, "Everybody's got good timing, here. You can all  be in bands and do better than us." Before his last song at the Opera House, Fallon thanks the crowd by  saying "We feel lucky to be there. There's a ton of good bands you're not seeing tonight and you're  seeing us, and I thank you."  Fallon expresses a modesty and a gratitude that verify no one leaves with the impression that  the band are "rock stars" who overestimate the service they provide, and manages the working class  impressions he makes by structuring the audience's response. It also reinforces Fallon's image as an  everyman ­ he may be a musician, a position of some status in American society, but he claims he is  doing something everyone else can replicate, not declaring any exceptionality, authority or social  standing that is higher than that of his audience. He suggests a communal, mutual relationship between  band and fan, rather than a relationship based on admiration or adoration. Fallon also thanks the 9:30  Club and Washington security "for being cool," and in both Sydney and at the Opera House, thanks the  bartenders, telling the crowd in Toronto that they have to look out for each other, because they're  "working class."  Fallon shows obvious respect for "working people," again suggesting his own social  perspective on labour, and his own affiliation with a particular class position. 

                                                            
70 71

 2010's American Slang, set for release on SideOneDummy Records.   "Punknews" refers to Punknews.org, a music news website and community. 91 

 

 

Fallon also makes an impression of gender identity in his onstage monologues. When 

introducing "The '59 Sound" at the Opera House, a song about friends of the bands who have passed on,  Fallon positions the car as the place where he, himself, does his thinking:  "I was reading in the newspaper, which is the weirdest way to find out that a kid you grew up  with passed away. And, uh, I was reading about that and I was driving around in the  summertime, and I was driving home, and I was just thinking about how, like, defined things  become when you're just driving by yourself and you're figuring out `I'm not a kid anymore  people are gonna start leaving.' And that's kinda weird, and I think that they would think that  you would want them to go on without you, the same way and they would want you to have a  good time, so this song's for them."     This, once again, is an expression of masculinity. Fallon envisions the car as a place of importance in his  emotional life and his personal identity development. This is characteristic of masculine identity, which  is thought to be tied to a natural interest in driving and an identification with the independence and  power of the car (Jakle & Sculle, 2008). It also communicates a rock and roll identity, symbolized by an  interest in cars and driving (Goodwin cited in Pfeil, 1995).    As well, Fallon's onstage speech is one aspect of his identity performance that sets him up in a  context where his identity is to be judged by the values of a music genre. His entire body of work so far  is, in a sense, a tribute to the music of others, an example of holding music in high regard, of wanting to  align itself with a particular tradition and set of identities, and of demonstrating its impact on an  individual. Music becomes legitimized as a path to finding or forging one's own identity and place in life  regardless of other status obstacles. In his clothing, it is established that Fallon is positioned in the  genres of rock and roll and modern everyman punk. Fallon introduces "Blue Jeans & White TShirts" in  Sydney by saying:  "Spent a lot of time listening to music growing up, and not really talking to anyone else. And you  get to that age where you watch your parents kinda figure out there's something weird here,  but something not weird here, too."     The statement implies several things. For one, it feeds into the mythology of contemporary music in  general, that it is a calling or that there is a natural connection between some individuals and music.  Fallon creates an impression of himself, that he was the sort of person who was affected by music from  an early age, and related to it perhaps more than he related to his other surroundings. It gives context  then, to his lyrical suggestions in the song that follows, that his social community is built around music  and the values that music discourses embrace.  Thereby, Fallon's social identity is to be evaluated  against the values and norms of the musical genres he reflects. This then justifies his being a man on 
92 

 

display and a man who is emotionally expressive, grants him respect and dignity regardless of his  working class identity and other areas of social disempowerment, and gives the impression that Fallon  may value freedom, individualism, youth, leisure and the like.  

Connection to Springsteen in Language and Speech 
  Nonmusical comparisons between Springsteen and The Gaslight Anthem may come from the  way the two frontmen speak. Both have a similar structure in their delivery and regionalize and politicize  their identities in their onstage monologues. Both tend to engage in monologues that often have no  clear direction. Generally, their delivery feels loose and unscripted, Fallon's more so than Springsteen's  (whose monologue in the middle of "Growin' Up" 1985 was heavily scripted). Both Fallon and  Springsteen seem to tell short (and sometimes, notsoshort) stories to introduce their songs, stories  that sometimes ramble, giving the impression of what Fox calls the White Other, the American  underclass, through using talk for talk's sake (2004).     Their lyrical improvisations are also built around similar images, at least in the footage analyzed 

here. Fallon's only lengthy improvisation comes during the bridge section of "Angry Johnny and the  Radio," where the band usually plays a cover. Instead, Fallon sings what appears to be a series of  improvised lines (while also including a line from Sam Cooke's "Good Times," omitted here):   "Take it softer now, got something that's gotta come out/little bit softer now/wanna hear `em in  the back of the house ... There's a train/train whistle blow/I hear it somewhere in the back of  the house/train coming down/train in the house/ I hear this train in the back of my house... take  me far/take my troubles down..."      This parallels Springsteen's sermon and his Barcelona improvisation on the redemptive power of rock  and roll, carrying the same message and serving the same purpose in creating Fallon's onstage identity.  Fallon also creates his own Springsteen comparison through an improvisation in the middle of "Say I  Won't (Recognize)," where he sings about pleading with a girl's father, referred to as "papa." Fallon asks  him if he can take out his daughter, and he responds with, "No, no, no, cause you got no money." Fallon  continues pleading with, "And I said I treat her real nice/Papa, I treat her real nice/We'll get a nice high  rise..." then breaking into the chorus of "Movin' On Up," the theme song from the Jeffersons.72 He ends  the song with more improvising: "Cause papa, now we's up in the big leagues/I ain't got a car or nothing,  but so what?/Ain't nothing wrong with that." Fallon's improvisation suggests Springsteen's "Rosalita  (Come Out Tonight)": "And your papa says he knows that I don't have any money." The improvisation,  and more so its shambolic nature, suggests that Fallon may be singing spontaneously. He may be                                                              
72

Itself a song about attempts at upward mobility. 93 

 

drawing inspiration from something that is familiar, comfortable and possibly natural to him, which may  suggest that Springsteen's music is embedded in the way Fallon speaks and may confirm ideas that he  may have a significant connection to Springsteen.        Springsteen and Fallon both use improper grammar in their onstage dialogue, reflecting a 

regionalized, working class manner of speech. This way of speaking accomplishes several things in terms  of creating an impression of identity in Fallon's performance, just as it did in Springsteen's performance.  First, it creates an impression of class. To some, it could correlate to the representation of the working  classes as uneducated and unintelligent (Butsch, 2003; Ross cited in Ching, 1997), demonstrated by their  use of incorrect grammar and colloquialisms. It also suggests their regional background, suggesting  some of the stereotypical representations of the New Jersey state dialect and accent, again reinforcing  their personas as aligned with the urban, American working class.    Geographic location is of significance in both Fallon's lyrics and his performance dialogue. This is 

another major source of legitimacy for comparisons with Springsteen. Both artists come from ­ and  openly declare coming from ­ New Jersey, and associate themselves with Asbury Park. Fallon describes  his band as being from "up the coast," in Sydney, and explicitly calls New Jersey his home while  performing at the Opera House. He also describes driving through the state:     "... I drive from the best parts of New Jersey. It's like the middle of New Jersey, and there's this    one bridge that kinda separates the North side from the South side, and you drive over it, and    it's called the Driscoll Bridge. I don't know why you need to know that, but I'm gonna tell you.    And, uh, it's weird because you drive down, and you drive down the parkway, and you can just...    Everybody knows where people live by what exit you live off of on the parkway. The funny thing    for us is that we drive down to Asbury Park, and you could... it's the best drive in the world in    the summertime cause there's nothing around, and you just see all these towns and steel mills    and things passing."     Fallon not only identifies his home and his personal affection for driving ­ a way of performing an  American, working class, rock and roll and hegemonically masculine identity  but his reverence for an  urban American landscape. Fallon's landscapes aren't marked by nature, wealth, or by universal  familiarity, but by icons of working, industrial American life. This image also reinforces the image of New  Jersey as an industrial, highly urbanized state, not depicting New Jersey's status as one of the wealthiest  states, but of its working class reputation. This, then, reaffirms Fallon's communicated American and  working class status. In sharing his impression of his home state, he is also confirming cultural  stereotypes of New Jersey, helping to create an image of a background shaped by a place marked in the  popular imagination as working class.   
94 

 

 

Onstage, Fallon, like Springsteen, identifies himself as a messenger of these places, opening 

"Even Cowgirls Get the Blues" at the Annandale Hotel set with, "This is a song to you from the  backstreets." The song begins with the verse, "I haven't seen Sandy, Angry Johnny or Mary/I heard they  got married/Mighta had a couple babies/And traded their memories/For Fairview and Acres/And never  play no pinball/Or get out past the breakers." This implies the characters in Fallon's past have grown up  and moved up in a traditional sense. The narrator, on the other hand, "still loves Tom Petty songs and  driving old men crazy," still living the youthful fantasy found on the boardwalk. Fallon introduces the  song as the messenger, making it feasible that the song is about him and the people on the  "backstreets" for whom he speaks. Not only does it give the impression that Fallon is part of the working  class, but it suggests he shares the values of and embodies the character he sings about ­ a straight,  rock and rollloving, working class male who has stayed close to his roots and his youth, and has not  engaged in upward mobility or been taken in by the American Dream, going so far as to call it  undesirable.  Further, in Washington, Fallon describes the band as having spent time in "the dirtiest  squat in Europe, with punk rockers, and rats and everything." He speaks in a joking manner, but  provides a verbal legitimization of his identification with the subcultures they sing about. Fallon also  describes working class New Jersey as authentic, saying, "This song's about where you don't have to be  suspicious ­ in a New Brunswick basement." Fallon is likely referring to a basement concert or party,  granting a sense of authenticity to the independent punk music scene in New Jersey, the scene the band  call home.  Moreover, Fallon appears to draw on a kind of idealization sometimes associated with the  working class, a tendency to reflect on the past as more honest, less complicated (Fox, 2004). In this  town in New Jersey, suspicion was unnecessary as everyone's intentions are honest and people are  straightforward.        Fallon's music possesses no explicit political ideology, outside of presenting a working class 

consciousness. However, Fallon makes two political statements, one in D.C. and one at the Toronto  Opera House show, both of which reveal a distaste for conservative American politics and indicators of  working class identity. Before introducing "Miles Davis & The Cool" at the Opera House, Fallon talks a bit  about Canada, jokingly calling it "paradise" in comparison to the U.S., and then saying "It's funny  because I'm only halfway kidding, because it is, kinda... You guys should send us an email or something,  over to whoever runs the U.S. of A. Tell `em I need a doctor! I'm goin' crazy!" Fallon's delivery is  exaggerated, clearly joking with his audience. However, the comment serves the purpose of showing an 

95 

 

alertness to the healthcare system in the U.S. at the time, as well as explicitly stating his national  identity and suggesting his class status suggested by his relationship to the healthcare system.      The more obvious comment comes early in the Washington show. In what is his first address to 

the crowd, Fallon starts by saying:     "I think it smells a lot better in your city now that I've been here. 'Cause four years ago, it    wasn't smelling so good. I kept thinking I smelled a rat. Not no more! Thank you very much for    that, housing the hope. But, let's see. Let's just see. We'll just see. A little suspicious, still. Always    suspicious, ladies and gentlemen."     His tone is more sarcastic than it is heavyhanded, but his point is made. It isn't quite the sentiment of  Springsteen's "blind faith in anything will get you killed," statement from 1985, but contains the same  echoes of a skepticism of power. Fallon also declares an antiGeorge W. Bush position, a sentiment that  echoes Springsteen's political position during the time of "The Rising," though not explicitly expressed in  any of the live shows analyzed here. Springsteen's politics, being more clearly and frequently expressed,  are more easily assumed to be leftleaning. Due to their similar statements and a shared connection to  working class issues, it may be suggested that the two do have an ideological connection.   

5.7. Intertextuality 
  The Gaslight Anthem, like Springsteen, also use covers throughout their live shows. Again as  with Springsteen, these covers are sometimes played in full, but more often are performed between or  during particular songs in their set. Generally, the band inserts a cover into "Angry Johnny and the  Radio" and "Say I Won't (Recognize)," and introduces "I'da Called You Woody, Joe" with the first verse  and chorus of Ben E. King's "Stand By Me."  These covers are particularly important in terms of  establishing the band's lineage and impression of authenticity. Unlike many other bands, The Gaslight  Anthem do not play many deliberately crowdpleasing covers. As well, the content of the cover songs is  not as important to identity communication as the song's genre and artist. The band's covers are acutely  selfaware, serving the purpose of displaying the artistic traditions their music seeks to fit into.     In Washington, the band play the first verse of The Clash's "Straight to Hell" and a full cover of 

Hot Water Music's "Trusty Chords." The two songs have little in common in terms of their content.  However, both are part of two traditions of "everyman" or working class punk music, both British and  American respectively. Both bands have built careers on representing the social and emotional lives of  average and marginalized people. As well, the performance of a Hot Water Music cover affirms the  band's place in a particular contemporary music scene despite their otherwise dominant affiliations with 
96 

 

music from the mid20th Century. "Trusty Chords" shows the band's debt and respect to their  immediate peers, a model of punk music built on the same values of ordinariness and sincerity as much  of American rock. As well, Fallon's "I'da Called You Woody, Joe" is an original song built on lyrical  references to The Clash's Joe Strummer, with Strummer's music being defined as a source of salvation  thereby articulating Fallon's lyrical messages and association with punk and rock identities.  Fallon also  makes reference to New Jersey underground punks Lifetime,73 establishing a sense of rootedness in  punk with strong working class and emotive connotations.     Again in Washington, the band play a snippet of "House of the Rising Sun," an American folk 

song best recognized for a version by The Animals (the version seemingly echoed here), and use lyrical  references to Jefferson Airplane, Bob Seger, Tom Petty, John Fogerty, Meatloaf and even the Counting  Crows. Much like Fallon's use of the Les Paul, this cover and these references connect the band to early  rock music (and another band that forges the same connections to early rock music in their songs), and  to American music, thereby also affirming the Americanness of Fallon's persona. Again, this is a marker  of musical authenticity and a communication of Fallon's belonging in rock and roll culture, and therefore  a connection to its dominant personalities and identities. Many of these artists are also examples of  what Kirkpatrick (2009) calls heartland rock ­ music that is popularly recognized as working class and  American and thought to communicate an American and rock and roll identity based on values of  independence, sincerity, honesty, ordinariness and its own vivid reverence for early American rock.     Fallon also makes frequent references to Tom Waits and Bob Dylan, as well as to Leonard Cohen 

and Paul Simon. All of these musicians are considered archetypal White male singersongwriters, and  are, to an extent, enigmatic personalities. Waits and Dylan, particularly, are models of a kind of classic  American voice for the working class and models of emotional connection, independence, authenticity  and integrity, with tendencies towards both gritty realism and romanticism. As well, these artists are  often thought of as being embedded in the tradition of White American republican art, a tradition that  in contemporary music is often most connected to the figure of Woody Guthrie. In Sydney, Fallon plays  an original song called "Red At Night," a melodic takeoff of Billy Bragg's "Way Over Yonder in the Minor  Key," the lyrics to which were written by Woody Guthrie but never set to music. Though not a traditional  cover, the song is based on the melody of Bragg's 1998 version. In simultaneously referencing Guthrie  and Bragg, Fallon incorporates himself into a legacy of working class music. Bragg's primary identity  association is as an English punkfolk protest singer, while Guthrie is currently remembered as the                                                              
73

 "We Came to Dance"  97 

 

ultimate musical torchbearer of American republican values in the 20th Century. The apolitical nature of  Fallon's interpretation again suggests that the song is not an explicit political statement. However, it  does align Fallon with a tradition of progressive politics and protest music. Perhaps more significantly,  the demonstrated reverence for (either of) these two artists shows a connection to the music of the  working class, and more specifically, the kind of social identity that upholds working class, American,  republican values. Another Springsteen comparison is evident at this point, as Guthrie also appears in  Springsteen's repertoire in 1985. Springsteen's purpose in covering Guthrie is to return to and promote  a vision of America as conceived by early American republicans, and later carried on by Guthrie. Fallon's  purpose is perhaps not so explicit, as the song is not acknowledged as a cover, not easily recognizable as  a Guthrie composition, nor is it prefaced with a direct message of intention. Instead, the song seems to  serve as a tribute to a particular ideology and social position, which in effect creates an impression of  authenticity and working class identity or politics representing working class interests.     Most of The Gaslight Anthem's cover material may be classified as early American soul music 

and the band make frequent references to soul singers. In only four shows, the band plays six separate  soul covers.74  Their "Say I Won't (Recognize)" is, like Springsteen's "Mary's Place," built on a Sam Cooke  song, using the imagery and lyrics of his "Having a Party." Fallon also names and uses lyrical references  from Wilson Pickett, Marvin Gaye, Otis Redding, Sam Cooke, Sam & Dave and Gary U.S. Bonds (who is  here labeled a soul performer75) bringing to Fallon's music all of the meanings of soul music specified in  section 2.7.. The use of classic American rock and roll and soul music prompts another comparison of  Fallon to Springsteen and his performances with the E Street Band. Both artists seek to establish the  same dominant lineage, even using the same artists and going about this communication in the same  manner. Both Fallon and Springsteen are, therefore, inviting their identities to be evaluated against  existing representations of soul masculinity and authenticity.     Most significant to comparisons of the two artists, however, is Fallon's direct use of Springsteen 

in his lyrics. This intertextuality is, by and large, what inspires many of the comparisons between the two  artists. Fallon uses the same images of beaches, carnivals and seeking redemption by the riverside. The  most obvious references are to Springsteen's biggest albums ­ Born to Run and Born in the U.S.A.76 ­  their general popularity likely making it easier for these references to be recognized and for                                                              
Ben E. King "Stand By Me," Sam Cooke "Bring it on Home" and "Good Times," James Brown "It's A Man's World,"  Jimmy Ruffin "What Becomes of the Brokenhearted?" and Ja'net Du Bois "Movin' On Up (Theme to The  Jeffersons)."  75  "Casanova, Baby!" 76  "High Lonesome," "Meet Me By The River's Edge," "Señor and the Queen."  98 
74

 

comparisons to be made. Fallon's most obvious Springsteen reference is found in "High Lonesome,"  where he sings "At night I wake up with the sheets soaking wet/It's a pretty good song, maybe you know  the rest," citing Springsteen's "I'm on Fire." Fallon also makes constant allusions to "4th of July, Asbury  Park (Sandy)." Springsteen's song begins with the lines, "Sandy, the fireworks are hailin' over Little Eden  tonight/Forcin' a light into all those stoned out faces left stranded on this Fourth of July," and later,  "Now the greasers they tramp the streets or get busted for trying to sleep on the beach all night." Fallon  reuses the image of the carnival, fireworks, the beach (even repeating the line "sleep on the beach all  night" in "Blue Jeans & White TShirts"), uses the name Sandy and uses Little Eden as a geographic  marker.77 Fallon also uses the lyric "jump back jack,"78 which first appeared in James Brown's "Papa's  Got a Brand New Bag," and is later used in Springsteen's live staple "Thundercrack," and directly  borrows the image of "the hood of a Dodge on a Saturday night"79 from Springsteen's "Jungleland."     Several things are accomplished through this intertextuality. First, it connects Fallon to the 

figure of Springsteen ­ White, working class, American and traditionally male, but built in the image of  American republicanism and rock and roll, and seeking to communicate the values of transcendence,  community, brotherhood, and dignity, voice and respect for the disempowered. Fallon also presents  himself as obviously familiar with a variety of Springsteen's work, at least from 1973 to 1984. This  suggests validity for some of the comparisons made ­ it makes sense, so to speak, that Fallon may be  modeling himself after a popular music figure with whom he is familiar. More importantly, however, this  intertextuality is the gateway for searching for comparisons between the two artists. In attempting to  see the lineage of any of these muchreferences artists in Fallon's own music and performance, it is the  figure of Springsteen that stands out in comparison, based on nearly every aspect of live performance.  This, therefore, leads to a perceived connection (intentional or otherwise) and contributes to  discussions, classifications and expectations placed on Fallon and therefore, on his band.    

5.8. Lyrical Themes 
Faith 
  Fallon makes no explicit comments on or references to religious faith in his lyrics. He does,  however, occasionally use an image of water in a similar manner as Springsteen. Fallon uses the                                                              
 "Blue Jeans & White TShirts," "Say I Won't (Recognize)," "The Patient Ferris Wheel," "Even Cowgirls Get the  Blues," "Meet Me By The River's Edge," "The Backseat."  78  "We Came to Dance"  79  "Wherefore Art Thou, Elvis?" 99 
77

 

religious image of "wash these sins away," and thereby uses water as a symbol of redemption and  rebirth.80 Again, this is a connotatively Christian image, suggesting a belonging to the Christian faith, and  therefore an American identity. Otherwise, Fallon does not overtly perform any of the values defined as  masculine or White in Christian imagery, with the exception of some performative displays of self restraint.  

Geography: 
  Fallon uses nearly identical geographic and regional locations as Springsteen in his lyrics to the  same identitycreating effect. He uses images of beach towns, amusement parks, the road, the riverside,  factories and specific American locations to situate his characters and create impressions of class and  national identity. Fallon's characters, like Springsteen's, are working class men and women whose lives  take place in regions popularly conceptualized as spaces of working class socialization and manual  labour.  Fallon also uses geographic references to articulate iconic markers of American dreaming and  social differences, again creating an impression of a familiarity with American mythology and therefore  American identity, as well as classed identity.81 Fallon uses references to California in order to represent  a dream fulfilled. It is, likely, the classic American representation of success, prosperity and glamour,  here positioned as a place where working class characters go to escape their past. Fallon also makes  reference to "Fairview and Acres" in "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues," describing these towns as where his  old friends have gone to get married, start families and leave their old recreational lives behind. Fallon  uses Fairview to the exact same effect as Springsteen does in "Darkness on the Edge of Town,"  describing the middleclass New Jersey suburb as the place where former acquaintances go to live up to  capitalist expectations ­ to live in a new style that is less authentic than the life into which they were  born. Significantly, this is an indicator of Fallon's vision of the American Dream. Mobility is equated with  artifice, and authenticity and value in staying true to one's roots. Fallon is at once demonstrating an  internalization of American mobility in his imagining of California and rejecting this notion of "moving  up" as positive and fulfilling. He is, therefore, forging the impression not only of being influenced by  American mythology (and therefore, of being an American), but of being suspicious of it, aligning his  identity with one of contemporary working class reality.                                                                   
80 81

 "Meet Me By The River's Edge," "The Navesink Banks."  "The Patient Ferris Wheel," "The Navesink Banks," "We Came to Dance."  100 

 

Car and Road Imagery: 
  Fallon's music also relies heavily on car and driving imagery, which has exactly the same effect  on his performed social identity as it does on Springsteen's. Fallon's cars are drafted in the same image  as Springsteen's ­ classic American cars, archetypes of rock and roll and working class American social  life and leisure. In Fallon, cars are a source of freedom and escape,82 serving the same purpose as they  do in terms of creating an impression of masculine identity in Springsteen's persona. Fallon's car  language grounds his work in early rock and roll and gives the impression of masculinity, imbuing his  performance with the values of freedom and independence. Fallon's narrators literally dream of cars ­  cars represent promise ­ "I was gonna get this great big engine"83 ­ along with the ability to run away  and a place to bond with other men. Similarly, classic American cars are romanticized in Fallon's lyrics,84  connecting Fallon to American and rock and roll identity along with the other masculine values  associated with driving.   

Characterizations of Men 
  Fallon's own performed identity ­ visually and otherwise ­ corresponds with the images of the  characters in his songs, much like Springsteen particularly in 1975 and 1985. While both performers are  enacting their song narrators and characters through their own performances, their characters are at  the same time contributing to the impressions an audience would have of their singers' identities. The  White, American, working class males in their songs may be interpreted as extensions of their creators,  an impression particularly substantiated by the authenticity and sincerity performed while singing.  Therefore, what is revealed about their characters contributes to the identity impression being created  onstage by the artist.      Fallon's men serve to build an image of hegemonic rock and roll masculinity and White 

American working class masculinity, as his characters are symbolic of existing cultural representations of  these identities. Fallon's male characters are likely best exemplified in the opening line from "We Came  to Dance": "We are the last of the jukebox Romeos." Fallon's male narrators are mostly macho male  archetypes forged in the same images of 1950s rock and roll culture that Fallon's personal aesthetics  reflect. They are described as dreamers, romantics and Casanovas, but also as corner boys, punks and  dimestore saints, as hard and independent. Fallon also describes his main characters as working men  and as salt of the earth.                                                               
82 83

 "Boomboxes and Dictionaries," "The Backseat," "Old White Lincoln," "Wooderson."   "Meet Me By The River's Edge"  84  "Old White Lincoln," "Boomboxes and Dictionaries," "Wherefore Art Thou, Elvis?" 101 

 

 

Fallon, too, sings of male independence in a slightly different way than Springsteen, creating a 

more traditional impression of his masculinity based on his promotion of the values of independence  and autonomy. In Springsteen's vision of idealized brotherhood and republican community, "two  hearts" are always better than one,85 regardless of the situation, which is a key way in which Springsteen  reflects White, American republican masculinity.  Fallon's vision is often revealed to be the opposite. He  articulates the traditional value of male independence and the need to rely on oneself ­ "But nobody  ever gonna tell you the way/You gotta figure it out boys and suffer the rain"86 ­ in order to survive, even  though you may seek community or companionship. In "We're Getting A Divorce, You Keep the Diner,"  Fallon creates an image of men who have sometimes been abandoned by their former brotherhood and  now have to hold their own. It appears to be the reality to Springsteen's republican brotherhood ideal ­  the articulation of maturing into a life of impossible expectations and having to leave behind or  becoming isolated from the bonds that, in Springsteen's world, are the best coping mechanism.     Fallon's songs are sung from male perspectives, often to women, often similarly making them 

promises about escape or apologizing for those dreams not coming true and finding some value in  love.87 It may be argued, then, that love and female companionship, more so than brotherhood, is the  source of the most satisfaction, redemption or reward in Fallon's lyrics, even though male independence  is valued. Fallon positions his narrators, much like Springsteen in his earlier work, as heroes in their  offering of escape. They reach out to women and offer them promises of a better life, seeking fulfillment  and power in relationships, as will be discussed briefly. Though the American Dream is acknowledged as  having failed in many instances, Fallon's songs are still largely escape narratives, or at least stories about  the rarelyrealized dream of escape. In one sense, this theme relates back to the myth of the "good  poor" (Allison, 2003) by way of the image of the escape narrative. As well, it depicts a position where  powerlessness is rectified through human connection, and in this creates an impression of empowered  working class identity. This can be read as working class masculinity being reaffirmed through fulfilled  heterosexual desire, or as male power being redefined in somewhat republican terms of successful  interpersonal relationships rather than accumulation and work.                                                                     
 "Two Hearts"   "Film Noir"  87  "Boomboxes and Dictionaries," "I Coulda Been a Contender," "1930," "We Came to Dance," "Casanova, Baby!"  "Say I Won't (Recognize)." "Old White Lincoln." 102 
86 85

 

Characterizations of Women 
  Fallon depicts women similarly to Springsteen. He uses female characters to develop  impressions of hegemonic masculinity by creating and depicting gender distinctions and employing  idealized images of women. Unlike Springsteen, however, Fallon provides his female characters with  significantly more power, portrays slightly more variance in their identities and includes them in his  depictions of American working life ­ presenting a male vision of women that is at once inclusive and  stereotypical.      Fallon refers to his female characters as doll, honey, darling, girls, mama (referring to both a 

love interest and a mother on separate occasions), baby, Señora, "my queen," Señorita and kitten. He  compares or relates his women to classic film icons ­ Audrey Hepburn, Judy Garland and Marilyn  Monroe (also referring to Greta Garbo in the only song not played in any of these shows), and defines  beauty in hegemonic, iconic feminine terms, thereby affirming his own hegemonic, American  masculinity. He also depicts the women his characters are involved with as wearing dresses, though an  exception to this comes in "Old White Lincoln," where the female character is described to wear high tops and be tattooed. Fallon presents an unconventional form of beauty, one that sparks an image of  rock and roll and punk subcultures. This is, however, not disruptive of his impression of masculinity. The  image of subcultural beauty is essentially meaningless, as Fallon's dominant lyrical depiction of women  and men is strictly normative.     Fallon also uses women's names to associate himself with a musical or cultural tradition. "We 

call every girl we ever met Maria, but only love Virginia's heart" he sings in "Blue Jeans & White T Shirts," a song that characterizes his own social group and shared identity. Maria appears in many of his  songs, along with Virginia, Mary, Matilda, Sally and Sandy. These are generally classic names in rock  music and are present in the work of the the icons Fallon sometimes borrows from ­ Springsteen, Dylan,  Waits, The Rolling Stones ­ associating him with these artists and placing his identity as an artist in this  line of White, often American, male singersongwriters.     Beauty, here, is often defined in White terms, particularly in references to blue eyes and White 

film stars. However, Fallon also refers to some of his women as Señora or Señorita, or Maria. Like  Springsteen, he implies their Hispanic ethnicity through names. It is the only time Fallon makes any kind  of nonWhite racial or ethnic reference. The depiction of Hispanic women as love interests could be read  in the same way as Springsteen's ­ symbolic of the Western connection in their imagery. Fallon's music, 

103 

 

indeed, relies on these conventions: images of "outlaw cowboy bands,"88 of boots, of "riding like  silver,"89 and the "high lonesome"90 sound of bluegrass. Western imagery, in terms of representation,  symbolizes White imperialism and hegemonic, American cowboy masculinity. Fallon's use of Hispanic  names could be part of this Western motif, therefore symbolizing White masculinity through conquest  (Limón, 2000).     In his depictions of women, Fallon also uses the character of the good time girl Palmer (1997) 

identified in Springsteen's work. The opening lines of "The Navesink Banks" begin with the image of a  warning sign above a woman's bed ­ "All hope abandon, ye who enter here"91 ­  the verse closing with  "And my first sin was a young American girl." Fallon envisions this woman as having ruined his narrator,  leading him on a path of delinquency. This is ultimately, however, a rare, severe image and not typical of  how Fallon portrays women. The good time girl definition, however, can still be interpreted in the roles  women play in the narrator's lives. Fallon's women provide male characters with escape from their  circumstances and the ability to assert the power and access to freedom associated with hegemonic  masculinity. Narrators approach female characters with offers for better lives, and are drawn as  potential saviours and working class heroes. With little access to other sources of hegemonic male  identity, these characters essentially view women as an opportunity to stake their own claim to  manhood.  Significantly, both artists put their male character's ability to save themselves and others from  their circumstances in the hands of women. Their hero masculinity is affirmed in theory, in an  articulated dream rather than in actually being able to escape. This is not to say that these men would  not be searching for or attempting escape without a female companion to take with them, but it is rare  for a man to be dreaming of escape without someone by his side in either Springsteen or Fallon's work.  They depend on women to project and enact their fantasies. At the point from which these songs are  sung, many of these male characters are asking for women to let them be saviours, let them find  redemption for the failure of their lives through love and companionship. The answer, which is rarely  implied here, is what will determine whether or not these men will be accepted as saviours or heroes,  able to change their identities, or be forced to return to a state of searching. In "I Coulda Been a  Contender," perhaps one of Fallon's clearest articulations of the dream failing, he opens the second                                                              
88 89

 "High Lonesome"   "Wooderson"  90  "High Lonesome"  91  The sign on the gates of hell in Dante's Inferno. 104 

 

verse saying, "Once you said I was your hero." That identity is gone, replaced only with expectations for  "heart attacks and broken dreams tonight." The women that chose to climb into Fallon's front seat, to  borrow a phrase, are shown to turn their backs on these former heroes. Love does not necessarily  overcome circumstance, and Fallon's women don't necessarily turn out to be genuine companions as  the idealized visions of love and community would have. Again, this treatment of female characters  affirms hegemonic masculinity, particularly by way of articulating gender differences and by  demonstrating a value for heroism and independence, even when it is not fulfilled.    Ultimately, Fallon gives more voice to female characters in his lyrics than Springsteen does in  any of the songs considered here.92 Springsteen never uses his narrative voice to tell the story of a  female character. However, Fallon does, creating the impression that women do not exclusively serve  the purpose of enacting male fantasies or facilitating displays of their masculinity. Particularly in "High  Lonesome," a woman is depicted as part of the same social world as men ­ she too is shown to  experience unfulfilled dreams and the consequences of circumstance. Similarly, Fallon gives the role of  saviour or dreamer, depending on how one reads the lyric, to the character of Sally in "Meet Me By The  River's Edge." In this song, it is Sally's character, not the narrator, who declares that "We're going to  wash these sins away/Or else we won't come back again," offering the redemption and escape of a life  of regret, failed dreams and fruitless hard work. While this does not necessarily have any impact on  Fallon's performed gender identity, the song once again establishes an impression of an awareness of  American ideology and its mythological properties. This again establishes Fallon's American identity and  his realistic rather than idealistic perspective on American class hierarchies.  

Class 
  What appears most significant in a sidebyside comparison of both artists is their connection to  a kind of working class awareness of circumstance. Springsteen's is ultimately more political, more  concerned with revealing the roots as well as the consequences of failure, and more rooted in  republican philosophy. Both artists are concerned with feelings of entrapment and frustration,  expressed through describing the location of the present as a "prison" or "rat trap." They make note of  changes in the state of the world of these characters ­ a changing, troubled America.     This is articulated by Springsteen through concrete details, in stories about economic changes, 

or stories of events that reflect injustices. These stories show the detrimental effect of the realities of  contemporary (or, thencontemporary) American life on characters sometimes explicitly defined as                                                              
92

 Note: this is still a male construction of female experience.   105 

 

working class.  Fallon approaches his articulation of the social, economic and political realities of the  people he sings about more vaguely. Instead, Fallon relies on the implication of geographical references,  leisure pursuits, allusions to manual labour, and feelings of despair and hopelessness to at once create  an impression of working class identity and defy the stereotypical cultural mythologizing of the  economically disadvantaged in America (Allison, 2003). Fallon isn't concerned with why these feelings  are experienced, but rather with articulating their existence. Fallon identifies the place his characters  inhabit as the "unstable arena of what's left or what's become of my America."93 As exemplified by the  song "We're Getting a Divorce, You Keep the Diner," Fallon declares, "We were the magnificent  dreamers," and locates the narrator as "struggling out in the mighty jungle." By the fourth verse, Fallon  questions, "Were the things that we wanted when we were still sixteen/Only passing and fleeting or just  too far out of reach?"     Both writers articulate this sense of once having a dream, sometimes having their songs only be  about the dream rather than its futility.94 This dream is always the dream of a better life, be it accessed  by literally relocating to a place with better circumstances, pursuing a dream, or finding satisfaction in  connecting to another person. For both writers, the "dream" in question is, fundamentally, the  American Dream, the national mythology that promises the ability to change one's circumstances of his  or her own volition, shaping class expectations accordingly. Ultimately, the dream of freedom and  worryfree living is realized as impossible, and the hard work it demands becomes a trap ­ "If I could put  down this old hammer/I'd take you somewhere new."95   Both Fallon and Springsteen cite the  impossibility of capitalistbased mobility and the impossibility of escape. However, Fallon doesn't  necessarily share in the idealized republican vision of Springsteen, directly discounting the role of hard  work in progress and mobility, displaying it too as futile.96     These circumstances, therefore, call for coping mechanisms. As discussed in section 4.8., 

Springsteen's work thematically focuses on how those not living the American Dream use the night and  leisure to experience freedom and autonomy. Fallon's music is similarly structured. At the core of  Fallon's stories is the failure of the idealized dream and how his characters come to deal with this  circumstance. Like Springsteen, he writes that freedom is found in surprising places: music and in bonds  with other people. Fallon sometimes structures his image of freedom and salvation in an image of an                                                              
93 94

 "We Came to Dance"   "Wooderson," "The Patient Ferris Wheel," "Born to Run."  95  "Casanova, Baby!"  96  "Meet Me By The River's Edge," "I Coulda Been a Contender." 106 

 

idyllic rock and roll past: "I need a Cadillac ride/I need a soft summer night/Say a prayer for my soul,  Señorita."97 He uses the same conventions as Springsteen, talking about leisure, summertime, and the  possibility for salvation and transcendence through music.98 Fallon's image of leisure comes from being  the "heart of Saturday night:"99 dancing, chasing girls, wasting time at the beach, or driving, all  exemplary values of rock and roll. Fallon's characters engage in this leisure to escape ­ either to ignore  or transcend. Set under the "central Jersey sky," "We Came to Dance" exemplifies the general purpose  of leisure ­ to cherish and take advantage of a time when working class characters can access freedom  and companionship, regardless of and possibly even in defiance of what's coming.100 Leisure and the  night are, as in Springsteen, are defined in opposition to the working day. They become figured as the  part of life where one can be their true self, a place of selfdefinition and a place to reject the capitalist  mentality of defining personal identity in terms of occupation. This portrayal of leisure accomplishes  essentially the same purpose as Springsteen, defining Fallon's identity in terms of rock and roll and a  respectful image of the American working class. It also facilitates easy comparisons with Springsteen, as  Fallon's sites of leisure are almost identical to Springsteen's, particularly in his use of New Jersey  boardwalk imagery.   Music, too, is defined as possessing the same redemptive, saving power in Fallon's lyrics in  addition to his onstage speech. His images of driving include the radio, and music is discussed as not  only part of the leisure world of escape, but as important to the emotional lives of some of his  characters. This is probably most obvious in the song "I'da Called You Woody, Joe," Fallon's tribute to  Joe Strummer. The song follows the experience of finding and listening to the kind of music that you  could later claim changed your life. Here, Strummer's music is described as "a shot from my skull to my  brain," performing the effect of waking someone up, calming them down and providing them with  support and emotional release. This is again a form of leisure and an articulation of rock and roll  identity, as well as a continued demonstration of Moore's thirdperson authenticity, and therefore, an  affirmation of personal authenticity.                                                                   
 "Wherefore Art Thou, Elvis?"   "I'da Called You Woody, Joe," "Boomboxes and Dictionaries," "We Came to Dance," "Even Cowgirls Get the  Blues," "Wherefore Art Thou, Elvis?"  99  "Blue Jeans & White TShirts"  100  "And if the big bomb drops down over this quiet Edison sky/we'll blow one last kiss/to all the beautiful nights  like this" ­ "We Came to Dance."  107 
98 97

 

5.9. Section Conclusion:  
  After considering both performers' identities, comparisons of Fallon to Springsteen appear  warranted due to the number of visual, performative and lyrical similarities between the two artists. It  can also be inferred that Fallon accesses many of these representations by way of Springsteen ­ that is  to say that while this analysis suggests that both artists fashion themselves as 1950s rebels, Fallon may  simply be fashioning himself after Springsteen, displaying any other identityshaping and authenticating  representations through his similarities with Springsteen. However, this analysis confirms that even  without the presence of Springsteen, Fallon would still essentially be creating the same impression of  identity. Both musicians communicate their identities by employing many of the same representations  of White, working class, American, male identity with similar perspectives toward American class  hierarchies and circumstances. Though Fallon attributes worth to community and brotherhood, the  performed impression of his ideology is significantly less suggestive of early American republicanism, or  at least suggestive of a vision far less idealized than that of Springsteen. Though Fallon's associations  with the republican artist musical tradition are prevalent, his overall ideology lacks the consistency and  coherence of Springsteen's republican vision. Though both are working class musicians whose material  is primarily concerned with articulating working class realities, Fallon's message does not obviously  engage in republican rhetoric the way Springsteen's does. Of every distinction that can be made  between the two artists, this is likely the most significant and suggests that while the figure of  Springsteen is present in Fallon's live performance, his ideology does not entirely permeate Fallon's  work.     Although both artists draw from the same images and sites of preknowledge, it is almost 

impossible to consider Fallon without Springsteen. Springsteen's presence in American popular culture  remains massive, and his level of fame alone ensures that the values and identities he communicates are  iconic. Springsteen's cultural presence helps clarify Fallon's identity and helps to place him in a musical  context where his expressions are readable because of their familiarity (regardless of where this  familiarity derives from) and the other musical identities they connote. Due to the performance  similarities between the two artists, it is possible to glean a lot of Fallon's identity information from the  figure of Springsteen that he reflects. Differences are ­ though not inconsequential ­ subtle and easy to  overlook because of their shared qualities, therefore facilitating assumptions about Fallon's identity and  making broad generalizations relatively appealing.  

108 

 

Chapter 6: Conclusion 
  This thesis was an attempt to understand the social identity of Bruce Springsteen based on his  live performances, and how and why this image ­ this figure of Springsteen ­ has become significant to  contemporary music. Previous work on Springsteen has already defined him as a model of American  identity, Whiteness, hegemonic masculinity and blue collar working class identity. Alternately, he is also  seen as representing the American musical and cultural history of republican philosophy and an anti capitalist working class identity. This analysis of Springsteen's performances draws a number of  conclusions about the overall identity he represents in popular culture, which are generally consistent  with other interpretations which have also considered his songs, music videos, album covers,  photographs, media portrayals and personal biography (E. Bird, 1994; Cullen, 1997; DeCurtis cited in M.  Smith, 1992; FriskicsWarren, 2005; Frith, 1996; Frith cited in E. Bird, 1994; Frith, 2009; Garman, 2000;  Hemphill & Smith, 1990; Kirkpatrick, 2009; Palmer, 1997; Pattie, 2007; Primeaux, 1996; Riley, 2004). In  performance, Springsteen reflects values of freedom, brotherhood, sincerity, authenticity, community  and hope, and presents himself as a performer with strong class politics. Based on the performative  elements considered in this analysis, Springsteen's onstage performance presents a clear image of his  social identity as a White, traditionally masculine, working class American rock and roll musician whose  identity and ideology is based in early American republican philosophy.     Springsteen's performances, on the surface, recognizably change from era to era. However, his 

performances are grounded in a consistent style of direct emotional expression and consistent lyrical  themes. Springsteen grounds his class and gender identities in his presentation of hard work and  leadership, his consistent reflection of masculine and working class archetypes in his image, and his  lyrics which are structured around exploring working class life and the capitalist and republican  ideologies that shape it, and masculinityaffirming images of women and cars. These patterns in  Springsteen's performances help to solidify a distinct impression of Springsteen's class identity and  gender, regardless of how his body, mannerisms and band evolve.     Springsteen's performances identify him with archetypes of the White American labourer, the 

disempowered 1950s teen rebel, union leaders and prototypical American republican artists. All of these  images solidify an impression of his identity as White and traditionally male, as well as working class and  American as informed by republican culture. His interactions with his band and his affiliations with rock  and roll serve not only to create a sense of authenticity about his identity and his music, but to build on 
109 

 

this identity impression. Some of his class and nationality impressions cast Springsteen as an All American hard worker, something he himself affirms throughout his performance. However, his  performance of these identities also serves to create the impression that Springsteen is not the kind of  depoliticized, oblivious White working American who believes in the capitalist vision of the American  Dream, but instead is connected with the social realities of the people he represents and intent on re envisioning a corrupt order in an image heavily rooted in early, founding American republican principles  of egalitarianism, brotherhood and community. Springsteen's performances relocate sources of identity  and dignity for the American working class, presenting realistic if occasionally momentary ways of  transcending circumstance through leisure and music and this redefined dream.     Springsteen's gender identity ­ a matter of much debate in popular literature ­ is only readable 

as alternative if one does not take into consideration the musical culture his performance embeds him  in. Springsteen, like Fallon, affirms a place in rock and roll culture with the way he dresses, his  relationships to music history and the content of his lyrics, all of which reference the prototypical images  and values of rock and roll. Early rock and roll was established as a medium that articulated the  disempowerment and vulnerability of young men at a time where icons of American masculinity were  unapproachable and unattainable, and social life was pervaded with messages of needing to assert and  affirm one's own masculinity in a time where its power was being threatened ­ something largely  unavailable to the young people eventually targeted by rock and roll. This musical ideology altered what  it meant to be a young man in American society, changing what were otherwise feminizing aspects of  identity into markers of hegemonic masculinity. In contextualizing his performances in rock and roll, as  well as soul music (where otherwise culturally disempowered male types were also redefined as  dominant, normative archetypes), while also using many of the gestural and emotional conventions  characteristic of mainstream hegemonic male identity, Springsteen's performance is always grounded in  a feeling of unambiguous masculinity. Though it is not the typically wealthy, authoritarian, unemotional  masculinity that is defined as normative in contemporary mainstream society, rockbased masculinity is  still identifiable as entirely male, particularly in the context of a music audience, who would likely be  familiar with rock and roll masculinity and understand it as a valid form of male selfrepresentation.     Springsteen's identity is also largely defined as hegemonically masculine through the use of 

images of prototypical, idealized masculinities of the past and present. Even Springsteen's emotional  output ­ considered uncharacteristic of masculine men ­ is contained within the emotional allowances  of his gender standards and his musical culture, as evidenced by his onstage mannerisms. He has never 
110 

 

lost that sense of being an unambiguous man while still being a communicator of varying human  emotion, and has in and of himself come to stand for sincere, emotionally authentic music.     Springsteen's persona is also largely built on this performance of authenticity. Most of 

Springsteen's gestures serve the purpose of communicating musical authenticity, including his clothing,  physical mannerisms, lyrical content, use of intertextuality, band relations, instruments and onstage  speech. Due to the closeness between the physical and visual elements of performance and  performance content, these are all expressions that affirm the believability of his own identity  performance while also shaping him as a figure representative of rock authenticity through the  demonstration of the majority of its values.     This study concludes, then, that the figure of Springsteen ­ which may otherwise be defined as 

the overall identity he now represents in popular music ­ is unambiguously White and masculine in a  way that is rooted in hegemonic ideals. He is also an icon of republican working class and American  identity, valuing hard work, leisure, hope, freedom and community, maintaining an optimistic viewpoint  on transcendence alongside a sense of realism about and distaste for capitalist American social order  and its mythology, as well as its popular images of undignified working class identity.     Brian Fallon's performed identity draws from many of the same archetypes and ideological 

perspectives recognizable in Springsteen's performance, and is communicated with even clearer  consistency. As noted in section 5.3., Fallon's performance is more subdued than Springsteen's. Though  this section specifically considered his use of mannerisms and denotative gestures, the same can be said  for Fallon's performance in general. Usually, Fallon's lyrics are not as overt or biting, his visual  iconography less directly referential, and his messages not as obviously articulated. However, Fallon is  also a rock and roll performer with rock and roll values and is authenticated, White, American, working  class and traditionally male. Fallon's masculinity is arguably more traditional and less influenced by  republicanism, as his performance speaks more highly of masculine independence, recognizes bonds  with other men as fallible, and is less suggestive that macho masculinity is a façade. Fallon's American  identity is, like Springsteen's also marked by an awareness and occasional partaking in the American  Dream, though also tempered by the overall conclusion that these dreams are faulty and rarely realized.  Additionally, though Fallon shares the same values of brotherhood and transcendence of circumstance  through leisure and relationships, his class ideology is slightly different than Springsteen's. Fallon's view  is less optimistic, less saturated with republican idealism, as evidenced in his comparatively more  frequent articulation of both failed escape and failed brotherhood. He also does not embrace the White, 
111 

 

American, blue collar value of hard work in quite the same way, with this stage performance looking far  more like leisure than hard labour, and his songs and clothing not reflective of Springsteen's idealization  of a strong work ethic.     Despite these subtle differences, Fallon's onstage identity performance is, perhaps 

unsurprisingly, markedly similar to that of Springsteen. Both performers use many of the same tools to  communicate their identities, and as such, their images strike a significant likeness. The figure of  Springsteen is echoed in almost every aspect of Fallon's performance, from his appearance, to his  mannerisms, instruments, speech, sociopolitical position, relationship to his roots and other music,  lyrical imageries and perspectives on American class ideologies. Out of the series of musicians Fallon  references in his performances, no one other artist proves to show as many points of notable similarity.  This significant, clearly observable connection would easily prompt comparisons of the two artists,  positioning Fallon as a leading persona in the reemergence of Springsteen as an important, revered  influence in contemporary music.     The effect the figure of Springsteen has, here, appears to be to reinforce or clarify the content of 

Fallon's performance. It is possible that striking a comparison between Springsteen and Fallon helps in  making a new artist "make sense" in a larger cultural context. An audience may recognize some visual or  even sonic similarities, the use of Springsteen references in Fallon's lyrics, or some fundamental  biographical similarities such as the shared home state of New Jersey, and proceed to attempt to  understand the meaning of Fallon's music and identity through their preknowledge of Springsteen,  therefore creating a comparison and a reputation of similarity. Though this thesis attempted to view  each identity separately and then comparatively, it is almost impossible to say that this analysis of  Fallon's identity wasn't fundamentally influenced by unconscious preknowledge of the larger cultural  meanings of Springsteen apparent before conducting any academicallyinclined research. Likely, much  of the comparison ­ and more than that, the continued evaluation of Fallon's identity against  Springsteen's, as is present in press about American Slang ­ draws from an inherent or taught need to  make sense of new cultural products by assessing them through the representations of old ones.     Ultimately, this method of making sense of new music through iconic music is where a purpose 

for echoing the figure of Springsteen becomes apparent. Fallon's performance identity is also found to  belong to a punk subgenre (or perhaps more accurately, punk subgenres) concerned with presenting the  experiences of the average American man. Many of the bands implicated in the socalled Springsteen  renaissance belong to the same or similar subgenres, where values of authenticity, ordinariness and 
112 

 

working class life are central to the meaning of their music and their performance styles. In American  popular culture, no other icon is as consistently or as obviously representative of those values as  Springsteen, nor do many other artists share the same critical esteem and reputation for integrity. Due  to what Springsteen represents, new bands looking to communicate similar stories of American life can  be instantly associated with a very clearly articulated ideology, making their new music interpretable  and familiar to audiences. This process of association is enacted as much by bands themselves (in things  like lyrical references) as it is by media, who are looking to contextualize, explain and sell a new product  and can do so by way of comparisons with other iconic artists.     As demonstrated here, an association with figure of Springsteen is an ideal way of embedding 

an artist in a multifaceted lineage that, generally, is built on the values they seek to project, or that  outsiders would like to project onto them. The Gaslight Anthem are one band in a line of many that are  making music with similar themes to those of Springsteen and presenting themselves as average, White  working class American men. These bands are, then, embedded in North American subcultures that  praise authenticity and ideologies that support their social identities.  An association with Springsteen's  identity, then, is ­ perhaps for lack of a better term ­ the most appropriate, popular and powerful  identity available to a relatively new trend, and therefore his influence and more significantly, the  recognition of his influence, has become increasingly prevalent in contemporary music.    

113 

 

References 
Akindes, F. Y. (2004). Grandma's Photo Album: Clothing as Symbolic Representations of Identity. In M.     Fong & R. Chuang (Eds.), Communicating Ethnic and Cultural Identity (pp. 85104). Lanham, MD:    Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.  Alexander, J. C. (2006a). Cultural Pragmatics: Social Performance Between Ritual and Strategy. In   J. C. Alexander, B. Geisen, & J. L. Mast (Eds.), Social Performance: Symbolic Action, Cultural  Pragmatics, and Ritual (pp. 2990). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.  Alexander, J. C. (2006b). From the Depths of Despair: Performance, Counterperformance and    "September 11". In J. C. Alexander, B. Geisen, & J. L. Mast (Eds.), Social Performance:    Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual (pp. 91114). New York, NY:   Cambridge University Press.  Alexander, J. C., & Mast, J. L. (2006). Introduction: Symbolic Action in Theory and Practice: The   Cultural Pragmatics of Symbolic Action. In J.C. Alexander, B. Giesen, & J. L. Mast   (Eds.), Social Performance: Symbolic Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual (pp. 128).   New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.   Allison, D. (2003). A Question of Class. In K. E. Rosenblum & T. C. Travis (Eds.), The Meaning   of Difference: American Constructions of Race, Sex and Gender, Social Class, and Sexual  Orientation (3rd ed.) (pp. 280290). New York, NY: McGrawHill.  Ashby, J. (n.d.). The Evolution of Jeans. Faze Magazine (9). Retrieved from    http://www.fazeteen.com/issue09/history_of_denim.html  Auslander, P. (2004). Performance Analysis and Popular Music: A Manifesto [Electronic   Version]. Contemporary Theatre Review, 14(1), 113.   Barclay, M. (2007, October 11). Reborn to Run [Electronic version]. Eye Weekly.   Barker, H., & Taylor, Y. (2007). Faking It: The Quest for Authenticity in Popular Music. New   York, NY: W. W Norton & Company, Inc.   Bhaba, H.K. (1995). Are You a Man or a Mouse? In M. Berger, B. Wallis, & S. Watson (Eds.),   Constructing Masculinity (pp.5765). New York, NY: Routledge.  Berger, M., Wallis, B., & Watson, S. (1995). Introduction. In M. Berger, B. Wallis, & S. Watson   (Eds.), Constructing Masculinity (pp. 17). New York, NY: Routledge.  Bird, E. (1994). "Is that me, Baby?" Image, Authenticity, and the Career of Bruce Springsteen.    American Studies, 35(2), 3957.   Bird, S. R. (1996). Welcome to the Men's Club: Homosociality and the Maintenance of Hegemonic   Masculinity. Gender and Society, 10(2), 120132.   Burke, P. J., & Stets, J. E. (2009). Identity Theory. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, Inc.   Butsch, R. (2003). Ralph, Fred, Archie, and Homer: Why Television Keeps Recreating the White Male    WorkingClass Buffoon. In T. E. Ore (Ed.), The Social Construction of Difference and Inequality:    Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality (2nd ed.) (pp. 376385). New York, NY: McGrawHill.   Cavicchi, D. (1998). Tramps Like Us: Music and Meaning Among Springsteen Fans. Oxford:   Oxford University Press, Inc.   Ching, B. (1997). The Possum, the Hag, and the Rhinestone Cowboy: Hard Country Music and   the Burlesque Abjection of the White Man. In M. Hill (Ed.), Whiteness: A Critical Reader (pp. 117 133). New York, NY: New York University Press.  Ching, B. (2008). Where Has the Free Bird Flown? Lynyrd Skynyrd and White Southern   Manhood. In T. Watts (Ed.), White Masculinity in the Recent South (pp. 251265). Baton Rouge,  LA: Louisiana State University Press.  
114 

 

Cofer, J. O. (2001). The Myth of the Latin Woman: I Just Met a Girl Named Maria. In M. L.    Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.), Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 342347).     Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, Inc.  Connell, R. W. (1995). Masculinities. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California   Press.   Cowie, J., & Boehm, L. (2006). Dead Man's Town: "Born in the U.S.A.," Social History, and   WorkingClass Identity [Electronic version]. American Quarterly, 58(2), 353378.   Cullen, J. (1994). The American Dream: A Short History of an Idea That Shaped a Nation [Electronic     version]. Oxford University Press.    Cullen, J. (1997). Born in the U.S.A.: Bruce Springsteen and the American Tradition. New York,   NY: Harper Collins Publishers, Inc.  Dimitriadis, G. (2001). Performing Identity/Performing Culture: Hip Hop as Text, Pedagogy,   and Lived Practice. New York: P. Lang.  Dyer, R. (1997). White. London: Routledge.   Epstein, C. F. (2003). Similarity and Difference: The Sociology of Gender Distinctions. In K. E.   Rosenblum & T. C. Travis (Eds.), The Meaning of Difference: American Constructions of Race, Sex  and Gender, Social Class, and Sexual Orientation (3rd ed.) (pp. 117125). New York, NY: McGraw Hill.  Ehrenreich, B. (2001). The Silenced Majority: Why the Average Working Person Has Disappeared     from American Media and Culture. In M. L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.), Race, Class, and    Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 143145). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, Inc.  Estes, S. (2008). A Question of Honor: Masculinity and Massive Resistance to Integration. In T.   Watts (Ed.), White Masculinity in the Recent South (pp. 99120). Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana  State University Press.   Flat cap. (2010, June, 19). Retrieved from Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flat_cap  Flood, M. (2007). Men's Relations With Men. In M. Flood, J. K. Gardiner, B. Pease, & K. Pringle (Eds.).   International Encyclopedia of Men and Masculinities [Electronic version] (pp. 424425, 427).   Taylor & Francis eLibrary.  Fong, M. (2004a). Identity and the Speech Community. In M. Fong & R. Chuang (Eds.),   Communicating Ethnic and Cultural Identity (pp. 318). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield  Publishers, Inc.  Fong, M. (2004b). Multiple Dimensions of Identity. In M. Fong & R. Chuang (Eds.),   Communicating Ethnic and Cultural Identity (pp. 1934). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield  Publishers, Inc.  Fong, M., & Chuang, R. (2004). Preface. In M. Fong & R. Chuang (Eds.),   Communicating Ethnic and Cultural Identity (pp. ix). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield  Publishers, Inc.  Fox, A. A. (2004). Real Country: Music and Language in WorkingClass Culture. Durham &    London: Duke University Press.   Frankenberg, R. (2003). Whiteness as an "Unmarked" Cultural Category. In K. E. Rosenblum &   T. C. Travis (Eds.), The Meaning of Difference: American Constructions of Race, Sex and Gender,  Social Class, and Sexual Orientation (3rd ed.) (pp. 9298). New York, NY: McGrawHill.  FriskicsWarren, B. (2005). I'll Take You There: Pop Music and the Urge for Transcendence.   New York, NY: The Continuum International Publishing Group Inc.  Frith, S. (1996). Performing Rites: Evaluating Popular Music. Oxford: Oxford University Press,   Inc.  
115 

 

Frith, S. (2009). The Real ThingBruce Springsteen. In D. Brackett (Ed.), The Pop, Rock, and Soul Reader:    Histories and Debates (2nd ed.) (pp.413419). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.  Garman, B. K. (2000). A Race of Singers: Whitman's WorkingClass Hero from Guthrie to Springsteen.    Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press.  Giesen, B. (2006). Performing the sacred: a Durkheimian perspective on the performative turn in   the social sciences. In J. C. Alexander, B. Giesen, & J. L. Mast (Eds.), Social Performance: Symbolic  Action, Cultural Pragmatics, and Ritual (pp. 325367). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.  Gilbert, P. (2006). Republics, Tribes and National Identities. In M. Wintle (Ed.), Image into   Identity: Constructing and Assigning Identity in a Culture of Modernity (pp. 119130).   New York, NY: Rodopi.  Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York, NY: Doubleday.   Books Ltd.   Gracyk, T.  (2001). I Wanna Be Me: Rock Music and the Politics of Identity. Phoenix, AZ:   Temple University Press.   Hill, M. (1997). Introduction: Vipers in Shangrila: Whiteness Writing, and Other Ordinary   Terrors. In M. Hill (Ed.), Whiteness: A Critical Reader (pp. 118). New York, NY: New York  University Press.  Hebdige, D. (2005). Subculture: The Meaning of Style. London and New York, NY: Routledge.  Hemphill, M. R., & Smith, L. D. (1990). The Working American's Elegy: The Rhetoric of Bruce   Springsteen. In R. L. Savage & D. Nimmo (Eds.), Politics in Familiar Contexts: Projecting Politics  Through Popular Media (pp. 199214). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation.   Hunter, D. (2009). Legendary Guitar: Bruce Springsteen's Fender Esquire. Gibson.com. Retrieved from     http://www.gibson.com/enus/Lifestyle/Features/legendaryguitarbruce514/  Jakle, J. A., & Sculle, K. A. (2008). Motoring: The Highway Experience in America. Athens,   GA: University     of Georgia Press.   Kaplan, E. A. (1997). The "Look" Returned: Knowledge Production and Constructions of   "Whiteness" in Humanities Scholarship and Independent Film. In M. Hill (Ed.), Whiteness: A  Critical Reader (pp. 316328). New York: New York University Press.  Kimmel, M. S. (2003). Masculinity as Homophobua: Fear, Shame, and Silence in the Construction of     Gender Identity. In T. E. Ore (Ed.), The Social Construction of Difference and Inequality: Race,    Class, Gender, and Sexuality (2nd ed.) (pp. 119136). New York, NY: McGrawHill.   Kirkpatrick, R. (2009). Magic in the Night. New York, NY: St Martin's Press.   Kokopeli, B., & Lakey, G. (2001). More Power Than We Want: Masculine Sexuality and Violence. In M.   L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.), Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 508 514). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, Inc.  Langston, D. (2001). Tired of Playing Monopoly? In M. L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.), Race, Class,     and Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 125134). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning,    Inc.  Lebrun, B. (2005). Mind over Matter: The UnderPerformance of the Body and Gender in   French Rock Music of the 1990s [Electronic version]. French Cultural Studies, 16(2), 205221.   Limón, J. E. (2000). TexSexMex: American Identities, Lone Stars, and the Politics of Racialized     Sexuality. In L. J. Reynolds & G. Hunter (Eds.) National Imaginaries, American Identities: The    Cultural Work of American Iconography (pp. 229245). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.   Lipsitz, G. (2003). The Possessive Investment in Whiteness: Racialized Social Democracy and the     "White" Problem in American Studies. In T. E. Ore (Ed.), The Social Construction of Difference   and Inequality: Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality (2nd ed.) (pp. 364375). New York, NY:  McGrawHill.  
116 

 

Lopez, N. (2006). Women's Image and National Identity in the Indian Nationalist Movement. In   M. Wintle (Ed.), Image into Identity: Constructing and Assigning Identity in a Culture of   Modernity (pp. 199208). New York, NY: Rodopi.  Lorber, J. (2003). The Social Construction of Gender. In T. E. Ore (Ed.), The Social  Construction of   Difference and Inequality: Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality (2nd ed.) (pp. 99106). New York,  NY: McGrawHill.   Lott, E. (2000). The Whiteness of Film Noir. In L. J. Reynolds & G. Hunter (Eds.) National Imaginaries,  American Identities: The Cultural Work of American Iconography (pp. 159181). Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press.   Mailer, N. (1957). The White Negro (Fall, 1957). Dissent online archive. Retrieved from   http://www.dissentmagazine.org/online.php?id=26  Maingard, J. (2006). Cast in Celluloid: Imag(in)ing Identities in South African Cinema. In M. Wintle (Ed.),   Image into Identity: Constructing and Assigning Identity in a Culture of Modernity (pp. 83100).  New York, NY: Rodopi.   Mantsios, G. (2003). Media Magic: Making Class Invisible. In T. E. Ore (Ed.), The Social   Construction of Difference and Inequality: Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality (2nd ed.) (pp. 81 89). New York, NY: McGrawHill.   Martinez, E. (2001). Seeing More Than Black & White: Latinos, Racism, and the Cultural Divides. In M. L.   Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.), Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 108114).  Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, Inc.  Mast, J. L. (2006). The Cultural Pragmatics of Eventness: The Clinton/Lewinsky Affair. In   J. C. Alexander, B. Giesen, & J. L. Mast (Eds.), Social Performance: Symbolic Action, Cultural  Pragmatics, and Ritual (pp. 115145). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.  McIntosh, P. (2001). White Privilege and Male Privilege: A Personal Account of Coming to See    Correspondences through Work in Women's Studies. In M. L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.),   Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 95105). Belmont, CA:  Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, Inc.  Melnick, J. (1997). "Story Untold": The Black Men and White Sounds of DooWop. In M. Hill   (Ed.), Whiteness: A Critical Reader (pp. 134150). New York, NY: New York University Press.  Menser, M. (2004). Homosociality. In M. Kimmel & A. Aronson (Eds.), Men and Masculinities: A Social,   Cultural, and Historical Encyclopedia (pp. 396398). Santa Barbara, CA: ABCCLIO, Inc.  Moore, A. (2002). Authenticity as Authentication [Electronic version]. Popular Music, 21(2),   209223.   Moore, B. (2005). Devils, Dust & God [Electronic version]. Commonweal, 132(22), 38.   Moore, R. B. (2001). Racist Stereotyping in the English Language. In M. L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins   (Eds.), Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 322333). Belmont, CA:  Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, Inc.  New Jersey. (2010, July, 11). Retrieved from Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Jersey  Newitz, A., & Wray, M. (1997). What is "White Trash"? Stereotypes and Economic Conditions   of Poor Whites in the United States. In M. Hill (Ed.), Whiteness: A Critical Reader (pp. 168184).  New York, NY: New York University Press.  Omi, M., & Winant, H. (2003). Racial Formations. In T. E. Ore (Ed.), The Social Construction of   Difference and Inequality: Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality (2nd ed.) (pp. 1828). New York,  NY: McGrawHill.   Ore, T. E. (2003). Constructing Differences: Introduction. In T. E. Ore (Ed.), The Social Construction of   Difference and Inequality: Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality (2nd ed.) (pp. 117). New York, NY:  McGrawHill. 
117 

 

Ortner, S. B. (2003). Reading America: Preliminary Notes on Class and Culture. In K. E.   Rosenblum & T. C. Travis (Eds.), The Meaning of Difference: American Constructions of Race, Sex  and Gender, Social Class, and Sexual Orientation (3rd ed.) (pp. 127135). New York, NY: McGraw Hill.  Osborne, J., & Wintle, M. (2006). The Construction and Allocation of Identity through Images   and Imagery: an Introduction. In M. Wintle (Ed.), Image into Identity: Constructing and   Assigning Identity in a Culture of Modernity (pp. 1530). New York, NY: Rodopi.   Palmer, G. (1997). Bruce Springsteen and Masculinity. In S. Whiteley (Ed.), Sexing the Groove:   Popular Music and Gender (pp. 100117). New York, NY: Routledge.   Pattie, D. (1999). 4 Real: Authenticiy, Performance, and Rock Music [Electronic version].   Enculturcation, 2(2).   Pattie, D. (2007). Rock Music in Performance. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.   Pfeil, F. (1995). White Guys: Studies in Postmodern Domination and Difference. London: Verso.   Pfeil, F. (1997). Sympathy for the Devils: Notes on Some White Guys in the Ridiculous Class   War. In M. Hill (Ed.), Whiteness: A Critical Reader (pp. 2134). New York, NY: New York University  Press.  Primeaux, P. (1996). The Moral Passion of Bruce Springsteen. San Francisco, CA: International   Scholars Publications.   Reynolds, L. J. (2000). American Cultural Iconography. In L.J. Reynolds & G. Hunter (Eds.) National   Imaginaries, American Identities: The Cultural Work of American Iconography (pp. 328).  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.   Richardson, L. (2003). Gender Stereotyping in the English Language. In K. E. Rosenblum & T.   C. Travis (Eds.), The Meaning of Difference: American Constructions of Race, Sex and Gender,  Social Class, and Sexual Orientation (3rd ed.) (pp. 509516). New York, NY: McGrawHill.  Riley, T. (2004). Fever: How Rock 'n' Roll Transformed Gender in America. New York, NY:   Picador.  Rodak, T. J. (1996). Meanings and Measures Taken in Concert Observations of Bruce Springsteen,   September 28, 1992, Los Angeles. Retrieved from ProQuest Digital Dissertations. (AAT 1381038)  Roediger, D. R. (1997). White Looks: Hairy Apes, True Stories, and Limbaugh's Laughs. In M.   Hill (Ed.), Whiteness: A Critical Reader (pp. 3546). New York, NY: New York University Press.  Roediger, D. R. (2007). The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American Working Class   (Revised ed.). London: Verso.  Rubin, L. (2001). "Is This a White Country, or What?" In M. L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.), Race,   Class, and Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 419427). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson  Learning, Inc.  Samuels, S. (2000). Miscegenated America: The Civil War. In L. J. Reynolds & G. Hunter (Eds.)    National Imaginaries, American Identities: The Cultural Work of American Iconography (pp. 141  156). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.   Simpson, M. (1994). Male Impersonators: Men Performing Masculinity. New York, NY:   Routledge.  Sinfield, A. (1994). Foreward. In M. Simpson, Male Impersonators: Men Performing   Masculinity (pp. ixxxi). New York, NY: Routledge.   Smith, M. N. (1992). Sexual Mobilities in Bruce Springsteen: Performance as Commentary. In   A. DeCurtis (Ed.), Present Tense: Rock & Roll and Culture (pp. 197218), Durham and   London: Duke University Press.   Smith, P. (1995). Eastwood Bound. In M. Berger, B. Wallis, & S. Watson (Eds.), Constructing   Masculinity (pp. 7797). New York, NY: Routledge. 
118 

 

Smith, S. M. (1999). American Archives: Gender, Race, and Class in Visual Culture. Princeton, NJ:   Princeton University Press.   Storr, M. (2003). Latex and Lingerie: Shopping for Pleasure at Ann Summers Parties. New York, NY: Berg.   Tetzlaff, D. (2004). Music for Meaning: Reading the Discourse of Authenticity in Rock   [Electronic version]. Journal of Communication Inquiry, 18(1), 95117.   Thandeka. (2003). The Cost of Whiteness. In K. E. Rosenblum & T. C. Travis (Eds.), The   Meaning of Difference: American Constructions of Race, Sex and Gender, Social Class, and Sexual  Orientation (3rd ed.) (pp. 254260). New York, NY: McGrawHill.  TheissMorse, E. (2009). Who Counts as an American? The Boundaries of National Identity. New York,   NY: Cambridge University Press.  Thompson, C. (2001). A New Vision of Masculinity. In M. L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.), Race, Class,   and Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 205211). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning,  Inc.  Wald, G. (1997). One of the Boys? Whiteness, Gender, and Popular Music Studies. In M. Hill   (Ed.), Whiteness: A Critical Reader (pp. 151167). New York, NY: New York University Press.  Wallace, M. (2000). "Are We Men?": Prince Hall, Martin Delaney, and the Masculine Ideal in Black   Freemasonry, 17751865. In L. J. Reynolds & G. Hunter (Eds.) National Imaginaries, American  Identities: The Cultural Work of American Iconography (pp. 182  210). Princeton, NJ: Princeton  University Press.   Waters, M. C. (2001). Optional Ethnicities: For Whites Only? In M. L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.),   Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 430439). Belmont, CA:  Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, Inc.  Watts, T. (2008). Introduction: Telling White Men's Stories. In T. Watts (Ed.), White   Masculinity in the Recent South (pp. 129). Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press.   West, C. (2001). Race Matters. In M. L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.), Race, Class, and Gender:   An Anthology (4th ed.) (pp. 119124). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, Inc.  Westerfelhaus, R. (2004). She Speaks to Us, for Us, and of Us: Our Lady of Guadalupe as a   Semiotic Site of Struggle and Identity. In M. Fong & R. Chuang (Eds.), Communicating Ethnic and  Cultural Identity (pp. 105120). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.   Wood, J. T. (2003). Gendered Lives: Communication, Gender, and Culture (5th ed.). Belmont, CA:   Thomson/Wadsworth.  Zinn, M. B., HondagneuSotelo, P., & Messner, M. A. (2001). Gender through the Prism of    Difference. In M. L. Anderson & P. Hill Collins (Eds.), Race, Class, and Gender: An  Anthology (4th   ed.) (pp. 168176). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning, Inc.      

119 

 

Videography 
Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Songwriters & Performers). (1985). Cadillac Ranch [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qcol7zsw3fg  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Songwriters & Performers). (1985). Growin' Up Pt. 1 [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f_6HsH5MPo  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Songwriters & Performers). (1985). Growin' Up Pt. 2 [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PdKEgZBVJX4&NR=1  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Songwriters & Performers). (1985). Janey Don't You Lose Heart   [live music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1CdPIj3_IW4  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Songwriters & Performers). (1985). My Hometown [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lZoXF6M3l8  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Songwriters & Performers). (1985). No Surrender [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://videos.sapo.pt/lrwkhzUiZdrPHSbWZtsF  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Songwriters & Performers). (1985). Seeds [live music video].   Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CEG0YmlOZvE  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Songwriters & Performers). (1985). Stand On It [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LbCvvGNMyOw  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Performers). (1985). This Land is Your Land [live music video].   Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1yuc4BI5NWU  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Songwriters & Performers). (1985). Thunder Road [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iNNcIhZbH0  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Performers). (1985). War [live music video]. Retrieved March,   2010 from http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x18swy_wav_brucespringsteen_music  Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Performers), Landau, J., Travis, G., & Springsteen, B.   (Producers), & Hilson, C. (Director). (2001). Bruce Springsteen & the E Street Band Live in New  York City [Motion Picture].  United States: Columbia Music Video.    Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Performers). Landau, J., & Carr, B., (Executive   Producers), Travis, G. (Producer), & Hilson, C. (Director). (2003). Bruce Springsteen & the E Street  Band Live in Barcelona [Motion Picture].  United States: Sony Music Entertainment.    Springsteen, Bruce & the E Street Band (Performers), Springsteen, B., Landau, J., Carr, B., &   Zimny, T. (Producers), & Hilson, C. (Director). (2005). Hammersmith Odeon London '75 [Motion  Picture].  United States: Columbia Records.    The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, July 30). The Annandale Hotel, Sydney 2008   [live music video] Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.moshcam.com/gaslightanthem/the annandalehotel152.aspx  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). The '59 Sound (version 1) [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from   http://www.youtube.com/user/mcstevepants#p/u/99/4VLE7yZD70o  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). The '59 Sound (version 2) [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/jh01bk#p/u/19/n8cD4TFDyqI  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). 1930 [live music video]. Retrieved   March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/jh01bk#p/u/13/Ubmox0ZjbMg   
120 

 

The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Angry Johnny and the Radio [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/jh01bk#p/u/15/B43ePoqfcZA  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). The Backseat [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/mcstevepants#p/u/94/Zay6lGofcU4  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Blue Jeans & White TShirts [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/mcstevepants#p/u/93/Mw1GvMycbo  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Brian Talking in Toronto [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/mcstevepants#p/u/96/IErTXpNO6VU  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Casanova, Baby! [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/mcstevepants#p/u/97/_p3S0rqJpk4  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Even Cowgirls Get the Blues    (version 1) [live music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/jh01bk#p/u/20/UEXLuNbR29o  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Even Cowgirls Get the Blues   (version 2) [live music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QtyRptkFPo4  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Film Noir [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/jh01bk#p/u/17/sutdxYmEgjg  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Great Expectations [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6UdhTJDZITE  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). I'da Called You Woody, Joe (version   1)[live music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSoWTuU72xo  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). I'da Called You Woody, Joe (version   2) [live music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NtZEET9t46o  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Meet Me By The River's Edge [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/mcstevepants#p/u/98/1cO1JwoQVc  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Miles Davis & The Cool [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/jh01bk#p/u/18/hTNR2fdDlIw  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Old White Lincoln Edge [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/mcstevepants#p/u/100/fhmeVwe9RkY  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Say I Won't (Recognize) [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PwqXNGnBTYE  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Señor and the Queen [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/mcstevepants#p/u/95/1FXhgxGdYUU  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2008, March 22). Wooderson [live music  
121 

 

video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/user/taffysandrin#p/u/6/fPkUNheZsh0  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2009, October 13). The '59 Sound [live music video].   Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iHlqCJdsZus&feature=related  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2009, October 13). Casanova, Baby! [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w5roViRqJMU&NR=1  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2009, October 13). Even Cowgirls Get the Blues [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kdQ65qLFfnM  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2009, October 13). Great Expectations [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IxUfYD6Rurg&NR=1  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2009, October 13). Here's Looking At You, Kid [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=URlYmmm k74&feature=related  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2009, October 13). Miles Davis   & The Cool [live music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KGorFNkH4U&NR=1  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2009, October 13). Old White Lincoln [live music   video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PJryAuyZ3I  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers). (2009, October 13). The Patient Ferris Wheel [live   music video]. Retrieved March, 2010 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iM7dOV75MDc  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers) & Bowman, T. (Videoproducer). (2009, October, 22).   The Gaslight Anthem  Live in D.C.  10/22/2009  Pt. 1 [live music video]. Retrieved March, 2010  from http://vimeo.com/7231715  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers) & Bowman, T. (Videoproducer). (2009, October, 22).   The Gaslight Anthem  Live in D.C.  10/22/2009  Pt. 2 [live music video]. Retrieved March, 2010  from http://vimeo.com/7231726  The Gaslight Anthem (Songwriters & Performers) & Bowman, T. (Videoproducer). (2009, October, 22).   The Gaslight Anthem  Live in D.C.  10/22/2009  Pt. 3 [live music video]. Retrieved March, 2010  from http://vimeo.com/7231733   

122 

 

