Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2012

Supportive Housing For Those Dealing With Mental Health And Addiction Issues In Toronto : An Interview Study To Consider System Level Characeristics and Service Planning Issues
Kari Ala-Leppilampi
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Urban, Community and Regional Planning Commons Recommended Citation
Ala-Leppilampi, Kari, "Supportive Housing For Those Dealing With Mental Health And Addiction Issues In Toronto : An Interview Study To Consider System Level Characeristics and Service Planning Issues" (2012). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1230.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

SUPPORTIVE   HOUSING   FOR   THOSE   DEALING   WITH   MENTAL   HEALTH   AND   ADDICTION   ISSUES   IN   TORONTO:    AN   INTERVIEW   STUDY   TO   CONSIDER   SYSTEM   LEVEL   CHARACTERISTICS   AND   SERVICE   PLANNING   ISSUES   By    Kari Alaleppilampi  Master Of Health Sciences, University of Toronto, 2001  Bachelor of Environmental Studies (Honours Planning), University of Waterloo, 1994        A Major Research Paper  presented to Ryerson University      in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of      Master of Planning   in   Urban Development  

.   Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2012                © Kari Alaleppilampi (2012) 

Author's Declaration    I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.    This is a true copy of the major research paper, including any required final revisions, as  accepted by my examiners.    I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research paper to other   institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research    I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this major research   paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions  or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.    I understand that my major research paper may be made electronically   available to the public. 

         

ii

SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR THOSE DEALING WITH MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTION ISSUES  IN TORONTO:  AN INTERVIEW STUDY TO CONSIDER SYSTEM LEVEL CHARACTERISTICS AND  ISSUES    Kari Alaleppilampi, 2012  Master Of Planning  in   Urban Development       Ryerson University      ABSTRACT                             This paper reports on an interview study that was conducted by the author with executive  directors representing 10 agencies in Toronto which provide supportive housing for those  dealing with mental health and/or addiction issues.  It provides a review of the literature and  evidence with respect to such housing, and describes its origin, evolution and general  characteristic in Toronto.   It then focuses on discussing themes identified over the course of the  interviews, in relation to overall system planning...and lack thereof.   Alongside of expected but  important themes, such as the desperate shortage of housing stock, a number of more subtle  trends are uncovered. For example, the increasing imposition of concepts and practices from  the hospital and private data management sectors, are proving troublesome for some  supportive housing providers as they threaten their community and client centered values,  beliefs, principles and practices.     An article which discusses service planning issues within Toronto's system of supportive housing  for those dealing with mental health and/or addiction issues, used key words: supportive  housing, mental illness, addictions. 

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TITLE PAGE                AUTHOR'S DECLARATION            ABSTRACT                INTRODUCTION              PART A: THE DEFINITIONS, EVIDENCE & HISTORICAL CONTEXT      1. Defining supportive housing: what it is and what it isn't                                                  1.1.   Supportive   versus   supported   housing   1.2.   Transitional   housing   1.3.   Housing   first   approaches   1.4.   The   many   flavours   of   supportive   housing   in   Toronto         9                          i  ii  iii  1  2  3 

 

2.   A   review   of   the   literature   &   evidence                    

2.1.   The   nexus   of   mental   illness   and   (inadequate)   housing   2.2.   The   effectiveness   of   supportive   housing   2.3.   The   cost   effectiveness   of   supportive   housing   2.4.   The   elusiveness   of   conclusive   evidence                                     

2.5.   Supportive   housing   and   community   Integration   2.6.   Key   components/characteristics   of   supportive   housing   2.7.   Characteristics   of   supportive   housing   tenants   2.8.   Negative   externalities   and   NIMBYism   18  

3.   The   origin,   evolution   and   general   nature   of   Toronto's   system               3.1.   The   historical   backdrop   of   deinstitutionalization   3.2   The   pragmatic   and   heroic   grassroots   of   the   system   3.3.   'After   the   fact'   government   involvement   3.4.   The   two   decisive   waves   of   government   funding   3.5.   The   early   years   of   inspired   investment   3.6.   The   "common   sense"   years   of   rent   supplements  

iv

                         

 

3.7.   The   transfer   of   the   supportive   housing   file               24      

4.0.   The   present   system              

4.1.   The   leading   provincial   role   4.2.   The   LHINs   4.3.   The   Mental   Health   and   Addictions                                                                                 Supportive   Housing   Network   and   CASH   4.4.   A   system   that   is   not   really   a   system     4.5.   An   overview   of   Toronto's   supportive   housing   landscape      29    

5.0.   The   contrasting   profiles   of   Toronto's   three   largest   agencies         5.1.   Mainstay   Housing   5.2.   Habitat   Community   Homes   5.3.   Loft   Community   Services                                                    

  34  35  37  39  41 

 

PART B: THE INTERVIEW STUDY           

6.  The rationale for the study    7.  The study method    8.  The study sample       

9. The thematic findings:                9.1.   A drastic shortage of supportive and affordable housing 9.2. 9.3. 9.4. 9.5. 9.6. 9.7. 9.8. 9.9. The greatest shortage for those in greatest need A convergence with the issue of population aging Complex and misaligned funding arrangements Creativity, invention, and the ability to stretch a dollar The entrepreneurial imperative A necessary 'love/hate' relationship with private developers NIMBYism, NIMBism, and exclusionary zoning The perception of an oversold housing first approach

v

9.11. 9.12. 9.13. 9.14. 9.15. 9.16. 9.17. 9.18. 9.19. 9.20. 9.21. 9.22. 9.23. 9.24. 9.25. 9.26. 9.27. 9.28. 9.29. 9.30.  

The rent supplements debate The drastic need for capital investment The ODSP and OW as even more fundamental concerns The ill addressed issue of cultural diversity An ongoing hospital focus & imposition of institutional ideas Dancing to the ever-changing tune of government priorities The encroachment of the LHINs Recent steps toward "formal" system wide integration Privacy in the age of the OCAN & IAR Questioning hard data as the holy grail The insertion of profit driven data management companies A new bureaucracy to protect privacy...or deflect liability? Questioning hard data as the holy grail The myth of "fat" in the system Hidden pockets of collaboration No more agencies, but not necessarily any fewer Administrative demands and the fate of the small agency The need for overall planning From CASH to comprehensive planning? On the cusp of "big", but as of yet unappreciated, changes         86 

10.  Summary of findings and concluding discussion     

APPENDIX A: The Interview Guide                      APPENDIX B: Some additional themes B1.  In defence of integrated housing and supports      B2. The questionable applicability of the Vancouver model REFERENCES                                           LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES  Table A: Supportive Housing Agencies in Toronto             

93                                                95 

   

   

97        28

vi

    1.    INTRODUCTION     This paper reports on the findings of a study on the supportive housing system for those 

dealing with mental health &/or addiction issues in Toronto (hereafter referred to simply as  supportive housing). The study elicited the knowledge & insights of key decision makers in order  to explore strengths, weaknesses, opportunities & challenges within the present system.                       As no recent study has taken an overall look at how supportive housing is being planned 

& delivered in Toronto, and as documentation on its complex inner workings is generally lacking ,  the study made an important contribution in this regard.   It served the valuable function of  documenting valuable knowledge, insights and informed opinion with respect to many aspects  of the system which had hitherto only existed in the minds of those actually involved in the  system.   As there are presently over 4000 Torontonians on the waiting list for such housing, and  as governments continue to move toward greater austerity, clearly additional knowledge, 

insights and ideas are desperately needed to make the most of increasingly limited resources.                                             The report begins with an initial chapter which introduces the concept of supportive 

housing, a second which reviews related research, and a third which provides  a brief review of  the origin and evolution of supportive housing in Toronto.                                                                                                    The second and central part of the report discusses the study itself and more specifically,  

key themes that were identified in the context of interviews which were conducted with a  sample of executive directors representing 10 supporting housing agencies.  Information from  these interviews was also used to inform the other parts of the paper, where appropriate, as  indicated with citations which reference the relevant participants (i.e., P1, P2, P3.....P10).  

 

1

PART   ONE:                                                            DEFINITIONS,   EVIDENCE,   AND   HISTORICAL   CONTEXT                  
2

1.   Defining   supportive   housing:   what   it   is   &   what   it   isn't     Supportive housing in the case of this paper describes independent rental 

accommodations in the community provided in combination with some form of community based  mental health and support services (Wong & Solomen, 2002; Rog 2004).   While supportive  housing also exists for different groups, such as those dealing with developmental issues or most  prominently with issues in relation to aging, it also has a very different history and characteristics  that accord with the distinct issues and needs that are being addressed.  Unless otherwise noted,   however, "supportive housing" will hereafter serve as short hand within this paper to refer to that  which is provided to those with mental health or addiction issues. 

1.1.   Supportive   versus   Supported   housing    

 

Some writers also make a distinction between supportive housing, in which a tenant's 

housing and social support services are integrated and often delivered by the same agency, and  supported housing in which the social services delivered to tenants are separate and portable in  that they travel with the tenant as they move from one residence to another (CAMH, 2011).  In the  case of supportive housing, access to the social services of the agency is contingent upon  successful tenancy and successful tenancy, in turn, requires successful engagement with its social  services.                                                                                                                                                                  

Arguments in favour of supportive housing focus upon the ability to engage, monitor and 

support tenants in a continuous and ongoing fashion, which may be particularly relevant in the  case of those facing severe mental illness (Rog 2004) .  Those in favour of supported housing focus  on the independence and autonomy that it may foster and the manner in which individuals  continue to be supported and engaged through continued access to social services even in the 

3

event that specific housing situations do not 'work out'.  As supported housing units are typically  rented within the private sector, this also offers the advantage of avoiding the large upfront  capital costs that would otherwise be associated with the construction or acquisition of new  residential facilities (Rog 2004).                                                                                                                    

Based upon the early input of participants within the present study, a distinction will not 

be made between supportive versus supported housing in the case of the present study. Instead,  all situations in which housing is delivered in combination with the relevant supports will be  referred to as supportive housing1.  As one early participant suggested, the distinction between  supported and supportive housing is often blurred in practice making a distinction somewhat  arbitrary at times (P10).   Moreover, the present author did not wish to prematurely narrow the  scope of the present study by virtue of drawing such a distinction.  This is also in keeping with the  practice employed by other researchers who have focussed on the Canadian experience (e.g.,   McKenzie 2004; George et al., 2005).   

1.2.   Transitional,   custodial   and   social   housing    

 

Supportive housing will be distinguished from stand alone rent geared to income housing 

and social housing programs, although these may be paired with health and social services to  create a form of informal supportive housing (George et al., 2005).   In fact, one participant in the  present study contended that, if adequate supports were provided to all of those who presently  required it within the existing stock of Toronto Community Housing Corporation (TCHC) housing, it 

would handily become the single largest supportive housing provider in the city.                                                                      Supportive housing will also be distinguished from transitional housing.  The latter refers 

to housing with supports which may be provided to those dealing with various issues (e.g., 
11

Similarly, literature referenced in relation to supportive housing will actually consist of literature in relation to both supported and supportive housing, unless the distinction would make inclusion inconsistent or misleading.

4

criminal justice involvement), including mental illness, but on a much more structured and time  limited basis (Sylvestre et al., 2009).  As the name suggests, transitional housing is viewed as a  strict and more detailed program to equip tenants to ultimately integrate into broader community  within a specified time frame, which is typically a year in duration (P5).  By extension, tenants  within transitional homes in Toronto may be evicted from such housing at the end of an agreed  upon term of tenancy, as they are not protected by the Ontario Landlord and Tenant Act.   In  contrast, all tenants within supportive housing accommodations are protected by the Act, which  has important implications for supportive housing providers                                                                

Supportive housing will also be distinguished from custodial housing.  Such housing began 

in the 1930s and has been referred to as the early iteration of what was to become the province's  supportive housing strategy (CAMH, 2011).  While it is argued that the model upon which it is  based now inappropriate and out of date, it still constitutes as much as 44% of what is considered  to be dedicated housing for the mentally ill within communities (ibid).  Custodial housing provides  a common standardized basket of basic services to tenants, such as meals, laundry and supervision,   but does not provide case management and the broader types of rehabilitation focussed  programming and amenities  that are found within supportive housing (Sylvestre et al., 2009).  As  a result of its strict and inflexible policies and standards it has been leading to  "transinstitutionalization",  which is the inappropriate application of institutional ideas to the  community sphere. In contrast to the non profit supportive housing providers, custodial homes  are owned and operated by private for profit entities (George et al., 2005).  

 

 

 

 

5

1.3.   Housing   first   approaches    

 

Supportive housing may also be distinguished from the highly publicized "housing first" 

approaches, that have been employed in a number of cities in Canada2 and abroad.  Such  approaches are aimed at 'hard to house' individuals who are homeless, and often suffer from  mental health issues, or may be targeted specifically toward those with concurrent homelessness  and mental illness.   What sets such approaches apart from supportive housing is the manner in  which they stress the fundamental goal of rapidly housing the individual, first and foremost,  without any concomitant requirements in terms of engagement with social services (Falvo, 2009).     The "housing first" approach arose in response to "treatment first" approaches which assumed  that it was most appropriate and efficacious to engage clients  in mental health treatment prior to  any consideration housing needs, preferences and options (Klodawsky, 2010).   This approach  proved particularly ineffective in the case of the homeless and hard to house individuals as it  created additional barriers to engagement, particularly in the typical case that they were simply  not interested in treatment.   As the number of homeless individuals suffering from mental illness  grew, policy makers and practitioners ultimately had to accept this reality and pursue other  options (ibid).                                                                                                                                    

Nonetheless, "housing first" approaches typically do provide for minimal levels of case 

management for tenants and afford them with the opportunity to engage within a broader array  of health and social services if they are interested .  In the case that tenants accept this  opportunity, it effectively creates defacto supportive housing.  As Rog (2004) has suggested,  "housing first" has spurred programming that is similar to supportive housing but with the over riding goal of decreasing homelessness, as opposed to any therapeutic outcomes per se.   If one 

2

 For example, Toronto's Streets To Homes program will be discussed in the next section of this paper. 

6

were to draw a line between supportive and supported housing,  "housing first" would be most  clearly aligned with the latter (Rog 2004).   

1.4.   The   Many   flavours   of   supportive   housing   in   Toronto    

 

The general definition of supportive housing is where the simplicity ends.  As the participants 

involved in the present study described, and as previous research has suggested (George et al., 2005),  there are many flavours of supportive housing in Toronto.  It may consist of a single, or shared room in  a boarding house or group home.   It may consist of a single and independent apartment within an  otherwise traditional market building, or within  a building dedicated to those with mental health  issues (P2).   It may foster wholly independent living, outside of the visits by social service workers, or  may include special communal facilities and group programs for those with mental health issues (P6).   In terms of support, social services may be provided  by a worker who lives on premises, or a worker  who visits clients within a number of scattered buildings (P1).  Such workers may provide intense 24  hour services, in the case of those with severe mental illness, or less frequent 'check up' visits (P8).     The nature of the social services provided to tenants not only depend on the nature of tenant 

needs but on administrative decisions.  For example, while  a tenant's housing related issues (e.g., rent  payment, compliance to rules of tenancy) and social and health related service needs may be dealt by  a single case worker in one living situation, these domains may be split up amongst two case workers  in another (P10).                                                                                                                                                    

Diversity exists not only in form but in underlying ideology.  For example while some settings 

may emphasize a "maintenance" approach, whereby continued tenancy might be encouraged as a  long terms means of contributing to the well being of individuals and the management of their mental  health issues, others may ascribe to a more rehabilitative transitional approach whereby supportive  housing is viewed as just one temporary step along the longer term path to recovery and fuller 

7

community integration (Leff et al., 2009).   Similarly, agencies may promote communal residential  activities and tenant involvement therein to differing degrees, depending upon their perspective with  regards to the goals of community integration and autonomy (P6).   In the case of substance misuse, in  particular3, some agencies may view sobriety as a necessary prerequisite to tenancy, and others may  adopt a harm reduction approach and/or accept such use as one of the number of the mental health  issues that the tenant is working on (P5).  By extension, a relapse may be viewed as grounds for 

expulsion from one program, but as a natural and expected part of the recovery process in another.                                  Clearly one of the main problems in defining supportive housing relates to the diversity of 

models that exist.  Such diversity is the product of the complex context and issues surrounding this  multifaceted intervention (Chilvers, Macdonald, Hayes, 2010) and of the varying needs and  preferences of the great range  of populations served.  As will be described shortly, such diversity is  also the product of  the unique history and evolution of supportive housing agencies in the city that  may operate according to very different guiding values, beliefs principles and beliefs as to best  practice.  Owing to the difficulties in defining supportive housing in conclusive terms, let alone  evaluating it as such,  it has been suggested that researchers should turn their attention away from  this elusive task by focussing upon identifying specific features that contribute to specific outcomes  within specific settings and populations (Fakhoury, Murray, Shepherd, Priebe, 2002).      

 

 

  

 As substance misuse is the most common and clinically significant co morbidity amongst those with  severe mental illness (Drake, Mueser, Brunette, McHugo, 2004), the manner in which it is addressed in  supportive housing is all the more relevant. 

3

8

2.   A   Review   of   the   literature   &   evidence    2.1.   The   nexus   of   mental   illness   and   (inadequate)   housing     Evidence has gradually led governments to recognize that a significant portion of the 

homeless population has mental health problems.  As such the intersection of housing and mental  health is not only an important consideration for those seeking to promote success and stability  amongst mentally ill populations, but for practitioners, decision makers and governments seeking  to address the increasingly prominent issue of homelessness within communities (Kirsh et al.,  2009).                                                                                                                                                                                  The most comprehensive study of homelessness in Canada to date found that 3035% of 

the homeless in Toronto suffered from some form of mental illness (City of Toronto, 1999).  The  rate was 95% for homeless women, which was in keeping with other studies that found such a  similar gender bias .   It has been suggested that the appearance and behaviour of mentally ill  individuals, and particularly those being discharged from hospitals or jails, may make it difficult to  impossible for them to secure housing in the private market..  Such individuals may also lack a  sufficient or consistent income stream to pay for housing, as a result of interrupted work histories,  or may simply struggle to fill in forms and to attend multiple meetings with potential landlords and  housing related agencies (Sylvestre et al., 2009).                                                                                  

                                    

Of course, in considering the root causes of homelessness it is necessary to consider both 

micro (e.g., mental illness) and macro (e.g., housing policies, broader economic forces) factors  (Gaetz, 2004).  Moreover, the high rates of mental illness amongst the homeless should certainly  not be misinterpreted as suggesting an obvious and simple causal relationship.    Just as mental  illness might contribute to homelessness, homelessness might contribute to mental illness; or  there might be other more important lurking variables (ibid).   Putting such academic 

9

considerations aside,  the simple fact that there are such high rates of mental illness amongst the 

homeless is clearly an important finding in and of itself with important policy implications.                                                 

2.2.   The   effectiveness   of   supportive   housing                                                                                               Several studies have pointed to positive outcomes accruing from supportive housing in 

comparison to other housing alternatives.  Such outcomes have included: longer housing tenure;  greater housing satisfaction; better quality of life; more meaningful activities and work;  lower  rates of psychiatric hospitalization; and lower overall social costs (Lipton et al., 2000).  In one quasi  experimental U.S. study, that is often cited,  Leff and Trieman (2000)  followed 900 formerly  hospitalized patients within supportive housing and compared them to counterparts who  remained in hospital.  At five years those in supportive housing experienced considerable  reductions in negative psychiatric symptoms and considerable improvements in social behaviour  and domestic and life skills.                                                                                

2.3.   Cost   effectiveness   of   supportive   housing     Despite some conflicting evidence (Rosenheck et al., 2003),  there is  research to suggest 

that supportive housing may be effective in reducing overall social costs.   In a large landmark  study involving 4699 homeless and severely mentally ill individuals placed within supportive  housing in New York City, overall hospital, criminal justice, and social service costs  per individual  were reduced $16, 281 per year in comparison to a matched control group.  Moreover, the cost of  the supportive housing was only $19, 299 per unit per year resulting in a net housing cost of $995 

per individual (Culhane, Metraux, Hadley, 2002).                                                                                                                              In the Canadian context, one study has estimated that the cost of supportive housing was 

a fraction of the cost of other facilities in which the homeless and mentally ill might find  themselves.  While a self contained apartment with support services on site was estimated to cost 

10

$69$88 per day alternate daily costs were: $380 in a psychiatric hospital, $140$191 in mental  health residential facilities, $80$185 in a detox center and $155$250 in a provincial correctional  facility.   Only an emergency homeless shelter had a comparable costs of $60$85 per day,  although the quality of such accommodations might clearly be drawn into question.   Similarly, a  study conducted in British Columbia concluded that it cost its government 33% more to provide  health care, criminal justice and social services to homeless persons versus a socially housed  unemployed individual (i.e., $24000 per year versus $18,000 per year). 

2.4.   Research   reviews   and   the   elusiveness   of   conclusive   evidence     Despite the promising findings, just described, a number of researchers caution against 

embracing the supportive housing concept in light of a paucity of rigorous studies undertaken.   Based upon a review and methodological evaluation of 15 studies, Rog (2004) concluded that  there was only strong evidence to suggest that supportive housing improved access to quality  housing stability, and reduced hospital usage.  With respect to all other purported outcomes,  evidence was weak and conflicting.   The shortage of randomized control trials, differing outcome  measures, and inconsistencies in defining and operational zing supportive housing itself were  identified major shortcomings within existing studies.   As  all of the programs varied in terms of  the services provided and the populations served, this was described as an added layer of  complexity which made any consensus and comparisons difficult.                                  

                                                   

A recent Cochrane Review drew even more critical conclusions.   In fact no randomized or 

quasi randomized studies were identified which met the quality criteria that had to be met for  inclusion into the review.  While suggesting that more research was in order, the authors  acknowledged how the complexity of supportive housing interventions, and the diversity of  models employed and populations served in practice, made such conclusive forms of research 

11

prohibitive..  In the absence of such evidence they suggested that policy makers needed to be  cautious about supportive housing policies and needed to ensure that they included an evaluative  component.   Practitioners were also advised  to make recommendation with respect to  supportive housing on the basis of both their professional judgment and the preferences of clients; 

by extension, clients need to be apprised of the subjective nature of that decision.                                                                  In contrast to the favourable economic arguments, described above, some writers have 

suggested that supportive housing is actually quite costly in light of the paucity of evidence with  regard to its effectiveness (Fakhoury, Murray, Shepherd & Priebe, 2002).  Others have suggested  that policy decisions with regard to supportive housing need to be made on the basis of our  underlying values, in as much as they should be made on the basis of the evidence (Sylvester,  Nelson, Sabloff, Peddle, 2009).   Of course, a value base approach provides one way forward in the  absence of conclusive evidence upon which specific decisions might be based.     

2.5.   Supportive   housing   and   community   integration     Community integration has become an underlying goal within mental health systems in 

North America and Europe, and supportive housing has been touted as being a vehicle for  achieving it.  It is assumed that those with psychiatric disabilities can assume roles and lifestyles as   participating members of a community when they are provided with appropriate services and  supports within the most normalized living environment possible (Wong & Solomen, 2002) .   Despite the intuitive appeal of this argument, and its central role as an attractive rationale for  supportive housing,  there is a surprisingly lack of empirical research to confirm the purported 

relationship.  This has led to a call for greater research into this area (Wong and Solomen, 2002).                                        One qualitative study  was identified involving 80 homeless subjects.  The 46 who were 

ultimately placed within supportive housing self reported a greater sense of community 

12

integration as a result but the same was also true for the others who were placed in housing  without supports (Yanos, Barrow, Tsembelis, 2004).   Wong and Solomen have also reviewed  19  studies involving community based housing for the mentally ill which included variables that might  be considered to reflect dimensions of community integration.  As they concluded most of these  variables focussed upon the degree to which community activities and resources were accessed,  and upon physical integration (e.g., venturing into the community).    As the authors suggest,  greater attention needed to be paid to the degree to which tenants actually interact with  community members (i.e., "social integration") and the degree to which they feel like they are part  of the community and have access to it (i.e., "psychological integration").   In their view future  research needed to acknowledge the multidimensionality of community integration and consider  the array of housing and social service characteristics that were relevant in promoting it;  supportive housing was not some singular and clearly defined concept that could serve as a simple  independent variable. 

2.6.   Key   components/characteristics   of   supportive   housing     Presently there is also little definitive research with respect to what specific components 

of supportive housing contribute to more positive outcomes (Rog, 2004).  A number of studies  have suggested that independent living arrangement and less restrictive housing policies are not  only preferred by tenants within supportive housing, but may result in greater satisfaction with  housing and neighbourhood.  However, feelings of isolation and loneliness have also been  reported more regularly by participants residing within more independent living arrangements  within some studies.   Similarly, living in setting that have fewer occupants has been shown to  result in positive outcomes in some studies, but negative outcomes in others, pointing to a  possible trade off between social support and independence.   In the case of a study by Goldfinger 

13

and colleagues (1999), participants living in independent apartments ultimately reported being  homeless twice as many days as those in group homes (98 versus 43 days, respectively).  Another  Canadian study Kirpatrich & Younger, 1995) suggested that gender might be a complicating factor,  for while men preferred independent living women preferred group setting primarily for safety  reasons.   Given such conflicting evidence, relationships between program characteristics and  ultimate outcomes may clearly be complex and highly client specific.                                           One means by which the complexity of these relationships might be captured is through 

the type of qualitative research employed by Kirsh and colleagues (2009).  These researchers  identified the lack of research in relation to the key features of supportive housing in general, and  research which incorporated the more detailed insights and perspectives of the actual providers  and users of supportive housing in particular.  In their study they conducted extensive qualitative  interviews with the latter groups in Toronto which were then considered alongside of a review of  existing research .   While their final analysis is far too long and detailed to discuss at any length  here, they identified the following as being key characteristics of successful supportive housing:  choice and flexibility; neighbourhood fit; awareness and attention to stigma; quality relationships  between residents and service providers; a range of supports; support with independent living;  support in preventing and managing a crisis; support with pursing work and school; support and  assistance with creating and maintaining social connections; and support and assistance with  health issues.   

 

 

 

14

2.9.   Research   on   the   characteristics   of   supportive   housing   tenants                                                                            While comprehensive data with regard to the characteristics of supportive housing 

tenants in Toronto is not yet available4, a review of U.S. research has provided some interesting  insights.  Those with mental illness who are living within supportive housing tend to be older and  less educated, compared to those with mental illness who are able to live more independently  (Phillips & Hawes, 2005).  They also tend to have greater cognitive deficits, a  longer history of  hospital care and higher unemployment rates.  A diagnosis of schizophrenia has also been found  to be common amongst those in supportive housing, leading to speculation that it may be  attracting tenants with this condition owing to its features matching the needs of this population;  it is argued that it may provide for the type of structure and support that is needed to prevent the  decomposition that accompanies this condition.     

2.8.   Negative   externalities   &   opposition   to   supportive   housing     Supportive housing often faces fierce community opposition, or NYMBY5ism, and Toronto 

is certainly no exception in this regard.   The local media has reported on a number of cases in  recent years where citizens have come out in angry opposition to supportive housing  developments in their neighbourhoods and in one particularly high profile case a long time city  councillor is said to have lost the recent election in her ward largely due to her failure to voice her  opposition (Kennedy, 2010).  Arguments in opposition to supportive housing are typically based on  the belief that the neighbourhood character will somehow change.  Most typically the fear is that  crime will increase, the general enjoyment of the neighbourhood will decrease, and property  values will ultimately drop (Walker & Seasons, 2002).  As the evidence does not ultimately support 

This will likely be made available in the near as a result of data that is now being collected through Toronto's Centralized Assessment to Supportive Housing (CASH) services. 5  NIMBY is an acronym for Not in My Back Yard. 

4

15

such beliefs, they are likely based upon false public perceptions with regard to the nature of  mental illness and the characteristics and behaviour of mentally ill individuals (Walker & Seasons,  2002); perceptions that have been distorted by sensationalized depictions within popular media  (Dream Team, 2010).                                                                                                                                                                          Of the few studies identified that considered the relationship between the location of 

supportive housing facilities and subsequent crime rates (Galster et al. 2004; de Wolff, 2008) and  property values (Galster et al., 2003), not one found a significant relationship.  In fact, a study by  Galster and colleagues (2003) suggested that supportive housing facilities might have led to an  increase in property values owing to its encouragement of further development in the vicinity.  In  addition, a study based on supportive housing facilities in Toronto found that their residents  contributed a modest but significant amount to their local economies and contributed to creating 

neighbourhoods that were more vibrant, friendlier, and more civically engaged (de Wolff, 2008).                                        Despite the evidence NIMBYism continues.  As some suggest, this continues to push 

supportive housing out of more affluent neighbourhoods and  into less desirable areas of the city,  leading to the same type of 'ghettoization' that occurred in the early days of deinstitutionalization,  albeit to a less obvious degree (Walker & Seasons 2002) .  Even when NIMBYism not successful,  it  has been described as delaying supportive housing development and as increasing its resultant  cost.   At  a time when both supportive housing units and money are in very short supply, clearly  such delays are of great concern.  Even more fundamentally, NIMBYism has been described as  

constituting a human rights violation (The Dream Team, 2010).                                                                                                    In order to address NIMBYism groups led by mental health consumer survivors have arisen 

in a number of cities to lobby for and raise awareness about supportive housing.  In Toronto, The  Dream Team and Homecoming Community Choice Coalition (HCCC) both carry out extensive  research and proactively educate policy makers.   Of particular note, the Dream Team carried out 

16

an extensive study on the community impacts of supportive housing in Toronto.   It also led a  recent court action to overturn what it described as discriminatory municipal bylaws that  restricted housing types (e.g., rooming houses) that were typically associated with supportive  housing for the mentally ill.  The HCCC has created a step by step 'how to' manual to address  issues (e.g., NIMBYism) that might be anticipated in developing supportive housing in the city.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17

3.   The   Origin   &   evolution   &   general   characteristic   of    Toronto's   system   3.1.   The   historical   backdrop   of   deinstitutionalization     Supportive housing for the mentally ill in Toronto arose in response to the much broader 

deinstitionalization movement that took place within mental health systems in Canada, and  abroad in the 1990s and 1980s (McKenzie, 2004; Fakhoury, Murray, Shepherd & Priebe, 2002).   Underlying this movement was a belief in the possibility of community integration and of its  benefits in terms of ultimately contributing to the recovery of those with serious mental illness.   Community based care was considered to be more aligned with the values and goals of recovery  than highly medicalized care within institutions.  Such recovery was believed to be possible, in the  absence of formal hospital based care, provided that appropriate community based treatment and  supports were in place.  By extension, there was a push toward community based housing for the  mentally ill in the last 40 years, to replace hospital based residential care (Fakhoury, Murray,  Shepherd & Priebe, 2002).                                                                                                                                               Beyond contributing to recovery this strategy was also supported upon purely 

humanitarian grounds and the notion of a common citizenship.  The strategy reflected the belief  that those with mental and/or physical disabilities had an inherent right, and should be afforded  the opportunity, to study, work, and recreate alongside of their disability free peers (Wong &  Solomen, 2002)                                                                                                                                                               Critics of deinstitutionalization, however, suggest that this was merely a strategy aimed 

reducing government costs associated traditional forms of care.  In support of this claim they point  to the lack of resources that were ultimately invested within communities in order to compensate  for the ultimate closures of hospitals and massive reductions in the number of hospital beds for  those with serious mental illness (CAMH, 2011) .  While the logic was that displaced patients  would be cared for by the community and their families, in reality patients had to rely heavily 

18

upon their families or were left in the lurch in the absence of any formal system of adequate  community based supports.  In this sense, one might suggest that deinstitutionalization was not  the problem per se, as is commonly suggested, but rather that it was lack of compensatory  measures taken in the wake of it.  Whether the government was complicit in this or simply caught 

off guard is an open question, and ultimately academic  relative to the actual outcomes.                                                        Much has been written about how such dependence upon families created undue 

hardships upon them, bred continued dependence within patients, and failed to address the  critical question of what would happen if family member ultimately passed on or were simply  unable to continue providing such high levels of support (McKenzie, 2004).  Patients who were  discharged from hospital and who could not rely upon family or community support were typically  left to fend for themselves and this often resulted in homelessness or housing arrangements that  were far  less than ideal.  Commonly they found themselves within crowded and poorly  maintained rooming houses with limited access to the services they required, let alone the  broader community integration that they were supposed to enjoy.   Such housing was typically  clustered within rundown neighbourhoods of the city which were poorly served by community  services and ultimately became known for such accommodations, rather than reflecting some  broader community into which residents could integrate.  While Toronto's Parkdale  neighbourhood was a classic case in point, similar clusters of rooming houses frequented by the 

mentally ill, and generally marginalized, could also be found elsewhere in the city (ibid).                                                        In addition to the crowded and poor conditions that residents faced within rooming 

houses, and other sub par accommodations, they were often taken advantage of as a result of  their compromised mental state (McKenzie, 2004).  They were often charged rents that were  excessive and subject to rules, fees, and general treatment that would not be tolerated by a  typical tenant in the city (P2).   As some landlords received social assistance cheques on behalf of 

19

their tenants, or simply became familiar with the amounts they were typically provided, this  clearly raised ethical issues and opened the door to corrupt behaviour (P3).                                         While deinstitutionalization may have been supported on the basis of achieving cost 

reductions, the government's failure to provide for adequate supports has also been criticized as  resulting in an inefficient system fraught with un necessary hospital expenditures.  Some point to   'revolving door' phenomena ( McKenzie, 2004), whereby patients discharged from hospitals too  hastily and/or without appropriate supports within the community simply cycle back and forth  between the community and hospital in a manner that is costly to society and undermines the  long term health and/or recovery.                                                                                                                                            

3.2.   The   pragmatic   and   heroic   grassroots   of   the   system     It is against this historical backdrop of deinstitutionalization that supportive housing first 

took root in Toronto.  Individuals and groups concerned about one of a number of interrelated  issues such homelessness, rooming house conditions and the fate of discharged hospital patients  ultimately stepped up to the plate (P10).  In order to create an early brand of supportive housing,  creative arrangements were struck which secured good quality affordable housing units for  tenants, while also providing for a guaranteed stream of rental income for private market  landlords (P2).  To fund such housing a variety of government, charitable and private funds were  cobbled together.  And as many of those involved in establishing such housing  had a unique  knowledge of and access to services, as a result of being employed within the mental health and  general social services system, this became a channel for securing the necessary housing supports  (P3).                                                                                                                                                                                  

In this sense supportive housing first evolved as a grass roots initiative, or rather initiatives,  

that initially sprang from a number of diverse quarters and social movements (P1, P5,P10).  As 

20

some suggest, it was also the direct result of the involvement of  "truly dedicated heroic" types of  people (P5).                                                                                                                

3.3.   'After   the   fact'   government   involvement    

 

While supportive housing eventually won government recognition and support, and was 

taken under its wing as an official policy and program with its own capital and operating dollars,  this was certainly not true from the outset.  That is, supportive housing was not the outcome of  some overall and integrated plan or policy (P5).  This is more than an interesting historical fact, as  it ultimately helps to account for the diverse and complex nature of the seemingly fragmented  system that exists today.     

3.4.   The   two   decisive   waves   of   government   funding               The availability of supportive housing in Toronto, and the very nature of the existing  supportive housing stock, has also been determined largely by a legacy of changing government  policies and priorities at the federal and provincial levels.  However, there have been two  distinctive periods of investment which clearly stand out.    As one participant within the present  study metaphorically described, they are clearly recorded within the existing supportive housing  stock that we now see in the city, like the distinct geological layers in a rock face (P6).   

3.5.   The   early   years   of   inspired   investment     

 

In the early years the provincial government provided funding to provide for the creation 

of supportive housing units within existing rental housing stock, and the federal capital dollars to  acquire and construct buildings.  This was an era in which the supportive housing concept seemed  to capture the attention and imagination of the provincial government, inspiring them  to  eventually invest therein.   Between 1985 and 1996 the federal and provincial governments both 

21

contributed significant capital funds to an affordable housing program which saw 59 buildings  acquired and constructed by supportive housing agencies.     To this day this period represents the  largest capital investment in the supportive housing system.                                                                                            

3.6.   The   "common   sense"   years   of   rent   supplements   &   homelessness   initiatives     The election of a conservative provincial government in Ontario in 1995, and the 

 

introduction of its so called "common sense revolution", effectively brought all investment into  affordable and supportive housing to an end (P8).  When the provincial government did reinsert  itself within supportive and affordable housing it did so through rental supplement programs, as  opposed to capital investment, an approach that has been relied upon heavily since that time.                                            However significant funding, including capital dollars, did become available for the 

development of supportive housing under two phases of a Mental Health Homelessness Initiative  (P9).   This initiative led to a 135% increase in supportive housing in the province, with 66% of its  funding going to the Toronto region (George et al., 2005)  

3.9.    The transfer and consolidation of supportive housing files    While 238 units of supportive housing units were originally developed and held by the 

Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation, and 2421 units were held by the provincial Ministry of  Municipal Affairs and Housing, these were transferred to and consolidated within the provincial  Ministry of Health and Long Term Care (George et al., 2005) in 1998 and 2002, respectively.  While  this was clearly be viewed as logical from a planning and administrative perspective, it also meant  that the MOHLTC found itself in the position of having to deal directly with housing related  matters for the first time.   This new and foreign reality might help to explain why health planning  bodies that were eventually established on the local level, in the form of the Local Health 

22

Integration Networks (LHINs),  initially appeared to tread quite softly with respect to supportive  housing; a possibility will be taken up in greater detail in Part B of this paper. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23

4.0.   The   present   'system'   4.1.   The   leading   provincial   role     The supportive housing portfolio presently sits with the Ministry of Health and Long Term 

Care (MOHLTC).   The Ministry's central Supportive Housing Unit provides agencies with the  operating and rent subsidies to cover the "bricks and mortar" housing costs, while Local Health  Integration Networks (which will be described shortly) provide agencies with the funding to deliver  services and supports to consumers.                                                                                                                     Ontario's entire system consists of roughly 6300 units of supportive housing, about half of 

which was developed as a result of the two phases of the province's Mental Health and  Homelessness Initiative (Sylvestre et al., 2009).  The provincial government currently allocates  about $30 million dollars per year to the housing component of the system, and $100 million to  accompanying services and support (ibid).                                                                                             

However, it is important to point out that the provincial contribution to supportive 

housing is not necessarily restricted to those specific items described above.   For example, while  residing within a supportive housing unit an individual may clearly access a wide array of health  and social services, in addition to those which might be tied to the unit on an accounting basis.   While these other services may be essential in terms of successful tenancy within supportive  housing, they may clearly not make it into the final accounting of the government's overall  investment therein.   Similarly, while the housing component of ODSP or OW may contribute to  the rents paid within supportive housing units, these are not considered government expenditures  on supportive housing per se.   

 

24

4.2.   The   LHINs       Local Health Integration Networks (LHINs) are local non profit corporations that were 

established by the provincial government in 2006 for the purpose of planning, integrating and  funding local health services, in collaboration with local service providers and community  members (MOHLTC, 2011).  While the Ministry previously had regional offices which dealt with  supportive housing agencies within their jurisdictions, these were essentially replaced when the  LHINs were introduced.  There are currently 14 LHINs in Ontario, four of which operate within  Toronto.  Apart from providing supportive housing agencies with the funds required to deliver the  services to tenants and cover their own office operating costs, LHINs are also intended to  encourage collaboration amongst them.   A single supportive housing agency in Toronto may  actually be accountable to multiple LHINs, as their jurisdiction boundaries of the latter are much  smaller than the previous regional office and do not align with the catchment area of agencies;  participants within the present study actually identified this as a significant ongoing challenge  owing to divergent and sometime conflicting priorities and requirements of the LHINs and the  time and energy wasted as a result of duplication (P1, P8).            

4.3.   The   Mental   Health   and   Addictions   Supportive   Housing   Network   and   CASH      The Mental Health and Addictions Supportive Housing Network was established by 

supportive housing agencies in Toronto in 2000 to provide  a forum for the exchange of  information and ideas and to facilitate potential partnerships (LOFT, 2012).  Under the umbrella of  the network, and with funding from the LHINs, the Coordinated Access to Supportive Housing  (CASH) program was established in 2010 in order to provide those requiring supportive housing  with a universal one stop application and referral process to access the full range of programs in 

25

the city (ibid). The LHINs, the network, and CASH, will all be discussed in greater detail in Part B of  this paper.           

4.4.   A   system   that   is   not   really   a   system     The supportive housing system in Toronto is diverse as separate agencies have arisen to 

respond to  particular populations and/or need.    It is the product of its unique history and of  the complex relationships that exist between its constituent agencies as well as with the various  levels of government (P3, P9).  Most important, perhaps, it is a product of the diverse needs and  populations that it serves (P10).  The nature and necessity of such diversity was best captured in  the words of one of the participants who were interviewed for this study.  As no agency was  doing exactly what they needed to do they had to "invent the wheel"; they simply looked for  "for rent" signs, talked to many reluctant landlords, and eventually developed a program and  approach that would "work" for them (P9).    For all intents and purposes the supportive housing system in Toronto is not a system at 

all; at least not in the strictest sense of the word.  There is no single overall plan, planner or  organizational structure to guide supportive housing in the city (P5).  Instead it consists of a  number of very different and relatively autonomous agencies that may collaborate with one  another, but are not compelled to do so in any overall way (P6).  While the LHINs, the Network  and CASH all encourage integration and collaboration, at the end of the day that is all they can  do (P3).  

4.5.   An   overview   of   Toronto's   supportive   housing   landscape     At present there are 31 supportive housing agencies in Toronto which provide 4400 units 

of supportive housing (See Table A).   These range from very small agencies that may provide a  handful of such units within one or two buildings, to those with many hundreds of units within 

26

buildings scattered across the city.   They include agencies whose focus is solely on supportive  housing, to multiservice agencies that provide a whole host of social services within their  communities.   They consist of providers which accommodate a diverse range of populations and  needs, to those which cater specifically to the needs of men, women, or specific ethno cultural  groups.  They consist of agencies that are independent or connected to hospitals or other  community organizations.                                                                                                                                             

Despite its diversity, the supportive housing system in Toronto is clearly one which is 

dominated by a great number of relatively small agencies, coupled with a handful of very large  ones.  As table 1 describes, 23 of the 31 agencies in the city  have under 100 units while three,  which we profile in the next section, have well over 800 units each.     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

27

Table   A:   Supportive   Housing   Agencies   in   Toronto     Organization        1. Accommodation Information & Support    2. Bayview Community Services Inc.     3. Canadian Mental Health Association     4. Centre for Addiction & Mental Health   5. Chai Tikvah Foundation       6. Community Outreach Services     9. COTA               8. Eden Community Homes   9. George Herman House      10. Good Shepherd NonProfit Homes    11.   Habitat   Services                                       Number of Units    95    16    249    48    11    18    201    20    10    185             860          52  21  390 

12. Hong Fook Mental Health Association  13. House of Compassion      14. Houselink Community Homes   

15.   LOFT   Community   Services                                           856   16. Madison Ave. Housing & Support Services      44 

19.   Mainstay   Housing                                                        869    18. Margaret Frazer House          19. Parkdale ActivityRecreation Centre (PARC)      20. Pilot Place Society            21. Progress Place            22. Regeneration House          23. Rouge Valley Health System         24. Scarborough Hospital, Manse Road Residential     25. St. Jude Community Homes          26. St. Stephen's Community House              29. Street Haven at the Crossroads  28. Supportive Housing in Peel/SHEY        29. The Salvation Army  Liberty Housing & Support Services  30. Wood Green Community Services        31. YWCA Toronto              31  10  20  45  108  36  10  89  13  33  84  29  9  100 

28

5.    The   Contrasting   Profiles   Toronto's   Three   Largest   Supportive   Housing   Agencies     In order to provide a for a richer and more tangible understanding of the diverse nature 

and historical basis of the system, a more detailed examination was undertaken of the origin and  evolution of three largest and most prominent supportive housing agencies in Toronto: Mainstay  Housing, Habitat Services and Loft Community Services   As these three agencies boast a total of  2583 units, that is well over half of the total units in the system, clearly this also provided a  glimpse into a good portion of the system as a whole.   While a brief profile of each agency follows,  those readers more familiar with the supportive housing system in Toronto may wish to proceed  directly to Section B of this report.        

5.1.   Mainstay   Housing 6    Mainstay housing, originally known as the Supportive Housing Network of Metropolitan 

Toronto, was created in 1982.  As the original name implies, it was initially contemplated to play a  much broader policy level role.  The Network originally brought together a number of individual  and groups who then lobbied the provincial government to provide dedicated supportive housing  for the mentally ill and educated the public as to this important issue.    To that end, it initially  developed a "Blueprint for Supportive Housing" and made the first submissions regarding 

supportive housing to the Ministry of Health.                                                                                                                                     Eventually it was successful in winning the support of a Minister of Health, by the name of 

Larry Grossman, who provided core funding to the Network and funds for the purpose of creating  the first government funded supportive housing in the city.  From this point forward the Network  effectively became the "middle man" in conveying provincial funds to agencies interested in 
This entire section was informed by the information derived from the participants involved in the  interview study, including a participant representing Mainstay Housing.  However, participant codes have  not been included in this case in order to protect confidentiality, and to avoid the specific possibility that  linkages might be made to interview comments presented in the second part of this paper.
6

29

providing supportive housing.   New non profit supportive housing agencies were created in order  to access such funds, or preexisting social service agencies morphed into organizations took on an 

additional role as supportive housing providers.                                                                                                                                While the Network initially conveyed funds for the purpose of covering the cost of rent 

and services provided within existing buildings in the city, provincial and federal government  dollars were eventually provided by which agencies could acquire and construct dedicated  buildings.   As the Network had served as an advocate for the mentally ill and was well apprised of  the issues 'on the ground', it provided the senior levels of government with the assurance that  funds were being directed responsibly and appropriately.                                                

                                                   

It was only by default that Network ultimately became an actual provider of supportive 

housing.   In cases in which agencies ultimately could not fulfill their supportive housing  obligations, their properties were ultimately taken back by the Network.   This new role  contributed to the Network's rebranding as Mainstay in 2004.  The unexpected manner in which it  was thrust into this role and acquired properties as a result, ultimately contributed to its rather  unique model of supportive housing delivery.                                                                                                         In contrast to other supportive housing providers in the city who either provide their own 

on site services, or have formal arrangements with other agencies to do so,  Mainstay applies a  'bring your own' philosophy.  That is tenants may apply to Mainstay, or more typically other  agencies may refer their clients there, but they must ultimately come with supportive services in  place.  As a result of its unusual model, some have referred to Mainstay as a provider of housing  for supportive housing, rather than as a supportive housing provider per se.   In actual fact,  Mainstay does have support workers to assist tenants with basic housing related matters, and to  engage them within recreational and communal activities, but it very intentionally does not  engage in intense individual case management.  This philosophy is reflected clearly in its staffing 

30

numbers.   While other supportive housing agencies in the city typically have tenant to support  worker ratios in the area of 1:20, the ratio at Mainstay stands at 1:80.                                                                          In summary, while Mainstay was originally envisioned as the type of upper tier planning 

body that might have ultimately provided for comprehensive system wide planning, this was  clearly overshadowed by  its early and more pragmatic role in simply getting supportive funding  'out the door'.    

5.2.   Habitat   Community   Housing   Services 7    In the 1980s, mental health workers, consumer advocates and housing providers began to 

voice their concerns about the living conditions of mentally ill tenants who were housed in  boarding homes in the city .  They formed Habitat Services in 1989 in order to consider how they  might address this issue and  ultimately arrived at an innovative strategy that ultimately became  known as the "Habitat model".                                                                                                                                Habitat enters into a contract with building owners, on behalf of individual tenants, and 

this contract lays out minimum standards in terms of physical housing quality and related services.   The owners, in turn, are motivated by the steady stream of guaranteed income that Habitat  provides.   It pays a per diem subsidy to such owners, which is funded on a cost shared basis 

between the provincial  Ministry of Health and Long Term Care and the City of Toronto.                                                         Each Habitat building has a housing coordinator who monitors standard and services, 

meets regularly with tenant and the building operators, and deals with disputes between them  through a formal process.  A housing inspector also makes regular visits to buildings to ensure that  building standards are met and applicable services (e.g., meals, supplies) are provided by the 
 This entire section was informed by the information derived from the participants involved in the  interview study, including a participant representing Habitat Housing Services.  However, participant  codes have not been included in this case in order to protect confidentiality, and to avoid the specific  possibility that linkages might be made to interview comments presented in the second part of this paper.   
7

31

building owner.  Habitat also employs on site support workers to engage tenants in communal  activities and provides for ongoing individual assistance with personal issues and goals.  It partners  with Community Occupational Therapy (COTA) Health, another supportive housing agency, which  provides support to those tenants with severe mental illness.                                                           While Habitat does not own its own buildings, the contracts effectively provide it with a                                 

large portfolio of supportive housing units which it can call its own.  Moreover, it has been able to  influence significant improvements in the quality of the overall boarding home stock the city as a  result of the increasing number of building owners who now vie for its contracts.  It has been  credited with eliminating the existence of triple occupancy rooms and is now pushing the standard  further by rewarding more contracts to owners who provide a greater portion of single room  occupancy units.       

5.3.   Loft   Community   Services 8    Loft Community Services was formed in 1953 when two programs run by the Anglican 

Church were merged to form Anglican Houses, an independent non denominational Charity.   It  was ultimately renamed Loft Community Services to reflect the broad array of needs and  populations that it serves.                                                                                                                                    

Loft may be distinguished from other supportive housing providers not only in terms of its 

size but in terms of its flexibility and general willingness to take risks and to embrace changes in  the name of addressing  emerging and unmet needs.  In response to such needs it  has developed  innovate supportive housing programs for a number of very specific populations such as seniors  dealing with mental illness and homelessness, men and women dealing mental illness, addictions, 
 This entire section was informed by the information derived from the participants involved in the  interview study, including a participant representing Loft Community Services.  However, participant  codes have not been included in this case in order to protect confidentiality, and to avoid the specific  possibility that linkages might be made to interview comments presented in the second part of this paper.   
8

32

homelessness and HIV/AIDS, the underserviced sub population of young women dealing with  addiction issues.  In cases where needs have been deemed to have been met, as by the entry of  other agencies, Loft has also taken the difficult step of ending programs in order to transfer 

resources toward more urgent emerging areas.                                                                                                                                 Loft is also unique in terms of being not simply a supportive housing provider, but a full 

fledged multi service agency.   In addition to having 800 units of supportive housing within 90 sites,  it serves 1800 clients per year through community support teams and street outreach programs in  both  in Toronto and York Region.                                                                                                                        In keeping with an important role it plays at the system wide level, LOFT was recently 

selected to serve as the host agency site for the new CASH system.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

33

PART   B:                                        THE   INTERVIEW   STUDY                   

34

4.   The   Rationale   6.1.   Why   interviews   with   executive   directors?                                                                                           A simple lack of existing data required that  primary research be conducted.   There is no 

recent literature that describes, let alone critiques, the overall planning and delivery of  supportive housing for those dealing with mental health and addiction issues in Toronto.    Literature focussed on supportive housing in Ontario as a whole is also dated and limited in  terms of both quantity and depth of analysis.   Coming to a true understanding of the very  complex system that exists in Toronto required a much finer, more timely and nuanced  understanding of the history and evolution of the system, organizational relationships, funding  arrangements etc.   For example, supportive housing in the city is continually subject to the  shifting tides of policies established at both the municipal and provincial level as its housing and  support components are funded through a confusing patchwork of public sources.                                        Such detailed knowledge as exists presently resides within the undocumented9 

professional experiences and insights of those who are actually involved in the system.   In order  to access this collective memory and knowledge, interviews with key informants, in the form of  the executive directors from supportive housing agencies, was determined to represent the  most suitable approach.   Key informant interviews involve those possessing particularly rich  body of knowledge and experience with regard to the study phenomena. They provide an  efficient means of gathering information (Jackson, 2003), as was necessary in light of the limited 

time that was available for the present study.                                                                                                                                 

 As became apparent over the course of the research, those working within the system, such as executive  directors, simply did not have the time to document such system wide information as they were focussed  upon the more urgent day to day issues facing their respective agencies.  

9

35

 

The involvement of human subjects was also necessitated by the nature of the data 

which would not simply constitute knowledge and fact, but perceptions, insights, attitudes and  opinions.  For example, a consideration of the potential strengths, weaknesses, opportunities  and challenges inherent in the present system is clearly a subjective process that is informed by  individual and organizational experiences, opinions, attitudes, values and beliefs.    These are  not question that can be answered conclusively by resorting to some clear and objective data  for the latter does not actually exist.  Some level of speculation and subjectivity is ultimately  involved.  Moreover, in the case of dealing with such a vulnerable and marginalized group, as  those who are dealing with mental health and addictions, the subjective issues of justice and  humanity inevitably come to the fore.   However, as little was known about the specific  strengths, weaknesses opportunities and challenges inherent in the present system an  exploratory qualitative approach, employing semi structured questions, was necessary. As  previous literature has suggested (Nelson, 2005) the system ultimately needs to be guided and  evaluated on the basis of values, as well hard evidence of best practice. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

36

7.   The   Method  

7.1.   The   interviews                                                                                                                                     Face to face interviews were conducted with the Executive Directors representing  agencies which currently provide supportive housing for those dealing with mental health  and/or addiction issues in Toronto.   The interviews were guided by the semi structured  questionnaire provided in Appendix A.  Participants were asked questions with regard to their  agency's experiences in delivering supportive housing and as to issues that stood out in that  regard.  They were asked about the present and potential future state of system, and asked  about potential improvements.   In particular, they were questioned as to the extent of system  wide integration & collaboration at present and as to the potential feasibility and outcomes of a  more comprehensive and system wide approach to planning.                                                                     

7.2.   The   analysis     The interviews were 4560 minutes in length and were recorded & transcribed verbatim.   

Both the interviews and their analysis were guided by the exploratory, inductive and iterative  principles typically associated with a grounded theory approach10.  Participants were provided  with broad latitude to identify & expand upon issues & ideas of importance to them, and  subsequent probes were then based upon these.   The transcripts were open coded to identify  ideas that arose within the data itself, and these codes were then tested, adjusted, and refined  in an iterative process consisting of multiple rereadings of the transcripts.  Ultimately such 

 This approach does not presuppose that there is a substantive theory to guide the data collection and  analysis process but rather that substantive theory is built from the 'ground up' based upon an open  minded data collection and analysis process.  

10

37

codes provided the basis for the higher level themes that were developed.   The QSR In Vivo 9  software package was used to code the transcripts and to store, organize, and rearrange  excerpts from them in accordance with the emerging relationships between the codes and  changes therein that occurred as the higher level themes emerged.       

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38

8.   The   Sample   8.1.   Number   of   participants                                                                                                                       The sample consisted of executive directors from 10 of the 29 agencies which currently  provided supportive housing to those dealing with mental health and addictions issues in  Toronto.  While this might be considered to constitute a small sample, it clearly represented a  sizable (i.e., 35%) portion of the overall target population.  While qualitative exploratory  qualitative approaches, such as those employed in this research, do not make claims with  respect to broad generalizeability, clearly capturing such a large portion of the target population  bodes well in terms of making an argument on behalf of the veracity of the ultimate findings.     

8.2.   Characteristics   of   participants                                                                                                             Moreover, as the executive directors recruited appeared to represent agencies with 

very diverse characteristics, this supported the possibility that a reasonable cross section had  been achieved.    Three represented some of the largest agencies in the system (i.e., 800+  housing units), three represented some of the smallest (i.e., less than 50 units), and the  remainder lay somewhere between.  Six represented multiservice agencies, meaning they  delivered a wide array of health and/or social services, while the remainder represented those  focussed mainly upon supportive housing.  One agency provided only the housing component of  supportive housing via a large portfolio of dedicated buildings that it held, while another only  delivered services, had no building to speak of, and relied solely upon rent supplements to  secure housing within the private market.   One of the participants represented one of only four  agencies in Toronto that provided housing formally designated and funded to provide so called 

39

"high needs" support11, while another represented the single agency in they system which had  an exclusively ethno cultural focus.  Four of the participants represented agencies that had  originated as result of funding provided under the provincial homelessness programs 1990s,  consisting primarily of rent supplements, while the remainder came about as a result of the  capital funds that the provincial health ministry had first invested into supportive housing in the  mid 1980s.  Only one of the participants had an office located outside of the boundaries of the  old City of Toronto; with that said, office location did not necessarily reflect the distribution of  their actual housing units.    In terms of personal characteristics, exactly half of the participants  were men and half were women.      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Such housing providers receive special funding to accommodate clients who typically need around the  clock assistance with their mental health and addiction issues, medication dispensing, and often very  basic daily tasks such as meal preparation  

11

40

9.   The   Thematic   Findings   The 30 themes which were ultimately identified are presented in the sections that  follow, and 2 which were deemed to be supplementary  are included in a Appendix B.  However,  a number of points should be made with respect to the manner in which the data has been  presented.  Firstly, in the interest of protecting the identity of participants they have only been  identified by a participant code (i.e.,  P1, P2,...,P9, P10), where appropriate,  and gender has also  been reversed in some cases; that is, if a participant code corresponds to a male participant,  they might actually be discussed as "her" or "she".   Specific details of participants' accounts may  also have been omitted or altered slightly, but only in cases where these might indirectly 

identify participants and were deemed  to be immaterial to the ideas being advanced.                                                           Throughout these sections the term "most" will be used to describe  69 participants, 

"many" will describe 45 participants, and "some" will describe 23 participants.  However, more  description (e.g., "a couple", "all but one") may also be provided where appropriate and if one  or all of the participants respond in a certain way it will be described literally (i.e., "one  participant", "all participants").                                                                                                                              Finally, it is important to emphasize that the themes that  follow reflect the values, 

beliefs, perspectives and ideas of the participants at least in so far as the analysis was able to  capture themso they should not be taken as definite and objective 'facts' or considered to  reflect the personal views of this writer.  

9.1.   A   drastic   shortage   of   supportive   and   affordable   housing                                                                    Most respondents identified a drastic shortage of supportive housing in the city as one 

of the major issues at present, and many pointed to the long waiting list that existed.  As one  described, "there are almost 5000 people on the waiting list for supportive housing and only 

41

4400 units " (P6);  similar figures were cited by the other participants.  As participants reiterated,  this demonstrated not only that there was a considerable number of people out there who were  in need of decent and affordable housing, but that many of  those same people also desperately  need help to manage their mental illness and even to carry out some basic daily tasks.  This  situation was described as "double troubling" by one participant, and by another as quite simply  a "crime". One participant suggested that those who were unable to secure supportive housing  were likely costing society much more in hospital and  criminal justice expenses thereby  contributing to both an "economic and humanitarian issue" (P5).   As another described, those  who were unable to secure a supportive housing unit were ultimately left to "fend for  themselves" in unsuitable and often dilapidated housing, in homeless shelters, or even on the  streets (P9).     Even in the case of those fortunate enough to find a spot within supportive housing, it 

appears that limited supply contributes to housing situations that are often less than ideal.  As  one participant described, over 40% of units in the system were shared, meaning a "highly  functioning 50 year old adult" might still have to share a kitchen and bathroom with others and  would have very limited opportunities to engage in the types of intimate relationships that are a  normal part of life and which "most of us simply take for granted" (P6).       Some participants felt that demand would continue to outstrip supply and, as a result, 

the list would continue to grow.   In support of this view, one participant described how the  creation of a few supportive housing units was often heralded as a major accomplishment, and  even trumpeted by providers themselves.  Meanwhile, this ultimately amounted to a mere drop  in the bucket as far as actually addressing demand (P8).  Another participant described how  such things as waiting lists had a tendency to become "normalized" once the "initial shock wears  off"; she also described a general complacency within contemporary society and mused as to  where the social activism that had led to creation of supportive housing in the 1990s and 1980s  had gone (P3).       Some participants pointed to how the shortage of supportive housing might be viewed 

42

as part of a larger shortage in investment within other community mental health services,  particularly relative to much larger scale investments within  hospital based programs.  For  example, a couple of participants pointed to long and equally troubling waiting lists for mental  health case management services in the city.  Most participants also described the shortage of  supportive housing as being part and parcel of an overall shortage of social and affordable  housing.   As one contended, it was "impossible to separate supportive housing from affordable  housing", and the situation in the case of the former was "absurd" (P6).  Some pointed to how  the rent supplement approach, in particular, had failed on the basis of there simply not being  sufficient and appropriate affordable rental housing stock available for those with mental health  and addiction issues (P2).      As one participant described:   
"one of the greatest challenges is finding a building where rents are affordable, so if you do not have a  rent supplement or enough of a rent supplement, you are at the mercy of whatever you can afford.   So  for $600 month you are still looking at shared accommodations within old buildings that are typically in  bad neighbourhoods, and this can lead to 'ghettoization' as people with mental health issues can only  afford to live in certain areas....and those with addictions issues may end up living in parts of the city with  drug dealing which may actually end up being a detriment, rather than benefit, to their health" (P9).  

   Similarly, another participant described how they were often not able to locate clients close to  important amenities or their existing social networks of friends and family, owing to the high  costs of housing in the city (P9).      

9.2. The greatest shortage for those in greatest need                                                                                                  
  Most of the participants identified high support housing as being in particularly short 

supply.   As they described, this is housing for individuals with particularly complex and/or  severe mental health issues and which typically involves 24 hour on site staff, meal preparation,  medication storage, and generally more intense levels of case management; it is also necessary  in the case of an individual is "on the edge" in terms of their mental health, and for whom  isolation is particularly dangerous (P5).   Living in the community was described as not typically  being an option for such individuals, particularly as community based treatment homes did not  exist.   If supportive housing was not available to them they simply had to remain in hospital (P1, 

43

P8) , or as one participant described, simply fell through the cracks into homelessness or  ill  equipped hostel systems.  In the midst of increasing hospital bed closures, more and more of  such individuals were ending up in hostels and on the streets, and this was described as taking a  very negative toll on their health and well being (P3, P8).        Participants identified only four agencies in the city which currently provided a very 

limited amount of high needs supportive housing.  As one described, those requiring high needs  housing tend to "sit on the waiting list for a very long time" as there are "just not enough high  support units" and thus "people are just not moving off the list" (P6).  Most telling with regard  to the shortage of such housing, however, was how a number of participants (P3, P5, P8)   continually identified the same recent development project, consisting of about 40 units of high  needs supportive housing, as the most significant development in this area in recent years.   While even such small progress is clearly a step in the right direction, it might clearly be  considered to pale in comparison to the scale and urgency of the issue at hand.        As a number of participants described, they would often have liked to have been able to 

provide the type of higher level care that was required but simply could not do so within the  limits of their funding and staffing.   To do so was not only described as unrealistic but as a  major source of potential liability (P4, P6).   One participant recounted  a case in which a  chronically  ailing client might have been trapped in her apartment for days had it not  been for  a chance visit by maintenance staff; this caused them to seriously reconsider the level of care  that they could reasonably offer  (P4).         Some participants also suggested that the increasingly popular rent supplement 

programs did not address the need for high needs supportive housing as they were not  accompanied by the funding required to deliver intensive care.   As one described, even the rare  capital investments that were still being made within the system did nothing to  address this  important support issue as the necessary support dollars did not follow.   As he suggested, "the  government wants to give less money to programs with onsite staff with the idea that people  will gradually require less support, but this will not always be the case with the types of severe 

44

and persistent mental illnesses that exist" (P3).    9.3.   A   convergence   with   issues   of   population   aging                                                                                   Participants reported a large number of long term clients, who had been engaged in 

services with them for a number of years, and others had come to them after many years of  living in substandard housing, and in some cases homelessness.  As a result, their agencies were  now contending not only with providing support for mental health issues but support for the  typical issues related to aging as well; this was described as a "formidable" challenge that  required a significant shift in focus and priorities, and a reassignment of already limited  resources.   As some pointed out this actually went beyond simply having to deal with dual  issues, as years of mental illness and/or living in precarious housing had led to health conditions  that were much more prominent and severe than those experienced by the general population,  as a natural part of the ageing process.   This included a very high prevalence of obesity and type  2 diabetes brought about by low levels of physical activity, poor eating habits and  extremely  high levels of psychiatric medication use; the was described as  contributing  to lethargy and low  metabolism.   As one recounted, it was not uncommon for a client to gain 60 or 90 pounds  within  6 months of pharmacological treatment for schizophrenia, one of the most common  conditions encountered.   One participant described an "epidemic of diabetes within supportive  housing" and described a program he had recently developed to address it, which included  special meals prepared for tenants, a dietician, and nutritional counselling (P6).    In a cruel irony, one participant described how just as some of his clients were just 

beginning to get a handle on managing they mental health issues, the issues of aging reared  their head. (P5).     Many of the participants pointed to a recent report which documented the  significant manner in which mental illness, homelessness and years of precarious housing took  its toll on supportive housing tenants in the city.  Echoing the title of the report, one participant  stated that , "40 is too young to die", and added that those who did manage to survive have  typically aged 20 more years compared to a similarly aged counterpart in the general population.  

45

One respondent went so far as to suggest that this would become an increasingly urgent  "human rights issue" as  more and more people would be going into their senior years "in really  bad shape", having taken psychiatric medications and suffered a variety of physical health  problems, on top of typical age related ailments like dementia.   As she suggested, someone will  ultimately need to "take responsibility" as the old "blame the victim" approach, typified by  diabetes education programs, would ultimately fall by the way side in the wake of the scale of  the problem and the image of grandfather and grandmothers in such poor health.        Some participants spoke to the particular importance of aging in place for those with 

mental health and addiction issues, and to the challenges they faced in trying to facilitate this.   As one described, aging in place has served to maintain the types of vital supportive social  networks that they had finally developed and needed in order to continue to manage their  condition (P0).   As another described, their agency was working through the very complicated  process of identifying potential funding and navigating zoning related issues associated with the  establishment of garden suites upon one of their building sites, as accessibility in their main  building was becoming an issue for some of the tenants (P4).  As she described, a number of  agencies were beginning to face similar issues with respect to much of the older multi unit  buildings that made up the supportive housing stock and which were not necessary equipped to  deal with accessibility issues; this was identified as constituting major capital cost in the future.        A couple of respondents also pointed to how the increasing challenge of having to deal 

with aging in the general population might actually serve to bring the to bring supportive  housing for the mentally illness into the light of public awareness (P3, P8).    As one described,  the health care system is going to need to develop new an innovative community base  approaches for dealing with the tremendous growth in the number of seniors who will  otherwise be ending up within the hospital system.   As this was not unlike the challenge the  government faced when it first introduced supportive housing as a means of diverting mentally  ill patients away from hospitals and so logically, he concluded there would logically be a cross  fertilization in terms of awareness and ideas (P8).   On the other hand, one participant pointed 

46

to how inadequacies were already being identified in the levels of support provided to seniors in  the community (P1, P6), begging the question: if we can't make it work for a group that can  garner as much public and government support as seniors, "who can we make it work for?" (P1).     

9.4.   Complex   and   misaligned   funding   arrangements                                                                                    Another prominent theme related to the incredible complexity of existing funding and 

operational arrangements.   As one participant described, there were "myriad  different  provincial funding formulae" that applied across, and even within different supportive housing  agencies (P8).   There were arrangements not only with the LHINs12, but between different  agencies.   Memoranda of understanding (MOU) were cited as being  commonly used tools to  connect  multiple agencies which each provide some aspect of the housing or support services  within a single supportive housing program.  In one case a participant described how an agency  was funded directly by the LHINs to provide high needs case management services, but then  transferred part of that funding to a second agency which supplied the actual housing and less  intense daily housing related13 support to clients (P8).   In another case, a participant described  how her agency provided the housing, but that a number of other agencies actually collaborated  to provide the supports; this was all strung together through MOUs (P0).    One participant described the existing situation as a case of "too many cooks in the 

kitchen" that served to create "confusion and chaos".   As he described, "...the Ministry of  Health and Long Term Care had its  rent supplements and previous capital investments in play,  and the City of Toronto administered rent supplements provided by the Ministry of Housing and  Municipal Affairs as well as capital contributions through various federal municipal affordable  housing programs that provided funds for supportive housing projects" (P1).      
12

Another participant who received operating funds for its units from both the City of 

 Local  health integration Networks (LHINs) are provincially mandated local bodies who are responsible  for the funding and general organization of health related services within their respective jurisdictions.  13  Housing related support includes assistance with the payment of rent, tenant disputes, and the general  upkeep of units.  It may also include the organization of various social and recreational activities within a  building or housing complex.   

47

Toronto and the MOHLTC, on a cost shared basis, admitted  to  not even being sure about the  details of their unusual14 agreement; what she did notice was their  lack of coordination and an  underlying antagonism (P2).  As she recounted, the province had once increased its contribution  to keep pace with levels of inflation, but the city then dragged its feet for another two years  until it finally followed suit; the city had "different decision making cycles" and simply "did not  wish to be dictated to by the province".    Meanwhile it was clearly the "clients who suffered".           Most participants pointed to the distinction between the Ministry of Health and Long 

Term Care (MOHLTC) and the Local Health Integration Networks (LHINs) as another major  source of complexity.  While the former was described as being responsible for capital  investments and rent supplements, the latter was described as being responsible for operational  costs associated with accompanying support services.   A number of participants still seemed  confused by this division or questioned its logic.  A common complaint was that these two  bodies operated within separate silos and failed to coordinate their decisionmaking.   In one  case a participant described how she had been offered rent supplements by the MOHLTC but  was then advised to speak to the local LHIN when she inquired about funding for accompanying  supports services.   The LHIN, in turn, failed to respond to her inquiry in a timely fashion putting  the rent supplements in jeopardy.  As she suggested, "...if they could just talk to each other for a  change and then come to us with the money it would be so much easier" (P9).       The general misalignment  between funding provided for capital versus operating costs 

was a general theme amongst many participants.   As one described, their agency might have  applied for previous affordable housing programs that provided capital funding on a number of  previous occasions, only there were not rent supplements being provided at the time.   Had they  forged forward with the capital project they would have assumed tremendous risk in the case  that rent supplements were not forthcoming.   Such a move might have spelled financial disaster  for the agency, and or resulted in rents that were far higher than their tenants could have 
 As the agreement had a long history, she was not even sure how much of it was documented and  suggested that some aspects might have simply been carried out on the basis of a phone call and a  handshake. 
14

48

reasonably afforded.      The fact that supportive housing constituted only one, and a very small one, of the 

programs that the MOHLTC and LHINs actually dealt with was also identified as a challenge by  some participants.  In alluding to the problems and delays in having to deal with such large and  bureaucratic organizations, one cited the example of how her agency once sought funding  approval simply to add a few units to one of their building sites.   This led to such a long and  complicated five stage approval process that they ultimately opted to fundraise (P4).  

9.5.   Creativity   and   the   ability   to   'stretch   a   dollar'                                                                                      In response to the complexity inherent within the system, and increasingly limited 

government funding, it would appear that agencies have also become incredibly inventive in  terms of cobbling together funds from a variety of divergent programs and in ultimately  stretching every dollar received to the greatest possible extent.  Rather than there being some  common blueprint or approach, many participants described how they more commonly arrive at  pragmatic, situation specific solutions according to the circumstances and resources at hand.        As a specific example, one participant described how they were able to stretch the rent 

supplements allotted to provide supportive housing for a specific number of homeless  individuals in order to ultimately serve many more.  To accommodate this, congregate  accommodations were proactively sought for those clients with families which maximized their  buying power and thereby served to reduce the rent subsidies that the agency ultimately had to  provide.  As the participant described, a person might be granted a $400 housing allowance  under ODSP and the typical rent for a bachelor apartment was close to $1000; this meant that  the agency would need to provide a further $600.   In contrast, a couple with two children were  entitled to a shelter allowance of $900, and the typical market rent for a two bedroom  apartment was $1200; this meant that the  agency only needed to provide an additional $300, if  it was able to facilitate a group living arrangement.     As it happens, the agency was also able to  take advantage of the fact that it dealt extensively with ethnocultural groups within which the 

49

concept of family is highly revered, and multigenerational homes were more common.   This  provided it with the flexibility to consider an even wider variety of family arrangement that  might be beneficial from an economic and financial perspective (P9).   As a result of the success  of this approach, the participant described how the agency actually began to develop a focus on  and niche in family centered approaches to housing and care.      Some participants also reported simply organizing and scheduling their staff so as to 

serve a greater number of clients than was the intention of the original rent supplements  provided.  As two described, funding that was originally provided to serve 16 and 48 clients  respectively, was ultimately stretched to serve 20 and 60.   As one admitted, however, this had  begun to raise concerns with regard to quality of care and long term staff burnout (P10).  As one  suggested, there was also the danger that it would raise the expectation of funders to an  unrealistic degree, in terms of what could be reasonably achieved with a given amount of  resources (P2).     Creativity in the face of complexity and scarcity also led to a situation in which rules 

were not always followed and funds were not always directed toward their intended purpose.    For example, one participant described how it was sometimes possible to use funds designated  for certain number of high needs clients in order to serve a much greater number of lower  needs clients owing to higher staff to client ratios that the latter afforded (P9).   Another  described how the MOHLTC had been willing to "turn a blind" eye in some cases in which  supportive housing agencies had also played the role of developer within head lease schemes by  establishing arms length bodies that had legal possession of the properties being developed and  subsequently rented by the provider (P6).  As will be described shortly, the rent supplements  upon which such schemes were based were intended for use in the private sector and were not  intended to create a situation in which supportive housing providers were ultimately paying rent  to themselves.      

50

9.6.   The   entrepreneurial   imperative                                                                                                            Owing to reduced government funding, and the increased bureaucracy and delays 

associated with it, many participants reported on how their agencies had become more  independent and entrepreneurial.    They described how their agencies were much more  actively involved in fundraising initiatives (P5, P8) and had begun to seriously consider issues in  relation to branding (P0 P9) and marketing themselves to the public and potential donors (P4).       Some participants also discussed how their agencies had begun to explore the 

opportunities for leveraging the equity that had built up within their properties.  However, they  also described how their ability to do so was often constrained by the government's legal  involvement within the  original ownership and financing arrangements in relation to properties.    As one described, they were the  legal owners of a number of buildings that might be used as  equity for the purpose of securing  loans for further construction,  but as the government was  also involved, these properties were "not considered to be worth a penny on their actual  balance sheet" (P6).  As another suggested, the government was expecting them to be more  creative and resourceful, and yet was maintaining restrictions that did not afford them the  flexibility to do so (P3).       While some participants pointed to the accumulation of funds in the form of various 

agency reserves, they also conceded that it would not likely be sufficient to support the  development of more supportive housing.    However, a couple of participants did point to the  possibility of pooling  resources amongst a number of agencies in order to fund such future  development.    One participant described how his agency had actually developed an  independent stream of revenue from the commercial tenants within one of its buildings; this  was in addition to revenues that were also being collected from cellular towers that were  perched on top (P4).     While the agency had lacked any commercial property management  experience, it had benefited from the business and legal expertise that existed within the  membership of its Board of Directors.   

51

 9.9. A necessary 'love/hate' relationship with private developers                                                                                                 The most typical form of entrepreneurial behaviour came in the form of an increasing 

number of partnerships that were being forged with  private property developers.    As many of  the participants described, the most typical scenario in the present funding context  involved  developers who agreed to provide, refurbish or build  rental buildings in return for the period of  guaranteed rental income that supportive housing agencies could provide to them via rent  supplements.  Typically, the supportive housing agencies would enter into a head lease  agreements with such developers in which they agreed to pay a fixed rent to the developers and  thereafter assume all responsibility for individual rent collection, tenant issues, and general  maintenance.  At the end the agreement period, which typically lasted about 25 years (P8), the  developer would retain ownership of the property.       Many participants expressed a great deal of frustration with such agreements.   As they 

described, it was the developers who ultimately reaped the benefits of a considerable level of  capital appreciation (P9,P8), having already benefitted from a guaranteed stream of rental  income, which would serve to cover mortgage payments,  and from any capital subsidies that  might have been provided  by the government in exchange for the construction of such  affordable housing stock.   One participant, pointed to the fact that they were essentially  providing the developer with free property management services and yet were not being  compensated for it (P5, P6).  As one participant described quite simply, "it was one subsidy on  another" (P9).      While some suggested that there were some "good developers" out there (P4), the 

consensus was that they were driven by the profit motive, and the "lure of easy money" (P6),  rather than by any real sense of benevolence (P5, P9).      As one participant pointed out, most  supportive housing providers were actually aware of inequities inherent within such head lease  agreements but as they needed units and had no capital funds, they simply had no choice (P6).      As some participants suggested, rules in relation to rent supplements were the problem. 

52

Rent supplements needed to be spent within the private sector, meaning that supportive  housing providers were prevented from constructing their own rental housing on the basis of  rent supplements which they might ultimately pay out to themselves.  This obstacle was  described as a "perverse obstacle" by one such participant who suggested that there was a  "desperate need for some form of social innovation" in this area (P5).     Another described how  his agency had actually considered the possibility of creating a separate and arms length  development company, but this was a complicated undertaking that was beyond their resources  and expertise (P6).   

  9.8. NIMBYism, NIMBism and exclusionary zoning                                                                                                                          While participants described NIMBYism as a persistent issue, the fact they did not 

discuss it with great passion or in great detail might have reflected the simple fact that few  dedicated buildings had been constructed in the city in recent years.  In keeping with the  growing reliance upon rent supplements, however, some participants did provide detailed  accounts of discrimination on the part of landlords when they attempted to secure rental  accommodation for their clients (P6, P9). In a typical case of such Not In My Building (NIMB) ism,  one participant described how she commonly inspected new units for clients only to be told that  they were suddenly not available once the landlord learned about potential clients with mental  health issues (P9).     Participants also pointed to an even more systemic case of discrimination in the form of 

exclusionary zoning.   Many described how the supportive units provided by their respective  agencies were typically scattered throughout the city, and somewhat more concentrated within  the boundaries of the former City of Toronto, but were conspicuously absent from many areas  within the boundaries of the former cities of Scarborough, North York and Etobicoke.  As one  described, zoning bylaws within all of these areas strongly restricted congregate style  accommodations, such as rooming houses and group homes, that might facilitate a critical mass  of supportive housing (P5, P10) .  As one participant described, there had been an attempt to 

53

address these bylaws when the new city of Toronto was amalgamated but they have somehow  "managed to stay on the books" (P1).  Another participant described how  zoning bylaws within  some of the inner boroughs of the city also set arbitrary minimum distances between buildings  which housed uses such as supportive housing (P9).  As one participant concluded with regard to  the existing regulations, it seemed that "supportive housing represented one of the few cases  where outright discrimination was still allowed" (P1)    In order to debunk fears about the negative impacts of supportive housing, some 

participants pointed to the positive relations that their clients had developed with their  community (P1).  As one described, neighbours had greatly appreciated a community garden  that their tenants had created in front one of their building and commonly interacted with them  at the local dog park.  Another recounted how neighbours had contacted the agency to express  their concern with regard to the well being of a well known tenant who was conspicuously  absent from the neighbourhood (P4).  In keeping with the research evidence (de Wolff, 2008;  The Dream Team, 2010) , no problems or conflicts with the community were identified over the  course of any of the interviews that were conducted.     

  9. 9. The perception of an oversold housing first approach                                                                                                           While some participants conceded that that so called "housing first" approaches might 

succeed in the case of clients who were otherwise difficult to engage, most also seemed to feel  that this approach was being over sold in terms of its overall and long term potential to assist  those with significant mental health issues.   In fact, some participants appeared to take strong  issue with housing first programs over the course of the interviews.    As one participant described, "you can not simply drop someone with a mental heath 

and addiction problem into a market unit, that may be surrounded by drug dealers, and think  everything is going to be great" (P0).   As another suggested, if homeless people with mental  health issues were simply "placed in a nice apartment", they would be back out on the street  within a year.    As he explained, many would struggle with everyday tasks, such as cooking, and 

54

as a result of loneliness would ultimately seek out the companionship of their friends on the  street (P10);.           As one participant suggested,  those promoting housing first approaches often alluded 

to the romantic notion of a broader supportive community that was simply "out there" and  ready to embrace individuals who "had no money and carried the stigma of a mental illness",  whereas in reality that simply did not exist.   What was needed, he argued, was the type of real  and tangible community of peers that dedicated supportive housing could provide (P6).      Some participants suggested housing first approaches did not engage with their 

fundamental belief that "housing  was more than just housing".(P0).  As they described, the  housing component of supportive housing actually serves as a medium through which agencies  were able to monitor and stay connected to their tenants in order to monitor and address their  mental health and broader needs.   Eviction processes, for example, were viewed as an  opportunity to gain deeper insights into the personal issues being faced by clients and to  provide them with enhanced  skills and valuable life lessons (P0).   Even in the case that clients  withdrew from case management and social activities, agencies were able to monitor their  condition  through contacts with their neighbours and through something as simple as building  maintenance visits (P9).  As one participant described, it was essential to stay abreast of  whether an individual's mental health was "sliding" as it provided them with a critical  opportunity to intervene quickly; for example, in  the case that clients were not taking their  medication and/or it needed to be adjusted, the agencies needed to reach them while they  were still lucid (P10).         As another participant described, "the goal of supportive housing was never to simply 

get clients housing, but to provide clients the opportunity to establish  networks of support for  broader problems solving that would flow out in terms of achieving other important things" (P0).    Similarly another described how they were about "creating stigma free recovery communities in  which tenants were free to express themselves and to take part in a host of self improvement  activities" (P6).       

55

 

A recent report15 funded by the Mental Health Commission of Canada, served as a 

lightning rod for the participant's critiques of housing first.   As one described, this study "failed  to even acknowledge" the existence of the type of dedicated supportive housing that they  provided, and ultimately appeared more like a piece of marketing on behalf of housing fist  approaches.  As he suggested, it would have been enlightening to have compared the outcomes  of these two approaches, but no such comparison was conducted; comparisons were conducted  merely between people in their housing first model, versus those who were on the street, in jail,  or in hospital.     Another participant admitted that their model would likely work for some  people, but that they would only be representative of a "very small segment" of the population  that they dealt with: as he concluded,  "...it is a one size solution, but the problem is that one  size did not fit all" (P5).    While one might logically assume that those working in supportive housing would have  

a close relationship with those working with housing first approaches, given their common  interests and issues, this did not appear to be the case.    In fact, the very characterization of the  housing first programs, presented above, does not seem to reflect their reality.  For example,  housing first is more than just the provision of housing to clients experiencing homelessness and  mental health issues. While housing first programs do not impose additional support services  upon its tenants they are commonly made available; providing them with choice in all of such  matters is the guiding principle .    Thus there is either a lack of knowledge with regard to this  program and/or perhaps some type of animosity that exists on an ideological level.  The latter  will be explored further in the final discussion.  

  9. 10. The rent supplement debate                                                                                                                                                     Participants pointed to both the benefits and drawbacks of rent supplements.   In terms 

of benefits, one participant described how it was an effective means of getting more supportive 
This report was entitled, Turning the Key: Assessing the Housing and Related Supports for Persons  Living with Mental Health Problems and Illnesses.  It was conducted by the Centre for Addiction and  Mental Health, in collaboration with the Canadian Council on Social Development. 
15

56

housing units into the system quickly and avoiding the NIMBYism and related delays that often  accompanied the introduction of new dedicated buildings (P5).   Some pointed to the  opportunities they offered in terms of allowing tenants to access a whole new range of market  units, which would not otherwise have been available to them (P5); it was also suggested that  such scattered units might allow tenants to integrate more effectively into the general  population (P9).       In contrast, some participants criticized rent supplement approaches on the basis that 

they did not take into account prevailing market conditions and the discriminatory practices of  landlords (P5).   As one asked, "what good are the rent supplements when there is a 1.4%  vacancy rate in the city and landlords continue to discriminate against those with mental  illness...at best tenants with mental health issues will be concentrated in run down buildings and  neighbourhoods" (P6).       Another participant suggested that rent supplements did not make sense in the case of 

the increasingly important16 subset of high needs clients.  Whereas rent supplements were  effective in securing scattered individual rental units, the efficient delivery of services to high  needs clients required congregate or clustered housing arrangements.17    As he explained,  travelling across the city to get from one client to another would detract from crucial case  management time and/or significantly limit the number of clients that could be served (P8).       As some participants described, their agencies actually lost ground in the context of rent 

supplement programs as increases in the supplements typically did not keep pace with the  increases in market rent (P0).  Others pointed to how the lack of capital investment that  accompanied rent supplement programs meant that they were unable to build equity that they  could leverage for the purpose of future development.   By not getting on to the property ladder,  they also described how they were unable to benefit from the substantial year to year gains that  were being realized within  the city's hot real estate market (P6).    Instead, the private 
 See "The greatest shortage for those in greatest need"   As participants described, one would be extremely lucky to find available rental units clustered together  at precisely the time when rent supplements became available
17 16

57

developers and landlords were the ones to profit.  As one participant suggested, "twenty years  from now we are going to realize that rent supplements are costing us too much as a result of  high and ever increasing rents, and yet we will have nothing to fall back on in terms of housing  stock that we actually own as we did not make the earlier capital  investments" (P9).        Some participants expressed the view that both housing first and rent supplement 

approaches, were indicative of an increasing government trend toward trying to do things "on  the cheap" (P3, P6).   Another extended this economic argument to hospitals by suggesting that  they were "likely to embrace" such approaches, if it simply meant getting more patients "off of  their books" (P0).  Another warned that the agencies promoting rent supplements, were often  the very same ones that relied upon them for their own revenue and thus "had the most to lose  or gain" (P6).    Ultimately most participants agreed that rent supplements had certain benefits and 

advantages and that, for better or worse, they were presently an essential component of the  system.   However, most of them also agreed that there was presently a tremendous and  very  troubling  overemphasis upon rent supplements; in fact, even participants who were form  agencies which utilized rent supplements were in agreement on this point.   Many  participants  argued that a wider variety of funding models were required in order to address the diversity of  needs.   As one participant summed up the general sentiment, "it is not a matter of this or that  approach, but of having a set of different tools that create options for clients.  The problem is  that today's toolbox is driven entirely by rent supplements" (P10). 

  9.11. The drastic need for capital investment                                                                                                                                   Throughout the interviews, and as already suggested in the discussion above, most 

participants reiterated an urgent need to acquire and build more supportive housing stock.    A number alluded to the two major periods of capital investment in the system which took place  in the mid 1980s and early 1990s, and which still account for most of the current dedicated  housing stock.   Others referred to this early housing stock as still constituting the essential, 

58

albeit "increasingly tenuous, backbone of the system" (P6).  Some criticized the dismal lack of  capital investment over the past 20 years, and suggested that greater investment was necessary  in order to simply ensure its viability and sustainability.       One participant helped to make this idea of sustainability via capital investments even 

more tangible.  He described that his agency started with one main dedicated supportive  housing building and then fanned out to provide supportive housing services in the broader  community, using tools such as rent supplements.    While they now reached a much larger and  more diverse population, he emphasized how they still relied upon that one original  building.  It  continued to serve a central hub from which all services and supplies then made their way out  to the broader community.  He emphasized that  all of this would not have been possible   without that original capital investment; as he argued such strategic capital investments were  now desperately  needed in order to provide a framework for the necessary system growth  (P9).    In arguing on behalf of greater capital investment within the system, one participant 

pointed to hospitals as a prime example of society's commitment to investing in order to have  important healthrelated resources concentrated and secured permanently (P6).  In contrast,  another suggested that it would prove increasingly difficult to convince government to actually  make such investments owing to increasingly bleak economic forecasts and prevailing  conservative ideologies (P8).     

  9.12. The ODSP and OW as even more fundamental concerns in their own right                                                                     The fact that the Ontario Works (OW) Ontario Disability Support Programs (ODSP) 

weaved into conversations with all of the participants was not surprising for as one participant  put it, most supportive clients were on one or the other of these programs (P9).   Most typically  participants alluded to how the financial support provided was insufficient, and to how the  shelter components were particularly meagre in a city as expensive as Toronto.  One participant  pondered whether the "crime" was actually the lack of supportive housing, or  more  fundamentally, the fact that programs such as ODSP and OW did not provide people with the 

59

basic level of income to access housing and all of the other things they needed to survive (P8).      As one described, the housing allowance under the ODSP was "ridiculous",  

 for even if a person could find an affordable or rent geared to income apartment, which was  difficult,  housing costs would typically still require dipping into the rest of the remainder of  his/her ODSP, which was intended for basic living costs; as he calculated18, in some cases a  person might be left with a mere $200 to cover food, transportation, clothing and all other living  costs for the month (P8). As another participant suggested, the amount left over from ODSP  after covering housing expenses provided little opportunity for clients to actually go out to  develop supportive social networks or to seek employment, as they "might not even have  money for a bus fare".  As he described those formulating policy in relation to ODSP, rent  supplements and affordable housing, "rarely spoke to one another, let alone coordinated their  actions" to take into account such realities on the ground; it was  "like two separate hands trying  to clap" (P 9).      Some participants pointed to structural problems inherent within ODSP and OW which 

made it difficult for their clients to lead more productive lives and to eventually even move on  from supportive housing.   As they described, ODSP "penalizes people too strictly and severely  for earning a bit of extra money" that they might need to simply get "on their feet", and they  may even put their rent supplements in danger by doing so.  As one explained, it does not  recognize that the incomes of those dealing with mental health issues may "fluctuate  significantly" owing to "repeated entries and exits from the work force" that might be  necessitated by their condition; it simply "claws back" income in a "drastic  manner" with little  regard for the circumstances or impact upon people's lives.  Many participants suggested that  ODSP and OW needed to be fundamentally reformed in order to provide their tenants with the  incentives and ongoing support necessary to move forward to improve their lives (P0, P5, P6, P9, 

18

 As he expanded, if a person managed to find a bachelor apartment for $750 in Toronto, which was "optimistic",  and got a typical  housing allowance of about $450, then the extra $300 would need to come out of  the rest of their ODSP.  He/she might then be left  with a mere $200 to cover food, transportation clothing and all of other living expenses for the month.  (P8).   

60

P8, P9).    

  9.13.  The ill addressed issue of cultural diversity                                                                                                                            Some participants argued that ethnocultural and linguistic issues needed to be taken 

into greater account in service provision (P6, P9, P9).  As one participant contended, it was one  of the biggest and most obvious issues, for as the city became increasingly diverse, agencies still  served a largely homogeneous population of white English speaking clients.   As he suggested,  long time tenants, who happened to be white, still made up a large portion of the overall  population in supportive housing as a result of a low turnover of units and a shortage of new  supply (P6).   As another suggested, those areas of the city in which many new immigrant groups  tend to settle, were also those in which culturally specific supportive housing is absent and  where new projects are presently restricted by exclusionary zoning; the Scarborough district  was described as a specific case in point (P6).      As another participant suggested, it is a case of "we don't know, what we don't know,  

so if there is an underserved Vietnamese population at Jane and Finch, I certainly would not  know as I am not connected to that culture" (P9).   Putting this into a broader and more critical  structural context, he added that if you looked across the room at healthrelated forums and  meetings in Ontario you would see a " pretty much homogenous group of predominantly white  and mainly male participants" as higher level boards tend to "self select in their own  community" (P9) ; the exception, which supported the rule, came in the case of organizations  focused specifically on ethnocultural issues.  As he suggested, you can then "pan out from there  in terms of considering who does and does not get served adequately" (P9).  Coincidentally,  such sentiments were supported by the nature of the present study sample itself, as all of the  executive directors interviewed were white and predominantly male.        Some participants emphasized the importance of becoming more culturally sensitive.   

One described how mental illness was far more stigmatized in certain cultures and how those  from different cultures often had very different perspectives and norms with regard to 

61

communal living (P9).  Another stated, " supportive housing might look very different to the   hundreds of thousands of people coming here from Somalia, or Vietnam or Iran?" (P5).     While participants did point to some programs that aimed to make supportive housing 

more ethnoculturally relevant 19, the consensus was that this was simply not enough in light of  the scale and importance of the issue.   And while a number of participants pointed to a  supportive  housing agency which had cultural issues at the heart of its mandate, a participant  from that agency pointed to the challenges they faced and to the limitations of their work.    As she described, they were only funded to provide services to Chinese, Cambodian, Korean and  Vietnamese clients.    While other important groups had been identified, such as Tamils and  newcomers from India, they were not included within their organization's mandate as they  simply  did not have the staff and resources to assist them; at the basic level, they did not have  staff fluent in the necessary languages. 

  9.14. An ongoing hospital focus and imposition of institutional concepts & ideas                                                                    While most participants argued that community based supportive housing constituted 

the most appropriate and effective use of mental health resources, they also pointed to the  continued dominance of hospitals in terms of garnering the greatest government funding and  policy attention.    As one stated,  "over 85% of provincial health care spending goes to  institutions, leaving little resources to address even more basic determinants of health that exist  in the community" (P5).     As another argued, if only 1% of the budget of hospitals were  directed to the community sector, this would have a "much more significant impact upon  population health" (P1).   In a rather telling example, one participant described how hospitals  had dedicated and ongoing capital programs, whereas supportive housing had to wait for special  funding programs or go to the MOHLTC "cup in hand" in order to get things built or even 
 For example, Fred Victor Center was identified as delivering a program to raise awareness about  supportive housing amongst newcomers to Canada and  Madison homes was identified as being involved  in a recent program for newcomers with mental health issues which incorporated information on  supportive housing.  One participant also reported having collaborating with Across Boundaries in the  past, but did not elaborate.    
19

62

repaired20 (P5).     Hospitals were not simply maintaining center stage in the health care system, according 

to the participants, but were actually beginning to become increasingly involved in supportive  housing.   As many described, the CAMH had not only become involved as a partner in recent  supportive housing projects in the city, including one involving the agency of one of the  participants,  but had collaborated with the MHCC on recent research to explore specific models  for its delivery (CAMH, n.d.).   Such increased involvement raised suspicion amongst some of the  participants for as one described, supportive housing had originally been developed as an  alternative to hospitalbased care.    Some worried that this might lead to the greater imposition  of hospital based ideas and concepts, which will be described shortly, while others simply felt  that those in the hospital sector might logically protect their own interests.     For example, one  participant suggested that it was not surprising that their research with the MHCC ultimately  promoted rent supplements as less capital expenditure on dedicated supportive housing in the  community would mean more capital funds for hospitals.  As another suggested, CAMH would  welcome rent supplements amidst reductions in government funding to hospital beds, as it  could then quickly  move long term patients into existing market apartments; irrespective of  whether they necessarily provide them with appropriate and/or adequate care.    As one  participant suggested, involving the hospitals within supportive housing was like "letting the fox  into the henhouse" (P9).      Many participants also described how concepts and ideas derived from the hospital 

sector were frequently and inappropriately imposed upon the supportive housing system.  They  depicted this as a clash between two very different cultures which was manifested most clearly  in the contexts of the LHINs21.    As one participant lamented, "we have been building and  refining our organizational approach for years and now everything is changing with words like 

 As he described, hospitals could tap into an ongoing capital program in case a new wing was needed to  accommodate more patients, but there were no such dedicated capital program for community based  agencies   21  Local Health Integration Networks. 

20

63

flow through, standardization, discharge, all of these terms that they use in hospitals".  As she  adds, "but nobody is critically thinking about what this will mean or about if it even makes any  sense" (P3).     Nowhere was this clash more evident than in the case of "flow ", a concept cited 

repeatedly by most of the participants.    As they explained, the LHINs were beginning  to  scrutinize the work of supportive housing agencies in terms of how efficiently they "moved  people through the system".  As one explained,  such `flow through' approaches were  successfully applied in the context of hospitals, in order to address their skyrocketing costs, so  the assumption was that they could be applied equally well to the supportive housing sector  (P3).      As one participant argued, the concept of flow through disrespected the considerable 

amount of time and effort that agencies had to invest with clients and it    implied that their job was simply to "fix people and then send them on their way" (P8).  As  another described people do not "simply recover from mental illness in stepwise and linear  fashion", as might be expected in the case of physical injuries and illnesses treated in a hospital.    Instead they commonly cycled back and forth between stable stages, and stages in which they  suffered setbacks and required higher levels of support; as she summed it up, "that is the nature  of mental illness", she explained (P9).      As one participant suggested, "flow through for us, if you even call it that" is about 

providing for a more "seamless transition between different options with differing levels of  support than it is about progressively moving a person toward an end goal of an exit from the  system" (P8).   As he recounted, there were often individuals who struggled when they moved  on to more independent forms of supportive living but thrived once they were  provided with an  opportunity to live within more communal congregate arrangements; while this was a "positive  flow" in his view, he remarked that the LHIN would likely see it very differently (P8).         Some participants questioned the concept of flow on the basis of economic and 

material realties.  As they all generally asked: why would those in supportive housing want  to 

64

move out, or be expected to move out,  if they had decent and affordable housing for the first  time in their lives and were finally in an environment where they got the tools and resources  they needed to manage their mental health issues (P0, P2, P4, P9).   As one suggested, "flow"  through was all the more unrealistic given lack of affordable housing and case management  services available in the broader community; that is, there was nowhere to flow to.   From this  perspective he added "there is nothing surprising or wrong about having no flow through" (P0).    Some participants argued that the concept of "flow " conflicted with both the 

fundamental beliefs and the legal obligations of supportive housing agencies.  As they pointed  out, supportive housing was premised upon a belief that people with mental health and  addiction issues had a right to security of tenure, and that such security actually contributed to  their health, well being and recovery (P3); flow clearly suggested that no such security existed.      As a couple of participants pointed out, supportive housing providers were also mandated to  provide permanent housing and their tenure rights were fully protected under the Ontario  Landlord and Tenant Act (P4).  As one remarked, this was a fact that was often overlooked by  those at the MOHLTC and in the LHINs (P2).  As she continued, it was "bewildering and  disappointing" to hear LHIN representatives suggesting that we should reconsider whether our  clients really need all the support we are providing and that we should work harder to "counsel  people to move on".     In the context of this discussion of "flow ", it is telling to point out how many of the 

participants expressed pride in the longevity of many of their tenants.  As one described: "we  have clients that have been here for 15 years or more, and a great number who have been for at  least five years"; as another noted "our very first client is still with us" (P9).           

A couple of participants also spoke to how new data collection and management tools 

seemed to reflect this clash of cultures.  As one pointed out,  the  language of the OCAN was  based on a "faith in hard data" and "framed in the language of needs and deficits "; in contrast,   he suggested that supportive housing was focused on an individual's strengths and assets and  on striving to enhance positive health and wellbeing (P6) .  Similarly many participants alluded 

65

to how the LHINs were beginning to impose the types of organizational models,  intensely data  focussed management approaches, and "business school type language" (P8)  that was more  typical of large hospitals; some questioned its appropriateness and value in the context of  community based supportive housing (P3). 

  9.15. Dancing to the everchanging tune of government priorities                                                                                              Participants described how supportive housing agencies often shifted their 

organizational focus and direction according to increasingly fickle provincial priorities, and the  resultant funding streams.   As one described, "if the funding shifts then so too do the  agencies...if the LHIN says we are funding programs for children, then suddenly agencies pull a  rabbit out and suggest that their contact with families makes them experts in the area" (P9).  As  another described, many agencies with dedicated housing stock have suddenly had to become  "engaged with the concept of rent supplements, and knowledgeable about how they work",  even if they do not necessarily believe in them" (P2).       One participant was very pragmatic about this phenomena in stating "we are flexible

and we are certainly not proud, so if they give us an opportunity but they want us to call it x we  will call it x, if they want us to call it y we will call it y.   If they want us to jump up and down we  will jump up and down.   But at the end of the day we  try to stick to our value system, and for  us the central concept of recovery is paramount" (P5).   Another, however, was much more  critical in describing what he referred to as planning on a "quote on quote, priority population  basis" (P8).   As an example, he pointed to how the MOHLTC had recently offered funding  toward supportive housing for those with addiction issues, for which a number of agencies then  clamoured to apply.  As he explained, the decision to  provide this funding was not based  upon  overall planning or any system level consideration, but was made to address one high profile  issue and to appease one high profile politician.  As it happened, there was an urgent need to  reduce emergency room costs, which were often frequented regularly by addicted and 

66

homeless patients, and the acting Minister of Health happened to have dealt with his own  addiction related issues.          

One participant also suggested that agencies ran the long term risk of "organizational 

drift" (P3) as a result of continually chasing government priorities and money.   As she described,  suddenly all the reports and correspondence coming out of agencies have to be reshaped in  order to somehow  fit into   LHINs' newest strategic directions; while it was sometimes mere  "semantics", she described how it could gradually pull an organization further and further away  from its own vision, core values goals and objectives.  

  9.16.  The encroachment of LHINs                                                                                                                                                      While participants acknowledged the important role that LHINs played in the health 

care system, many suggested that they had thus far been quite hands off in the case of   supportive housing.   As one suggested, this was most evident when one considered their much  more active, aggressive, and visible role with regards to institutional care22.   As another  remarked, "you don't really see a whole lot about supportive housing when the LHINs put out  reports and when you hear about them in the news...we are usually a side note" (P9).  Such  relative (in) attention was explained on basis of scale.   As the supportive housing system as a  whole accounted for a mere fraction of the money spent on hospitals, some participants  suggested that finding efficiencies in the latter was a much higher priority for LHINs.      However, most participants also agreed that LHINs would become much more involved 

in the years to come.  Some pointed to the increasingly focused role that the LHINs had already  begun to assume by virtue of encouraging and supporting  initiatives such as the Coordinated  Access to Supportive Housing (CASH), the Ontario Common Assessment of Need (OCAN) and the  Integrated Assessment and Referral (IAR) system; these were considered to be harbingers of  things to come.    

 For example, the LHINs were involved in the amalgamation of a number of hospitals in Ontario in the  1990s, which was alluded to by some of the participants.   

22

67

 

Others anticipated that LHINs would become increasingly involved with supportive 

housing as policy makers became increasingly aware of its potential value in terms of getting  people out of expensive hospital beds and into the community; once initial steps had been taken  to reduce hospital cost directly, their attention would inevitably turn to reducing them even  further by making supportive housing more effective and efficient.    Some participants did, however, suggest that the LHINs were not quite as well equipped 

to deal with the issues associated with the housing aspect of supportive housing.  As one  remarked, they are "health people not housing people" and those are "two different worlds  with two different skill sets" (P6).  Another described how their local LHIN had not even set out  any specific goals or objectives with respect to housing, as it had with some other health system  components, beyond a vague suggestion that they would visit this issue at some point in future  (P9).          

9.17. Recent steps toward a more "formal" system wide integration of services                                                                      All participants discussed recent and formal steps that had been taken to achieve 

greater system wide integration.   The advent of the Toronto Mental Health and Addictions  Supportive Housing Network, and its offspring in the form of the CASH23 program, featured  prominently.  Some participants suggested that the monthly meetings of the network provided  an important means of networking with other agencies to share ideas and resources (P3, P9).  Most also praised the manner in which CASH provided those with mental health and addiction  issues more equitable and convenient one stop access to all of the available supportive housing  options in Toronto, and criticized the fragmented and adhoc system that had previously existed  (P5).  As one participant described, "previously those looking for supportive housing, or their  loved ones, had to send different applications to over twenty agencies, and had to knock on a  lot of doors...now they can get information on them through a single website and can apply to 
 Coordinated Access for Supportive Housing (CASH), is a centralized application and referral service for  supportive housing in Toronto which was recently introduced, largely as a result of the efforts of the  Toronto Mental Health and Addictions Supportive Housing Network   
23

68

them all through one application process" (P1).   As another described, "CASH finally provides an  opportunity for people to access all of the diverse supportive housing options that are actually  out there" (P9).  Other participants described how CASH finally made the process "fair" (P10),  "equitable" (P2), "universal and transparent" (P0).       Participants also pointed to the broader strategic advantages of CASH.  As it ultimately 

demonstrated that there were thousands of people who were in need of supportive housing,  many participants suggested that it was a valuable tool in advocating for greater government  investment in this area (P4, P9).  As one suggested, "to be able to state that there over 4000  people out there who not only need decent housing, but also basic supports to manage their  mental illness, is a powerful thing" (P9).       Some participants also pointed to how the CASH waiting list finally provided a basis to 

more appropriately distribute the supportive housing stock 24(P3, P5).  As one argued, finally  having one overall list of applicants, and knowing exactly what resources were available at a  given time, would allow them to match needs to services and to rationalize more appropriately  if certain resources were in short supply.  However, participants also conceded to the obvious  challenges with, and lack of specific metrics, for  making a determination as to the greatest  priorities and needs25 (P5).       There were also critiques of CASH.   As most participants were quick to point out, CASH 

provided better access to supportive housing but it did nothing to address the severe housing  shortage (P3, P4, P10).  As some suggested, it might actually have created false hopes (P6).    Others pointed to how the universal CASH system actually served to disrupt a number of long  standing partnerships that supportive housing providers had developed with specific institutions 

 As one participant suggested, there were undoubtedly those in the system who were presently  receiving more support services than required and alternatively, those who might not be receiving  enough.    25  As one participant suggested, they did not presently have a "precise measure of severity and need for  adults dealing with mental health issues"; even in the case of seniors in the general population who  required supportive housing, applicable measures were described as being of questionable value.  

24

69

and programs26; the preferential access to supportive units enjoyed by the latter was lost as a  result of the new and universal referral service (P0, P2).       Some participants described how the universal application had resulted in them 

receiving many inappropriate referrals and led to pressure to accept applicants who were not  necessarily a good fit27 with their program (P0).  Some also criticized the application as being  quite long and onerous to fill in and process, owing to the fact that it had included input from so  many agencies; and they warned, this might actually discourage some from even applying (P3)    One participant described how CASH had also been envisioned as a means of compiling 

important data on supportive housing applicants; for example, he described how information  with regard to the fate of those on the waiting list may prove to be particularly valuable in terms  of making the case for supportive housing (P8).  However, he also conceded that this had not  materialized as a result of a lack of resources.  At present, staff were struggling to enter all of  the  data from the applications, while also identifying suitable housing units for fortunate  applicants.  As he lamented, they were also unable to maintain contact with those on the  waiting list, let alone provide them with potentially critical interim support.  It would appear  that CASH had created a  catch 22 situation.       

  9.18. Privacy in the age of the OCAN and the IAR                                                                                                                            Most participants also identified the Ontario Common Assessment of Need (OCAN)28 

process and the Integrated Assessment and Referral (IAR) 29 service as important recent 

 While such relationships had typically been established with hospitals (P6), one participant described  how a very longstanding and value driven relationship26 with a homeless shelter also had to be dissolved  as a result of CASH (P0).    27  While they accepted that it was important to provide applicants with equitable access to all options,  they also felt that a certain level of agency discretion was necessary in order to assure that it was a good  fit for both the applicant and the agency.     28  The Ontario Common Assessment of Need (OCAN) is a standardized and recorded process by which  agencies are now required to continually revaluate each client's status and needs at regular 6 month  intervals   29  The Integrated Assessment & Referral (IAR) is a virtual portal through which the OCAN and a wide array  of other health and social service related reports can be accessed in relation to a client; it is available to a  wide range of professionals from whom the client might seek services or care. 

26

70

developments in terms of promoting better overall integration and coordination of services.   They applauded it for forcing all agencies to take a more systematic accounting of the progress  made by clients so that they might make any necessary adjustments.30   As they suggested, the  less formal dialogue that case workers typically had with clients with regard to "how they were  doing" might be "less apt to get at everything" (P9).  The IAR was described as reducing  unnecessary delays, enhancing the continuity of care, and  relieving clients of the burden of  having to  "tell their story over and over again" (P5).       However, a number of participants also expressed concerns.  As one suggested the 

OCAN was often times "redundant and patronizing", particularly in the case of their long term  and essentially permanent residents; potentially sending the message that "you are not doing  enough to get better".  More importantly, participants expressed increasing concern over  privacy in light of the amount of personal information collected.   As one suggested, the OCAN  might be considered to be a "personality profile" as it collected "such an incredible amount of  personal information" on clients (P0).      Others questioned whether such large amounts of personal information should be 

shared so freely amongst so many professionals via the IAR.  As one asked rhetorically" Do they  all really need to know every single detail of someone's mental health history in order to do a  good job; as a case in point she added, "do recreation therapist really need to know about all of  that stuff in order to teach them to swim or to work with others on team?" 31.   As another  argued, each professional might need access to certain types of information, but beyond that  there might be little to no benefit.   As she posited, a client care might actually suffer in those  cases as providers began to view them through the lens that has been distorted by the  knowledge of  all of the clients previous setbacks and missteps.   This was all the more likely, she  added, as "those who worked in the mental health and addictions field tended to be curious and 

 As they described,  it sometimes revealed client needs and interests of which they were not previously  aware and provided agencies with an important opportunity to adjust goals or to break them into smaller  and "more realistic"  pieces in the case that they were not seeing progress  31  The participant identified this profession as being one that was slated to receive access to the IAR. 

30

71

nosy by nature".32        One participant pointed out how many of the community based professional s who 

would ultimately have access to client information under the IAR would not necessarily be  subject to the same strict  accountability structures as were already  in place for doctors and  nurses33;  as a result, he  questioned the level of confidentiality that could ultimately be assured  (P8).   Another pointed to how such community based professionals, including those working in  supportive housing, would have access to hospital records for the very first time via the IAR;  the  implications were far more significant and "fraught with danger" than most appreciated, he  argued, and he was not even sure if he wanted or needed such access (P6).     As a simple password would provide access to  all of a client's information under the 

proposed IAR, one participant questioned whether it was an appropriate system; at the very  least, should there not be firewalls in place to protect certain information from general  consumption?, she asked.34      Most participants also pointed to the unique aspects of client information that made 

privacy issues a central concern.  As one described, those with mental health issues tend to have  histories of hospitalization and criminal justice involvement which they might wish to keep  private as a result of its potential implications this might have on their relationships,  employment prospects, and experiences within health and social services systems35 .   In fact, a  formal and recorded diagnosis of severe mental illness, inandof itself, was  described as  resulting in Canadians potentially being denied access into the United States.  As one participant 

 She did not make this remark in a disparaging way, as she also had a background in front line work, and  suggested that workers therein were inevitably drawn in to the lives of their clients.  33  For example, strict and formal ethical policies and processes in place under the Ontario College of  Physicians and Surgeons  34  As she described, it was difficult to accept an explanation that was offered up by the software company  suggesting that such measures could not be implemented, given that educational institutions had  successfully implemented them in the case of student records.  35  As one participant suggested, those with mental health issues may often experience differential  treatment within hospital emergency rooms owing to their general appearance and behaviour; having  said that, he also suggested that a documented mental illness might actually lead to better treatment as  emergency room staff might be better prepared and held to a higher standard by virtue of being apprised  of the nature of the situation  

32

72

highlighted, what was at risk was not simply exposing highly confidential and potentially  damaging  information, but of exposing such information with respect to a segment of the  population which was already extremely vulnerable and marginalized.      Not surprisingly, this led to some participants taking exception with the overall move 

toward "harvesting" more and more personal information on clients (P10).   As one reflected on  all of the new processes, versus the old:   
"...when people applied to us in the past we would sit down and talk to them briefly in order to see if they  would  be a good fit for our program.  As  we were most concerned with  their present situation and  functional status,  there was no need to go into great depth about their past.    Now, if an applicant innocently applies to our program they are immediately met with this long and  imposing application form and then if they manage to secure housing they still have to submit to a series  of long and personal evaluations." (P3)   

  In a similar vein, another simply asked, "why should they have  to give up so much information  simply to access decent housing and support....who else is expected to do that?"  (P4 

  9.19. The insertion of profit driven data management companies                                                                                               As all agencies had to purchase expensive proprietary data management software from 

the same companies, who also hosted mandatory training sessions, some participants expressed  concern regarding the increasing private sector influence that this invited.  As one suggested, "it  is a whole different world when you involve private companies who are selling you these  products and are driven by profit margins"  P3).   One participant described her horror when her  questions with regard to securing a client's informed consent were met with the suggestion that  they "did not need to know all of the details about IAR" and should simply emphasize that it is  "for their own good";  this was all very "patronizing" and seemed to create a situation where the  "tail was wagging the dog".  As she added, it also came from  people "with degrees in business  and information technology who just did not understand the "nature of community health" and  the "importance of concepts such as empowerment" (P0).  Similarly, others described how there  was a "whole lot of confusion" about the issue of informed consent (P4) and what exactly it  meant in the context of marginalized individuals who "were not always of sound mind"(P8).           

73

  9. 20. The creation of a new bureaucracy to protect privacy...or deflect liability?                                                                    One participant did point to a process which was to be incorporated in the IAR which 

would flag cases in which client records were inappropriately accessed (P5).  However, another  criticized this process as "naive" given the difficulty in establishing that a file was inappropriately  accessed, particularly as operational funds to carry out such tasks were being continually cut  back36.   Even if they did catch someone, she added, this would not address any negative  impacts already suffered by the client.    Some participants also described how they were facing an increasing amount of 

provincial policy in relation to privacy, driven largely by the OCAN and IRA.  As one described,  the MOHLTC was even beginning to contemplate the establishment of a new organization for  the sole purpose of dealing with s matters of privacy.    However, a couple of participants also  suggested that such policies tended to focus too narrowly upon liability, and were typically  framed so as to protect the MOHLTC by placing greater responsibility upon agencies.  As one  described, "they must have a team of lawyers going over all of this stuff" as they are "constantly  shooting out agreements to cover them"; ultimately,  it was suggested that  the agencies would  be the ones to pay the price in terms of the considerable and inevitable liability issues that  would arise37  (P3).   In any case, given the significant resources that were being directed toward  protecting privacy seemed apparent that any  savings achieved through gathering all of such  information ultimately needed to be weighed against the significant and increasing resources  that were now being directed to simply address privacy and liability concerns.   

 As she suggested it would be quite easy to conjure up an official reason for having accessed a client file,  and would be quite difficult to prove otherwise.  Moreover, it was described as overly optimistic to  suggest that a great deal of resources would be put toward pursuing such inherently complicated matters,  owing to the fact that there was not likely to be increased operating funds available to do so during a  forthcoming period of funding cuts and general austerity.    37  As a specific example, she pointed to how clients were typically also employed by supportive housing  agencies on a part time basis, in keeping with their focus on expanding their opportunities,  and yet might  now have their hospital records scrutinized in the case of extended absenteeism; this in turn might trigger  lawsuits on the basis of workplace discrimination     

36

74

  9.21. Questioning hard data as the holy grail                                                                                                                                    While more and more data were being collected from agencies through the CASH, the 

OCAN and the increasing LHIN reporting requirements, some participants admitted to how they  often did not know how it was all ultimately being used (P4).   Others suggested that there were  significant drawbacks in terms of the very nature of the data which limited how it could be  applied and the conclusions that might be drawn.  As one described, the LHIN driven practice of  recording the number of "contacts" made with clients was of limited value and potentially  misleading.  As she described, a staff member might spend an entire day, or even several, simply  encouraging a suicidal tenant to go to hospital and then escorting them there to provide support  and ensure that they ultimately followed through; as she suggested, this would only be  considered to constitute a single client contact and yet clearly it was necessarily much more  urgent and involved.  Another pointed to how present measures failed to take into account  important outcomes that were not necessarily valued equally by the LHINs: "how does one  place a value upon one day clean and sober?", he asked.   Another spoke about how existing  measures were not capturing the extensive efforts that they had made to involve clients within  the operations of the agency, by offering them opportunities to be involved in its governance  and by creating part time and casual employment; the resultant capacity building and  empowerment were equally important outcomes and measures of success which were not  captured by the existing measures.     One participant pointed to a specific example in order to highlight the weakness of 

existing approaches.  Over the course of his involvement with a new supportive housing  program for addicted clients, he recalled how "the great brains" at the Ministry came up the  idea of recording how many addicted patients returned to hospitals within 30 days of being  discharged.   They did not consider whether patients had returned to hospital for injuries or 

75

illnesses that were actually related to their addiction38, and they did not consider whether  patients might originally have been discharged from hospitals prematurely39. Most surprising,  perhaps, individuals were identified as having made contact with the CASH service, but then no  further information was collected as to if and when they were ultimately able to secure housing.    As the participant concluded, it was clearly impossible to evaluate supportive housing based on  such data for even a chance fall by a tenant that led to a hospital visit, or a hospital visit by  someone who had not accessed supportive housing at all, might lead to the false assumption  that supportive housing had ultimately failed (P8).  As he described, there was significant "push  back" to this measure by agencies as it clearly added little in the way of value.    One participant simply warned of the dangers associated with considering "hard data" to 

represent some "panacea or holy grail" for the supportive housing system.   As he described, there  was "unavoidable flaws and limitations inherent within all hard data", and "values and practical  experience had to come into play".  To reflect this reality, he described how the term "evidence  based practice" had subsequently been changed to "evidence informed practice" within the  annual reports of his own agency; for as he explained, a "simple resort to the facts" was often not  adequate in terms of setting priorities and determining what was a "right and just" course of  action, particularly in relation to such a vulnerable and marginalized population (P8).      

  9.22. The myth of "fat" in the system                                                                                                                                                 Many participants suggested that the system had been unfairly and inaccurately 

characterized as being plagued with fragmentation, duplication, and waste.   One participant  coined this as the "myth of fat in the system" (P4) while another suggested that it was an "  illusion of inefficiency" created by all of the diversity that had arisen from a process of organic  growth; as she added, it was ultimately needed in order to deal with the great diversity of needs 

as opposed to any number of common  injuries and illness, unrelated to addictions issues,  that might be  encountered by those in the general population  39  The participant noted how patients were commonly discharged prematurely in order to free up beds for  new patients.

38

76

and situations that existed in the city (P2).    Finally, one remarked that "the government is hot  on the idea of duplication in our system, but if you drill down deeper it doesn't exist" (P6).      As some argued, these characterizations were also refuted by the  lean and frugal 

management that actually existed within their agencies.  As one described:  
"if we had our finance person come in one less day per week, this would still not save us anything as she  already has too much to do... [and]... eventually someone would still have to file all those LHIN reports.  It  is not like she has oodles of time that she might be spending on something else" (P3).  

  As another argued, there is a problem if an agency has "2 managers for only 2 staff but we have  3 managers for over 30 staff and the ratios are pretty consistent from agency to agency.  As he  also added, the staff to client ratios were  often dictated by broader policies and funding  arrangement, so the huge efficiencies that policy makers claimed they could find really were  "just not there" (P9).    A number of participants pointed to how the CASH waiting list ultimately seemed to 

vindicate the system in terms of efficiency, at least as far as initial administrative duplication and  waste was concerned.   While policy makers felt that a number of applicants were on multiple  waiting lists prior to CASH, and that suggested demand was inflated as a result, this was not  borne out by the facts.  As one participant pointed out , only 20 of 900 original applicants to  CASH indicated previously being on multiple lists, and 4 of those had been on more than two; as  he concluded, duplication did not factor into  the demand, which  soon resulted in a list of over  4000 applicants (P6).    

  9.23. The hidden pockets of collaboration                                                                                                                                        A number of participants also refuted the notion of "fat" in the system directly, or 

indirectly, by pointing to the great number of collaborative relationships between agencies, and  to their resultant efficiencies; of course, this also served to refute the common belief that  integration was wholly absent (P3).  These relationships reached well beyond the formal  partnerships, discussed earlier, that had been established to deliver actual supportive housing  programs.  As one participant described, the multitude of relationships were not fully 

77

appreciated and in many cases not documented (P2).      Participants described how their agencies participated on the steering committee of 

CASH, which held regularly monthly meetings.   However, agencies were also described as taking  part in the regular meetings of various special working groups that had been established apart  from and prior to the advent of CASH: for example, one working group was made up of agencies  who dealt with addictions issues and another involved agencies who delivered high needs  supportive housing (P8).   In addition, the LHIN was described as hosting regular meetings of all  mental health  providers within their jurisdictions, and this was described as providing an  obvious opportunity for networking between participants' agencies and other system players  (P9).      Some participants described how their agencies were also members of organizations 

that fostered collaboration and achieved added efficiencies.  For example, the Federation of  Community Mental Health and Addiction Programs and the Ontario Non Profit Housing  Association, were described as providing valuable education and training programs, networking  opportunities, and discounted group premiums on insurance and employee benefit programs  (P2, P3).      On a less obvious but even more direct basis, some participants described how they 

served on the boards of a number of organizations of system wide relevance40,  alongside of  their colleagues in other supportive housing agencies; this served as a valuable form of  networking through which ideas and information was often exchanged.   Others pointed to how  supportive housing agencies often collaborated in order to achieve "backroom integration and  efficiencies".   For example, one described how they provided quasitraining sessions to other  agencies in order to convey the information that they had gathered from formal training  sessions and conferences (P4).  Another discussed how their dietician travelled to other  agencies in order to share information and ideas, and how they were in the process of 

 Homecoming Community Choice Coalition was cited as one such organization, as it educates on and  advocates for the housing rights of those dealing with mental health and addiction issues in Toronto 

40

78

establishing a process for sharing a common information technology system and support service  for a handful of small agencies (P3).  Agencies were also described as collaborating in research  and as producing joint reports on important issues; these were then utilized by other agencies  to address similar internal matters and/or used to lobby for broader system wide changes (P0,  P2, P3, P4, P6). 41         It became apparent that the supportive housing system was actually a tight knit family 

in which individual players shared resources, interacted regularly and typically knew one  another quite well; in fact multiple participants reported being previously employed by other  supportive housing agencies and remaining involved with them on an informal basis (P3, P6,P8).      By extension, numerous examples were cited whereby the clients from different supportive  housing agencies came together to enjoy shared experiences and resources.   In one case, a  participant described how clients from other programs came to take part in art programs that  they offered to their clients.  In another, agencies were described as bringing together both  clients and resources to provide for social outings in the broader community.42   

  9.24. No more agencies, but not necessarily any fewer                                                                                                                  Interestingly, when participants were asked directly whether they felt that the present 

number of supportive housing agencies was appropriate or needed to be either increased or  decreased, all of them agreed that no further agencies should be introduced.  However, only  one suggested that the number should actually be reduced; as he argued,  the existing number  reduced efficiency, tied resources up within management, and meant that there were "simply  too many interests to overcome"43 (P1).   The remainder took a more tentative position, and  while acknowledging the potential challenges faced by smaller organizations (P5), pointed to the  value that a number of agencies might provide. 
 For example participants pointed to two recent reports on the issue of bed bugs within supportive  housing buildings and on possible means of addressing alarmingly high rates of early mortality amongst  supportive housing tenants.  42  In one case a participant referred to shared trips that were taken to the Toronto Islands.  43  He also suggested that his was not likely a common or popular opinion amongst other participants.
41

79

 

One argued that a greater number of agencies provided for levels of consumer choice 

that were essential given the great diversity of client populations, housing needs, funding  streams and planning contexts.  As we had well over 29 different types of coffee shops in the  city to satisfy our "wants" was that really too many agencies to address such vital "needs?", he  asked.   As he then calculated, about 30 different agencies for a city region consisting of about 4  million people, effectively meant 1 supportive agency for every 133,000 residents in Toronto; or  one agency for a city the size of Oshawa (P1).  As he continued,   the overall ratio was likely even  larger, as 5 or 6 of the existing agencies had arisen to meet the needs of specific groups within  particular areas of the city .        Some participants pointed to how an elimination of agencies, would also mean a loss of 

the free and invaluable skills, knowledge and experience that was presently derived from their  boards of directors and from the many community relationships that they had formed over the  years (P3).   One pointed to how this would also lead to the irretrievable loss of valuable  organizational knowledge which would ultimately be essential to inform system level planning  and decision making (P9).    As I discovered for myself over the course of the interviews, such  knowledge was often not documented, existing only in the minds of those involved in the  system.       Finally, some participants simply questioned the economies of scale that would be 

achieved by reducing the number or agencies owing to their relatively lean and frugal  management.   In questioning arbitrary assumptions that were sometimes made, in light of the  complex nature of the system, one  asked, "how can we really say that having 10 organizations is  really going to be more efficient than having 29"(P2).  This was all the more questionable, of  course, if one considered the previous suggestion that managertostaff ratios were generally  consistent across agencies and  that stafftoclient ratios were often dictated by broader policies  and funding arrangements  (P9).     

80

  9.25. Administrative demands and the precarious fate of the small agency                                                                               Discussion with regard to the number of agencies ultimately merged  with a discussion 

regarding the value and fate of small agencies.   For example, one described how a reduction in  the number of agencies might threaten the "client centered and community like" culture of  small agencies such as theirs, by causing them to amalgamate and become "large, impersonal  and bureaucratic" or by forcing them out of the system altogether  (P8).44      Others suggested that such changes might already be at hand.  All but one of the 

participants described how there were much greater administrative demands being placed upon  their agency as a result of the advent of CASH, the OCAN, IAR, and the increasingand  increasingly complicatedLHIN reporting requirements.   While those from larger agencies seem  to take it in stride, and accept it as a necessary part of doing business (P1, P5)45 , those from  smaller agencies were much more critical and worried about potential impacts upon their  operations and viability.   A participant from one small agency expressed frustration in having to  hire an accountant to come in once a week just to do the agency's financial reports, and in  having to resubmit them regularly as a result of the LHIN constantly changing its reporting  requirements (P3).  Another described how having to send her staff off to day long training  sessions as a result of initiatives such as the OCAN and IAR, was beginning to put a serious strain  on her small and overworked staff and was beginning to detract  from their ability to focus on  their more critical front line work (P4).        Even participants from the larger agencies seemed to be sympathetic to these issues 

faced by their smaller counterparts.  One suggested that it would be  "very difficult for small  agencies to compete and survive as a result of such cumbersome and technical demands" (P6), 
 As an example, this participant described how they had an open door policy, in terms of allowing clients  to drop into the office freely and at any time.  In fact, he pointed to a community lounge that had been  set up to encourage this and described how clients played a number of paid and involuntary roles within  the organization that were afforded by the informal manner in which they tried to conduct their business.    He suggested that this might be threatened if the organization were to become larger and more  bureaucratic.  45  As a couple of  participant from  larger agencies commented, these requirements were somewhat  burdensome (P7) but would get easier once they got into the habit of doing them (P8).
44

81

while another expected that they would likely face "staff burnout" as a result (P5).   

  9.26. The need for a system wide planning of services                                                                                                                   As CASH dealt mainly with the "mechanics" of "agency reporting" and of "people 

"applying to and moving through  the system", some felt that it simply did not go far enough  in  terms of dealing with the real issues of overall planning and coordination (P1, P9, P8). While  many participants expressed a general view that greater system wide planning was in order, one  participant provided a particularly passionate, detailed and reasoned argument.    As he  suggested, system wide planning would firstly serve as a an important advocacy tool by virtue of  educating the public and policy makers about the nature and importance of supportive housing,  and by encouraging the provincial government to finally make a "solid commitment" to the  tangible and long term course of action that it laid out (P8).   As he described, there was  presently a "back and forth cycle" within the system whereby different  proponents would argue  on behalf of different supportive housing approaches and as it was often impossible to establish  that one proposal was any better than another, from an objective point of view, politics and  happenstance would often determine the outcome.  If  there was one overall strategic plan, he  argued, there would be a commitment to a long term vision and course of action from which all  other decisions would more logically flow.  For example, funding directed toward rent  supplements in the short term could be justified on the basis that the necessary capital  investments into new and dedicated housing stock were also scheduled for some future point in  time.      In expressing his confusion as to why there was no single plan for supportive housing in 

the city one participant mused, "every large and successful company has a plan" (P6).   As  another suggested it was just "common sense" as " it is difficult to ask the provincial  government for the type of money that we need if we do not first have some type of plan to  suggest how it should be spent"; on that basis he actually argued that a focus on comprehensive  planning should "precede any discussion of increased funding" (P10).            

82

 

Some participants also suggested that there are limits to what could ultimately occur in 

terms of system wide planning, by virtue of the organic  manner in which the system had  originally evolved.  As one described, "the system did not follow from some strict and rational  premise or blueprint so it is not clearly organized, logical or even equitable" and as a result  decisions will "inevitably always be based on politics to a great extent" (P5).   As he added,  "what they had was what they had", and while it "was not perfect", it was still "pretty good" and  "getting better and better" with the advent of initiatives like CASH (p5). 

  9.27. From CASH to comprehensive planning?                                                                                                                                 An obvious question which was posed over the course of the interviews was whether 

the Mental Health and Supportive Housing Network might build upon CASH to ultimately  become the base for a more comprehensive and system wide process of planning.      While some suggested that this was a possibility (P5), most seemed surprisingly resistant and  pointed to a variety of logistical challenges.  As some suggested, this was never the intention of  the network as it was to be a site for greater coordination and the sharing of ideas, "not a  master planner" (P1, P6).    While such resistance to the idea of CASH becoming a site for planning was somewhat 

bewildering, the comments of one participant served to put it into a political perspective.  As  she suggested, "it would be next to impossible to get all of the agencies to cooperate in order to  establish some overall plan for the network as each of their  underlying values and philosophies  are so different"46 (P9).  As she suggested, the only way in which the network might become a  site of comprehensive planning was if some "outside body stepped in to take the lead", and this  would definitely not be welcomed.     

 In making her point, she described how her agency once parted ways with another that it had originally  partnered with as it ultimately had very different ideas as to what constituted legitimate grounds for  expelling clients.  According to the other agency, a  hospital readmission constituted a "relapse" for which  a tenant was punished with an eviction.   

46

83

  9.28. On the cusp of big, but as of yet unappreciated, changes                                                                                                    Many participants felt that the supportive housing system was on the cusp of 

tremendous changes.   As one described, the LHINs had "more than hinted" at their intention to  encourage greater integration and consolidation within the system" and it was not  inconceivable that they would ultimately push to have only a handful of major agencies involved.   He also added that the supportive housing agencies involved with CASH were already discussing  how they might take greater proactive steps to offset any unilateral and draconian steps that  might be in the wings; as he described they had recently decided it was important to "take  control of  their own collective destiny", rather than having it dictated to them; the LHINs  had  encouraged them to integrate voluntarily but was now quite ready to involuntarily impose it  (P6).       Another participant described how they might well be at a "crisis stage".  For while the 

LHINs were encouraging greater and greater standardization, uniformity and integration, the  supportive housing system was still made up of a great number of agencies that all varied  tremendously in terms of their size, characteristics, and "general way of doing things"; in his  words, "something had to give" (P8).   One participant predicted that the number of  agencies  would inevitably be merged or eliminated within the next five years, leading to a system that  looks  "very different than it is today" (P6).    Two participants pointed to significant legal challenges that stood  in the way of the 

province simply stepping in to take charge of the system, and these might also have accounted  for them not taking a strong hand earlier.  As one described, supportive housing agencies had  whole or partial ownership of their properties, and were bound to agreements in relation to  them with charities and a variety of other community bodies.   Even  if it was the government's  intention, it was suggested that it could not simply sweep in and pull all of these properties  under its wings unilaterally; at least, not without considerable negotiation and potential  litigation(P8).   Having said that, he conceded that they still wielded the balance of power by 

84

virtue of holding the purse strings for all ongoing support dollars.     Some participants focused upon an apparent lack of awareness about forthcoming 

changes.    As one suggested, the average person "does not even know what a LHIN is or what it  does" and yet they are about to make these big changes that are going to have a serious affect  on people's lives.  As she suggested, they would not only have a very direct and dramatic impact  upon her clients, but potential impact upon everyone as a result of the basic human rights and  privacy issues involved (P3).  Reflecting on how social activism had led to the very establishment  of supportive housing, another participant mused about the present lack of concern; "was it a  generational thing"?  As she added, it was even more astounding that people involved in the  system were not trumpeting these as "huge changes" that people needed to pay attention to  (P4).    Others expressed concern that the changes that were already underway were being 

implemented too hastily and had unpredictable consequences.   As one participant suggested,  with the new CASH application, OCAN and the IAR, they were simply "trying to do too much all  at once" (P8).  As another described, we are "being encouraged to go out and tell our clients  that it is okay to participate in the IAR, but the truth of the matter is we really do not know what  it going to happen once all their data is put in one big repository" (P4).  One participant  remarked, "one would think that there was some common understanding" of these changes  "across the board" but they were not nearly as coordinated as one would assume"; for example  emerging relationships new players such as data management companies really were not clear  (p3)     Participants' views of the future were undoubtedly coloured by a recently released 

report on public service reform in the province47, which some referenced directly.  As it painted  a "grim picture" (P1) in terms of recommending cuts and general austerity in all areas, possible 

This was the 2012 report by The Commission on the Reform of Ontario's Public Service that was headed  by Dwight Drummond. 

47

85

efficiencies would need to be a top priority for everyone (P6, P8).48     8.   Summary   of   findings   and   concluding   discussion     The thematic analysis presented above has a number of important implications.   

The supportive housing system for those with mental health and addiction issues must clearly  evolve to meet the demands of an increasingly diverse ethnocultural population in Toronto,  and to meet the immense and increasingly complex demands that will continue to be placed  upon it by an aging population.   Clearly, urban planning must also evolve with these demands  by recognizing that there is a desperate and essential need for supportive housing, and thus  enabling zoning bylaws, within all areas of the city.   As part of their role in creating a civil city,  planners must work to create opportunities for more supportive housing, rather than putting  forth obstacles to it.   Exclusionary zoning, NIMBYism and NIMBism must all be recognized as an  affront to human rights, and proactive policies must be put in place in order to address any  related conflicts in a much stronger and more systematic fashion.    As those dealing with mental health and addictions typically constitute a vulnerable and 

extremely marginalized group, the significant, immediate and demonstrated need to create  more supportive housing represents a clear humanitarian issue, that lies even above and  beyond any economic arguments that might be put forth.   The fact that those most in need of  such housing are also those with the most significant support related needs, simply amplifies an  already intolerable situation.    It is clearly unacceptable that those with such significant  challenges should have to continue struggling to survive and to fend for themselves on the  street, in shelters, or in substandard housing.        There is a strong argument in support of greater capital investments into the system in 

order to address the tremendous demand at hand and to ensure the long term sustainability of 

 While it was suggested that the Drummond Report might offer  an opportunity in the case that money  was shifted more appropriately  the community sector as a means of achieving greater overall health  system effectiveness and efficiencyparticularly as no new spending was anticipated in any areait was  considered to be highly doubtful that this would not likely be embraced by the hospital sector.

48

86

the system.  In that vein, policy makers must clearly ask themselves whether the existing  approach makes sense on purely economic grounds; one  in which private developers profit on  the guaranteed income and capital gains  that are ultimately secured by initial government  subsidies.  As one participant suggested, is there going to come a day when the government  realizes that the amount being paid toward rent is simply too high and if so, what then?    As supportive housing agencies are becoming increasingly entrepreneurial, the study 

findings suggest that there is also a reasonable argument for providing them with the  opportunity to take greater control of their financial destinies by making it easier for them to  leverage their properties and to take more direct advantage of tools such as rent supplements.    In effect, it might make more sense to get rid of the middle man by allowing supportive housing  agencies to also become property developers, alone or in financial partnership with fellow  agencies.      With that said, the analysis has also suggested that the increasingly narrow emphasis 

upon rent supplements might be worth reconsidering.  The diversity of populations, needs and  situations that exist, means that there is also a need for a wide variety of housing options  supported by a wide variety of funding arrangements, which include direct capital investment.    As the analysis has suggested, there are a number of compelling arguments in favour of rent  supplements, and related `housing first' approaches, but there is also a danger that they may   become over popularized as a result of exaggerated claims and expectations.  For example, it  may be overly optimistic to assume that all of those dealing with mental health and/or  addictions can achieve the levels of independence assumed by such approaches and that private  landlords will embrace the mentally ill with open arms, particularly if vacancy rates in the city  remain  low.   Most importantly, governments must avoid the temptation to try to 'do  supportive housing on the cheap' through an exclusive and economically driven reliance upon  such measures for, as the adage goes, you ultimately get what you pay for.      On a broader level, clearly there is a strong argument to be made for greater 

investments into the affordable housing stock more generally in order to provide all of Toronto's 

87

residents with a decent standard of living, and not simply those dealing with mental health and  addiction issues.  However, as the analysis has revealed, more affordable housing might also  have the added benefit of providing those presently residing in supportive housing units with a  viable option to transition to the broader community, thereby not only contributing to their  ability to move forward with their lives but  freeing up their units for those in the greatest need.       Significant problems in the ODSP and OW also constitute broader issues that clearly 

affect a much larger population, and yet have an inevitable and magnified impact in the case of  those who also struggle with the added burden of mental illness and housing issues.  Reforms  are clearly needed in order to provide people with a basic level of income and with the  opportunities to improve their own lot in life; these may clearly represent even more  fundamental and upstream determinants of health than the provision of supportive housing  itself.          

Clearly the funding and operational arrangements in relation to existing supportive 

housing programs are extremely complex.   While this has contributed to a high degree of  innovation and creativity amongst agencies which should be applauded, one must clearly ask  whether this is in keeping with systemwide planning and coordination and whether it actually  results the most efficient use of limited resources.  For example, considerable resources must  clearly be devoted to the very process of navigating, negotiating, and aligning the various  programs.  Moreover one must ask if it is morally or rationally defensible that government  funding originally intended for one population and/or purpose is ultimately put toward another,  even if this might be justified on local pragmatic grounds.  After all, should decisions involving  taxpayer dollars not be transparent and should government policies and programs not be  implemented so that they can ultimately be evaluated as to whether they have met their  intended goals?   Clearly neither is possible in the case that situation specific decisions are being  made covertly by agencies and sometimes on the basis of a nod or a wink.  Moreover, what  struck this researcher was how murky the system still appeared despite spending a considerable  amount of time researching supportive housing and having the benefit of a graduate level 

88

education.   It begged the question of whether this situation might prove problematic in the  case that the ultimate goal was to generate support for the system and perhaps even bring a  broader community voice to the planning and decision making table; how might that be  accomplished if the system could not even be described in a clear and more concise fashion?  It  also begged the question of whether aspects of the system might somehow be reorganized so  as to function in a manner in which could ultimately be evaluated more simply in terms of value  for the money; although this writer acknowledges that the complexity of the needs addressed  by the system might limit such opportunities.    Hidden pockets of integration and the generally lean and frugal management within 

supportive housing agencies seemed to refute the image that participants' felt existed in certain  circles: that is of a supportive housing system which is riddled with inefficiencies, duplication  and waste.  Moreover, it seems reasonable to assume that much of what might appear to be  redundant to the casual observer, might actually reflect aspects of the system that have evolved  organically and are ultimately necessary for addressing the diversity of populations, needs and  situations at hand.   While some efficiencies may be found through enhanced integration, any  suggestion that huge savings might be achieved through the removal of large "chunks of fat"  from the system would be exaggerated and overblown.    To the contrary, it seems that many  agencies have gone to such great lengths to stretch each government dollar that concerns are  actually beginning to arise as to whether this is creating unrealistic expectations amongst  funders and burnout amongst agency staff.    By extension, it would also appear that any proposal to simply reduce the number of 

agencies in the name of achieving big and easy savings is optimistic and overlooks the important  benefits that such agencies bring to the table in terms of diversity, experience and innovation.    In fact, in light of such benefits there is definite cause to be concerned about the precarious fate  of smaller agencies.  In the wake of increasing administrative demands resulting from a growing  number and complexity of LHIN reporting requirements, a number of agencies may simply and  unceremoniously vanish, with no consideration as to the value that they bring to the table and 

89

to the important opportunities, knowledge, and experience that might be lost.  It would  certainly seem more sensible to have a reasoned discussion with regard to their future based  upon a more thoughtful consideration of their overall benefits and costs to the system.    Examples provided within the analysis seem to support the contention that  some of the 

supportive housing outcomes being considered by decision makers such as the LHINs are not  always appropriate and/or adequate enough to provide for informed decision making.  Such  findings raise questions as to whether the quest for data has actually become an end in itself.    As one participant suggested, perhaps evidenceinformed practice should take the place of  evidencebased practice, owing to the inherent flaws and limitations of hard data and the equal  importance of values and practical experience.   Such a critical and insightful position resonates  with the early work of Nelson (2005 ), who characterized Ontario's system of supportive housing  as a whole as one that ultimately needs to be driven by both values and evidence.      The increasing focus on data within the supportive housing system would clearly seem 

to reflect the influence of popular business models, and the increasing involvement of profit  driven private sector players from the data management industry.  As the analysis suggests, it  also seems to reflects the resurfacing of a historical institutional hegemony within the health  care system which prioritizes concepts such as "levels of care" and "flow thru"; concepts that  were originally applied to, and arguably most suited for, the treatment of physical illness, injury  and disease within hospital settings.       As the study findings suggest, this institutional hegemony is also reflected in and 

supported by a disproportionate amount of health care spending that continues to go toward  hospitals, as opposed to supportive housing and other forms of communitybased care.   There  is certainly a strong argument that can be made for having more funds directed to the latter,  particularly if one subscribes to a popularly held view that preventive communitybased care is  ultimately more appropriate and cost effective      While it would seem that most participants agreed that recent initiatives aimed at 

bringing about greater and more formal system wide integration, such as the CASH, OCAN and 

90

IAR, are steps in the right direction in principle, there are clearly significant concerns with  regards to how things have materialized in practice.  Most importantly perhaps, are major and  seemingly justified concerns regarding how the increasing focus on data collection and  management is putting the privacy of client populations in jeopardy.  As one participant asked,  why should people who are struggling with an illness have to forgo their privacy and risk so  much simply in order to secure support and a decent and affordable place to live?  This certainly  does not seem to be keeping with  increasing public concerns with regard to individual privacy,  and it is certainly doubtful as to whether the average citizen would accept this as a reasonable  trade off for attaining something so fundamental.   One might logically ask why marginalized  groups are not entitled to the same level of consideration, particularly as they may already  struggle with stigma and discrimination and may arguably have even more fundamental rights  and entitlements  at stake.     There are clearly significant benefits to be had through even more comprehensive and 

ongoing system wide approaches to planning, that reach  beyond service integration initiatives  such as CASH.  As one participant argued, the existing process of chasing after funding streams  deriving from ever changing and somewhat fickle government priorities, could be replaced with  a process of systemwide planning in Toronto in which specific long term goals were established  and then continually and consistently strived toward within each and every fundingrelated  decision.   Having said that, it would also appear to be quite challenging to achieve such a  system, owing to the very different values, beliefs and principles of agencies; even as CASH has  finally set the table for  master planning, it appears that agencies still have very different ideas  about supportive housing that will need to be overcome.        In closing, a final theme identified over the course of the analysis was how many of the 

changes described above were suddenly taking place within the system and  how even more  drastic changes were expected.    At the broadest level such changes clearly include a potential  shift away from the core values, beliefs and principles associated with community based mental  health promotion and service delivery and toward those aligned with business models and 

91

hospital  based institutional care.   Moreover, the analysis suggests that the general population,  and even some of those within the system itself, may not be aware of these changes and/or  grasp  their full impact upon people's lives.  It is hoped that this paper has helped to address this  gap in knowledge and awareness by providing a first exploratory description and discussion of  these changes, alongside of providing more general insights into the inner workings of the  supportive housing system.  If so, it has served one of its primary goals in terms of documenting  the invaluable collective knowledge and memory that presently exists within the supportive  housing community.                                                

       

92

Appendix   A:   Questionnaire   and   Interview   Guide       Questionnaire and Interview Guide    [Begin the interview with the following explicit instructions:]    Before I begin posing questions,  I should stress that you should take as much time as you wish in  responding to each.  While I may not say much please do not misinterpret this as disinterest.  I  will be making a concerted effort not to interrupt you as I as I wish to afford you as much  latitude as possible to talk about issues and ideas which you feel are most interest, relevant and  important.         As I come to this research with relatively little in depth knowledge or practical experience with  regard to supportive housing, please do not assume that any detail is too simple or obvious to  discuss. There is presently very little written about the complex inner working of the supportive  housing system for those dealing with mental health and addiction issues in Toronto, and so I  greatly value your role as an expert in this regard.     Furthermore, as a relative novice I certainly do not come to this interview with  preconceived  ideas as to the present or potential future state of the system.  While I may pose questions with  regard to more centralized planning for example, I am most certainly appreciate that there may  be significant challenges and shortcoming associated with such an system and not an advocate  for one approach or another.      Having said that, let us begin.    [Proceed with the following questions]      BASIC ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION (~1015 minutes)    1. What specific housing and/or social services do you provide?    2. What specific populations do you serve?    3. Is there a particular vision, values, principles or ideas that guide the work of your  organization?     4. In general termsthat is, without providing specific locations how are your supportive  housing units distributed throughout the City of Toronto?   How did your organization  first come to own and manage supportive housing units, and how did your portfolio  evolve in terms of subsequent building acquisitions and construction?     5. What sources of funding has your organization utilized for the acquisition and  construction of housing units and the subsequent provision of services to your clients?    

93

  [In proceeding with the remaining  questions, provide participant with the time to answer as  each as fully as possible.  Engage the participant with physical (e.g., nods, eye contact)  and  verbal cues (e.g., "yeah") so as to encourage them to expand upon their thoughts and ideas.  If  there are lulls comfort them (e.g., "take your time") and encourage additional discussion ("is  there anything further you would like to add on that subject").   As the participant is responding interrupt as little as possible with questions.  Instead, jot down  key words to represent those questions, and other important information and ideas raised by  the respondent.   Once the respondent has indicated that they are finished responding, probe  them with additional questions based on the key word list]     EXPERIENCES & ISSUES (4550 minutes)    Organizational experiences &  issues    6. How has your organization evolved in terms of the services provided and populations  served?    7. What would you describe as your greatest strengths and accomplishments of your  organization?    8. What would you describe as the greatest challenges to your organization?    System wide experiences and issues    9. What do you feel are the greatest strengths and accomplishments of the overall  supportive housing system in Toronto?  What are its greatest challenges?  Are there  specific changes you feel are necessary?      10. Are there examples of collaboration between the various players in the supportive  housing system?  Are there way in which your organization has collaborated with others  within the system?  If so, please elaborate.    11. Are there opportunities for greater coordination and integration within the supportive  housing system?  Are there specific challenges to achieving greater system wide co ordination and integration?   Are there any risks or drawbacks to moving toward a more  integrated, comprehensive and system process of planning for supportive housing in  Toronto?       12. How would you describe the role of the Local Health Integration Networks in relation to  supportive housing?  In your view have they been successful in terms of achieving  greater integration and collaboration amongst supportive housing providers?  Is there  something that you feel they should be doing differently?    13. Do you anticipate any changes within the supportive housing system in Toronto in the  foreseeable future?  If so, please explain.      

94

Appendix   B:   Additional   Themes  

  B1.   In defense of the integrated supportive housing agency                                                                                                        Participants did not generally engage with the somewhat dated "supportive" versus 

"supported" housing debate identified in the literature.  As on participant put it: "that  distinction was relevant in the 1980s and maybe 1990's, when supportive housing was  synonymous with a far more custodial and institutional approach in which the housing and  supports happen to be combined....it no longer applies in practice" (P0).  However, some  participants did feel compelled to defend programs which still tended to somewhat more  structured than others and in which their agency delivered both the housing and support service  components as a means of providing for a continuity of care and a  greater sense  of community.    As one explained, ""when one agency delivers the building and support there is no doubt that  clients are getting what they need... if you only have the building and need to contact a support  agency it is less effective as a result of delays" (P8).  As case workers often reduced visits to  clients once they were stable, and took on additional such existing ones were stabilized, they  were often less able to respond in the case that the original clients suddenly experienced  setbacks and needed immediate assistance (P0, P8).  With support tied to housing, the same  pressures did not exist to simply move people through the system.  In discussing the benefits of  their integrated model one participant reflected upon how he wished that the special addiction  support that had to be called in for specific tenants would simply spend more time with them.49      Another participant referred to an unfairly critical stance that had been taken toward 

integrated models of housing and support within a recent and highly touted MHCC report.   As 

 Having said that, he admitted that it was sometimes difficult to continue case managing clients who  exited their housing as a result of their own case loads and focus upon resident clients, which speak to  one of the primary arguments in favour of separating the housing and support components.   By having a  separate support component it is argued that the supports are portable and may more easily travel with  the individual. 

49

95

he described, the Commission promoted a rent supplements approach and still characterized  their integrated model a highly institutionalized, patriarchal and custodial in nature.   They  ignored how it had actually evolved into a much more recovery based model centered upon  more effectively addressing clients needs and creating the sense of community that was still so  desperately needed and/or desired by a great number of those dealing with mental illness, and  particularly those with the most severe of needs (P6).   

B2. The questionable applicability of the Vancouver model
  When participants were presented with the example of the City of Vancouver as a 

contrasting example of more comprehensive planning toward which Toronto's supportive  housing system might strive50,   participants pointed to how that city benefitted from  much  stronger provincial and municipal leadership from the outset on all matters of affordable  housing (P0, p6), and to how their supportive housing sector had necessarily chosen to focus   largely upon specific populations (e.g., illicit drug users) and certain housing types (e.g., hotel  style housing) within the city's notoriously impoverished east end neighbourhoods51 (P5).  In  contrast, the supportive housing system in Toronto was described as grappling with a diversity  of populations, housing stock, and subsequent housing solutions within the multitude of  neighbourhoods across the city upon which they have chosen to focus their equal attention.52    Some suggested that while the system in Vancouver appeared comprehensive and rational on  paper, in reality it was likely much more complex and akin to what was observed in Toronto (P5).     

 as a report discussed earlier in this paper appeared to suggest that a more centralized and  comprehensive system of planning for supportive planning existed in that city, participants were asked to  comment upon it  51  The "East End" or "Hastings Avenue" is commonly used to refer to a specific section of Vancouver's  inner city which is characterized by drug use, mental illness, poverty, and 'third world' living conditions. 52  Interestingly, the difference between these two cities in terms of supportive housing might have  mirrored differences in terms of illicit drug use and/or illicit drug use control, with the latter also being  much more concentrated in certain areas of Vancouver, and much more diffuse in the case of Toronto.   While this possibility arose in the context of the interview, it would clearly need to be verified through  more data and research.     

50

96

REFERENCES   CAMH (2005). Housing Guide: A Comprehensive Guide For People With Mental Health and  Substance Use Concerns 20042006. Toronto., Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH).      CAMH. (N.D.). Turning the key: assessing housing and related supports for person living with  mental health problems and illness, Community Support and Research Unit, Centre for  Addiction and Mental Health.      CMHA. (2004). "Housing, Health & Mental Health."   Retrieved October 15, 2011, from  http://www.cmha.ca/data/1/rec_docs/549_CMHA_Housing_EN.pdf.      CMHA. (2008). Housing and Mental Illness. Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA).      CMHC. (2007). Research Highlight: Supportive Housing for Homeless and HardtoHouse Seniors:  An Indepth Case Study. Socioeconomic Series 07017, Canadian Mortgage and Housing  Corporation (CMHC).      De Wolff, A. (2008). We Are Neighbours: The Impact of Supportive Housing on Community,  Social, Economic and Attitude Changes., Wellesley Institute & The University of Toronto.        Fakhoury, W., Shepherd, G., Priebe, S. (2002). "Research in supported housing " Social Psychiatry  and Psychiatric Epidemiology 37(7): 301315          Falvo, N. (2009). Homelessness, Program Responses and an Assessment of Toronto's Streets to  Homes Program. Toronto, Canadian Policy Research Network (CPRN).    George, L., Sylvestre, J., Aubry, T. ;Durbin, J., Nelson, G , Sabloff, A., Trainor, T. (2005).  Strengthening the Housing System for People who have Experienced Serious Mental Illness: A  Valuebased and Evidencebased Approach.              Lipton, F. R., Siegel, C., Hannigan, A., Samuels, J.,  Baker, S. (2000). "Tenure in Supportive  Housing for Homeless Persons With Severe Mental Illness " Psychiatric Services 51: 479486.    McKenzie, J. (2004). Supportive housing strategies for the mentally  ill in Canada. Adequate and  Affordable Housing For All. Centre for Urban and Community Studies, University of Toronto, 455  Spadina Avenue, Suite 400, Toronto, Ontario.        Nelson, G. (1994). "The development of a mental health coalition: A case study. ." American  Journal of Community Psychology 22(2): 229255.      Nelson, G., Hall, B., WalshBowers, R. (1997). "A comparative evaluation of supportive  apartments, group homes, and boardandcare homes for psychiatric consumer/survivors."  Journal of Community Psychology 25(2): 167­188   

97

Nelson, G., Lord, J. ,Ochocka, J. (2001). "Empowerment and mental health in community:  narratives of psychiatric consumer/survivors." Journal of Community & Applied Social  Psychology 2: 125142.      Nelson, G., Sylvestre, J., Aubry, T., George, L.,  Trainor, J. (2007). "Housing Choice and Control,  Housing Quality, and Control over Professional Support as Contributors to the Subjective Quality  of Life and Community Adaptation of People with Severe Mental Illness " Medicine  Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research 34(2): 89100.      Nelson, G., Aubry, T., Lafrance, A. (2007). "A Review of the Literature on the Effectiveness of  Housing and Support, Assertive Community Treatment, and Intensive Case Management  Interventions for Persons With Mental Illness Who Have Been Homeless." American Journal of  Orthopsychiatry 77(3): 350­361.        Phillips , C., Hawes, C.  (2005 ). "Care Provision in Housing With Supportive Services: The  Importance of Care Type, Individual Characteristics, and Care Site." Journal of Applied  Gerontology 24  (1 ): 5567       Rog, D., Randolph, F. (2002). "A multisite evaluation of supported housing: Lessons learned from  crosssite collaboration." New Directions for Evaluation 94: 61­72.    Rosenheck, R., Kasprow, W., Frisman, L.,  LiuMares, W. (2003). "Costeffectiveness of Supported  Housing for Homeless Persons With Mental Illness." Archives of General Psychology 60: 940951.    Trainor, J. (2010). NIMBY from within: supported housing faces opposition from surprising  quarters. Crosscurrents. 14: 619.      VCH. (2007). Revised Supportive Housing Strategy for Vancouver Coastal Health's Mental Health  & Addictions Supportive Housing Framework., Vancouver Coastal Health (VCH).      Walker, R., Seasons, M. (2002 ). "Planning Supported Housing : A New Orientation in Housing for  People with Serious Mental Illness." Journal of Planning Education and Research 21: 313349.      Weisberg, S. (1994). "Housing policy for persons with mental illness in Ontario " Administration  and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research 21(3): 227228.    Wong, Y., Solomon, P. (2002). "Community Integration of Persons with Psychiatric Disabilities in  Supportive Independent Housing: A Conceptual Model and Methodological Considerations "  Mental Health Services Research 4(1): 1328.      Wong, Y., Hadley, T., Culhane, D.,  Culhane, S.,   Davis, M., Cirksey, B., Brown, J. (2006).  Predicting Staying in or Leaving Permanent Supportive Housing That Serves Homeless People  with Serious Mental Illness, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of  Policy Development and Research.      Wong, Y., Stanhope, V. (2009). "Conceptualizing community: A comparison of neighbourhood  characteristics of supportive housing for persons with psychiatric and developmental  disabilities." Social Science & Medicine 68 1376­1387 

98

  Yanos, P., Barrow, S., Tsemberis, S. (2004). Community Integration in the Early Phase of Housing  Among Homeless Persons Diagnosed with Severe Mental Illness: Successes and Challenges.  Community Mental Health Journal, 40, 2, 133150.     

99

