Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Two 19th Century Japanese Souvenir Travel Albums At The Art Gallery Of Ontario
Jenny Li
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Photography Commons Recommended Citation
Li, Jenny, "Two 19th Century Japanese Souvenir Travel Albums At The Art Gallery Of Ontario" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1145.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Two 19th Century Japanese Souvenir Travel Albums at the Art Gallery of Ontario

By Jenny Li Honours BA, York University, 2002 A thesis Presented to Ryerson University and Art Gallery of Ontario In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts In the Program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 ©Jenny Li 2009

Figure 1.

PROPERTY OF

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

Author's Declaration Page
1hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation.
1 authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

ii

Abstract
Two 19th Century Japanese Souvenir Travel Albums at the Art Gallery of Ontario Master of Arts 2009 Jenny Li Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University

This paper analyzes two nineteenth-century Japanese souvenir travel albums from the Art Gallery of Ontario's collection of photography. The project includes: a literature survey discussing sources and researchers of early photography in Japan; contextual research on the introduction of photographic technology in nineteenth-century Japan and the influence that traditional woodblock prints may have had on the genre of commercial souvenir photographs of Japan; and a detailed description of both albums with a potential attribution. Furthermore, the applied component of the project, which entailed documentation of both albums in the form of a catalogue of their 100 tinted albumen prints, is included as an appendix. The paper also provides recommendations for the optimal storage and preservation of both albums, as well as a housing solution. The cataloguing and housing of the two albums will enhance accessibility and facilitate future research of these albums.

iii

Acknowledgements
One of the most valuable resources in writing this thesis project has been the endless patience, encouragement, and editing skills of my thesis advisor, Sophie Hackett. The important advice and guidance provided by my second reader, Robert Burley, were significant to shaping this paper. The helpful comments and insights from Maia-Mari Sutnik were a great contribution to the development of this project. I would like to acknowledge our 'thesis team' of David Harris and Marta Braun for their brain- storming and ideas. 1would also like to thank Jack Howard at the Royal Ontario Museum for access to the Japanese albums in their collections and his assistance on the topic.

Dedication
I would like to dedicate this thesis to my lovely colleagues- Julienne Pascoe, Juli SheptytskyZall, Rebecca Streiman and Serra Erdem, this past year with you lovely ladies has been fantastic. I have learned so much from each of you and I look forward to our future travels. Thank you to my dad and brother for always supporting me, no matter what I decide to do. And last, but not least, thank you to my significant other, Scott Murphy, for cheering me on when things seemed impossible and always giving me a reason to smile.

iv

Table of Contents
Introduction ........................................................................................................ 1

Literature Survey .............··..........................·..·..·......·......··....·...·..·.....·............... 3 Photography in 19th Century Japan ..·...........·.·.·...·..·.·.·.........··......................·.·... 9 Tinting and the Relationship to Ukiyo-e Prints ...··..·.·.........·.·..··.....··.·..·..·....·.... 13
The Albums ....................................................................................................... 21

Description ........................................................................................................ 21 Attribution ........................................................................................................ 25 Cataloguing Methodology ................................................................................. 30 Physical Issues ................................................................................................... 33

Conclusion ........................................................................................................ 36
Append ices ............·...........·..·..·..................·...·.··..·....·.·....·..·..··.....·..·..·..·...··.... 38 A. Images ......................................................................................................... 38 B. Recommendations for Preservation and Storage ........................................ 54 C. Catalogue Listing of Both Albums ............................................................... 56 Bibliography ..·................................·............·.............................·..·.....·............. 70

v

List of Illustrations
Figure 1. Felice Beato (Ital ian 1833/4-1907) My Artist~ 1867-68 Albumen print 21.6 x 29.5 em The artist responsible for hand-coloring Beato's views of Japan holds a carte-de-visite. With the decline in popularity of the woodblock print (ukiyo-e), many artists turned to hand coloring 1 photographs for their livelihood Figure 2. Utagawa Kunisada (Toyokuni Ill) (Japanese 1786-1865) Girl amid autumn leaves from Lucky Days from a Decorative Calendar, 1844 Woodblock print 2 Private collection Figure 3. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Japanese woman with scarf and umbrella], 1880s Tinted albumen print 24.0 x 19.3 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.50 Figure 4. Utagawa Toyohiro (Japanese 1773-1828) Women cooling themselves at Shijogawara in Kyoto Woodblock print 3 Private collection Figure 5. Unknown
1

Clark Worswick, Japan: Photographs 1854-1905 (New York: Knopt 1979L 85. Richard llling, The Art of Japanese Prints (New York: Gallery Books, 1980L 81. Sadao Kikuchi and Don Kenny, trans. A Treasury of Japanese Wood Block Prints: Ukiyo-E (New York: Crown

2

3

Publishers, 1969L 49.

vi

(Japanese? 19th century) [Group of Japanese women sitting outside on mats], 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.2 x 24.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.40 Figure 6. Ando Hiroshige (Japanese 1797-1858) Evening Scene in Saruwakacho Woodblock print 4 Private collection Figure 7. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Busy street of shops in Osaka], 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.9 x 25.2 em AGO accession#: 2003/1372.9 Figure 8. Toyohara Chikanobu (Japanese 1838-1912) Boys sailing models boats on a pond, 1887 Woodblock print in triptych 5 Private collection Figure 9. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Japanese women with children in park], 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.3 x 24.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.43 Figure 10. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to]
4

1bid, 87. Donald Keene, Anne Nishimura Morse, and Frederic A. Sharf, Japan at the Dawn of the rvlodern Age: Woodblock

5

prints from the rv'leiji EraJ 1868-1912 (Boston: MFA Publications, 2001), 43.

vii

(Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of Kobe, Kioto ... }, 1880s 'oro-toned' print on lacquered cover, recto 31.8x4l.Ocm AGO accession#: 2003/1372 Figure 11. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of Kobe, Kioto ... }, 1880s lacquered cover, verso 31.8x4l.Ocm AGO accession#: 2003/1372 Figure 12. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 2 (views of Tokyo, Nikko, Yokohama}, 1880s three decorative inlays on lacquered cover, recto 31.0 x 40.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373 Figure 13. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 2 (views of Tokyo, Nikko, Yokohama}, 1880s lacquered cover, verso 31.0 x 40.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373 Figure 14. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of Kobe, Kioto ... ), 1880s 'oro-toned' print on lacquered cover, recto close-up of monogram 'LRB' AGO accession#: 2003/1372 Figure 15. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 2 (views of Tokyo, Nikko, Yokohama), 1880s three decorative inlays on lacquered cover, recto
viii

close-up of monogram 'LRB' AGO accession#: 2003/1373 Figure 16. and 16a. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) Nishi Otani at Kioto, 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.8 x 25.2 em AGO accession#: 2003/1372.19 Figure 17. and 17a. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) Rapid at Kioto, 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.9 x 25.2 em AGO accession#: 2003/1372.30 Figure 18. and 18a. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) Lake of Biwa from lshiyama, 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.8 x 25.2 em AGO accession#: 2003/1372.34 Figure 19. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Japanese woman chopping vegetable], 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.0 x 24.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.37 Figure 20. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) {Japanese woman in kimono (traditional Japanese garment) playing drum], 1880s Tinted albumen print 24.0 x 19.3 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.44
ix

Figure 21. Kusakabe Kimbei (Japanese 1841-1932) /maichi NikkoJ Road, 1880s Tinted albumen print 20.3 x 26.4 em 6 Hall Collection Figure 22. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) lmaichi Road Nikko, 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.9 x 25.2 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.17 Figure 23. Kusakabe Kimbei (Japanese 1841-1932) Fujiyama from TagonouraJ 1890 Tinted albumen print 20.2 x 26.4 em 7 Hall Collection Figure 24. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) Fujiyama from Tokaido, 1880s Tinted albumen print 20.0 x 25.1 em AGO accession#: 2003/1372.37 Figure 25. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of KobeJ Kioto .. .}, 1880s partially separated leather spine cover AGO accession#: 2003/1372
6

Catherine Crowston, ed. Koshashin: The Hall Collection of 19th Century Photographs of Japan (Edmonton: Art

Gallery of Alberta, 2009), 39.
7

1bid, 48.
X

Figure 26. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 2 (views of Tokyo~ Nikko~ Yokohama), 1880s missing section of leather spine covering AGO accession#: 2003/1373 Figure 27. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of Kobe~ Kioto ... }, 1880s buckled and warped album pages AGO accession#: 2003/1372

xi

Introduction
This thesis will explore the artistic, social and cultural dynamics surrounding the production of two souvenir travel albums of late nineteenth-century Japan in the photography collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario. Both albums have lacquered covers with a cherry blossom design and each album contains 50 tinted albumen prints. The monogram 'LRB' appears on both covers and there are no other handwritten inscriptions on or in either album. The tinted albumen images- most with captions -depict views and picturesque landscapes, architectural structures of historically significant sites in Japan, and staged scenes of Japanese people engaged in various activities. These souvenir albums are not the personal photographic memoirs of an individual traveler's journey to Japan but products of early commercial photographic studios in Japan catering to the burgeoning tourist industry. Tinted albumen prints of this type were the first glimpses of traditional Japanese culture that were available to the Western world. 8 My goals and approaches to these albums took different turns throughout the duration of this project and a lack of knowledge of the Japanese language as well as a lack of time limited my ability to pursue certain research possibilities. The objectives for this project became an assessment of available resources to understanding the historical context and academic viewpoints on the production of the two albums. I also sought to situate the photographic images within the pre-existing graphic visual environment of woodblock prints, to document

8

Clark Worswick, Japan: Photographs 1854-1905 (New York: Knopf, 1979}, 131.

1

the provenance and exhibition history of the albums, and to posit a potential attribution for the creator of the albums. The literature survey of resources on the beginnings of photography in Japan includes only works that are available in English. Hence, this is a representation of European and North American perspectives on the history of photography in Japan rather than a Japanese viewpoint. Researchers of nineteenth century photography in Japan incorporate diverse methodologies in their study and I outlined their academic views. This paper includes a physical description with an analysis of the condition and attendant conservation issues of the two albums. Recommendations for preservation and storage are included in the Appendix B. Recommendations for Preservation and Storage. I also completed a cataloguing of the two albums and their prints. The cataloguing of the 100 tinted albumen prints was finished in April 2009 and the full listing is in Appendix C. Catalogue Listing of Albums. The addition of a detailed inventory of the two Japanese albums to the AGO database makes these albums more available to future researchers and facilitates their further study. Through the contextual research and the applied component, this project has accomplished a better understanding of the production of the two Japanese souvenir albums and their cultural and artistic environment. It has also increased their accessibility for those who may wish to continue an investigation of similar photographic objects.

2

Literature survey
During the course of this project, I have encountered significant obstacles to researching the history of photography in Japan. One of the major difficulties of studying any non-Western history of photography is a language barrier and lack of accessibility to civic and genealogical records. As a result, this survey is limited to publications written in the English language and does not access a Japanese perspective on the history of photography in Japan. While these restrictions may impose some limitations, there are also many good sources of published information by recognized researchers. In Japan: Photographs 1854-1905, published in 1979, Clark Worswick chronicles the lives and careers of now well-known early European and Japanese photographers in Japan. The profession of photographers such as Felice Beato, Baron Raimund von Stillfried, Kusakabe Kimbei and Ogawa lsshin is described along with the political, cultural and social climate of late nineteenth-century Japan. There are examples of the photographers' works with biographical information and an account of their photographic practice. To this day, Worswick's portrayal and compilation of Japanese photography in the nineteenth-century is a seminal work, which I would recommend as a starting point for a researcher studying this topic. Captain Francis Brinkley (1841-1912) amassed the most thorough collection of photographs of Japan during the late nineteenth-century and published a 10-volume set in 1897 titled Japan, Described and Illustrated by the Japanese. Brinkley was born in Ireland and traveled to Japan as an assistant officer to the Japanese Embassy in 1867. His numerous visits to Japan inspired him to such a degree that he eventually decided to live the rest of his life in the country. During Brinkley's time in Japan, he became the publisher and chief-editor of Japan
3

Mail, one of three English-language newspapers in Yokohama in the Meiji period. He also had a
passionate interest in collecting Japanese works of fine art including photographs. While I have not had the opportunity to see Brinkley's volumes documenting Japanese artwork in person, the Hood Museum of Art, Dartmouth College holds an entire set in their collection and a selection of images is available through the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's series of online essays titled Visualizing Cultures.
10

9

In the 1980s, a new western interest in Japanese photography appears in the form of many new exhibitions with accompanying publications. There are a number of published exhibition catalogues dating from this period and they articulate the beginnings of the North American academic study of the history of photography in Japan. Exhibition catalogues such as
A Timely Encounter: Nineteenth-Century Photographs of Japan, published in 1988 by editors

Melissa Banta and ~usan Taylor, A Century of Japanese Photography, published in 1980 by John W. Dower and Once Upon a Time: Visions of Old Japan. Photographs by Felice Beato and Baron
Raimund von Stillfried, published in 1986 by Chantal Edel, begin to establish an awareness of

nineteenth-century Japanese photographs as material objects of significant historical and cultural value, warranting further academic study as opposed to images used solely for reference.

9

James E. Hoare "Captain Francis Brinkley (1841-1912) : Yatoi, Scholar and Apologist". In Britain & Japan:

Biographical Portraits, Vol. Ill, edited by James E. Hoare, (London: Japan Library, 1999), 102.
10

A selection of images from Captain Francis Brinkley's 10-volume set titled Japan can be viewed online through

the Massachusetts Institute of Technology series of websites titled "Visualizing Cultures", 2008. http://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/21f/ 21f. 027/hom e/i ndex.htm l.

4

In the early 2000s, a number of books and articles appeared concentrating on different aspects of early photography in Japan; they focus on subjects such as the commercial photography studio market in Meiji era
11

Japan, and Japanese culture and Westernization as

reflected in these types of images. From what I have found, there are generally two approaches to understanding and interpreting the works produced in the early years of photography in Japan. One of the approaches focuses on attributing authorship to photographic images- essentially, a connoisseurship approach. British writer and leading expert on early Japanese photography, Terry Bennett, has undertaken extensive research in this vein and has published numerous works such as Early Japanese Images in 1995, Old Japanese
Photographs: Collectors' Data Guide in 2006, Photography in Japan 1853-1912 also in 2006,

along with many contributions to anthologies on the topic.

12

A connoisseurship study such as

Bennett's seeks to understand a photographer's vision, describes and analyzes their style, and establishes whether their work was typical or unusual for the period of their career. This is not easy to undertake when taking into consideration the numerous photography studios and practicing photographers in Japan during this period.
11

Experts in the field have used different

means to attribute the authorship of these images, referencing early publications, studio numbering systems, photographic styles and the re-use of props and photographic

11

The period from 1868 to 1912 in Japan is referred to as the Meiji era and translates to the "Enlightened" era for

this was when Japan undertook drastic measures to modernize the country.
12

Terry Bennett has also contributed articles to monographs and exhibition catalogues, such as Pierre Joseph

Rossier, Photographe: Une f'v'lemoire Retrouvee published in 2006, and also Koshashin: The Hall Collection of 19th Century Photographs of Japan, published in 2009.

5

backdrops."

13

One can more easily attribute souvenir travel albums as the products of a

specific studio, but the prints within could have been the work of any number of working photographers. The sale of a photography studio often included its stock of negatives as part of the transaction . This meant that entire collections of negatives would be included in the repertoire of images for a newly bought studio. Albumen prints were usually unsigned and were instead inscribed with an identifying number and a descriptive title. Bennett has created a valuable resource by ascribing glass plate negative numbers to specific photographers. Unfortunately, his list does not include the negative numbers in the AGO albums. This inability to match the images or numbering systems speaks to the multitude of photographs available from the many photographers during the period. In the two AGO albums, the variety of numbering systems, fonts for the captions and styles of composition indicate the photographs were created by multiple makers. The other approach to investigating early photography in Japan is studying the social and cultural environment surrounding the production of photographic images. The critical argument put forth by such researchers as Dartmouth University professor, Allen Hockley, is that it would be impossible to verify the attributions of photographic images due to the profusion of prints produced by numerous photographers for many competing photography studios, as well as the mergers of collections from various photographic studios. Hockley has

13

Arlene Haii"The Hall Collection". In Koshashin: The Hall Collection of 19th Century Photographs of Japan, edited

by Catherine Crowston (Edmonton: Art Gallery of Alberta, 2009), 11.

6

published articles such as ~~Expectation and Authenticity in Meiji Tourist Photography" 14, "Packaged Tours: Photo Albums and Their Implications for the Study of Early Japanese Photography"
15

and ~~Globetrotters' Japan: Foreigners on the Tourist Circuit in Meiji Japan"

16

.

Hockley's research highlights the original function of Japanese travel albums by describing the nature of the tourist industry in Japan during the late nineteenth-century, as well as how foreign travelers may have perceived these photographic representations of Japan. His writing and inquiries are an important interpretation of the different types of images that were available, the reasons for how they appeared and how they appealed to tourists. Other books on photography in Japan are generally concerned with a particular collection within a gallery or museum. These types of books include introductory essays, which outline historical information about Meiji era Japan and early photographers in Japan during this period. lsobel Crombie's Shashin: Nineteenth-Century Japanese Studio Photography published in 2004 displays the collection of prints from the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne and focuses its analyses on the types of staged studio photographs. Sebastian Dobson's collection of essays published in 2004 in Art and Artifice: Japanese Photographs of the
Meiji Era provides detailed and insightful articles on Japanese souvenir albums of the
I

nineteenth-century. This compilation of essays on the Frederic A. and Jean S. Sharf collection at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston is particularly relevant to the two Japanese albums at the
14

Published in Challenging Past and Present: The rvletamorphosis of Nineteenth-Century Japanese Art, edited by

Ellen P. Conant (Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 2006}, 114-131.
15

Published in Reflecting Truth: Japanese Photography in the Nineteenth Century, edited by Nicole Coolidge

Rousmaniere and Mikiko Hirayama (Amsterdam: Hotei Publishing, 2004), 66-85.
16

Accessed at http ://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/21f/21f.027 /gt japan people/gal essayOl.html.

7

AGO due to their similarities. The essayists create an awareness of the significant role that photography played in the beginnings of the tourist industry in Japan through their research on and analysis of the production of photographs and travel albums by photography studios of that period . This literature survey has brought together works in the English language that directly investigate photographs from Japan in the nineteenth-century and published in the span of two decades before and almost a decade after the twenty-first century. Future researchers of this topic might consider delving into sources written and published in the nineteenth-century to gain a better account of how writers of that era perceived photographs of Japan.

8

Photography in 19th century Japan
In the mid-nineteenth century, there was a heightened eagerness in the West to become familiar with the history and traditions of Japan. For over the previous two centuries, Japan had been under a self-imposed isolation policy and severely limited the contact of its citizens with foreigners. In 1639, a new policy of isolationism, sakoku (closed country), was implemented, fueled by a fear of western culture- specifically the influence of Christianity. During this period, sakoku prohibited Japanese people from leaving Japan and forbade the entry of foreigners, with the exception of some limited and closely supervised exchanges with Dutch and Chinese traders at the island of Deshima in Nagasaki Bay. 17 It was through Dutch traders at Deshima that the first camera arrived in Japan in 1848. The camera was purchased by Ueno Shunnojo, a wealthy merchant from Nagasaki and was sold a year later to Shimazu Nariakira, a powerful lord of the Satsuma domain. While there was some experimentation with the camera, there is no record that they made real progress towards understanding photographic technology or producing lasting images.
18

The closure of Japan to the world lasted until July 8, 1853, when Commodore Matthew Perry of the United States Navy sailed into Tokyo Bay with four American warships. When faced with superior American military technology, Japan was compelled to sign a trade treaty with the United States a year later, which effectively ended their two hundred and fifty year seclusion. Artist and daguerrean, Eliphalet Brown Jr. (1816-86) accompanied the Perry mission
17

Clark Worswick Japan: Photographs 1854-1905 (New York: Pennwick/Knopf, 1979), 130. Terry Bennett "Japanese Photography: From Daguerreotypes to Souvenir Albums". In Koshashin : The Hall

18

Collection of 19th Century Photographs of Japan, edited by Catherine Crowston (Edmonton: Art Gallery of Alberta,

2009), 16.

9

as the official photographer. Although he created some 400 daguerreotypes, unfortunately only six, dated to 1854, survive today. Smaller groups of American, British and European traders traveled to Japan with the intent of striking trade agreements and brought with them cameras and photographers to document their efforts. Museum and gallery collections have been able to preserve and locate only a handful of known images of Japan from this period of 1855 to 1859.
19

In the years after Commodore Perry's entrance into Japan, the country experienced dramatic upheaval in all sectors of society. Basil Hall Chamberlain remarked in 1890 on the rapid rate of modernization that Japan underwent during the Meiji era:
'7o have lived through the transition stage of modern Japan makes a man feel preternaturally old: for here he is in modern times, with the air full of talk about bicycles and bacilli and "spheres of influence," and yet he can himself distinctly remember the Middle Ages. The dear old Samurai who first initiated the present writer into the mysteries of the Japanese language, wore a queue and two swords. This relic of feudalism now sleeps in Nirvana. His modern successor, fairly fluent in English, and dressed in a serviceable suit of dittos, might almost be a European, save a certain obliqueness of the eyes and scantiness of beard. Old things pass away between a night and a morning. The Japanese boast that they have done in thirty or forty years what it took Europe half as many centuries to accomplish. Some even go further, and twit us Westerns with falling behind in the race. "20

The period that followed the influx of Western technology and ideas into the Japanese feudal system led to a time of enormous turmoil and transformation, both politically and socially. The introduction of photographic technology into Japan happens during a time of increasing openness to modern ideas but also, inversely, a yearning to preserve and revitalize old traditions.

19

Ibid, 17. Basil Hall Chamberlain, Japanese Things {Vermont: Charles E. Tuttle Co., 1971), 1.

20

10

A photographer for the London firm Negretti and Zambra, Pierre Rossier, made the first commercial images of Japan for stereographic views between 1859 and 1861.
21

Soon after this

period, a growing number of commercial photographic studios began to establish themselves at the treaty ports. Two famous Japanese studios were set up in 1862, following the opening of previous photographic enterprises initiated by American owners and sold to Japanese photographers. One in Yokohama belonged to Shimooka Renjo {1823-1914), who is today considered in Japan as the 'father of Japanese photography'. With his studio in Nagasaki, Ueno Hikoma {1838-1904) is the other noteworthy figure of early Japanese photography.
22

The prints in the two souvenir photograph albums of Japan in the AGO are tinted albumen prints and hand-colouring has been applied to the full surface of the photographs. Well-known British and Italian photographer, Felice Beato (1833/4-1907) is credited for initiating the use of hand tinting on albumen prints of Japan in the late 1860s by hiring a local artist for this subtle and painstaking work.
23

Beato opened his photographic enterprise in

Yokohama around July 1863 and in 1877, he sold his stock of negatives to his competitor, Baron Raimund von Stillfried {1839-1911). Stillfried was an Austrian nobleman who had traveled widely in Asia and by early 1885, sold his business to the Italian-American, Adolfo Farsari {184198). Farsari's studio was one of the last foreign studios to compete with the dominant

21

Terry Bennett "Son Peri pie en Extreme-Orient". In Pierre Joseph Rossier, Photographe: Une f'v'Jemoire Retrouvee,

by Terry Bennett, Gerard Bourgarel and David Collin (Freiburg, Switzerland: Pro Fribou rg, 2006), 7.
22

Terry Bennett "Japanese Photography: From Daguerreotypes to Souvenir Albums". In Koshashin : The Hall

Collection of 19th Century Photographs of Japan, edited by Catherine Crowston (Edmonton: Art Gallery of Alberta,

2009), 18-9.
23

Clark Worswick, Japan: Photographs 1854-1905 (New York: Knopf, 1979), 132.

11

Japanese studios. His employment of clever marketing strategies and emphasis on quality ensured his commercial success. Kusakabe Kimbei (1841-1932) was a former student of Beato and Stillfried and in 1880, opened his first studio in Yokohama. 24 Souvenir albums from the studios of Farsari and Kimbei are considered some of the best examples of photographic work from this time. The flurry of commercial photographic activity in Japan in these early years makes it very difficult for researchers today to ascertain firm attributions for specific images. This summary includes only those names that are often noted in association with the history of photography in Japan and acknowledges that there were many more photographers working during this period who are not discussed.

24

Terry Bennett "Japanese Photography: From Daguerreotypes to Souvenir Albums". In Koshashin: The Hall

Collection of 19th Century Photographs of Japan, edited by Catherine Crowston (Edmonton: Art Gallery of Alberta,

2009), 23-7.

12

Tinting and the relationship to ukiyo-e prints
The intricately tinted photographic albumen prints of late 19th century Japan are a pleasure to view and are often remarked upon for their elegant charm. While photographic technology could not yet render full color images for a mass market in the 1880s, the practice of tinting albumen photographs with various dyes and pigments was a common method by which photography studios could appease their consumers' desires for color in their photographic images. In Europe and North America, common techniques included adding a pink blush to the subjects' cheeks or highlighting a detail on a piece of clothing or jewelry such as gold buttons on a gentleman's jacket or a lady's brooch.
25

Details of the sitter's hair and eye

color were also often tinted but could only be as accurate as the photographer's assistant's records. This manner of coloring photographs is seen in photographic objects varying from daguerreotypes to cartes-de-visite and began as attempts to increase the verisimilitude of the photograph and to overcome its "mechanical" coolness through hand-work. In the West, this practice would serve to bring the photograph more in line with what we see, rather than in Japan where the practice of tinting sought to bring photographs in line with a pre-existing pictorial tradition, that of woodblock prints. Where the application of color to photographs in the West was careful and modest, in Japan tint was applied to the overall surface of albumen prints to create full colour compositions. The application of color in these prints not only highlights fine details but uses subtle shades and tones of color throughout the photographic image to bring out depth and
25

James M. Reilly, Care and Identification of 19th Century Photographic Prints (Rochester: Eastman Kodak

Company, 1986}, 37.

13

realism. A significant reason for this vast difference in tinting practices between the West and Japan is attributed to Japan's centuries old traditional craft of woodblock printing. The unique cultural and artistic characteristics of the pre-existing graphic visual culture in 19th century Japan created a fascinating environment for the introduction of photographic technology. While the tools of photography were new to a Japanese understanding of image making, the practice and distribution of woodblock prints had been flourishing in Japan as far back as the seventeenth-century. Books produced through the woodblock printing method from Chinese Buddhist temples were seen in Japan as early as the eighth-century; these are considered the earliest examples of Japanese woodblock printing. Thus, the concept of distributing reproducible and colourful images was well established by the 19th century in Japanese culture, and some sectors of the Japanese public- particularly the merchant classwould have been accustomed to such multi-colored images, known as 'ukiyo-e'. The term 'ukiyo' means 'floating world' and 'e' means pictures. The 'floating world' was the realm of Kabuki theatre, actors, beautiful women and pleasure seekers; it was considered an illusory and transitory world where hedonistic desires could be satiated. The 'ukiyo-e~ genre began in the Edo period (1603-1868), during a time of a strong, highly integrated feudal system and a time of unprecedented peace in Japan. This social condition fostered the growth of a skillful and affluent merchant class. "The merchants, however, suffered under the oppression of the feudal authorities. They had no true freedom, and the full development of their financial strength was severely obstructed, with the result that mercantile wealth was largely

14

squandered in extravagant and unproductive ways."

26

With no contact with the world outside

of Japan and a stifling political environment, the mercantile class during the Edo period found many ways to amuse themselves, and ukiyo-e prints were the graphic art of that social sphere. The subjects and craft of ukiyo-e woodblock prints were not considered those of fine art, nor did the prints have a high monetary value. (Even in recent years, woodblock prints produced during this period were relatively accessible to the avid collector due to their broad and abundant distribution, and affordable price.) Such prints would also have been a readily available source for early entrepreneurial European photographers in Japan such as Felice Beato and Baron Raimund von Stillfried, and might have inspired their photographic practices. Beato was the first photographer to employ a local woodblock print artist to colour his photographic prints and the practice of tinting caught on in other photographic studios. As Japanese apprentices began to learn the skills of photography and develop their own studios, the art of the woodblock print slowly declined. Those colorists who had lost employment in woodblock printing studios regained positions as colorist in the new market of photography studios.
28 27

Beato even photographed the local Japanese artist responsible for

coloring the photographic prints from his studio as shown in the image in Figure 1.

26

Seiichiro Takahashi and Richard Stanley-Baker, trans., Traditional Woodblock Prints of Japan (New York:

Weatherhill, 1972), 9.
27

Clark Worswick, Japan: Photographs 1854-1905 (New York: Knopf, 1979), 129. Terry Bennett "Japanese Photography: From Daguerreotypes to Souvenir Albums". In Koshashin : The Hall

28

Collection of 19th Century Photographs of Japan, edited by Catherine Crowston (Edmonton: Art Gallery of Alberta,

2009), 26.

15

Many have remarked on the similarities of style, subject, composition and colouring between ukiyo-e prints and tinted albumen prints of 19th century Japan. Both image-making processes were commercial businesses creating products for audiences wanting a respite from the monotony of their daily lives. The major difference between them was that photography was introduced and established by early European photographers. Their aim was to market their images to Western travelers who wanted souvenirs of their visit to exotic Japan and to export products to armchair tourists abroad. Woodblock prints, on the other hand, were designed by skilled Japanese artisans for a Japanese merchant class stagnating under a strict feudal system. Photographs and prints were also understood to have different qualities. The following quote describes a comic sketch from a weekly journal in 1887 portraying the divergence between Western photography and Japanese woodblock printing.
u ··. a figure in Western attire personifying photography, in the form of a framed photo of a courtesan modishly seated in a chair, is put on the defensive by a stick-wielding Japanese representing a bundle of color woodblock prints that depict conventional standing courtesans. "I show only the truth," says the photograph. ul dislike mistakes. No matter how many years pass, I am still interesting to look at." The print responds: "I make beautiful women and other things look more beautiful than they really are by means of illustrated books and sets of prints. You can't knock me down." Here the victor is

unclear because both have their good points: realism versus idealization."

29

During this period of common circulation, despite the significant disparities in target audiences and in perceived character, many of the photographic and ukiyo-e images from this period share a remarkable resemblance. The idealized fantasy world of woodblock prints permeated photography and a certain documentary impulse found its way into ukiyo-e. In the

29

Julia Meech-Pekarik, The World of the f\!leiji Print: Impressions of a New Civilization (New York: Weatherhill,

1986}, 101.

16

three pairs of images illustrated in figs. 2 to 7, on the left is a woodblock print and on the right is a tinted photograph from the albums at the AGO. As one can see, there is an obvious resemblance from the prints on the left to the set of images on the right. The woodblock print shown in fig. 2 is dated 1844 and incorporates intricate detailing that might not be expected from a woodblock print. Each addition of a new color requires the carving of a new piece of wood and by the mid 19th century, woodblock prints had reached a level where a single print could include up to 20 layers of printing. The more colors and details introduced into a print also increased the risk of misaligned registration. The colors in the prints are perfectly in place and each separate shape is clearly outlined in black, indicating the success of woodblock printing's registration technique. In fig. 3, the tinted print from the AGO album, likely made in the mid-1880s, the Japanese woman wears a blue scarf wrapped in a similar style around her head and carries an umbrella in her hand. Studio scenery places her outside and standing amidst winter elements. There is no attribution provided for the photographic print as one has not yet been determined but by placing these two similarly composed images side by side, it can be seen how the preceding woodblock prints could have inspired the later photographic image. The next pair of images (see figs. 4 and 5) that follow are interesting for their likenesses in subject and composition. The woodblock print portrays a group of women in the traditional Japanese dress of kimono, sitting on a dock over water and enjoying a leisurely meal while playing a musical instrument. Their body language and robes are as flowing and languid as the body of water surrounding them. The tinted photographic print of a similar scene where a group of women in kimono are gathered together and sitting on a dock by the water does not

17

convey the same atmosphere of relaxation as the woodblock print. Their backs are upright and erect while the lake is flat, and the straight lines and angles of tiles and beams cross through the image. The idea for the composition of the photograph could have been drawn from the woodblock print but is lacking in the ease that it conveys. Between these two images, it can be surmised that the interpretation of a pleasurable scene in a woodblock print can lose its initial mood when recreating it for photographic documentation. Street scenes are a staple of souvenir photography; they provide travelers with a reminder of streets they would have visited during their journey through the country and portray locals going about their daily activities. In the woodblock print on the left (see fig. 6), the street scene is set in the evening which would have been next to impossible to recreate in a photograph of the mid 19th century due to the need for sufficient light. The tinted photographic print in fig. 7 is typical of prints from glass-plate negatives for the small details that it records. What is normally not seen in this type of souvenir photography are signs of the modernization that was sweeping across Japan. Yet in this image there are Western style umbrellas rather than bamboo parasols, electric wires strung across the street and in the lower right-hand corner, a Japanese man is dressed in a Western style hat and suit. As commercial photography studios re-staged and documented the feudal lifestyle that was quickly vanishing from Japan, woodblock print makers addressed the modernization that was spreading throughout the country. {{Consequently, an entire genre, developed first by European photographers, then further adapted by Japanese photographers, was preserved by

18

its popularity outside of the country whose life it captured." 30 As Japan made progress on its goal of modernization, later Japanese owned photography studios were criticized by the Japanese public for continuing to disseminate outdated images of a feudal era Japan, which by that time was being brought to a conclusion, for their financial profit. 31 Instead the modernization of Japan is seen in the traditional Japanese craft of woodblock printing. It is a situation of inversions where an old feudal Japan of classic geisha beauties, picturesque landscapes and fierce samurai are portrayed in the modern Western technology of photography, and the new Westernized dress, architecture, technology and social customs of Japan is represented in traditional woodblock prints. An example of this inversion can be seen in figs. 8 and 9. The first is a woodblock print in a triptych, showing a family enjoying a day at the pond. The Japanese women are dressed in Victorian outfits with bustles, corsets and elaborate bonnets. The men are in Western style military suits with buttons, medals and caps. The scene is a cheerful one where young boys are about to place their toy sailboats onto the pond. In contrast, the tinted photographic print in fig. 9 from the AGO albums shows two Japanese women in kimono carrying their young children on their backs. They stand in a sparsely treed park and view the photographer with an unreceptive gaze. The sense of gaiety and joy in the woodblock print has not been re-produced in the family scene recorded by the photographic image. It would be difficult to reconcile the disparity between these two prints from the same period without an understanding of the audiences they each sought to attract.
3

°Clark Worswick, Japan: Photographs 1854-1905 (New York: Knopf, 1979), 131.
Terry Bennett Photography in Japan 1853-1912 (Tokyo: Tuttle Publishing, 2006), 225.

31

19

"Print artists avoided tradition as much as globetrotter photographers avoided modernity. While we might claim that these omissions constitute misrepresentation it is perhaps more prudent to see both cases as convincing testaments to the power of their respective markets. Print consumers celebrated Japan~s modernization; globetrotters visited Japan seeking a different vision- one that any smart businessman with a camera would only be happy to fulfi/1 ." 32
Woodblock print artists designed for a Japanese public and were subject to imperial censors. Great leaps in modernization were enacted in Japan due to the sweeping reforms undertaken by the Japanese government and the imposed positive attitude towards all things Western is reflected in the traditional art of the woodblock print. While Japan embraced photographic technology, as they did Western technology in general, photographers producing souvenir albums drew on a traditional style of images understood by the Japanese public to represent a fantasy world to create an idealized view of the feudal era in the final years of its existence. In the West, these images in travel albums came to be seen as documents of daily life in Japan.

32

Allen Hockley, "Foreigners on the Tourist Circuit in Meiji Japan" (from Globetrotters~ Japan: People, as part of

MIT series of online essays and images titled Visualizing Cultures, can be accessed at: http:/ /ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/21f/21f.027 /gt_japan_people/gal_essayOS.html)

20

The Albums Description
The two nineteenth-century souvenir albums of Japan are unique photographic objects in their appearance and production. A detailed physical description of both albums can provide clues to their origins. In examining the historical context during which photographs were produced, an understanding of how, why and for what type of audience these images were created can be reached. Maia-Mari Sutnik, Curator of Photography at the AGO first came into contact with these albums for the exhibition she curated titled "19th Century Photographs of Japan: Western Visions, Japanese Identities". The exhibition opened in February (unconfirmed date), 1999 and closed April 25, 1999, and both albums were included, on loan from Toronto dealer and collector John Silverstein. The albums later came into the AGO collection in 2003 through Silverstein, one as a purchase [AGO Accession#: 2003/1372] and the other album as a gift [AGO Accession#: 2003/1373]. He acquired the albums from Swann Galleries in New York; unfortunately I was unable to obtain further details of the auction. 33 The front and back covers of both Album 1 and Album 2 are made of Japanese lacquer in a reddish-brown color with a cherry blossom design (see fig. 10, 11, 12 and 13). In the centre of the cover of Album 1 is an image of a deer on a tree-lined path (this image also appears within the album on page 5 with the inscription 'No. lOlA ENTRANCE TO KASUGA TEMPLE AT NARA.') as an 'oro' toned print on metal; it is a photographic image rendered in gold tones on a

33

Provenance and exhibition details obtained via email correspondence with Maia-Mari Sutnik, Photography

Curator at AGO.

21

metal plate. Centered above the gold-toned image the monogrammed initials 'LBR' are in gold and blue paint in a calligraphic style. While the initials may appear in the order previously stated, it would be more accurate to list the initials as 'LRB', as the centered 'B' is the biggest letter and likely stands for the last name of the individual who once owned these albums (see fig. 14). The cover of Album 2 contains decorative inlays of three different designs. The three designs are in a triangular arrangement with one inlay at the top portion of the album and the other two inlays at the lower portion of the album. The design of the decorative inlay on the top is of two cranes flying over bamboo leaves with the moon in the background encircled in gold. The design of the decorative inlay on the lower left portion is of a butterfly flying near a chrysanthemum branch against a blue background with the entire motif traced in a gold flowershaped outline. The design of the third decorative inlay on the lower right portion is of a lakeside mountain vista, most likely Mount Fuji, an extremely popular image, outlined in a gold scalloped pattern. To the left of the top decorative inlay, the monogrammed initials 'LRB' are in blue and gold paint in a calligraphic style (see fig. 15). Unfortunately, the initials 'LRB' inscribed on the covers of both albums are the only physical clues remaining of their previous ownership. There are no personal inscriptions or any other significant physical marks indicating who may have possessed them in the past. It would be difficult to trace their genealogy beyond Swann Galleries in New York and Silverstein. It would also be difficult to discern whether the purchaser of these albums had even traveled to Japan. Curiosity about Japan in the West during the late 19th century was so great that a thriving export market for Japanese objects developed. In the West, one could acquire many
22

souvenirs and mementoes of Japan without having to undertake the long trip to the country itself. Within each of the two lacquered albums are 50 tinted albumen prints. The prints have been mounted to both sides of each album page and each print is interleaved with tissue. The interleaving tissue in both albums is adhered to the card stock mount at the right side of the left print. The album pages are in generally good condition; they are gilded and of heavy-weight cardstock. The use of heavy-weight cardstock greatly enhances the ease with which albumen prints can be viewed. French photographer Louis-Desire Blanquard Evrard discovered the technique of developing photographic images on albumen paper in 1850. Part of the process is preparing the supporting paper which involves floating sheets of paper one at a time over a 'mousse' of albumen (beaten egg whites) and salt (sodium chloride). Once dried, the sheets of albumenized paper were sold and prepared for photo-sensitivity by the photographer. The photographer would place the albumenized sheets face down in a bath containing a 10% solution of silver nitrate, creating a light-sensitive layer of silver-chloride. Albumen paper prepared in this manner could not be kept for very long, and so the sensitization, exposure and development of the image often had to take place within the same day. The choice of paper in the albumen process is significant to the process; the selected paper had to be light enough so that it would not sink but float atop a bath of liquid albumen solution or the silver nitrate bath. The majority of these delicate albumen prints depict temples, shrines, and historic sites, natural scenic landscapes and popular regions in Japan such as Kobe, Kyoto, Tokyo, Nikko and Yokohama. The photographs in both albums are organized according to location. For instance, the main streets, temples, pagodas and gardens in Kyoto are grouped together. The next set

23

displays the roads and lakes of Hakone and give us viewers the sense that we are travelling through different regions of the island. The last 15 prints in Album 2 are of Japanese women in traditional dress modeling with musical instruments, enacting the tea ceremony and various other staged interior poses. While the organization is generally consistent, the format of the images themselves is not. Many prints include English captions, but there are 25 prints where the caption is absent. There is also a lack of uniformity in the captions, where the font is not always the same and the negative numbers preceding the title seem to be from unrelated numbering systems (see figs. 16a, 17a and 18a). There are dissimilarities in the framing of the photographs. In fig. 19, the subject of the tinted albumen print- a woman chopping a vegetable- is vignetted and the outline of the straw mat she is kneeling on can just barely be seen; she seems to hover suspended in the centre of the otherwise blank page. In fig. 20, the full size of the print is used and the woman posing with a drum is situated within a photography studio setup. The floor is covered with straw mats and the backdrop scenery is beginning to curl up at the bottom left-hand corner. While fig. 19 is the only image in the album that is framed with a vignette, the combination of this discrepancy and the different captions support the idea that the images in both albums were selected from a stock of works by different photographers.

24

Attribution
Confirming attributions to photographs in the field of nineteenth-century souvenir photographs of Japan is a difficult task due to the proliferation of photography studios and enterprising photographers during that period, who frequently bought and sold each other's businesses. The estimated date range for the production of these albums is based on physical observations and background research. The glossy sheen, yellow hue and finely weighted paper identify the prints as results of the photographic process known as albumen. The photographic process of albumen printing was most prevalently in use between the 1850s to the 1890s. To narrow the range of dates of creation for these albums, I referred to research on another collection of late nineteenth-century Japanese tinted photographs published in Art and
Artifice: Japanese Photographs of the rv'leiji Era on the Jean S. and Frederic A. Sharf collection at

the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston. In the essay "A Traveler's Paradise" by Frederic A. Sharf, an album cover
34

identical in design to the cover of Album 2 [AGO Accession#: 2003/1373] in the

AGO collection is attributed to the studio of Italian photographer Adolfo Farsari. An email to the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston inquiring on the origin of the attribution yielded a response from Anne Nishimura Morse, the William and Helen Pounds Senior Curator of Japanese Art. She explains that their album has "a title page in the form of a photograph showing text over photo-collage: "Japan, A. Farsari & Co., Yokohama." The photographs inside also are framed by thematic illustrations". Neither of the two albums at the AGO has a title page and none of the

34

Sebastian Dobson, Art & Artifice (Boston: MFA Publications, 2004), 12.

25

album pages are bordered with illustrations. Despite this, there are also other signs that these albums may have been from Farsari's studio. The cherry blossom design on reddish-brown lacquered covers and pattern of decorative inlays of the Sharf albums is consistent with the two 19th century Japanese albums at the AGO and with the appearance of albums that are identified as products of Adolfo Farsari's photography studio in Japan. Details about Farsari's life and work seem to further support this attribution. From the investigative work of Terry Bennett, a photography historian who has been the source of much information on the growth of photography from its primary introduction in Japan, published in Photography in Japan: 1853-1912, we have biographical details for many early European and Japanese practitioners of photography in Japan. About the photography studio of Adolfo Farsari, Bennett writes that Farsari began his commercial enterprise in photography in 1885. For a photography studio to open in the 1880s in the commercial photography market in Japan is considered relatively late when compared to early photographers who had established themselves in the market since the mid 1860s. The 1880s is considered a period of fierce competition in the market due to the introduction of the much easier to handle dry-plate process which fostered the opening of many new Japanese-run studios whose low prices were forcing Western studios out of business. Prior to starting a photography studio, Farsari ran a firm selling maps, guides and photographs of Japan to Western tourists. This early experience with sightseers would have prepared him for his future endeavor as the operator of a photography studio aimed at supplying foreign tourists with souvenirs; he would have been knowledgeable about the popular historical sites and familiar with local Japanese customs. He would also have been

26

attuned to travelers' tastes and buying preferences. At some time in 1885, Farsari set up his own studio. He acquired stock and photographic negatives which included work from Felice Beato and Baron von Stillfried, two of the earliest European photographers to extensively photograph Meiji era Japan. Farsari's initial commercial success was sadly shortlived, as a fire broke out in his studio in 1886 destroying all of his studio's equipment, including the inherited negatives of Beato and Stillfried. Not discouraged by this great loss of material, Farsari spent five months rephotographing scenic views of Japan and by the end of 1890, his studio had a staff of thirty-two employees and was a thriving success. His studio's success is due in large part to his insistence on a higher price for a higher quality product during a time of hastily produced items at a cheaper cost. One of the main selling points of his studio was the intricate and superior quality of coloring the photographic prints. This detailed attention to coloring is evident in the prints of both albums at the AGO. The hand-coloring, or tinting highlight even the smallest features photographically recorded within each print. Farsari is noted for his emphasis on training his colorists to accurately replicate the colors in the prints as they appeared in actuality.
35

While

colorists employed in other studios would turn out nearly forty prints a day, Farsari was satisfied with his colorists completing two or three prints per day. Rudyard Kipling wrote in 1889 " ... In Japan ... you must buy photographs, and the best are to be found at the house of Farsari & Co .... A coloured photograph ought to be an abomination. It generally is, but Farsari

35

Cortazzi, Hugh and G. Webb, eds., Kipling's Japan: Collected Writings (London: Athlone Press, 1988), 89.

27

knows how to colour accurately and according to the scale of lights in this fantastic country" .36 Luckily for Farsari and his photography studio, Japan was a country with a workforce of craftsmen skilled at elaborate hand-coloring from the popular native graphic art of woodblock printing. Based on existing research on the attribution for the album covers and a detailed biography of Adolfo Farsari, the production of these albums could be dated to between 1885 and 1886. This would be the period between when Farsari opened his photography studio with the bought negative stock of Beato and Stillfried which would account for the diversity in the image formats, and before the fire that destroyed Farsari's studio. An element that could place the production of these albums at a later date would be whether Farsari had somehow managed to salvage some of the negative plates he purchased from Beato and Stillfried. While the prints within these two albums at the AGO have not previously been published, similar views of Japan have been attributed to known photographers. From the Hall Collection of nineteenth-century Japanese photographs at the Art Gallery of Alberta, photographer Kusakabe Kimbei is attributed with many of the works. The attribution was possible as most were "found, numbered and named, on a list dating from the 1890s that documented the photographs available from the Kusakabe studio at that time".
37

The two

pairs of images (shown in figs.21, 22, 23 and 24) illustrate the photographing of popular sites by

36

Terry Bennett, Photography in Japan 1853-1912 (Tokyo: Tuttle Publishing, 2006), 219-23. Arlene Hall "The Hall Collection". In Koshashin: The Hall Collection of 19th Century Photographs of Japan, edited

37

by Catherine Crowston (Edmonton: Art Gallery of Alberta, 2009), 11.

28

Kusakabe Kimbei and the unknown photographers of prints in the two albums at the AGO. Each pair of images has in common matching landscape subjects with an identical framing and composition but where they differ is in the numbering systems and captions. Tree-lined lmaichi Road was the gateway to Nikko, which is the site of Japan's most famous historical landmark: the Toshogu Shrine (see figs. 21 and 22). Mount Fujiyama was one of the most admired subjects for souvenir photographs. Many commercial photographers in Japan during this period reproduced similar images using various numbers and captions of their own (see figs. 23 and 24).

29

Cataloguing methodology
The task of cataloguing and describing the albums and their prints is an important aspect to understanding the objects. It is a method of close description and recording which yields a greater comprehension of how the albums and their images are related. Initially my intention was to catalogue all the prints in both Japanese albums using the database program Filemaker Pro, but in the end, I decided to catalogue in Microsoft Excel. The program Filemaker Pro is aesthetically pleasing and enables the addition of a thumbnail image of the catalogue entry but the difficulties and anticipated problems that might arise when migrating the information into other databases is a valid concern. The suite of software programs offered by Microsoft seems to be a common and basic database management choice for galleries, museums and archives. Currently the AGO utilizes Microsoft Access to organize and make collections information available for the various objects in their considerable collection, and is in the process of migrating to a new database system, The Museum System (TMS). To reduce the risk of disrupting flow of information between database management systems during inevitable future migrations, and to conform to widely used programs, I opted to catalogue the albums and each of their 50 tinted albumen prints in Microsoft Excel. In determining the necessary fields that would be required to catalogue these albums, I consulted the Getty website for their standards of organization in Categories for the Description of Works of Art (CDWA). In addition, I also referred to the AGO's existing database fields as well as those used by the Mira Godard Study Centre at Ryerson University. The relevant database fields were mainly selected from the AGO's list of potential fields and supplemented with applicable fields from the Getty's extensive list. The Microsoft Excel spreadsheet titled 30

'album and prints.catalogue.xls' provides two ways of organizing the albums, one is at the exterior album level and the second is to describe each of the prints within the two albums.

The following is a list of fields used in cataloguing the albums and where each entry detail originates. AN- Accession Number: as provided by AGO AGO ID: as provided by AGO GRP- Donor: as listed in AGO files MO- Mode of Acquisition: as listed in AGO files LUI- Provenance: as listed in AGO files AR- Artist: unknown Creator Identity: Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-1889), due to similar album styles attributed to Farsari in Sebastian Dobson's Art and Artifice: Japanese Photographs of the Meiji

Era
Creator Role: owner and operator of photography studio in Japan, from Terry Bennett's research on biographical information of photographers in 19th century Japan Creation Place/Original Location: as listed in texts on the subject of 19th century photography in Japan Object/Work Culture: as listed in texts on the subject of 19th century photography in Japan Styles/Periods Indexing Terms: based on the known timeframe of the object Tl -Title: as titled in AGO database CTGY- Category: type of object Album Number: as numbered by cataloguer OT- Object Type: type of object with specific detail Album: HT- Height (em): from album Album: LE- Length (em): from album Album: DP- Depth (em): from album MED- Medium: from album MKSL- Marks and Labels: from album NTRLT -Inscriptions: as inscribed on album CAT- Cataloguer: cataloguer's initials are listed CD- Catalogue Date: date on which cataloguing completed CREM -Cataloguer Remarks: any remarks from cataloguer

The following is a list of fields for cataloguing the prints. AN- Accession Number: as provided by AGO AGO ID: as provided by AGO AR- Artist: various

31

CU-Culture: period and culture during which albums were produced CTGY- Category: from album Print: IHT- Image Height (em): from print Print: IWI- Image Width (em): from print MED- Medium: from print Album Number: as assigned by cataloguer Album Page Number: as penciled on album pages Tl -Title: as inscribed on bottom edge of print. If inscribed title does not appear on the print, a description of the print image is provided by cataloguer in square brackets MKSL- Marks and Labels: from print Location of caption on Print: as appears on print NTRLT- Inscriptions: as inscribed on print CAT- Cataloguer: cataloguer's initials are listed CD- Catalogue Date: date on which cataloguing completed CREM -Cataloguer Remarks: any remarks from cataloguer

32

Physical Issues
The current physical condition of both albums and the photographic prints within them is generally good. However, the spines of both have undergone major deterioration. This is likely due to the excess weight of the heavy weight gilded card stock used for the pages within the albums. The spine of Album 1
38

is made of leather with gold embossing and is in poor

condition; it is only barely attached to the perimeter edge of the album itself. The entire width of the leather cover protecting the spine is mostly separated from the album and the edges of the album pages underneath are exposed to the unpredictability of its surrounding environment. The leather spine itself is also undergoing Ired-rot' where it is crumbling and small pieces are flaking off (see fig. 25). Album 2's 39 gold-embossed leather spine is also in poor condition. The lower section of the leather piece covering the spine is completely missing from the album and the lower edges of the album pages underneath are exposed. The leather spine itself is undergoing Ired-rot' where it is crumbling and small pieces are flaking off (see fig. 26). In consultation with Katharine Whitman, Conservator of Photographs at the AGO, a temporary solution of using thin mat board and thick linen tape to secure the spines of both albums was devised. In order to prevent any further abrasion and to disperse the pressure from the ties, a thin mat board cut to the size of the album that can curve to the shape of the spine will be wrapped around them. Thick linen tape will be tied at intervals for even pressure. The albums will be housed in custom boxes, labeled /fragile spine', and viewing of both albums
38

AGO Accession#: 2003/1372. AGO Accession#: 2003/1373.

39

33

will be limited until the albums can be conserved. Future conservation treatments could entail re-binding or re-attaching a new spine cover and would require the expertise of a bookbinder. The front and back covers of both albums are in generally good condition with light scuffs and some deeper scratches due to mishandling or accidental mishaps. The scuffs, chips and scratches are a cosmetic concern and do not pose a threat to the structural integrity of the album. The conservation issue that arises with albumen prints is the problem of curling and rolling. The fine and lightweight papers that are necessary to the process cannot withstand the tension created by the albumen layer. If left unmounted, an albumen print will roll in on itself over time.
40

All tinted albumen prints in both Japanese albums were mounted onto heavy

weight card stock where the entire print has been pasted onto the card (en plein) so that the verso cannot be viewed. While the bulk of the card has posed problems for the integrity of the spine of the albums, they have kept the prints flat and the album structure has protected the photographs from physical and climactic shock. Today the heavy album pages are visibly buckled and warped though the prints are not yet affected. There is a minimal amount of foxing and dust on the album pages; the instances of foxing and dust shadows are concentrated on the outermost pages of the album (those pages which are closest to the front cover and back cover). The interleaving tissue is in generally good condition with minimal wrinkling and no tears or folded creases (see fig. 27).

40

Annabelle Simon, "Nineteenth Century Japanese Photography: Techniques, Conservation and Restoration,"

France, 1998, http://www.oldjapan.co.uk/article_techniques.html.

34

The tinted albumen prints are in generally good condition. The prints are securely adhered to the album pages, likely with a starch-based glue or paste; there are no tears, creases or separation issues with the corners. The photographs have retained their clarity and depth of detail. The colored dyes used in the hand-tinting process have faded somewhat from their original vibrancy but the tones and shades are still quite apparent and colourful. Generally the highest concentration of fading of both the photographic image and the color tinting that has occurred is focused on the outermost perimeter of each print.

35

Conclusion
While much has been written about early photography in Japan, there is much more that remains to be discovered. The photographs in the AGO albums represent only a miniscule portion of the vast number of tinted albumen prints that were produced and available in late nineteenth-century Japan. Most tinted albumen prints from this period have no attribution nor do they carry any hints of their creators. As researchers continue to investigate these types of images, more information on who made these images, and how, will surface. While our understanding of the far-reaching influence and malleability of photography deepens, continued exploration will also improve our understanding of the social, cultural and artistic impact of photographic technology. Both albums are photographic objects that were not solely borne from the import of Western photographic technology into Japan but they are objects strongly infused with Japanese aesthetics. The prevalent and preceding Japanese craft of ukiyo-

e, or woodblock printing would appear to be a significant element in the design, style and
composition of these souvenir images. Researchers of early Japanese souvenir photographs often note this striking similarity to ukiyo-e woodblock prints. By placing visual parallels of the woodblock prints and the tinted albumen photographs side by side, one can see the remarkable likenesses between the two diverse artistic traditions. The images in these albums enabled those who were curious about Japan to embark on a visual journey through its most scenic locales and attractions. Today we still travel to foreign lands through images and motion pictures yet these Japanese albums have retained their aura of mystery and allure. As time passes and the world continues to evolve, these two photographic albums continue to provide viewers with a glimpse into a country, an era, a 36

traditional culture and a way of making pictures for the commercial tourist industry that have faded away.

37

Appendices A. Images

Figure 2.

Figure 3.

Figure 2. Utagawa Kunisada (Toyokuni Ill) (Japanese 1786-1865) Girl amid autumn leaves from Lucky Days from a Decorative Calendar, 1844 Woodblock print Private collection Figure 3. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Japanese woman with scarf and umbrella], 1880s Tinted albumen print 24.0 x 19.3 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.50

38

Figure 4.

Figure 5.

Figure 4. Utagawa Toyohiro (Japanese 1773-1828) Women cooling themselves at Shijogawara in Kyoto Woodblock print Private collection Figure 5. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Group of Japanese women sitting outside on mats], 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.2 x 24.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.40

39

Figure 6.

Figure 7.

Figure 6. Ando Hiroshige (Japanese 1797-1858) Evening Scene in Saruwakacho Woodblock print Private collection Figure 7. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Busy street of shops in Osaka], 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.9 x 25.2 em AGO accession#: 2003/1372.9
40

Figure 8.

Figure 9. Figure 8. Toyohara Chikanobu (Japanese 1838-1912) Boys sailing models boats on a pond, 1887 Woodblock print in triptych Private collection Figure 9. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Japanese women with children in park], 1880s Tinted albumen print

41

19.3 x 24.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.43

Figure 10. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of Kobe, Kioto .. .), 1880s 'oro-toned' print on lacquered cover, recto 31.8x41.0cm AGO accession#: 2003/1372

42

Figure 11. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] {Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of Kobe, Kioto ... }, 1880s lacquered cover, verso 31.8x41.0cm AGO accession#: 2003/1372

43

Figure 12. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 2 (views of Tokyo, Nikko, Yokohama), 1880s three decorative inlays on lacquered cover, recto 31.0 x 40.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373

Figure 13. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 2 (views of Tokyo, Nikko, Yokohama), 1880s lacquered cover, verso 31.0 x 40.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373

44

Figure 14. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of Kobe, Kioto ... ), 1880s 'oro-toned' print on lacquered cover, recto close-up of monogram 'LRB' AGO accession#: 2003/1372

Figure 15. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 2 (views of Tokyo, Nikko, Yokohama), 1880s three decorative inlays on lacquered cover, recto close-up of monogram 'LRB' AGO accession#: 2003/1373
45

Figure 16.

Figure 16a. Figure 16. and 16a. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) Nishi Otani at Kioto, 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.8 x 25.2 em AGO accession#: 2003/1372.19

46

Figure 17.

Figure 17a. Figure 17. and 17a. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) Rapid at Kioto, 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.9 x 25.2 em AGO accession#: 2003/1372.30

47

Figure 18.

Figure 18a. Figure 18. and 18a. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) Lake of Biwa from lshiyama, 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.8 x 25.2 em
48

AGO accession#: 2003/1372.34

Figure 19. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Japanese woman chopping vegetable], 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.0 x 24.0 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.37

Figure 20. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) [Japanese woman in kimono (traditional Japanese garment) playing drum], 1880s Tinted albumen print

49
PROPERTY OF RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

24.0 x 19.3 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.44

Figure 21. Kusakabe Kimbei (Japanese 1841-1932) lmaichi Nikko, Road, 1880s Tinted albumen print 20.3 x 26.4 em Hall Collection

Figure 22.

so

Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) /maichi Road Nikko, 1880s Tinted albumen print 19.9 x 25.2 em AGO accession#: 2003/1373.17

Figure 23. Kusakabe Kimbei (Japanese 1841-1932) Fujiyama from Tagonoura, 1890 Tinted albumen print 20.2 x 26.4 em Hall Collection

51

Figure 24. Unknown (Japanese? 19th century) Fujiyama from Tokaido, 1880s Tinted albumen print 20.0 x 25.1 em AGO accession#: 2003/1372.37

Figure 25. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of Kobe, Kioto ... ), 1880s partially separated leather spine cover AGO accession#: 2003/1372

52

Figure 26. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 2 (views of Tokyo, Nikko, Yokohama), 1880s missing section of leather spine covering AGO accession#: 2003/1373

Figure 27. Adolfo Farsari [attributed to] (Italian 1841-98) Album 1 (views of Kobe, Kioto ... ), 1880s buckled and warped album pages AGO accession#: 2003/1372

53

B. Recommendations for preservation and storage
One of the main causes of deterioration to these albums is the penetration of air. Storing the album in a box of non-reactive materials in an environment of controlled temperature and humidity will reduce the exposure to oxidative elements and eliminate the majority of factors that are potential causes for deterioration. The following guide lists the most appropriate conditions for storage and exhibition, and also describes the most common signs of deterioration that appear on 19th century Japanese tinted albumen prints.
Recommended conservation conditions for 19th-Century Photographic Prints.

Relative Humidity: 30-40% Temperature: 18 ± 1QC Air Filtration for Particles Air Purification to Remove Oxidant and Sulphurant gasses Lignin and Acid Free Cellulose Materials Use only Cellulose Triacetate, Polyester (Polyethylene Terephthalate) and Polyethylene Plastics - no PVC (Polyvinyl Chloride) or any Materials containing Chlorine or Sulphur.
Recommended Lighting Conditions for the Display of Japanese 19th-Century Albumen Prints

Always use lights with UV Filter Protect against Sunlight Light Level: 50 Lux (5 foot-candles) Exhibition time not to exceed 250 hours.
Photochemical Damage to Hand-coloured Albumen Prints

Yellowing of the Albumen Protein Embrittling of the Cellulose Fading of Organic Pigments
54

Degradation of Lignin producing Substances which Stain Prints and Attack Silver Images Acceleration of Chemical Reactions
41

41

Annabelle Simon, "Nineteenth Century Japanese Photography: Techniques, Conservation and Restoration," France, 1998, http://www.oldjapan.co.uk/article_techniques.html.

55

C. Catalogue listing of both albums
Location of Typesetti ngon NTRLTInscriptions Print Album page: Album page:HT WIWidth Height (em) (em) Print: IHTImage Height (em) Print: IWIImage Width (em)

Album Album Numbe Page Number Tl- Title r

Inscribed on recto: '938 HARBOR OF

1

1 Harbor of Kobe

BR

KOBE.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 468 NUNOBIKI

30.5

38.7

19.8

25 .2

Nunobiki Waterfall

1

2 at Kobe

BL

WATER FALL AT KOBE.· Inscribed on recto: '948 NARA.' Inscribed on recto: '168A. SARUSAWA

30.5

38.7

25.0

19.8

1

3 Road to Nara

BR

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Sarusawa pond at

POND AT

1

4 Nara

BL

NARA.' Inscribed on recto: 'No.101A ENTRANCE TO KASUGA TEMPLE AT NARA.·

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Deer with antlers at entrance to Kasuga Temple at Nara [as on album

1 1 1

5 cover] 6 Forest path Religious 7 ceremony

BL

30.5 30.5 30.5

38.7 38.7 38.7

19.8 25.2 19.8

25.2 19.8 25.2

56

Castle overlooking

1

8 stone water basin
Inscribed on recto: 7GB Busy street of OSAKA

30.5

38.7

20.0

25.2

1

9 shops in Osaka

BL

STREET.' Inscribed on recto: '138A. YAAMI

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

Yaami Hotel at

HOTEL AT

1

10 Kioto

BR

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 622. GION

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Gion street at

STREET AT

1

11 Kioto

BR

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 600. CHIONIN

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

Stairs to Chionin

GATE AT

1

12 Gate at Kioto

BR

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 584.A CHIONIN TEMPLE AT

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Chionin Temple at

1

13 Kioto

BL

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 583. KIYOMIZU

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

Kiyomizu Temple

TEMPLE AT

1

14 at Kioto

BL

KIOTO.'

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

57

Inscribed on recto: '928 KIYOMIZU

1

15 Kiyomizu at Kioto

BR

AT KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 103A. KIYOMIZU

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

Kiyomizu Pagoda

PAGODA AT

1

16 at Kioto

BL

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: '915 (illegible) OZAKA AT

30.5

38.7

25 .2

19.9

1

17 Osaka at Kioto

BL

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: '922 SANJIYO AT

30.5

38.7

25.2

19.9

1

18 Sanjiyo at Kioto

BL

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: '228

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Nishi Otani at

NISHI OTANI

1

19 Kioto

BR

AT KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 627. NISHI

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Nishi Otani at

1

20 Kioto, 2

BL

OTANI AT KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: '924 MIKADO

30.5

38.7

25.2

19.9

Mikado Gate at

GATE AT

1

21 Kioto

BL

KIOTO.'

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

58

Inscribed on recto: '457 HONGANJI

1

22 Honganji Kioto

BL

KIOTO.'

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

Inscribed on recto: '1050 INTERIOR OF Interior of HONGANJI

1

23 Honganji Temple

BR

TEMPLE' Inscribed on recto: '108B. SANJIU

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.1

Sanjiu Sangendo at

SANGENDO

1

24 Kioto [Man and boy on
thickly forested

BL

AT KIOTO.'

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

1

25 path]
Inscribed on recto: '910 GINKAKUJI Ginkakuji Garden GARDEN AT

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.1

1

26 at Kioto

BR

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: '136A. BOOT PINE

30.5

38.7

25.2

19.8

Boot pine tree at

TREE AT

1

27 Kioto

BL

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: '917 KINKAKUJI

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Kinkakuji Garden

GARDEN AT

1

28 at Kioto

BR

KIOTO.

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

59

Inscribed on recto: '920 C KINKAKUJI Kinkakuji Garden GARDEN AT

1

29 at Kioto, 2

BR

KIOTO' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 102A. RAPID

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

1

30 Rapid at Kioto

Bl

AT KIOTO.'

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

Inscribed on recto: '171A. KATSURAGA Katsu ragawa WA RAPIDS

1

31 Rapids at Kioto

BR

AT KIOTO.'

30.5

38.7

19.5

25.0

Inscribed on recto: '901 HOZUGAWA, Hozugawa, a A RAPIDS, AT

1

32 rapids at Kioto

Bl

KIOTO.' Inscribed on recto: '1083 MIIDERA AT

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.0

1

33 Miidera at Otsu

Bl

OTSU' Inscribed on recto: '1084 Lake of Biwa

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

Lake of Biwa from

1

34 lshiyama

Bl

From lshiyama' Inscribed on recto: '1096 Large Pine

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Large pine tree at

1

35 Karasaki

Bl

Tree at Karasaki'

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.1

60

Inscribed on recto: 'SSSB. NAGOYA

1

36 Nagoya Castle

BL

CASTLE.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 1064 FUJIYAMA

30.5

38.7

19.7

24.9

Fujiyama from

FROM

1

37 Tokaido

BR

TOKAIDO.' Inscribed on recto: '617 ROAD AT

30.5

38.7

20.0

25.1

Road at

MIYANOSHIT

1

38 Miyanoshita

BL

A' Inscribed on recto: '616 ROAD AT

30.5

38.7

25.2

20.0

Road at

MIYANOSHIT

1

39 Miyanoshita, 2

BL

A' Inscribed on recto: '242 HAKONE, TOU, NO,

30.5

38.7

25.2

20.0

1 1

40 Hakone [Houses in 41 mountainside]

BR

SAWA.

30.5 30.5

38.7 38.7

19.9 19.8

25.1 25.2

Inscribed on recto: '619 ROAD AT

1

42 Road at Kiga

BR

KIGA'

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

61

Inscribed on recto: '631 Miyagino, near MIYAGINO,

1

43 Kiga

BL

NEAR KIGA' Inscribed on recto: '602 LAKE

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.3

1

44 Lake Hakone

BL

HAKONE'

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.1

Inscribed on recto: '1664. Fujiyama Fujiyama from from Hakone

1

45 Hakone Lake

BR

Lake' Inscribed on recto: '606 HAKONE

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

1

46 Hakone Lake

BL

LAKE' Inscribed on recto: '814

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.1

1

47 Hakone

BR

HAKON E.' Inscribed on recto: '815 UBAGO

30.5

38.7

19.8

24.8

1

48 Ubago Hakone

BR

HAKON E.' Inscribed on recto: 'OWAKI-

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

1

49 Owaki-Dani

BL

DAN I.' Inscribed on recto: '414 FUJI-YAMA FROM

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Fujiyama from

OTOME

1

so Otome Toge

BL

TOGE.'

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.3

62

Album Album Numbe Page r Number Tl- Title

Location of Typesetti NTRLTngon Inscriptions Print

Album page:HT Height (em)

Album page: WIWidth (em)

Print: IHTImage Height (em)

Print: IWIImage Width (em)

[Priest and boy next to bell in 2 1 front of entrance] Inscribed on recto: 'No. 217 2 2 Tokaido 30.5 38.7 19.9 25.2

BL

TOKAIDO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 138B MOAT

30.5

38.7

20.0

25.2

2

3 Moat at Tokyo

BL

AT TOKYO.' Inscribed on recto: '428 CHERRY BLOSSOMS

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Cherry Blossoms at 2
4 Uyeno Park

AT UYENO

BL

Wisteria [Girl sitting under wisteria next to 2 5 pond] Wisteria Blossoms [Mother and children under 2 2 6 wisteria] [Family on bridge 7 over pond]

PARK' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 498

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

BL

WISTERIA.' Inscribed on recto: '1253 WISTERIA

30.5

38.7

20.0

25.3

BR

BLOSSOMS'

30.5 30.5

38.7 38.7

19.8 19.9

25.2 25.2

Inscribed on recto: '277 2 8 Shiba Tokyo SHIBA TOKYO'

BR

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.1

63

Inscribed on recto: '538 SHIBA AT 2 9 Shiba at Tokyo, 2

BL

TOKYO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 143B TEMPLE AT

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

Temple at Shiba, 2 10 Tokyo Shiba at Tokyo, 2 [Man kneeling on front steps of 2 11 temple]

SHIBA,

BL

TOKYO' Inscribed on recto: '528 SHIBA AT

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.1

BR

TOKYO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 289 TIME BILLS AT

30.5

38.7

20.0

25.0

Time Bills at Tokyo [two boys on bell 2 12 tower]

BR

TOKIO.' Inscribed on recto: 'o. 1040A. TEMPLE AT

30.5

38.7

25.2

19.8

Temple at Uyeno 2 13 Park Tokyo

UYENO PARK

BL

TOKYO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 988 TAKINOGAW A NEAR

30.5

38.7

20.0

25.2

Takinogawa near Tokyo [couple on bridge over pond 2 14 in park]

BL

TOKYO.' Inscribed on recto: '263 TEA HOUSE

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

2

15 Tea House at Oji

BL

AT OJI.'

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

64

Inscribed on recto: '220 SENGAKUJI AT Sengakuji at 2 16 Shinagawa SHINAGAWA

BR

I

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Inscribed on recto: '743 IMAICHI lmaichi Road Nikko 2 17 [tree-lined road] [stone bridge over 2 18 river/stream] Inscribed on recto: 'No. 424 NIWOMON Niwomon Gate of 2 19 Nikko GATE OF 30.5 38.7 19.8 25.2 ROAD

BR

NIKKO.'

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

BR

NIKKO.' Inscribed on recto: '757 PAGODA AT

30.5

38.7

20.0

25.0

2

20 Pagoda at Nikko

BR

NIKKO.' Inscribed on recto: '713 MIZUYAAT

30.5

38.7

25.2

19.9

2

21 Mizuya at Nikko

BL

NIKKO.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 3 46 YOMEIMON

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Yomeimon Gate of 2 22 Nikko

GATE OF

BR

NIKKO.'

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

65

Inscribed on recto: '.658. MIKADO'S ROOM OF Mikado's room of interior at Nikko INTERIOR AT NIKKO

2

23 Temple

BL

TEMPLE.' Inscribed on recto: '711 STONE

30.5

38.7

19.5

24.5

Stone steps at

STEPS AT

2

24 Nikko

BL

NIKKO.' Inscribed on recto: '714 TOMB EAYASU

30.5

38.7

25.2

19.8

Tomb Eayasu

SHOGUN AT

2

25 Shogun at Nikko

BL

NIKKO.' Inscribed on recto: 'KAMAKURA

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Kamakura [road in

2

26 village]

BR

223'

30.5

38.7

19.5

25.5

Inscribed on recto: '574. Daibutsu at Kamakura [large DAIBUTSU AT

2

27 Buddha statue]

BL

KAMAKURA.' Inscribed on recto: 'No. 52B.REVER

30.5

38.7

19.8

25.2

Rever [sic] to

TO

2

28 Enoshima

BR

ENOSHIMA.'

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

Inscribed on

2

29 Enoshima

BR

recto: '1009. ENOSHIMA.'

30.5

38.7

20.0

25.2

66

Inscribed on recto: '164A BOYS Boys Fest iva I FESTIVAL
BL

2

30 Yokohama

YOKOHAMA'

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.0

Inscribed on recto: 'No. 439 THE 101 STONE The 101 Stone STEPS AT YOKOHAMA' Inscribed on recto: '984 MISSISSIPPIB AY Mississippi Bay YOKOHAMA. '

2

31 Steps at Yokohama BR

30.5

38.7

20.2

25.2

2 2

32 Yokohama 33 [Ships in harbor] [Interior of room
with mats and

BL

30.5 30.5

38.7 38.7

19.7 19.6

25.2 25.2

2

34 bonsai trees]

30.5

38.7

19.9

25.2

[Two Japanese women in kimono {traditional Japanese garment} bowing to each

2

35 other in room] [Two Japanese
women engaged in

30.5

38.7

19.3

24.0

2

36 tea ceremony]

30.5

38.7

19.3

24.0

67

2

[Japanese woman chopping 37 vegetable] [Japanese woman playing samisen (stringed musical 38 instrument)] [Japanese women playing samisen (stringed musical instrument) and 39 posing with fans] [Group of Japanese women sitting outside on 40 mats] [Japanese women wading in water 41 with baskets]

30.5

38.7

19.0

24.0

2

30.5

38.7

19.2

24.0

2

30.5

38.7

19.3

24.0

2

30.5

38.7

19.2

24.0

2

30.5

38.7

19.2

24.0

[Japanese women in kimono (traditional Japanese garment) being pulled in
2

jinrikisha 42 (rickshaw)] [Japanese women with children in
43 park]

30.5

38.7

19.3

24.0

2

30.5

38.7

19.3

24.0

68

2

[Japanese woman in kimono (traditional Japanese garment) 44 playing drum]

30.5

38.7

24.0

19.3

2

2

[Japanese woman arranging another 45 woman's hair] [Group of young Japanese boys dressed in 46 costume] [Japanese woman being carried in kago (sedan chair) 47 and two bearers] [Field workers picking from bushes with 48 baskets] Inscribed on recto: '1016 RICE PLANTING'

30.5

38.7

24.0

19.3

30.5

38.7

19.2

24.0

2

30.5

38.7

19.4

24.1

2

30.5

38.7

19.2

24.0

2

49 Rice planting

Bl

30.5

38.7

19.2

24.1

2

so

[Japanese woman with scarf and umbrella]

30.5

38.7

24.0

19.3

69

Bibliography
Photography in Japan
Banta, Melissa and Susan Taylor, eds. A Timely Encounter: Nineteenth-Century Photographs of Japan. Essays by Melissa Banta, Ellen Handy, Haruko Iwasaki, and Bonnell D. Robinson. Exhibition catalogue. Cambrige, Massachusetts: Peabody Museum Press, 1988. Bennett, Terry. Early Japanese Images. Michigan: Charles E. Tuttle, 1995. Bennett, Terry. Old Japanese Photographs: Collectors' Data Guide. London: Quaritch, 2006. Bennett, Terry. Photography in Japan 1853-1912. Tokyo: Tuttle Publishing, 2006. Bennett, Terry, Gerard Bourgarel and David Collin. Pierre Joseph Rossier, Photographe: Une Memoire Retrouvee. Freiburg, Switzerland: Pro Fribourg, 2006. Bonneville, Patrick. La Photographie Japonaise Sous L'Ere Meiji {1868-1912}. Paris: Les Editions de I' Amateur, 2006. Brinkley, Francis. Japan Described and Illustrated by the Japanese. Tokyo and Boston: Millet, 1897-98. Chamberlain, Basil Hall. Japanese Things. Vermont: Charles E. Tuttle Co., 1971. Crombie, lsobel. Shashin: Nineteenth-Century Japanese Studio Photography. Melbourne: National Gallery of Victoria, 2004. Crowston, Catherine, ed. Koshashin: The Hall Collection of 19th Century Photographs of Japan. Edmonton: Art Gallery of Alberta, 2009. Dobson, Sebastian, Anne Nishimura Morse and Frederic A. Sharf. Art & Artifice: Japanese Photographs of the Meiji Era. Boston: MFA Publications, 2004. Dower, John W. A Century of Japanese Photography. New York: Pantheon Books, 1980. Edel, Chantal and Linda Coverdale, trans. Once Upon a Time: Visions of Old Japan. Photographs by Felice Beato and Baron Raimund von Stil/fried. New York: Friendly Press, 1986.

70

Hight, Eleanor M. "The many lives of Beato's "beauties"." In Colonialist Photography: lmag(in)ing Race and Place, edited by Eleanor M. Hight and Gary D. Sampson, 126-158. New York: Routledge, 2002. Hoare, James E. "Captain Francis Brinkley {1841-1912): Yatoi, Scholar and Apologist". In Britain & Japan: Biographical Portraits, Vol. Ill, edited by James E. Hoare, 95-111. London: Japan Library, 1999. Hockley, Allen. "Expectation and Authenticity in Meiji Tourist Photography." In Challenging Past and Present: The Metamorphosis of Nineteenth-Century Japanese Art, edited by Ellen P. Conant, 114-131. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 2006. Hockley, Allen. Globetrotters' Japan: People. Foreigners on the Tourist Circuit in rvleiji Japan. http://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/21f/21f.027/gt_japan_people/gal_essayOl.html (accessed December 4/08). Hockley, Allan. "Packaged Tours: Photo Albums and Their Implications for the Study of Early Japanese Photography." In Rousmaniere, Nicole Cooldidge and Mikiko Hirayama, eds. Reflecting Truth: Japanese Photography in the Nineteenth Century, 6685. Amsterdam: Hotei Publishing, 2004. Lehmann, Jean-Pierre. The Image of Japan: From Feudal/solation to World Power, 1850-1905. London: Allen & Unwin, 1978. Sladen, Douglas. Japan in Pictures. London: Ballantyne Press, 1906. Tucker, Anne Wilkes. The History of Japanese Photography. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2003. Wilson, Alona C. Felice Beato's Japan: People- An Album by the Pioneer Foreign Photographer in Yokohama. (http://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/21f/21f.027 /beato_people/fb2_essay01.html) . Worswick, Clark. Japan: Photographs 1854- 1905. New York: Pennwick/ Knopf, 1979.
Woodblock Printing

Fenollosa, Ernest F. Epochs of Chinese and Japanese Art; Vol Two. New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1963. Hillier, Jack and Lawrence Smith. Japanese Prints: 300 Years of Albums and Books.

71

London: British Museum Publications, 1980. Hockley, Allen, curator. Inside the Floating World: Japanese Prints from the Lenoir C. Wright Collection. Greensboro: Weatherspoon Art Museum, 2002. llling, Richard. The Art of Japanese Prints. New York: Gallery Books, 1980. Keene, Donald, Anne Nishimura Morse, and Frederic A. Sharf. Japan at the Dawn Of the Modern Age: Woodblock prints from the rvJeiji Era, 1868-1912. Boston: MFA Publications, 2001. Kikuchi, Sadao and Don Kenny, trans. A Treasury of Japanese Wood Block Prints: Ukiyo-E. New York: Crown Publishers, 1969. Kobayashi, Tadashi and Mark A. Harbison, trans. Ukiyo-e. Tokyo: Kodansha International Ltd., 1982. Meech-Pekarik, Julia. The World of the Meiji Print: Impressions of a New Civilization. New York: Weatherhill, 1986. Mueller, Laura J. Competition and Collaboration: Japanese Prints of the Utagawa School. Boston: Hotei Publishing, 2007. Takahashi, Seiichiro and Richard Stanley-Baker, trans. Traditional Woodblock Prints of Japan. New York: Weatherhill, 1972. Till, Barry. Japan Awakens: Woodblock prints of the Meiji Period {1868-1912}. San Francisco: Pomegranate, 2008.
19th Century Travel in Japan

Brendan, Piers. Thomas Cook: 150 Years of Popular Tourism. London: Seeker & Warburg,1991. Ashmead, John. The Idea of Japan 1853-1895: Japan as Described by American and Other Travelers from the West. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc, 1987.
Hand-tinted Albumen Prints - Conservation

Henisch, Heinz K., and Bridget A. Henisch. The Painted Photograph 1839-1914: Origins, Techniques, Aspirations. Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1996.

72

Keefe, Jr., Laurence E. and Dennis Inch. The Life of a Photograph: Archival ProcessingJ MattingJ FramingJ and Storage. Boston: Focal Press, 1984. Reilly, James M. Care and Identification of 19th Century Photographic Prints. Rochester: Eastman Kodak Company, 1986. Simon, Annabelle. Nineteenth Century Japanese Photography: TechniquesJ Conservation and Restoration. France, 1998. (http://www.oldjapan.co.uk/articl e techniques .html) Weinstein, Robert A. and Larry Booth. CollectionJ UseJ and Care of Historical Photographs. Nashville: American Association for State and Local History, 1977.

73

