Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2011

Exhibiting Atrocity: A Preliminary Exhibition Proposal for the Kigali Genocide Memorial Centre's State Identification Card Portrait Collection
Sarah Munro
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Photography Commons Recommended Citation
Munro, Sarah, "Exhibiting Atrocity: A Preliminary Exhibition Proposal for the Kigali Genocide Memorial Centre's State Identification Card Portrait Collection" (2011). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1425.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Exhibiting  Atrocity:      A  Preliminary  Exhibition  Proposal  for  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre's     State  Identification  Card  Portrait  Collection        by        Sarah  Munro   Bachelor  of  Fine  Arts,  Ryerson  University,  2009            A  Thesis  presented  to      Ryerson  University   and   the  Art  Gallery  of  Ontario      in  partial  fulfillment  of  the        requirements  for  the  degree  of   Masters  of  Arts        in  the  program  of      Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management                                                Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2011   ©  Sarah  Munro  2011  

  

     

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  PAGE         I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  to  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.     

      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  by  photocopying  or   by  other  means,  in  total  or  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for   the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.     

                                                              

  

  

i  

ABSTRACT      Exhibiting  Atrocity:   A  Preliminary  Exhibition  Proposal  for  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre's     State  Identification  Card  Portrait  Collection     Master  of  Arts   2011   Sarah  Munro   Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management   Ryerson  University  and  the  Art  Gallery  of  Ontario         Exhibiting  Atrocity  investigates  common  modes  of  publicly  displaying   photographs  of  atrocities,  from  the  Holocaust  (1933-1945)  to  the  Cambodian  and   Rwandan  genocides  (1975-1979  and  1994,  respectively).    It  incorporates  the   practical  and  theoretical  concerns  raised  by  these  display  modes  into  a  preliminary   exhibition  proposal  for  the  approximately  six  hundred  Rwandan  state  identification   card  portraits  housed  at  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre  (KGMC)  in  Kigali,   Rwanda.                 The  paper's  introduction  and  literature  survey  are  followed  by  an  overview   of  the  Rwandan  genocide  and  the  role  of  state  identification  cards  therein.    The   KGMC's  identification  portraits  are  then  discussed  in  contrast  to  more  explicit   depictions  of  atrocity,  wherein  the  benefits  and  detriments  of  displaying  less   graphic  imagery  are  argued  through  an  analysis  of  comparable  past  exhibitions  in   terms  of  their  artistic  or  curatorial  intention,  methodology  and  critical  reception.     The  findings  of  this  analysis  are  subsequently  applied  to  the  KGMC's  collection,   yielding  a  preliminary  exhibition  proposal  that  advocates  the  involvement  of   atrocity  survivors  in  the  creation  of  such  photographic  displays.                           

  

ii  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS         First  and  foremost,  I  would  like  to  extend  my  gratitude  to  my  first  reader,   Ryerson  University  Professor  Blake  Fitzpatrick,  for  generously  sharing  with  me  his   knowledge  and  time.    Thank  you  as  well  to  my  second  reader,  Assistant  Professor   Sharon  Sliwinski  of  the  University  of  Western  Ontario,  whose  feedback  was   instrumental  to  the  completion  of  this  paper.                      Thank  you  to  Program  Director  Robert  Burley  for  being  so  supportive  of  my   decision  to  pursue  an  internship  in  Rwanda,  as  well  as  to  Ryerson  International   Program  Administration  and  Communication  Officer  David  Begg  for  facilitating  that   internship's  funding.    Thank  you  as  well  to  my  project  partner  Shannon  Scully  for   presenting  me  with  an  unparalleled  opportunity  to  learn  and  grow,  and  to  the  entire   staff  of  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre  for  welcoming  me  so  warmly.                  Thank  you  to  Ryerson's  Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections   Management  faculty,  including  Marta  Braun,  Chris  Evans,  David  Harris,  Peter   Higdon,  Vid  Ingelevics,  Jennifer  Park,  and  Mike  Robinson.    A  special  thanks  goes  to   Professor  Thierry  Gervais  for  his  ongoing  guidance  and  encouragement.    Thanks   also  to  the  Art  Gallery  of  Ontario's  Curator  of  Photography  Maia  Sutnik  and  Assistant   Curator  of  Photography  Sophie  Hackett  for  taking  the  time  to  share  the  AGO's   collection  and  their  vast  knowledge  on  it.          Thank  you  to  my  classmates  and  colleagues  for  their  constant  feedback  and   words  of  support.    In  particular,  thank  you  to  Sara  Keane,  Emma  Leverty,  Tracy   Mallon-Jensen,  Jill  Offenbeck,  and  Olga  Zotova  who  shared  with  me  their  second   year  at  the  AGO.                                 Lastly,  I  would  like  to  extend  my  sincerest  thanks  to  my  fiancée,  Dan  Mark,   for  his  unfailing  love  and  support  throughout  this  process.      

  

iii  

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS   List  of  Illustrations      1.  Introduction               a.   b.   c.   d.   e.      2.  Literature  Survey     

           

           

           

           

              

                          

                          

Page   v   1   7   7   11   13   14   16  

Histories  of  Wartime  Photojournalism  

Histories  of  the  Rwandan  Genocide,  its  Events  and  Aftermath   10   Analyses  of  the  Depiction  of  Human  Suffering   Exhibition  Publications   Conclusion                             

3.  The  Rwandan  Genocide  and  the  Establishment  of               the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre        4.  Raw  Evidence                 

  

  

  

20   25   37   44     53   62     68   69  

5.  State  Identification  Cards  Within  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre   7.  Arguments  For  and  Against  the  Use  of  Atrocity  Photographs      9.  The  Archival  Mode:                                                                                         

6.  The  Emergence  of  Atrocity  Photographs  Within  Wartime  Photojournalism   28   8.  Archive  Fever  and  Alternatives  to  the  Exhibition  of  Atrocity  Photographs   42             Photographs  from  S-21  at  The  Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Crimes     10.  The  Conceptual  Mode:                      Alfredo  Jaar's  Rwanda  Project:  1994-2000   11.  The  Anatomy  of  an  Exhibition      12.  Conclusion   Bibliography                                   

  

iv  

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS                        Fig.  1.   Unknown  photographer,  "UWIZEYE  Béatha  (recto),"  c.  1990.  
Courtesy  of  Genocide  Archive  Rwanda.  

  
     

Page  
          4                                                                           4                                                            

Fig.  2.   Fig.  3.   Fig.  4.   Fig.  5.   Fig.  6.   Fig.  7.   Fig.  8.   Fig.  9.   Fig.  10.   Fig.  11.   Fig.  12.   Fig.  13.   Fig.  14.   Fig.  15.   Fig.  16.   Fig.  17.  

Unknown  photographer,  "UWIZEYE  Béatha  (verso),"  c.  1990.   Courtesy  of  Genocide  Archive  Rwanda.  

Unknown  photographer,  "Rwanda  National  Identity  Card                   4                                                                               Nº30143  circa  1994,"  June  25,  1992.  Courtesy  of  Genocide  Archive  Rwanda.    

Frank  Wolf,  "Deep  gashes  delivered  by  the  killers  are                   21                                                                                             visible  in  the  skulls  that  fill  one  room  at  the  Murambi  School,"  2001.                                   Courtesy  of  U.S.  Government  Photos  and  Images.       Sean  Kilpatrick,  "Governor  General  Michaelle  Jean  visits  the  Kigali                21                                     Memorial  Centre  in  Kigali,  Rwanda,"  2010.  Courtesy  of  The  Canadian  Press.   Robert  Capa,  "Loyalist  Militiaman  at  the  Moment  of  Death,"     September  5,  1936.    Courtesy  of  Life  Magazine.       George  Strock,  "Three  dead  Americans  on  the  beach  at  Buna,"   September  20,  1943.    Courtesy  of  Life  Magazine.                   29                                                                     31                                                             33                          

"The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"(pg  32-33)  May  7,  1945.     Courtesy  of  Life  Magazine.  

Margaret  Bourke-White,  "In  the  barracks  at  Buchenwald"  from                  33                                                                   "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"  May  7,  1945.  Courtesy  of  Life   Magazine.   Margaret  Bourke-White,  "Deformed  by  malnutrition"  from                   33                                                                                       "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"  May  7,  1945.  Courtesy  of  Life   Magazine.   "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"(pg  34-35  and  pg  36-37)   May  7,  1945.  Courtesy  of  Life  Magazine.             34                                            

Unknown  photographer,  "Identification  photographs  at  the  Tuol  Sleng             45                           Museum  of  Genocide  Crimes,"  2001.    Courtesy  of  the  Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of   Genocide  Crimes.                         Nhem  Ein,  Untitled  (14-5-7-8),  c.  1975.    Courtesy  of  The  Photo  Archive  Group.    51   Alfredo  Jaar,  "Real  Pictures,"  (installation  shot),  1995.     Courtesy  of  Galerie  Lelong.          

          55                                                                                    

Alfredo  Jaar,  "The  Eyes  of  Gutete  Emerita,"  1996.    Courtesy  of  Galerie  Lelong.          57   Alfredo  Jaar,  "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu,"  (installation  shot),  1996.      Courtesy  of  Galerie  Lelong.     Alfredo  Jaar,  "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu,"  (detail),  1996.   Courtesy  of  Galerie  Lelong.                   58                                                   58                                                                            

  

v  

1.     

INTRODUCTION   Susan  Sontag  famously  stated,  "All  photographs  are  memento  mori.  To  take  a  

photograph  is  to  participate  in  another  person's  (or  thing's)  mortality,  vulnerability,   mutability."1    But  while  it  is  true  that  all  photographs  of  the  living  will  some  day  be   photographs  of  the  dead,  the  recognition  of  that  living  subject's  mortality  is   certainly  more  immediate  in  some  images  than  others.    For  example,  in   photojournalistic  depictions  of  the  dead  and  the  dying,  referred  to  in  the  context  of   war,  genocide,  and  other  mass  tragedies  as  atrocity  photographs.    While  the  term   atrocity  photography  essentially  refers  to  all  photographs  of  atrocious  events,  it   nevertheless  evokes  a  rather  specific  set  of  photographic  subjects.    In  her  book,   Remembering  to  Forget:  Holocaust  Memory  Through  the  Camera's  Eye,  Barbie  Zelizer   identifies  these  subjects  as  the  "agonized  faces  behind  barbed  wire...stacks  of  skulls   and  body  parts...  and  pits  of  human  carnage."2    In  essence,  what  atrocity   photography  as  a  genre  has  come  to  represent  is  the  kind  of  brutally  explicit   photographic  evidence  made  iconic  by  the  print  media  in  the  wake  of  World  War  II.     Indeed,  the  emergence  of  atrocity  photography  as  a  genre  unto  itself  can  be   attributed  to  the  evolution  of  wartime  photojournalism,  both  technologically  and   ideologically.    By  World  War  II,  improvements  in  photographic  technology  had   enabled  the  creation  of  realistic  frontline  images  of  war,  while  society  came  to  not   only  accept  them,  but  to  demand  them  as  proof  that  the  atrocity  actually  took  place.     This  is  especially  true  of  the  Holocaust,  the  events  of  which  were  hard  to  deny  in  the   face  of  published  photographic  evidence.    Made  iconic  by  the  media,  atrocity   photographs  later  found  their  way  into  less  ephemeral  forums,  including  conflict   memorials  where  they  now  serve  as  ongoing  reminders  of  the  consequences  and   casualties  of  war.    Herein  lies  a  problem,  however,  for  the  aim  of  a  photojournalistic   image  of  conflict  and  a  memorializing  image  of  conflict  is  not  necessarily  the  same.     Although  some  images  of  conflict  can  ultimately  fulfill  both  functions,  they  are                                                                                                                   
1  Susan  Sontag,  "In  Plato's  Cave",  in  On  Photography  (New  York:  Farrar,  Straus  and  Giroux,  1977),  15.   2  Barbie  Zelizer,  Remembering  to  Forget:  Holocaust  Memory  Through  the  Camera's  Eye  (Chicago:  University  of  

Chicago  Press,  2000),  208.    

  

1  

nonetheless  created  with  different  intents.    Where  one  is  required  to  be   sensationalistic  in  order  to  sell  newspapers  and  magazines,  the  other  is  expected  to   be  sensitive  in  order  to  avoid  re-victimizing  those  directly  affected  by  war.     In  picturing  victims  of  atrocities  such  as  war  and  genocide,  photojournalists   not  only  acknowledge  the  vulnerability  of  their  subjects,  but  stand  to  victimize  them   further  through  the  act  of  taking  their  picture.    Whether  they  live  or  die,  atrocity   victims  must  then  suffer  the  further  indignation  of  their  trauma  being  circulated  for   the  world  to  see.  While  they  are  required  to  provide  proof  to  the  viewer,  these   photographs  are  not  obligated  to  give  anything  back  to  the  victim.    On  the  contrary,   they  have  the  tendency  to  take  away.    Indeed,  this  is  the  root  of  the  argument   against  the  proliferation  of  atrocity  photography,  a  discussion  that  remains  relevant   so  long  as  there  is  conflict  to  photograph.  Photographic  theorists,  stimulated  by   Sontag's  assertions  in  her  landmark  text  On  Photography,  continue  to  argue  the   benefits  and  detriments  of  picturing  human  suffering.3    It  is  an  argument  further   complicated  by  the  ever-changing  role  of  photography,  whose  early  application  as  a   documentary  tool  has  given  way  to  its  acceptance  as  a  fine  art.    In  addition  to  issues   of  re-victimization,  then,  another  charge  against  atrocity  photography  is  its   inappropriate  aestheticization  of  human  suffering,  which  arguably  occurs  when   such  photographs  are  shown  within  artistic  institutions.    Again,  it  is  the  atrocity   image's  context  and  not  simply  its  content  that  poses  a  problem  within   photographic  depictions  of  war.             If  atrocity  photographs  are  inherently  problematic  as  most  photo  theorists   would  suggest,  and  if  these  problems  are  only  exacerbated  by  the  various  contexts   in  which  they  may  be  exhibited,  is  there  a  responsible  way  to  exhibit  them  at  all?     Indeed,  what  is  the  most  suitable  mode  of  display  for  images  of  atrocious  events?     And  is  this  mode  of  presentation  site-specific,  or  can  the  same  exhibition  of  war-  or   genocide-related  photography  travel  to  more  than  one  institution  in  more  than  one                                                                                                                   
3  See,  for  example,  Barbie  Zelizer's  About  To  Die:  How  New  Images  Move  the  Public,  Laura  Brandon's  Art  and  

War,  and  Susan  Sontag's  Regarding  the  Pain  of  Others.  

  

2  

geographic  location  without  major  reworking?    These  are  the  questions  that  lie  at   the  heart  of  this  paper,  an  analysis  of  the  modes  of  display  used  to  exhibit  genocide   photography.    Further,  it  is  an  analysis  with  a  real  world  application,  as  it  will   inform  the  creation  of  an  inaugural  photographic  exhibition  for  the  Kigali  Genocide   Memorial  Centre  (KGMC)  in  Kigali,  Rwanda.    This  paper  proposes  the  exhibition  of  a   specific  collection  of  photographs  related  to  the  Rwandan  genocide  that  is  currently   housed  by  the  KGMC.    It  questions  why  this  particular  set  of  images  should  be   exhibited  at  all,  and  further  asks  how  they  should  be  exhibited  given  the  complex   and  potentially  problematic  nature  of  their  subject  matter.                                         As  an  emerging  resource  on  the  Rwandan  genocide,  the  Kigali  Genocide   Memorial  Centre's  newly  established  National  Documentation  Centre  houses  a   growing  collection  of  photographic  evidence  of  the  conflict  and  its  aftermath,   including  victim  and  perpetrator  portraits,  photographs  of  exhumations  and   commemoration  ceremonies,  and  photojournalistic  images  of  the  event  itself.     Within  it  is  a  sub-collection  of  approximately  six  hundred  silver  gelatin  prints,  which   are  the  focus  of  this  paper.    Measuring  approximately  3.5x1.5  inches,  the   photographs  are  small  in  scale  and  similar  in  appearance.    Each  is  comprised  of  two   portraits  ­one  portrait  appears  upright  and  the  other  upside  down­  presumably   intended  to  be  cut  apart.    They  are  standard  headshots  depicting  male  and  female   secondary  school-aged  children  who  have  similarly  shorn  hair  and  who  often   appear  dressed  in  the  same  school  uniform.    Handwritten  on  the  back  of  each  image   is  the  student's  name  as  well  as  information  relating  to  their  school  and/or  their   family's  geographic  location.  These  images  are  believed  to  have  been  taken  prior  to   the  Rwandan  genocide  in  1994  for  use  on  government-issued  state  identification   cards.    Most  importantly,  those  identification  cards,  mandatory  for  each  Rwandan   citizen,  became  one  of  the  most  important  factors  facilitating  the  speed  and   magnitude  of  the  genocide,  as  they  prominently  stated  each  citizen's  ethnicity:  Hutu,   Tutsi  or  Twa.       

  

3  

  

    
Fig.  3.  Unknown  photographer,  "Rwanda  National  Identity  Card  Nº30143  circa  1994,"  June   25,  1992.  Courtesy  of  Genocide  Archive  Rwanda.    

            4  

I  first  encountered  the  photographs  during  an  internship  at  the  National   Documentation  Centre  in  the  summer  of  2010.    Through  my  ongoing  role  within  the   Centre,  it  will  be  among  my  responsibilities  to  assist  in  increasing  the  visibility  of   the  KGMC's  burgeoning  collection  through  an  inaugural  photographic  exhibition.    It   is  the  KGMC's  intention  that  this  exhibition  will  eventually  travel  to  affiliated   memorial  centers  and  museums  within  Europe  and  North  America.    However,  as  the   National  Documentation  Centre  is  a  newly  founded  facility,  no  definitive  curatorial   mandate  exists  and  precedents  on  public  exhibition  have  yet  to  be  set.    Nonetheless,   if  the  center  intends  for  its  very  first  exhibition  to  encompass  such  complex  imagery   ­and  further,  for  it  to  suit  both  a  Rwandan  and  an  international  audience  at  a  variety   of  different  venues­  it  will  require  an  informed  curatorial  approach.     In  order  to  justify  why  this  particular  set  of  images  should  be  shown  and  to   further  suggest  how  it  should  be  shown,  this  paper  first  discusses  the  events  of  the   Rwandan  genocide  and  the  role  of  state  identification  cards  within  it.    It  also   explains  the  significance  of  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre  and  its  specific   collection  of  state  identification  card  photographs.    It  states  the  traditional  approach   to  the  exhibition  of  war  and  genocide  photography  ­that  is  the  display  of  explicit   images  of  atrocity  as  proof  of  its  occurrence­  and  counters  that  approach  with  case   studies  of  two  more  contemporary  modes  of  display.    The  first  counter-mode  of   display  is  the  Archival  Mode,  which  favours  implicit  images  of  genocide  culled  from   photographic  archives  over  explicit  images  of  genocide  such  as  those  taken  for  the   print  media.    Whereas  photojournalistic  images  tend  to  depict  the  atrocious  event  or   its  aftermath  in  horrific  detail,  archival  images  often  allude  to  the  tragedy  without   actually  showing  it.    Images  employed  by  the  Archival  Mode  include  photographs   produced  for  both  bureaucratic  and  personal  functions,  such  as  identification   portraits  or  family  snapshots,  whose  gravity  is  defined  more  by  their  context  than   their  content.    The  second  counter-mode  is  the  Conceptual  Mode,  which  can  employ   both  explicit  and  implicit  images  of  atrocity,  but  which  nonetheless  presents  them  as   concept-driven  artistic  interpretations  of  an  atrocity  rather  than  as  hard  evidence.        

  

5  

In  analyzing  case  studies  representative  of  these  modes,  this  paper  will   attempt  to  determine  the  degree  to  which  the  two  strategies  improve  upon  the   traditional  approach  to  exhibiting  graphic  atrocity  images.    It  is  in  this  way  that  the   paper  ultimately  determines  which  mode  of  display  is  most  suitable  to  the  KGMC   and  its  collection  of  identity  card  photographs.    It  thereby  takes  the  first  steps   towards  facilitating  a  successful  inaugural  exhibition,  which  stands  to  subsequently   increase  the  international  visibility  of  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre's   growing  collection.                       

  

6  

2.        

LITERATURE  SURVEY   This  survey  includes  historical  and  analytical  texts  on  both  the  specific  

events  of  the  Rwandan  genocide  and  on  photographic  representations  of  genocide   in  general.    It  also  includes  artist  statements  and  project  proposals,  monographs  and   exhibition  catalogues,  and  critical  reviews  of  specific  exhibitions  of  genocide   photography.    It  begins  with  a  review  of  books  on  the  history  of  wartime   photojournalism  in  terms  of  its  evolution  and  dissemination.    This  section  includes   texts  on  photojournalistic  magazines  such  as  Life,  as  well  as  on  Life  photographer   Margaret  Bourke-White.    This  is  followed  by  an  examination  of  texts  on  the   Rwandan  genocide,  as  well  as  books  on  the  creation  of  memorial  museums  and   photographic  archives  in  response  to  such  events.    The  third  section  discusses   analytical  texts  on  the  depiction  of  genocide  and  human  suffering  in  both  a   photojournalistic  and  an  artistic  context.    The  survey  concludes  with  a  review  of   publications  on  specific  exhibitions  of  genocide  photography,  from  their  inception  to   their  execution  and  their  critical  reception.        2.a      Histories  of  Wartime  Photojournalism   General  histories  of  photojournalism  such  as  Bodo  von  Dewitz's  Kiosk:  A  

History  of  Photojournalism  seek  to  parallel  the  evolution  of  the  genre  with  both   improvements  in  photographic  technology  and  the  emergence  of  forums  for   photojournalism's  rapid  dissemination.    Von  Dewitz's  focus  on  illustrated  news   magazines  as  one  such  forum  emphasizes  the  impact  of  a  photograph's  context  on   its  interpretation.    Through  its  reproduction  of  complete  magazine  pages  and   spreads  as  opposed  to  isolated  images,  the  text  allows  for  the  discussion  of  editorial   decisions  such  as  image  selection,  cropping  and  retouching,  layout  design,  headlines   and  captions,  all  of  which  affect  the  public's  reading  of  an  image.    Like  most  books  of   its  kind,  this  history  of  press  photography  from  the  late  1800's  until  1973  pays   considerable  attention  to  war  pictures  through  the  sections  "Press  photography  in   the  First  World  War  1919-1932",  "Propaganda  and  photography  1936-1945",  and   "Wartime  reporting  1945-1949".    However,  as  a  German  publication  discussing  

  

7  

many  other  German  publications,  Kiosk  requires  some  supplementation  if  the  reader   is  to  emerge  with  a  more  holistic  understanding  of  the  potential  for  the  press'   manipulation  of  wartime  photojournalism.       Erika  Doss'  Looking  at  Life  Magazine  fulfills  that  very  function,  discussing  Life   as  a  cultural  phenomenon  (at  the  height  of  its  popularity,  Life  sold  13.5  million   copies  per  week4)  that  directly  affected  North  America's  understanding  of   innumerable  current  events,  including  World  War  II.    Unlike  Kiosk,  the  book  does   not  deconstruct  individual  issues  of  Life  by  way  of  editorial  decisions  made  by  its   staff.    Instead  it  provides  a  chronological  overview  of  landmark  events  that  impacted   American  society  and  then  outlines  Life's  approach  thereto.    To  that  end,  it  also   discusses  the  role  of  certain  writers  and  photographers  in  shaping  both  the   magazine  and  its  readership  through  especially  groundbreaking  articles  and  images.     Among  them  is  the  May  7,  1945  story  "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities",   photographed  in  part  by  Margaret  Bourke-White.     At  first  glance,  "The  German  Atrocities"  is  a  straightforward  enough  resource.     It  consists  of  six  pages  showcasing  twelve  photographs  from  the  liberation  of   German  concentrations  camps  in  Belsen,  Buchenwald,  Gardelegen,  and  Nordhausen.     Taken  by  four  of  Life's  war  correspondents,  William  Vandivert,  George  Rodger,   Johnny  Florea  and  Margaret  Bourke-White,  the  images  are  accompanied  by   evocative  captions  and  an  approximately  250­word  contextualizing  paragraph.     With  so  little  text,  the  insights  provided  by  this  article  can  only  be  understood  by   reading  between  the  lines,  so  to  speak.    Through  such  editorial  decisions  as  image   selection,  layout  and  captioning,  the  issue  differentiates  Bourke-White's   photographs  from  those  of  her  male  colleagues  seemingly  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that   they  were  photographed  by  a  woman.    The  implied  female  sensitivity  to  scenes  of   human  suffering  is  a  theory  supported  by  several  other  publications.    For  example,   Nancy  Caldwell  Sorel's  writings  on  Margaret  Bourke-White  in  The  Women  Who   Wrote  the  War:  The  Compelling  Story  of  the  Path-  breaking  Women  War                                                                                                                   
4  Erica  Doss,  Looking  At  Life  Magazine  (Washington:  Smithsonian  Institution  Press,  2001),  2.  

  

8  

Correspondents  of  World  War  II  implies  that  the  "new  sensibility"  with  which   Bourke-White  pictured  the  liberation  of  Buchenwald  ­among  other  pivotal  events  of   World  War  II­  can  be  attributed,  in  part,  to  her  femininity.    Or  at  least  it  can  be   attributed  to  the  novelty  of  her  femininity  within  the  patriarchal  world  of  wartime   photojournalism.    Caldwell  Sorel  repeatedly  references  the  ways  in  which  Bourke- White  used  her  femininity  to  her  advantage,  including  one  occasion  when  Bourke- White  dissolved  into  tears  in  front  of  Soviet  soldiers  and  was  rewarded  with  their   permission  to  shoot  an  additional  roll  of  film  at  a  location  she  had  been  instructed  to   leave.5    Similarly,  two  of  Bourke-White's  own  memoires,  1946's  Dear  Fatherland,   Rest  Quietly:  A  Report  on  the  Collapse  of  Hitler's  `Thousand  years'  and  1963's  Portrait   of  Myself  recount  in  words  and  photographs  her  horror  and  disgust  upon  touring  the   Nazi  camps  and  the  possible  motivations  for  her  strong  personal  reaction,  including   her  status  as  a  woman  and  as  the  child  of  a  non-practicing  Jew.     Finally,  Robert  H.  Abzug's  Inside  the  Vicious  Heart:  Americans  and  the   Liberation  of  Nazi  Concentration  Camps  testifies  to  the  importance  of  Margaret   Bourke-White's  witnessing  (her  gender  notwithstanding)  by  including  her  in  this   series  of  personal  stories  on  the  camp  liberations  as  experienced  by  such  historical   figures  as  Generals  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower  and  George  S.  Patton,  and  newspaper   publisher  Joseph  Pulitzer.  Through  their  diaries,  letters,  and  photographs,  Abzug   illustrates  how  Americans'  eyewitness  accounts  and  other  published  evidence   enabled  the  world  to  believe  what  had  only  been  rumored.    The  subsequent   impression  that  photographs  can  and  do  convey  the  reality  of  genocide  will  further   be  addressed  by  the  publications  in  the  following  section,  whose  focus  on  the  events   and  aftermath  of  the  genocide  in  Rwanda  will  speak  to  the  movement  of  such   photojournalistic  evidence  into  post-war  memorial  museums.  

                                                                                                                
5  Nancy  Caldwell  Sorel,  The  Women  Who  Wrote  the  War:  The  Compelling  Story  of  the  Path-  

breaking  Women  War  Correspondents  of  World  War  II  (New  York:  Arcade  Publishing,  2011),  124.  

      9  

2.b     

Histories  of  the  Rwandan  Genocide,  its  Events  and  Aftermath   Shake  Hands  with  the  Devil:  The  Failure  of  Humanity  in  Rwanda  by  Roméo  

Dallaire  is  but  one  of  many  texts  to  outline  the  circumstances  contributing  to  the   Rwandan  genocide.    Like  most,  it  presents  the  genocide  as  the  result  of  ongoing   ethnic  tensions  incited  by  colonization.    It  provides  a  chronology  of  events  and  key   players  in  the  genocide  and  ­in  addition  to  the  history,  geography  and  statistics  of   the  nation­  offers  the  Canadian  general's  personal  interpretation  of  the  event   through  meticulous  diary  entries  written  while  he  was  stationed  in  Rwanda.    While   Dallaire's  publication  focuses  on  the  events  and  immediate  aftermath  of  the   genocide  from  a  largely  militaristic  or  political  perspective,  Paul  Williams'  Memorial   Museums:  The  Global  Rush  to  Commemorate  Atrocities  concentrates  on  the  long-term   effects  of  genocide  from  a  cultural  perspective.    One  such  long-term  outcome  is  the   establishment  of  memorial  museums  and  other  sites  of  remembrance  in  post-war   nations.    A  relatively  recent  phenomenon,  the  Third  World  memorial  museum  exists   as  a  multipurpose  cultural  space  modeled  after  First  World  War  and  Holocaust   memorials.    In  the  chapter  "Photographic  Memory:  Images  from  Calamitous   Histories",  Williams  discusses  the  changing  role  of  photographs  within  these   memorial  museums,  from  pieces  of  corroborating  evidence  within  object-based   exhibitions  to  the  sole  focus  of  exhibitions  all  their  own.    In  the  process,  Williams   acknowledges  the  dual  capabilities  of  photography  to  document  and  to  aestheticize,   and  he  problematizes  specific  exhibitions  that  have  attempted  to  walk  the  line   between  document  and  art.    Among  those  exhibitions  is  Photographs  from  S-21:   1975-1979,  a  show  of  images  from  the  Cambodian  genocide,  which  will  be  the   subject  of  a  case  study  within  the  body  of  this  paper.       Nicholas  Mirzoeff's  article  in  the  autumn  2005  issue  of  African  Arts,  "Invisible   Again:  Rwanda  and  Representation  After  Genocide",  deals  largely  with  artistic   interpretations  of  the  conflict,  such  as  Gilles  Peress'  photo  book  The  Silence  and   Alfredo  Jaar's  Rwanda  Project:  1994-2000,  the  latter  being  the  subject  of  a   comparative  case  study  within  this  essay.    In  his  article  Mirzoeff  identifies  the   struggle  of  Western  contemporary  artists  to  accurately  represent  the  suffering  of  a   subaltern  culture.    He  states  that  their  attempts  to  do  so  have  traditionally  relied      10  

upon  the  familiar  frameworks  of  Christianity,  documentary  photography,  and   conceptual  art6,  and  he  subsequently  deconstructs  the  efficacy  (or  inefficacy,  as  the   case  may  be)  of  each  approach.    One  tactic  Mirzoeff  does  not  address  is  the   recontextualization  of  archival  images,  which  is  also  common  practice  amongst   contemporary  artists  engaging  with  representations  of  genocide.    Instead  it  is   Jacques  Derrida's  Archive  Fever:  A  Freudian  Impression  that  lays  the  foundation  for   the  discussion  of  archival  imagery.    Here  the  philosopher  defines  the  archive  as   emerging  at  the  "disintegration  point  of  the  memory  it  seeks  to  preserve"7,   suggesting  the  archive's  paradoxical  role  as  a  site  wherein  memories  are  both   preserved  and,  in  a  sense,  lost.    Derrida  subsequently  sets  up  society's  repetitive   engagement  with  the  archive  and  its  contents  as  a  compulsive  act,  which  helps  to   rationalize  the  revisitation  of  archival  photographs  of  genocide  by  artists.    It  is  the   consequences  of  their  photographic  representations  of  human  suffering  that  the   books  in  the  following  section  will  address.                2.c      Analyses  of  the  Depiction  of  Human  Suffering   Perhaps  the  most  influential  text  on  the  photographic  representation  of  

human  suffering  is  Susan  Sontag's  2003  book,  Regarding  the  Pain  of  Others,  which   reconsiders  her  earlier  contention  in  1977's  On  Photography  that  society's  ability  to   respond  to  atrocity  is  compromised  by  "the  relentless  diffusion  of  vulgar  and   appalling  images"8  within  our  media-driven  culture.    In  examining the  many  issues   associated  with  images  of  genocide  and  other  atrocities,  Sontag  references  a   complex  history  that  includes  the  Crimean  War,  the  American  Civil  War,  the  Spanish   Civil  War,  the  Nazi  death  camps,  the  Khmer  Rouge,  and  the  Rwandan  genocide.    She   discusses  the  history  of  atrocity  photographs,  the  various  purposes  for  their   production,  the  evolution  of  such  imagery  (which  she  sees  as  culminating  in  the                                                                                                                   
6  Nicholas  Mirzoeff,  "Invisible  Again:  Rwanda  and  Representation  After  Genocide,"  African    

Arts  (Autumn  2005):  36.       Press,  1996),  11.       

7  Jacques  Derrida,  Archive  Fever:  A  Freudian  Impression  (Chicago:  University  of  Chicago     8  Susan  Sontag,  Regarding  the  Pain  of  Others  (New  York:  Farrar,  Straus  and  Giroux,  2003),  109.  

  

11  

intersection  between  art  and  document),  and  the  impact  of  atrocity  photographs  on   both  their  victims  and  their  viewers.    Overall,  Sontag's  text  explores  what  it  means   for  outsiders  to  regard  the  suffering  of  others  by  questioning  whether  the  act  of   looking  necessarily  accomplishes  all  that  the  accompanying  photographic  rhetoric   suggests.        Barbie  Zelizer's  About  to  Die:  How  News  Images  Move  the  Public  narrows   Sontag's  discussion  down  to  depictions  specifically  of  death,  with  the  photographs   she  cites  having  been  created  within  the  context  of  catastrophic  or  atrocious  events.     In  particular,  Zelizer  addresses  how  and  why  journalists  exploit  images  of  the   moment  before  one  dies  (what  she  refers  to  as  the  as  if  moment)  over  the  death   itself.    She  separates  as  if  photographs  into  three  distinct  categories:  images  of   presumed  death  wherein  inanimate  objects  act  as  signifiers  of  human  casualties,   images  of  possible  death  wherein  single  anonymous  figures  stand  for  the  dead   masses,  and  images  of  certain  death  wherein  the  figure  depicted  is  the  one  who  will   die.    It  is  the  latter  category  that  tends  to  evoke  the  greatest  sense  of  discomfort,   disbelief  and  subsequent  engagement,  and  it  is  these  images'  potential  to  engage   that  has  historically  justified  the  proliferation  of  all  as  if  images.    Engagement  is   paramount  to  Zelizer,  who  argues  it  is  when  the  viewer  regards  about-to-die  images   merely  as  conduits  of  information  about  an  atrocity  ­empty  symbols  as  opposed  to   real  people­  that  they  truly  become  exploitative.    While  Zelizer's  focus  is  on  the  use   of  potentially  exploitative  atrocity  imagery  within  the  news  media,  Roger  I.  Simon's   interest  is  on  the  use  of  such  imagery  within  public  exhibitions.    His  article  "A  Shock   to  Thought:  Curatorial  Judgment  and  the  Public  Exhibition  of  `Difficult  Knowledge'",   which  appeared  in  the  February  21,  2011  edition  of  Memory  Studies,  alleges  that   institutions  of  social  memory  have  reduced  their  emphasis  on  affirming  exhibitions   such  as  displays  of  triumph  or  great  deeds  in  favour  of  more  difficult  exhibitions   depicting  violence,  loss  and  death.    Upon  dissecting  what  it  is  that  renders  certain   exhibitions  difficult,  Simon  questions  what  might  be  accomplished  by  making  these   painful  histories  public.    He  does  so  through  a  series  of  comparative  studies  of   varying  museum  exhibitions.    While  drawing  largely  from  the  same  archive  of   images,  each  exhibition  presents  those  artifacts  in  different  ways,  suggesting  that      12  

each  unique  mode  of  display  fulfills  a  different  purpose  and  achieves  a  different  end.     It  is  the  end  result  of  disparate  representational  strategies  that  is  addressed  by  the   texts  in  the  following  section.    These  publications  deal  with  the  specific  artists  and   exhibitions  later  employed  by  this  essay  as  case  studies,  and  address  issues  of   artistic  or  curatorial  intent,  methodology,  and  critical  reception.                    2.d      Exhibition  Publications   Beautiful  Suffering:  Photography  and  the  Traffic  in  Pain,  the  exhibition  

catalogue  to  the  self-same  titled  2006  show  at  Williams  College  Museum  of  Art,   effectively  bridges  the  gap  between  the  theories  surrounding  photographic   representations  of  human  suffering  and  their  exhibition  in  art  galleries.    Drawing  on   images  from  advertising,  photojournalism  and  contemporary  art,  both  the  book  and   the  exhibition  question  whether  it  is  indeed  inherently  problematic  to  aestheticize   pain.    Acknowledging  that  there  is  no  definitive  answer  to  the  query,  the  writers  and   curatorial  team  treat  the  works  within  Beautiful  Suffering  as  punctuation  points   within  a  series  of  open-ended  questions  included  in  the  exhibition  as  wall  text  and   reproduced  within  the  book.    They  ask:  "Why  do  we  take  pictures  of  people  in  pain   instead  of  helping  them?"  "Does  [a  picture's]  beauty  deepen  our  critical  engagement   or  distract  us,  anesthetizing  us  to  pain[?]"    "Do  the  photographs  here  [in  exhibition]   accomplish  more,  less,  or  just  something  altogether  different  from  those  we  see   everyday  in  the  news?"    The  catalogue's  essays  address  selected  works  in  relation  to   these  questions,  one  of  which  is  a  piece  from  Alfredo  Jaar's  Rwanda  Project,   described  by  editor  and  essayist  Mike  Reinhardt  as  "hugely  ambitious  and  self   undercutting...a  work  that  shows  its  own  inability  to  capture  its  referent."9     However,  Reinhardt  appears  to  regard  this  as  an  asset  rather  than  a  liability  as  he   speaks  at  length  to  the  complexity  of  Jaar's  work.10                                                                                                                                     
9  Erina  Duganne,  Holly  Edwards  and  Mark  Reinhardt,  Beautiful  Suffering:  Photography  And  the  Traffic  in  Pain  

(Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  2007),  34.  

10  Jaar's  piece,  as  discussed  by  Mike  Reinhardt,  is  entitled  "The  Eyes  of  Gutete  Emerita".    A  description  of  the  

work  can  be  found  in  a  later  section  of  this  paper,  wherein  a  more  thorough  case  study  deconstructs  Jaar's   simultaneous  unwillingness  and  inability  to  photograph  the  events  of  the  Rwandan  genocide  (the  "referent").    

  

13  

  

Providing  more  polarized  viewpoints  are  the  critical  reviews,  both  local  and  

international,  of  one  of  the  aforementioned  photographic  exhibitions,  Photographs   from  S-21:  1975-1979.    Among  them  are  The  New  York  Time's  review,  "Hypnotized   by  Mug  Shots  That  Stare  Back:  Are  They  Windows  or  Mirrors?",  The  Wall  Street   Journal's  "Profiting  from  his  Shots  of  Pol  Pot's  Terror",  The  Village  Voice's  "Killing   Fields  of  Vision:  Was  Cambodia's  Genocide  Just  a  Moment  of  Photographic  History?",   and  The  New  York  Observer's  "Jottings  of  Death  in  Gallery  Three".    While  critical   reviews  written  within  Thailand  and  Cambodia  are  fairly  favourable,  those   published  in  New  York,  where  the  exhibition  was  held,  are  largely  unfavourable.     They  question  the  exhibition's  organizers  and  museum  curators'  motivations  for   exhibiting  archival  documents  within  an  arts  institution.    They  also  make   accusations  of  profiteering  from  the  inappropriate  aestheticization  of  horrific   images.                  The  notion  of  curatorial  or  artistic  intention  versus  critical  reception  factors   into  texts  on  Alfredo  Jaar  as  well.    Ben  Okri  and  David  Levi-Strauss'  Let  There  be   Light:  The  Rwanda  Project  1994-1998  and  Alfredo  Jaar:  La  Politique  des  Images  by   Jacques  Rancière  address  Jaar's  artistic  intention  in  relation  to  his  output.    They   discuss  the  artist's  struggle  to  represent  the  unrepresentible,  and  its  manifestation   as  numerous  projects  derived  from  the  same  source  material.    Jaar's  refusal  to   revictimize  those  directly  affected  by  genocide  is  also  discussed  as  the  motivation   for  his  employment  of  exhibition  strategies  that  paradoxically  deny  his  audience   access  to  the  very  images  he  created.      2.e      Conclusion       Building  upon  the  arguments  of  the  aforementioned  texts,  this  paper  will  

discuss  the  presentation  and  dissemination  of  graphic  images  through  illustrated   news  magazines.    It  will  identify  key  magazine  photographers  whose  iconic  images   of  World  War  II  and  the  Holocaust  set  the  tone  for  all  subsequent  photographic   representations  of  genocide.    It  will  further  address  the  movement  of  such   representations  out  of  the  press  and  into  memorial  museums  and  their  traveling   exhibitions,  as  well  as  list  the  problems  inherent  with  this  recontextualization.        14  

Through  two  case  studies,  the  paper  will  discuss  differing  modes  of  display  that   have  previously  been  applied  to  photographs  of  genocide  to  varying  degrees  of   success.      Finally,  in  deconstructing  the  successes  and  failures  of  those  modes,  the   paper  will  propose  a  strategy  to  display  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre's   collection  of  state  identity  card  photographs,  as  ideal  subject  matter  for  the  Centre's   inaugural  exhibition.         

  

15  

3.  

The  Rwandan  Genocide  and  the  Establishment  of  the  Kigali  Genocide   Memorial  Centre   The  Rwandan  genocide  (1994)  resulted  from  the  politicization  of  

longstanding  ethnic  tensions  between  the  Tutsi  minority  who  had  controlled  power   for  centuries,  and  the  Hutu  majority  who  came  to  power  in  the  rebellion  of  1959­ 1962.    Prior  to  the  country's  colonization  by  both  Germany  and  Belgium,11  a  Tutsi   monarchy  reigned  over  Rwanda.    This  monarchy  continued  under  colonial  rule,   however  its  efficacy  was  undoubtedly  undermined  by  the  presence  of  a  foreign   political  agenda.    Indeed,  it  was  Belgian  colonists  who  played  a  pivotal  role  in   establishing  the  divide  between  the  Tutsi  and  Hutu  peoples.    While  ethnic  categories   existed  loosely  before  colonialism,  the  specific  differences  between  them  were   substantiated  by  the  Belgians'  introduction  of  mandatory  ethnic  identification  cards   in  1935.    Earlier  German  colonists  had  believed  the  Tutsi  to  be  a  superior  race  due   to  their  alleged  Hamitic  origin,  as  it  was  believed  that  the  Tutsi  were  of  Caucasian   ancestry.    The  European  eugenics  movement  only  increased  colonial  interest  in  the   physical  differences  between  the  two  tribes.    Beginning  in  the  1920s,  Belgian   ethnologists  analyzed  thousands  of  Rwandans  on  comparable  racial  criteria,  and  in   1931,  ethnic  identity  was  officially  mandated  and  administrative  documents  began   specifically  stating  each  person's  ethnicity.    Height,  build,  and  skin  color  were   among  the  physical  traits  typically  considered  in  ethnic  identification.  Tall,  slender   and  lighter-colored  Rwandans  were  typically  Tutsi,  while  shorter,  stockier  and   darker-skinned  Rwandans  were  considered  Hutu.    Familial  wealth,  determined   largely  by  livestock  ownership,  was  another  supposed  indicator  of  a  Rwandan's   ethnicity,  with  the  Tutsi  typically  possessing  greater  wealth  than  the  Hutu.12    As  the                                                                                                                   
11  Rwanda  was  formally  divided  between  Belgium  and  the  German  Empire  in  1890.    After  several  border  

skirmishes,  the  final  borders  of  the  colony  were  established  in  1900,  with  the  German  Empire  controlling  the   kingdom  of  Rwanda.    By  the  end  of  World  War  I,  Belgium  had  acquired  completed  control.        
12  Traditionally,  anyone  possessing  ten  or  more  cattle  was  considered  a  member  of  the  Tutsi  social  class.  It  

should  be  noted  that  the  Rwandan  people  previously  considered  these  categorizations  to  be  fluid;  Hutu  who   gained  wealth  by  acquiring  cattle  could  become  Tutsi,  just  as  Tutsi  who  lost  cattle  could  become  Hutu  through  a   process  known  as  kwihutura.    

  

16  

colonial  presence  in  Rwanda  gradually  reduced,  the  Belgians  bequeathed  the   majority  of  their  property  and  power  to  the  Tutsi,  while  the  Hutu  were  left  to  work   as  forced  labourers.    It  is  in  this  way  that  Belgian  colonists  strategically  created  a   culture  of  inequality,  and  subsequent  instability,  in  Rwanda.       It  was  not  until  1957  that  the  embittered  Hutu  Emancipation  Movement   published  the  Hutu  Manifesto,  asserting  that  the  Tutsi  minority  held  an  unfair   monopoly  of  power  in  Rwanda.    This  increase  in  anti-colonial  and  anti-Tutsi   sentiments  resulted  in  Belgium  granting  Rwanda  national  independence  in  1961.     By  1962,  the  Hutu  had  overthrown  the  monarchy  and  established  the  Republic  of   Rwanda,  headed  by  Grégoire  Kayibanda.    Kayibanda's  regime  persecuted  the  Tutsi   in  turn,  causing  many  to  flee  for  Uganda.    Then-General  Juvénal  Habyarimana,  an   ethnic  Hutu,  seized  power  in  a  coup  in  1973,  killing  Kayibanda  and  promising   progress.  In  1990,  the  Rwandan  Patriotic  Front,  a  rebel  group  composed  mostly  of   Tutsi  refugees,  invaded  northern  Rwanda  from  Uganda  in  an  attempt  to  defeat  the   Hutu-led  government.  This  began  the  Rwandan  Civil  War,  further  exacerbating   ethnic  tensions  in  the  country.    In  response,  many  Hutu  gravitated  toward  the  Hutu   Power13  ideology,  spurned  by  state-controlled  Rwandan  media.       The  divisiveness  of  the  Hutu  Power  ideology  resulted  in  the  assassination  of   Rwandan  president  Juvénal  Habyarimana  and  Cyprien  Ntaryamira,  the  president  of   neighbouring  Burundi,  on  April  6,  1994.    Responsibility  for  Habyarimana's   assassination  was  disputed,  with  both  Tutsi  and  Hutu  extremists  being  blamed.   Regardless,  the  president's  death  set  off  a  violent  reaction,  resulting  in  the  mass   murder  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  Tutsis  and  moderate  Hutus  in  the  span  of   approximately  one  hundred  days.    The  genocide  had  been  planned  by  members  of   the  Hutu  Power  group  known  as  the  Akazu,  many  of  whom  occupied  positions  at  top                                                                                                                   
13  Hutu  Power  was  an  ideology  propounded  by  Hutu  extremists  in  Rwanda  before  the  onset  of  the  

1994  genocide.    It  idealized  an  ethnically  pure  territory  governed  by  the  "Hutu  Ten  Commandments",   wherein  Hutu  and  Tutsi  were  forbidden  from  intermarrying  and  conducting  business  together,  and   wherein  the  Rwandan  education  system,  Armed  Forces,  and  positions  of  power  were  intended  to  be   exclusively  Hutu.        

  

17  

levels  of  the  national  government.    The  genocide  was  supported  and  coordinated  by   the  national  government  in  cooperation  with  local  military  and  civil  officials.    Two   Hutu  militias  had  been  organized  to  carry  out  the  killings:  the  Interahamwe  and  the   Impuzamugambi,  although  many  Hutu  civilians  also  took  part  in  the  murders.  The   militias  erected  hundreds  of  roadblocks  around  the  country,  creating  checkpoints  at   which  ethnic  identification  cards  could  be  demanded,  with  verified  Tutsis  being   systematically  slaughtered.14    The  killing  continued  for  three  months,  until  the   overwhelmed  Rwandan  Patriotic  Front  fought  its  way  out  of  the  nation's  capital  and   joined  with  other  RPF  units  in  the  north.    Upon  regrouping,  the  RPF  launched  an   offensive  and  on  July  4,  1994  overtook  the  capital.    Less  than  two  weeks  later,  the   RPF  defeated  the  last  government  stronghold  and  declared  victory.     The  resulting  death  toll  of  the  Rwandan  genocide  is  estimated  at  between   500,000  and  1,000,000  people,  or  as  much  as  85%  of  the  Tutsi  population  and  20%   of  the  total  national  population  in  1994.15    Constructed  on  the  site  where  over   250,000  of  those  people  have  since  been  buried,16  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial   Centre  was  created  by  the  Kigali  City  Council  in  partnership  with  the  UK-based   genocide  prevention  organization  Aegis  Trust  to  commemorate  the  tenth   anniversary  of  the  genocide  in  April  of  2004.    The  facility  features  external  mass   graves  and  memorial  gardens,  the  main  memorial  building,  the  Education  Centre,   and  the  National  Documentation  Centre,  home  to  the  newly  established  Genocide   Archive  of  Rwanda.  The  eleven  mass  graves  consist  of  numerous  concrete  crypts,   filled  from  floor  to  ceiling  with  coffins,  each  containing  the  fragmented  remains  of   up  to  fifty  victims.    These  mass  graves  serve  to  consolidate  the  contents  of  hundreds   of  shallow  graves  still  being  unearthed  around  the  city.    Within  the  main  building   are  three  permanent  exhibitions  spanning  two  floors.  The  lower  level  exhibition                                                                                                                   
14  Jim  Fussell,  "Group  Classification  on  National  ID  Cards  as  a  Factor  in  Genocide  and  Ethnic  Cleansing",  (paper  

presented  during  the  Seminar  Series  of  the  Yale  University  Genocide  Studies  Program,  New  Haven,  Connecticut,   November  15,  2001).
15  Both  the  Rwandan  death  toll  and  overall  population  figures  vary  significantly  from  source  to  source,  hence  

they  have  been  presented  as  minimum  versus  maximum  values.    

16  By  2004,  the  ongoing  discovery  of  mass  graves  in  and  around  Kigali  after  the  genocide  had  resulted  in  the  

exhumation  of  approximately  250,000  bodies,  which  have  since  been  buried  in  mass  graves  at  the  Kigali   Genocide  Memorial  Centre.    

  

18  

chronicles  the  Rwandan  genocide  in  three  sections,  from  its  inception  to  its   implementation  and  its  aftermath.    All  three  sections  use  a  combination  of   photographs,  text  panels,  charts  and  maps,  and  audiovisual  elements.    Also  included   on  the  lower  level  are  artistic  interpretations  of  the  genocide  conveyed  through  a   pair  of  stained-glass  windows  and  a  series  of  six  wooden  sculptures.    A  separate   room  houses  a  combination  of  victims'  bones  and  personal  belongings  enclosed  in   glass  cases,  three  television  monitors  displaying  subtitled  survivor  testimony,  and   an  informal  photo  gallery  where  visitors  are  encouraged  to  leave  images  of  lost   loved  ones.    The  upper  level  includes  a  separate  children's  memorial,  comprised  of   photographs  and  text  panels.  This  exhibit  features  fourteen  windows,  each  depicting   the  enlarged,  backlit  photographic  transparency  of  a  child  killed  during  the   genocide.  Beneath  each  portrait  is  a  plaque  containing  a  few  details  about  them  and   an  overview  of  how  they  died.    Finally,  the  exhibit  entitled  "Wasted  Lives"  chronicles   in  words  and  photographs  the  history  of  genocide  around  the  world,  and  includes   Armenia,  the  Holocaust,  Bosnia  and  Darfur.   That  the  permanent  exhibition  seeks  to  situate  the  events  of  1994  alongside   the  Holocaust  and  other  acts  of  genocide  seems  logical.    However  it  also  begs  the   question,  to  what  degree  does  the  Aegis  Trust  UK  ­and  thus  the  European/Western   museum  model­  influence  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre  and  its  visitors'   understanding  of  the  Rwandan  genocide?    And  is  this  influence  an  asset  or  a   liability?    It  is  worth  noting  that  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre  is,  to  date,  the   most  affluent  and  arguably  "Westernized"  memorial  to  the  Rwandan  genocide,  and   that  it  exists  in  stark  contrast  to  the  six  other  facilities  situated  throughout  the   country.       

  

19  

4.  

Raw  Evidence   Rwanda's  six  other  memorial  sites,  located  in  Nyamata,  Ntarama,  Bisesero,  

Nyanza,  Nyarubuye,  and  Murambi,  involve  far  fewer  components  than  the  Kigali   Genocide  Memorial  Centre,  having  remained  largely  unmediated  since  the  genocide.     Although  some  are  in  the  process  of  being  revitalized,  they  still  consist  primarily  of   existing  sites  and  structures  significant  to  the  genocide  where  the  remains  of  victims   are  openly  displayed,  having  been  "curated"  to  varying  degrees.    The  Nyamata   memorial  site  consists  of  a  church  compound  where  approximately  10,000  people   were  killed.    Presently,  victims'  remaining  bones,  clothing  and  personal  belongings   are  piled  upon  church  pews,  which  face  an  altar  posthumously  adorned  with  an   encased  rosary  and  a  machete.    Two  underground  crypts,  which  hold  the  bodies  of   approximately  41,000  victims,  are  fully  accessible  to  visitors  who  may  view  the   shelved  contents,  categorized  by  skulls,  femurs,  and  other  assorted  bones.    As  with   Nyamata,  the  church  at  Ntarama,  which  saw  the  death  of  approximately  5,000   people,  is  now  filled  with  the  randomly  piled  bones,  clothes  and  belongings  of   victims.    Two  sets  of  metal  shelves,  later  installed  at  the  front  and  back  of  the   church,  hold  additional  skeletons  and  personal  belongings,  while  outside  the  church   a  makeshift  memorial  garden  features  flowers  and  an  incomplete  wall  of  inscribed   victim  names.    The  memorial  at  Bisesero,  also  referred  to  as  the  "Hill  of  Resistance",   is  comprised  of  nine  small  outbuildings,  which  represent  the  nine  communes   formerly  constituting  the  province  of  Kibuye.    At  the  foot  of  the  hill  is  a  shed  housing   the  remains  of  over  1,000  victims.  The  remaining  buildings,  ranging  from  an   abstract  archway  to  a  bunker-like  structure  to  four  empty  exhibition  buildings,  are   connected  by  stone  steps  that  lead  up  to  a  set  of  mass  graves.    Over  50,000  victims   are  buried  at  Bisesero.    The  national  memorial  at  Nyanza,  where  over  2,000  victims   were  murdered  following  a  death  march  from  the  outskirts  of  Kigali,  consisted   originally  of  rows  of  wooden  crosses,  which  have  more  recently  been  replaced  by   less  conspicuous  concrete-topped  mass  graves.    Nyarubuye  consists  of  a  convent   and  school  where  an  estimated  20,000  people  were  killed.    In  2003,  the  school   became  functional  again,  while  the  convent  remains  empty  apart  from  the  bones  of  

  

20  

the  victims.    Only  the  Murambi  Memorial  Centre,  also  a  former  school  where   approximately  27,000  people  were  killed,  will  eventually  come  closest  to  replicating   the  experience  of  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre.    It  is  presently  a  series  of   outbuildings  where  hundreds  of  intact  corpses  and  loose  bones  have  been   temporarily  preserved  and  presented  on  slatted  wood  tables.     However  construction  at  the  Centre,  currently  being  completed  by  Kigali  Genocide   Memorial  Centre  and  Aegis  Trust  UK  staff,  will  result  in  an  exhibition  similar  to  that   at  the  KGMC,  which  is  slated  to  open  on  May  26,  2011.  

  
Fig.  4.  Frank  Wolf,  "Deep  gashes  delivered  by  the  killers  are  visible  in  the  skulls  that   fill  one  room  at  the  Murambi  School,"  2001.  Courtesy  of  U.S.  Government  Photos  and   Images.         

   Fig.  5.  Sean  Kilpatrick,  "Governor  General  Michaelle  Jean  visits  the  Kigali  Memorial   Centre  in  Kigali,  Rwanda,"  2010.  Courtesy  of  The  Canadian  Press.  

  

  

21  

As  evidenced  by  the  similarities  between  the  other  six  national  memorial   sites,  the  tendency  in  Rwanda  ­and  indeed  many  post-conflict  developing  nations­   is  to  display  personal  effects  and  human  remains  at  memorial  sites  in  lieu  of  formal   exhibitions  incorporating  text  and  images.    The  display  of  a  victim's  belongings  is   not  unique  to  the  developing  world;  by  the  1990's,  the  exhibition  of  Holocaust   victims'  personal  property,  influenced  by  the  collection  of  the  Auschwitz  II-Birkenau   Memorial  Museum,  was  commonplace.17    The  corporeal  nature  of  clothing  in   particular,  perhaps  the  most  commonly  exhibited  personal  item  in  Rwandan   memorials,  makes  it  an  especially  suitable  surrogate  for  the  bodies  themselves,   however  the  necessity  of  such  a  surrogate  is  debatable.    While  the  display  of  human   remains  has  been  deemed  by  the  United  States  Holocaust  Memorial  Museum  as   "offensive  to  the  memory  of  the  dead"18  and  while  other  Holocaust  memorials  have   since  echoed  the  sentiment,  it  remains  common  practice  in  Rwanda.    The  most   readily  accepted  explanation  for  this  is  that  the  sight  of  death  is  commonplace  in   developing  nations,  where  disease  is  prevalent  and  life  expectancy  is  lower.     However,  it  is  less  likely  that  human  remains  are  exhibited  because  life  expectancy   is  low  than  because  the  cost  of  memorialization  is  high.    The  exhibition  of  human   remains  can  indeed  be  attributed  to  several  factors,  including  the  fiscal  and  practical   impossibility  of  identifying  and  thus  properly  burying  upwards  of  one  million   people,  as  well  as  the  perceived  need  to  provide  proof  to  the  external  international   community  and  internal  genocide  deniers.19    Whatever  the  reason,  the  accepted   tendency  to  exhibit  human  remains  in  Rwanda  was  supplanted  by  the  Aegis  Trust's   plans  for  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre  and  its  exhibitions.    The  inclusion  of   token  remains,  encased  subtly  behind  smoked  glass,  represented  a  compromise   between  the  accepted  standards  of  Holocaust  memorial  sites  and  those  related  to                                                                                                                   
17  Paul  Williams,  Memorial  Museums:  The  Global  Rush  to  Commemorate  Atrocities  (Oxford:  Berg  Publishers,  

2007),  29.  

18  Edward  T.  Linenthal,  Preserving  Memory:  The  Struggle  to  Create  America's  Holocaust  Museum  (New  York:  

Columbia  University  Press,  2001),  213.  

19  Genocide  denial  and  revisionism  remain  ongoing  issues  in  Rwanda.    Accusations  that  the  Tutsi  engaged  in  a  

"counter-genocide"  against  the  Hutu,  for  example,  are  supported  by  Pierre  Péan's  text  Black  Furies,  White  Liars,   published  in  2005.  

  

22  

the  Rwandan  genocide.    "For  those  who  say  it  is  undignified  to  show  bones,  we're   burying  them,  in  a  sense,  behind  dark  glass,"  explained  Aegis  Trust  co-founder  and   Chief  Executive  Dr.  James  Smith.  "For  those  who  say  it  is  necessary  to  see  the  death,   we're  accommodating  them,  too."20    While  perhaps  as  diplomatic  a  resolution  as   possible,  the  decision  to  tailor  the  inclusion  of  human  remains  to  European   standards  is  still  emblematic  of  the  overall  Westernization  of  the  KGMC.    As  are  the   contents  and  structure  of  the  exhibitions'  text  panels,  all  of  which  were  written  and   designed  by  employees  of  Aegis  Trust's  head  office  in  the  UK,  before  being  shipped   to  Rwanda  for  installation.    The  aforementioned  artistic  interpretations  also  display   a  certain  Eurocentricity;  the  stained-glass  windows  were  commissions  created  by   Ardyn  Halter,  whose  father,  Roman  Halter,  was  a  survivor  of  the  Auschwitz  death   camp.    Aegis'  European  influence  further  extends  to  the  Education  Centre,  whose   civic  education  programming  for  Rwandan  schoolchildren  is  "based  on  the   successful  work  that  has  already  been  carried  out  through  teaching  about  the   Holocaust  at  the  [Aegis  Trust-run]  Holocaust  Centre  in  Nottinghamshire,  UK."21     While  the  myriad  differences  between  the  Holocaust  and  the  Rwandan  genocide   need  not  be  reiterated,  the  importance  of  not  painting  two  entirely  different  events   with  same  brush,  so  to  speak,  bears  repeating.    If  the  primary  goal  is,  as  it  should  be,   to  enable  Rwandans  to  reconcile  and  reclaim  their  own  troubled  history  through  the   KGMC,  then  they  should  be  encouraged  to  do  so  in  their  own  way.    The  selection  of   images  and  text,  of  artworks,  and  of  educational  programming,  as  well  as  the   decision  to  include  or  exclude  human  remains  should  not  be  the  choice  of  a   European  institution  working  within  a  Holocaust  mindset;  it  should  be  the  choice  of   Rwandans.    This  is  a  point  that  will  again  be  addressed  in  the  concluding  sections  of   this  paper;  for  the  fixedness  of  the  main  building's  exhibitions  does  not  prevent  the   greater  input  of  the  Rwandan  community  in  the  future.    With  its  recent  expansion  to   include  the  physical  and  digital  Genocide  Archive  of  Rwanda,  the  KGMC's   Documentation  Centre  stands  to  become  as  important  a  resource  as  the  exhibitions                                                                                                                   
20  Marc  Lacey,  "10  Years  Later  in  Rwanda,  the  Dead  are  Ever  Present,"  New  York  Times,  February  26,  2004,  A8.   21  Kigali  Memorial  Centre.  "Education  Project."  Last  modified  March,  2004,  http://  

www.kigalimemorialcentre.org/old/doccentre  /index.html  

  

23  

themselves.    Not  simply  a  hub  for  the  digitization  of  documents,  the  Centre  and  its   staff  are  interested  in  giving  information  back  out  to  the  public  as  opposed  to   merely  taking  it  in.    Several  strategies  will  facilitate  their  giving  back,  namely  the   Genocide  Archive  of  Rwanda  web  database  (globally  accessible  and  free  of  charge),   the  eventual  on-site  accessibility  of  physical  artifacts  to  eligible  researchers  and   educators,  and  the  proposed  creation  of  one  or  more  traveling  exhibitions   showcasing  such  artifacts.       Under  consideration  for  the  inaugural  exhibition  is  the  aforementioned   collection  of  state  identity  card  photographs.    In  part,  their  suitability  for  exhibition   can  be  attributed  to  the  simple  fact  that  they  are  the  largest  cohesive  set  of   photographs  in  the  archive  to  date.    While  broad  subject  categories  of  images  exist   within  the  Genocide  Archive  of  Rwanda  website  ("Victim  Photographs",  "Alleged   Perpetrator  Photographs",  etcetera22)  these  particular  photos  belong  to  the  largest   sub-collection,  that  is  a  depiction  made  by  the  same  photographer  or  in  the  same   place  at  the  same  time.    A  better  justification  for  their  exhibition,  however,  is  their   status  as  pre-genocide  state  identity  card  photographs,  and  it  is  the  importance  of   this  very  distinction  that  is  the  subject  of  the  following  section.                                             

                                                                                                                
22  A  complete  list  of  photographic  subject  categories  is  available  on  the  Genocide  Archive  Rwanda  website:  

http://www.genocidearchiverwanda.org.rw/index.php/Category:Photographs.    

  

24  

5.  

State  Identification  Cards  Within  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre   The  Rwandan  genocide  left  more  than  corpses  in  its  wake:  it  created  a  

cultural  divide  so  significant  it  was  uncertain  whether  Rwanda  as  a  nation  would   ever  fully  recover.  In  an  effort  to  instill  feelings  of  unity  and  to  promote  national   healing,  Rwanda's  rebuilt  government  immediately  enacted  laws  strictly  prohibiting   any  and  all  emphasis  on  ethnic  affiliation.    The  mere  discussion  of  ethnicity  has  been   formally  outlawed  in  Rwanda,  where  one  can  now  stand  trial  for  pointedly   questioning  the  ethnic  identity  of  another.23    To  that  end,  following  the  genocide   new  identification  cards  were  issued  which  omitted  the  tribal  origin  of  the  card   bearer  (Ubwoko/ethnie).    New  residency  cards  were  issued  in  1995  and  new   national  identification  cards  in  1996.     The  collection  of  photographs  currently  housed  by  the  Kigali  Genocide   Memorial  Centre  was  originally  recovered  from  the  genocide  survivor  organization   IBUKA  before  being  migrated  to  the  KGMC  for  digital  and  physical  archivation.    In   the  absence  of  further  information  indicating  their  provenance,  several  visual  clues   have  informed  their  interpretation  as  pre-genocide  state  identification  card   photographs.  One  such  clue  is  the  overall  uniformity  of  the  photographs'   appearance.    The  photos  affixed  to  identification  cards  issued  during  or  prior  to   1995  were  taken  at  communal  offices  or  by  itinerant  photographers  there  from,   whereas  the  photos  affixed  to  newer  cards  are  brought  in  by  the  applicants   themselves.24    Since  many  of  the  sitters  appear  in  front  of  the  same  (or  a  similar)   backdrop,  it  is  likely  that  the  photographer  was  the  same,  or  at  least  employed  by   the  same  studio.    Another  clue  is  the  inscription  on  the  back  of  each  photo,  which   presumably  states  where  in  Rwanda  each  sitter  resides.    Regardless  of  when  it  was   produced,  each  finished  identification  card  bears  the  name  of  the  prefecture  or   province  where  they  were  (or  are)  to  be  issued.    Prior  to  the  genocide,  standard                                                                                                                   
23  In  2004  the  Rwandan  Penal  Code  officially  criminalized  all  acts  considered  to  encourage  divisionism  or  

sectarianism.    The  code  threatens imprisonment to anyone who speaks of ethnicity in a "divisive manner".  
24  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada.  "Rwanda:  Procedure  for  obtaining  or  replacing  a  national  

identification  card  including  a  description  of  the  card  and  information  on  the  `attestation  d'identité'  signed  by  a   burgomaster."  Last  modified  June  14,  2007,  http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/47d65476c.html.  

  

25  

administrative  titles  for  geographic  regions  were  Prefecture,  Commune,  Secteur,   and  Cellule,  whereas  after  the  genocide,  geographic  regions  were  referred  to  via   Province,  District,  Sector  and  Cell.25    Since  all  of  the  inscriptions  use  the  titles   Prefecture,  Commune,  Secteur  and  Cellule,  it  is  safe  to  assume  they  were  written   before  1995.     A  third  clue  is  the  age  range  of  the  depicted  sitters,  which  is  surprisingly   narrow  considering  the  quantity  of  images.    For  such  a  large  number  of  images   presumably  taken  by  the  same  studio  or  individual  photographer  not  to  depict  a   broader  spectrum  of  sitters  is  indeed  curious.  While  the  exact  age  of  each  sitter  is   impossible  to  determine,  many  of  the  images  contain  inscriptions  on  the  verso  that   include  the  letters  "E.S",  likely  the  abbreviation  of  École  Secondaire,  and  in  one   instance  the  word  Collège,  also  suggesting  a  secondary  school.    If  all  of  the  sitters  are   approximately  the  same  age,  as  they  appear  to  be,  and  if  some  of  them  attended   specific  secondary  schools,  then  it  is  safe  to  assume  they  are  all  between  the  ages  of   fourteen  and  seventeen.26    Finally,  that  they  are  indeed  identification  card   photographs  and  not  simply  high  school  portraits  is  verified  by  the  fact  that,  unlike   in  the  West,  it  is  not  customary  for  Rwandan  students  to  have  their  portraits  taken   every  year.    Nor  is  the  production  of  high  school  yearbooks  common  within  Rwanda.     Again,  without  additional  information  on  the  photographs'  provenance,  it  is   impossible  to  know  their  exact  origin.    However,  the  combination  of  these  visual   clues  suggests  the  photos  fulfilled  an  important  role  in  Rwandan  history  and  are   therefore  deserving  of  additional  study  through  exhibition.                If  the  photographs  were  indeed  produced  for  use  on  identification  cards  issued  

prior  to  1994,  they  represent  a  powerful  genocidal  tool.    Better  still,  they  represent  a   genocidal  tool  that  is  less  likely  to  offend  a  contemporary  museum  audience.     Compared  to  the  presentation  of  actual  killing  apparatuses  (common  to  many                                                                                                                   
25  "Rwanda:  Procedure  for  obtaining  or  replacing  a  national  identification  card  including  a  description  of  the  

card  and  information  on  the  `attestation  d'identité'  signed  by  a  burgomaster"  

26  Rwandan  youth  are  only  issued  identification  cards  at  or  after  the  age  of  sixteen,  whereas  the  names  of  

children  under  sixteen  years  of  age  are  typically  written  on  their  father's  identification  card.  

  

26  

memorial  museums  worldwide),  the  exhibition  of  identity  cards  is  both  less   offensive  and  more  accessible  to  viewers,  since  identity  documents  say  more  about   the  logical  bureaucracy  of  genocide  than  its  unimaginable  brutality.    This  is  due   largely  to  their  employment  of  the  headshot,  which  has  fulfilled  numerous   bureaucratic  functions  throughout  the  history  of  photography.    To  look  at  even  the   most  modern  ID  photograph  within  a  museum  context  is  to  subconsciously  call  to   mind  the  many  uses  of  the  headshot  historically.    For  example,  to  view  the   identically  expressionless  faces  of  Africans  in  particular  evokes  ethnographic   portraiture,  and  thus  allows  for  the  discussion  of  the  Rwandan  ID  cards'  colonial   origins  and  subsequent  discriminatory  applications.    Likewise,  a  headshot  of  any   kind  indirectly  references  the  prison  mug-shot,  a  comparable  tool  of  intervention   and  of  control  over  subjects  from  whom  all  rights  have  been  stripped.  This  allows   for  the  analysis  of  the  ID  cards  in  terms  of  their  Tutsi  subjects'  presumed  innocence   (wherein  that  subject  is  seen  as  undeserving  of  their  cruel  fate)  versus  implied   criminality  (wherein  the  subject  is  seen  as  having  brought  that  fate  upon  his  or   herself).    Headshots  simultaneously  say  everything  and  nothing  about  their  subjects,   describing  their  physical  selves  in  perfect  detail  while  leaving  their  mental,   emotional,  social,  and  political  identities  open  to  interpretation.             That  identity  cards  permit  so  many  entry  points  into  the  discussion  of   genocide  suggests  that  they  aught  to  be  seen  publicly.    Perhaps  the  most  powerful   argument  for  why  these  specific  works  should  be  presented  to  the  public,  however,   is  rooted  not  in  what  they  are,  but  what  they  are  not.    For  as  emblematic  as  these   photos  are  of  the  atrocities  committed  in  Rwanda,  these  are  not  atrocity   photographs  insofar  as  Barbie  Zelizer  and  other  photographic  theorists  have   defined  them.    In  other  words,  they  are  not  the  explicit  images  of  human  suffering   that  the  world  has  come  to  know  and  expect  in  the  wake  of  early,  and  now  iconic,   photographic  depictions  of  mass  atrocity  such  as  those  produced  during  World  War   II.       

  

27  

6.  

The  Emergence  of  Atrocity  Photography  Within  Wartime   Photojournalism   The  Holocaust  is  widely  considered  to  be  the  touchstone  for  both  public  

recognition  of  atrocity  photographs,  and  for  debate  surrounding  their  presentation   and  reception.27  While  it  is  estimated  that  approximately  two  million  Holocaust- related  images  can  be  found  in  the  public  archives  of  over  twenty  nations,28  most   people  are  familiar  with  only  an  iconic  few.    Among  them  are  the  harrowing   depictions  of  emaciated  concentration  camp  survivors,  huddled  in  overcrowded   bunks  or  behind  barbed-wire  fences,  as  well  as  the  unflinching  inventories  of   victims'  remains,  both  of  which  were  captured  in  equal  measure  by  famed   photographer  Margaret  Bourke-White.    The  specific  iconicity  of  Margaret  Bourke- White's  photographs  depicting  prisoners  at  the  Buchenwald  concentration  camp  can   be  attributed  to  the  conflation  of  circumstances  that  accompanied  their  creation.     These  circumstances  include  the  increased  capabilities  of  photographic  technology   and  their  impact  on  the  field  of  wartime  photojournalism.    They  also  include  the   forums  through  which  photojournalistic  images  of  conflict  came  to  be  seen  by  such  a   wide  audience,  as  well  as  the  changes  to  censorship  laws  that  permitted  their   publication  in  the  first  place.         The  Crimean  War  (1853-1856)  and  the  American  Civil  War  (1861-1865)   were  among  the  first  conflicts  to  be  captured  photographically.    Many  of  the  most   impactful  images  thereof  merely  depicted  the  aftermath  of  war,  often  staged,  as   photographic  technology  was  not  yet  advanced  enough  to  allow  for  the  realistic   capture  of  combat.29    It  was  the  Spanish  Civil  War  (1936-1939)  that  was  the  first  to   be  covered  in  the  contemporary  sense:  by  professional  photojournalists  whose   work  was  immediately  printed  in  newspapers  and  magazines.    The  most  iconic   image  to  emerge  from  the  Spanish  Civil  War  was  Robert  Capa's  "Loyalist  Militiaman   at  the  Moment  of  Death",  allegedly  taken  at  Cerro  Muriano  on  September  5,  1936.30                                                                                                                     
27  Williams,  Memorial  Museums:  The  Global  Rush  to  Commemorate  Atrocities,  54.   28  Sybil  Milton,  "Photographs  of  the  Warsaw  Ghetto,"  Simon  Wiesenthal  Center  Annual  3  (1986):  307.   29  Depictions  of  war  as  we  know  them  were  only  made  possible  by  the  advent  of  lightweight  cameras,  such  as  

the  Leica,  and  of  35-mm  film,  officially  introduced  in  1925  and  1934,  respectively.  

30  Also  known  as  The  Falling  Soldier,  the  photograph's  subject  was  originally  identified  as  a  Workers'  Party  of  

Marxist  Unification  militiaman  who  was  shot  in  Cerro  Muriano  on  the  Cordoba  Front.  However,  the  authenticity  

  

28  

The  photo  appears  exactly  as  its  title  describes,  depicting  a  Republican  soldier  at  the   very  moment  he  is  hit  by  an  enemy  bullet.       

      While  perhaps  tame  by  today's  standards,  at  the  time  of  its  initial  publication  in  the   September  23,  1936  issue  of  the  French  pictorial  magazine  Vu,  Capa's  image  was  a   shocking  sight.    Indeed,  that  was  the  intention.    In  addition  to  documenting  conflict,   photojournalistic  images  of  war  were  intended  to  arrest  attention  and  thus  to  sell   magazines.    Fittingly,  the  early  advertising  slogan  of  Paris  Match,  another  French   photo  magazine  that  would  fill  the  void  left  by  the  short-lived  Vu,  read,  "The  weight   of  words,  the  shock  of  photos."31    It  would  appear  that  somewhere  between  Vu's   publication  of  Capa's  militiaman  in  1936  and  the  founding  of  Paris  Match  in  1949,   the  use  of  such  shock  tactics  became  common  practice  in  wartime  photojournalism.     If  any  one  photojournalistic  forum  served  to  set  the  precedent  for  the  kinds  of  
Fig.  6.  Robert  Capa,  "Loyalist  Militiaman  at  the  Moment  of  Death,"  September  5,  1936.     Courtesy  of  Life  Magazine.      

                                                                                                                
of  this  photograph  has  been  widely  disputed.    Numerous  publications  allege  that  the  photograph  could  not  have   been  taken  where,  when,  or  how  Capa  had  suggested.  
31  Sontag,  Regarding  the  Pain  of  Others,  23.  

  

29  

conflict  imagery  the  general  public  was  not  only  permitted32  but  encouraged  to  see,   it  was  Life  magazine.       Launched  in  the  wake  of  Capa's  militiaman  on  November  23,  1936,  Life   likewise  did  not  shy  away  the  depiction  of  difficult  subject  matter,  nor  could  it.     When  the  first  issue  of  Life  appeared  on  newsstands,  the  United  States  was  in  the   midst  of  the  Great  Depression  and  the  world  was  headed  towards  war.    Preceded  by   Vu,  the  German  Berliner  Illustrierte  Zeitung,  the  British  Weekly  Illustrated  and   Picture  Post,  and  a  host  of  American  magazines  including  National  Geographic  and   Vanity  Fair,  Life  was  hardly  an  anomalous  publication.    It  was,  however,  helmed  by   an  experienced  publisher  (Luce  was  also  responsible  for  the  weekly  news  magazine   Time  and  the  business  monthly  Fortune)  and  employed  some  of  the  most  celebrated   photojournalists  in  the  history  of  the  medium.    During  the  conflict  Life's  circulation   skyrocketed,  from  380,000  copies  of  the  first  issue  to  more  than  two  million  by  the   onset  of  World  War  II,33  and  the  magazine  consistently  endeavoured  to  provide  its   substantial  audience  with  as  thorough  a  picture  of  the  war  as  possible,  given  the  U.S.   War  Department's  ongoing  policy  of  pictorial  censorship.    It  was  not  until  mid-1943,   when  Allied  victory  seemed  imminent  and  when  the  formal  suppression  of   contentious  imagery  was  abandoned,  that  Life  was  at  liberty  to  publish  its  first  "real"   photograph  of  war,  George  Strock's  shocking  "Three  dead  Americans  on  the  beach  at   Buna",  printed  in  the  September  20  issue.34      

                                                                                                                
32  The  First  World  War  saw  a  strictly  enforced  ban  on  press  photography;  in  particular  the  German  and  French  

high  commands  allowed  only  a  select  few  military  photographers  at  the  front.  
33  Doss,  Looking  at  Life  Magazine,  2.  

34  While  photographs  of  anonymous  American  casualties  had  appeared  in  earlier  publications,  their  faces  were  

always  concealed  for  the  sake  of  dignity.    Strock's  image  depicted  two  soldiers  lying  face-down  and  a  third  lying   face-up,  making  it  the  first  image  of  dead  American  troops  to  appear  in  media  during  World  War  II  without  their   bodies  being  enclosed  in  a  coffin,  draped,  or  otherwise  covered.        

  

30  

  
Fig.  7.  George  Strock,  "Three  dead  Americans  on  the  beach  at  Buna,"   September  20,  1943.    Courtesy  of  Life  Magazine.  

   Over  the  remaining  two  years  of  the  war,  the  now  uninhibited  Life  dispatched   twenty-one  photographers  to  various  combat  zones.    Through  Life  the  prevalence   and  popularity  of  grittily  "realistic"  wartime  photography  grew.    Even  as  the  war   came  to  a  close,  the  magazine  spared  no  expense  in  its  reportage.    A  total  of  eight   Life  photographers  were  stationed  along  the  Western  front  to  cover  the  close  of   World  War  II,  almost  as  many  photojournalists  as  every  other  picture  and  news   agency  put  together.35    Inevitably,  many  of  them  photographed  concentration  camps   in  the  first  days  following  their  liberation,  and  it  was  through  these  images  that  the   ever-intensifying  photojournalism  of  World  War  II  unwittingly  evolved  into  an   entirely  new  genre  of  imagery.       Of  those  eight  Life  photographers,  four  would  be  featured  in  the  magazine's   infamous  May  7,  1945  article,  "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities."    As  the   photographs'  accompanying  text  would  attest,  "many  people  refused  to  put  much   faith  in  stories  about  the  inhuman  Nazi  treatment  of  prisoners...  For  the  first  time                                                                                                                   
35  Jonathan  Silverman,  For  the  World  to  See:  The  Life  of  Margaret  Bourke-White  (New  York:  Viking  Press,  1983),  

151.  

  

31  

[this]  was  irrefutable  evidence."36    That  evidence  came  in  the  form  of  twelve   photographs,  of  which  William  Vandivert,  who  would  also  be  the  first  to  photograph   Hitler's  bunker,  contributed  five.  George  Rodger  contributed  four  photographs,   while  Johnny  Florea  was  credited  with  one.    Only  two  of  the  twelve  images  were   attributed  to  Margaret  Bourke-White,  images  whose  gruesomeness  paled  in   comparison  to  the  contributions  of  her  colleagues.    

                                                                                                                
36  "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"  Life  magazine,  May  7,  1945,  33.  

  

32  

  
(top)  Fig.  8.  "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"(pg  32-33)  May  7,  1945.  Courtesy  of  Life   Magazine.   (bottom  left)  Fig.  9.  Margaret  Bourke-White,  "In  the  barracks  at  Buchenwald"  from  "The  Week's   Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"  May  7,  1945.  Courtesy  of  Life  Magazine.   (bottom  right)  Fig.  10.  Margaret  Bourke-White,  "Deformed  by  malnutrition"  from  "The  Week's   Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"  May  7,  1945.  Courtesy  of  Life  Magazine.  

  

33  

   Fig.  11.  "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"(pg  34-35  and  pg  36-37)  May  7,  1945.  Courtesy   of  Life  Magazine.  

  

34  

   Of  the  twelve  photographs,  only  Bourke-White's  two  would  depict  living   prisoners.    In  one  photograph  the  prisoners  are  even  shown  eating,  waving  and   smiling.    And  yet  it  was  these  images,  as  part  of  Bourke-White's  larger  photographic   series  from  Buchenwald,  that  would  leave  the  most  lasting  impression.    This  larger   collection  of  photographs  pictured  what  Bourke-White  would  later  recount  as  "the   piles  of  naked,  lifeless  bodies,  the  human  skeletons  in  furnaces,  the  living  skeletons   who  would  die  the  next  day...  the  pieces  of  tattooed  skin  for  lampshades."37    Despite   her  grim  description,  however,  it  was  never  Bourke-White's  intention  to   sensationalize  the  subjects  of  her  photographs.  In  her  autobiography,  Portrait  of   Myself,  Bourke-White  would  later  reflect,  "The  war  was  racing  toward  its  close  in   that  crucial  spring  of  1945,  and  we  correspondents  were  hard  pressed  to  keep  up   with  the  march  of  events...  No  time  to  think  about  it  or  interpret  it.    Just  rush  to   photograph  it;  write  it;  cable  it.    Record  it  now  ­  think  about  it  later.    History  will   form  the  judgments."38    As  objective  a  record  as  they  attempted  to  provide,   photographers  like  Margaret  Bourke-White  were  not  without  their  biases  or   personal  agendas.    Bourke-White's  priorities  included  self-preservation,  as  she  has   since  famously  stated,  "Using  the  camera  was  almost  a  relief.    It  interposed  a  slight   barrier  between  myself  and  the  horror  in  front  of  me."39    As  the  first  female  war   correspondent  as  well  as  the  first  female  photographer  for  Life,  it  is  entirely  possible   that  Bourke-White's  implied  sensitivity  towards  her  subjects  also  contributed  to  the   impact  of  her  Buchenwald  images.    Undoubtedly,  so  did  the  editorial  choices  made   by  Life  magazine,  whose  call  to  arms  printed  immediately  above  Bourke-White's   images  read,  "Dead  men  will  have  indeed  died  in  vain  if  live  men  refuse  to  look  at   them."40    To  accurately  report  an  historical  event,  photographically  or  otherwise,   requires  a  witness.  Further,  within  a  forum  reliant  upon  the  constant  reproduction   and  dissemination  of  images  to  sell  magazines,  witnessing  requires  the  creation  of  a                                                                                                                   
37  Margaret  Bourke-White,  Portrait  of  Myself  (New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1963),  258-259.     38  Bourke-White,  Portrait  of  Myself,  258-259.   39  Bourke-White,  Portrait  of  Myself,  258-259.  

40  "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities,"  33.  

  

35  

so-called  star  witness,  celebrated  for  their  ability  to  capture  particularly  arresting   photographs.41    Through  her  photographs  of  Buchenwald,  Margaret  Bourke-White   became  Life's  star  witness  to  the  Holocaust,  and  in  doing  so  unwittingly  set  the   precedent  for  all  subsequent  depictions  of  genocide.       

                                                                                                                
41  Sontag,  Regarding  the  Pain  of  Others,  33.  

  

36  

7.  

Arguments  For  and  Against  the  Use  of  Atrocity  Photographs   If  all  photographs  echo  photographs,42  as  the  continuous  usage  of  certain  

photographic  tropes  can  attest,  then  it  is  inevitable  that  the  images  of  subsequent   atrocities  would  reference  the  concentration  camp  photographs  of  1945.    Not   guaranteed,  however,  was  that  all  photojournalists  would  treat  the  subject  matter   with  such  sensitivity  and  (in  hindsight)  such  artistry  as  Margaret  Bourke-White.     Thus,  while  relegated  to  the  same  purpose,  not  all  photographs  of  genocide   ultimately  performed  the  same  function  for  their  viewers.    With  the  advent  and   ensuing  proliferation  of  memorial  museums  in  the  wake  of  World  War  II,   photojournalistic  images  of  genocide  were  nonetheless  plucked  from  the  pages  of   newspapers  and  magazines  and  placed  on  the  museum  wall.    Their  original  function   there  was  to  corroborate  text-  or  object-based  exhibition  narratives,43  as  with  the   revelation  of  an  atrocity  comes  the  expectation  of  photographic  evidence  thereof.     This  evidence  typically  took  the  form  of  casualties  and  other  depictions  of  human   suffering.    Exhibited  alongside  explanatory  text  panels,  maps,  and  artifacts  both   personal  and  militaristic,  atrocity  photographs  functioned  as  but  one  piece  of  the   puzzle.    However,  as  the  overarching  institutional  attitude  towards  photography   evolved,  the  perceived  legitimacy  of  the  medium  and  thus  its  presence  within   museums  ­historical,  cultural  and  artistic­  became  more  pronounced.    Over  time,   photographs  became  increasingly  central  to  the  memorial  museum  experience,  and   with  this  shift  in  the  institutional  visibility  of  photography  came  arguments  against   the  use  of  explicit  atrocity  images  in  illustrating  the  alleged  reality  of  conflict.       The  first  such  argument  suggests  that  atrocity  images,  regardless  of  where   they  are  encountered,  are  inherently  voyeuristic.    In  pursuit  of  realism,   photojournalists  are  permitted  ­perhaps  even  required­  to  take  shocking   photographs.  That  there  is  often  shame  as  well  as  shock  in  viewing  atrocity  images   suggests  that  not  everyone  should  be  permitted  or  required  to  see  them.    The                                                                                                                   
42  Sontag,  Regarding  the  Pain  of  Others,  84.   43  Williams,  Memorial  Museums:  The  Global  Rush  to  Commemorate  Atrocities,  51.  

  

37  

counter-argument  to  this  is  that  atrocity  images  can  function  as  a  rallying  cry,  that   they  can  impel  average  people  to  assist  in  ending  the  suffering  of  others.    For   photographs  to  incite  public  outrage,  and  thereby  create  change,  they  must  shock.     However,  does  this  shock  not  expire?    Another  argument  against  the  use  of  graphic   atrocity  photographs  is  that  the  proliferation  thereof  has  desensitized  the  public  to   their  impact.    Civil  War  photographer  Alexander  Gardner  once  wrote  of  his  images,   "Here  are  the  dreadful  details!  Let  them  aid  in  preventing  such  another  calamity   from  falling  upon  the  nation."44    Almost  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  later,  with  two   World  Wars  and  countless  other  conflicts  under  America's  belt,  Gardner's  hope  for   his  photographs  seems  sadly  naïve.    More  often  than  not,  national  cries  of  "Never   again!"  are  being  ignored,  in  part  because  of  apathy.    While  constant  exposure  to   violent  imagery  can  indeed  cause  viewers  to  "turn  off",  they  may  also  become   unresponsive  as  a  result  of  fear,  which  manifests  as  an  unwillingness  or  inability  to   look  closer.    It  used  to  be  believed  that  showing  shocking  images  of  war  was   guaranteed  to  elicit  an  emotional  response.    Consequently,  photographers  became   increasingly  concerned  about  the  moral  implications  of  provoking  and  exploiting   sentiment.    But  while  a  percentage  of  people  will  be  made  to  feel  sad  or  angry  by   depictions  of  extreme  violence,  many  others  will  simply  shut  down.    For  some   viewers,  corpses  will  not  necessarily  register  as  real  human  beings,  both  because   they  cannot  and  will  not  regard  them  as  such.    Incapable  of  identifying  with  the   photographs'  subjects,  nor  of  understanding  the  personal  toll  that  war  took  on  them,   they  can  easily  view  victims  of  genocide  with  a  sense  of  detachment.    For  these   viewers,  traditional  atrocity  images  do  not  stand  to  teach  anything  about  the   conflict,  and  indeed  this  is  a  common  complaint.    If  the  goal  of  atrocity  images  is  to   appeal  to  human  emotion  by  either  evoking  or  suppressing  it  then  perhaps  such   images  have  been  successful,  however  they  are  of  little  help  if  the  task  is  instead  to   understand.  The  problem  is  not  that  people  remember  through  photographs,  but  

                                                                                                                
44  Alexander  Gardner,  Gardner's  Photographic  Sketch  Book  of  the  Civil  War  (New  York:  Dover  Publications,  

1959),  56.    

  

38  

that  they  remember  only  photographs,45  in  part  because  they  have  had  little  to  no   direct  experience  of  the  event  itself.    It  is  in  this  way  that  atrocity  images  over  time   may  become  empty  symbols,  visual  sound  bites  to  prompt  the  recollection  of  an   event.     Thus  far,  the  arguments  against  atrocity  photographs  could  relate  to  their   use  in  any  forum:  in  newspapers  and  magazines,  in  books,  on  television  or  over  the   Internet.    Bearing  in  mind  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre's  impending   inaugural  show,  the  task  now  is  to  address  the  implications  of  utilizing  atrocity   images  specifically  in  exhibition.    As  museum  walls  become  metaphorically  less   concrete,  and  as  atrocity  images  are  disseminated  through  digital  galleries  or  are   otherwise  exhibited  beyond  them,  the  list  of  problems  associated  with  their  usage   grows.    First,  as  long  as  atrocity  photographs  can  be  considered  art  ­and  arguably   this  is  what  they  become  when  hung  on  certain  institutional  walls­  they  will   inevitably  be  aestheticized.46    That  images  of  human  suffering  could  be  considered   beautiful,  even  in  the  sublimely  tragic  sense  of  the  word,  is  inherently  unsettling.     While  photography  has  long  since  been  acknowledged  as  a  fine  art,  and   practitioners  like  Robert  Capa  or  Margaret  Bourke-White  exhibited  in  both   photojournalistic  and  artistic  contexts,  museum  goers  and  photographic  theorists   alike  still  struggle  to  reconcile  the  dual  capability  of  photographs  to  document  and   to  assign  aesthetic  value.      Perhaps  it  is  because  the  two  functions  have  the  capacity   to  cancel  each  other  out.    Indeed  a  beautiful  photograph  has  the  ability  to  turn   attention  away  from  its  serious  subject  matter  and  onto  the  medium  itself,  thereby   compromising  the  picture's  status  as  documented  proof.    Likewise,  a  documentary   photograph  whose  subject  matter  is  particularly  disturbing  has  the  potential  to   detract  from  the  fact  that  it  is  nonetheless  a  carefully  composed  aesthetic  object.     That  Bourke-White  was  rebranded  an  artist  only  after  her  images  of  Buchenwald   were  made  somehow  saves  them  from  this  debate.    Not  so  for  photojournalists   working  in  the  wake  of  photography's  acceptance  as  fine  art,  who  must  increasingly                                                                                                                   
45  Sontag,  Regarding  the  Pain  of  Others,  89.   46  Williams,  Memorial  Museums:  The  Global  Rush  to  Commemorate  Atrocities,  56.  

  

39  

consider  where  their  images  might  end  up.    The  same  photograph  will  read   differently  when  experienced  in  any  number  of  contexts;  in  a  memorial  museum,  a   photography  museum,  a  contemporary  art  gallery,  or  an  exhibition  catalogue.    A   photograph  deemed  acceptable  in  one  context  may  well  offend  in  another,  and  this   sentiment  applies  not  only  to  the  type  of  institution  in  which  it  is  shown,  but  also  to   other  factors  such  as  the  geographic  region  in  which  that  institution  is  located.       Between  victims  of  genocide  and  viewers  of  genocide-related  imagery  lies  a   vast  difference  in  their  physical,  mental,  and  emotional  proximity  to  war.    Thus  the   types  of  conflict  imagery  exhibited  must  be  considered  in  relation  to  the  audience  to   whom  they  are  being  shown.    Historically,  the  frankness  of  a  conflict  photograph  has   been  directly  proportionate  to  the  distance  of  war;  the  more  remote  or  exotic  the   locale,  the  more  likely  we  are  to  see  graphic  depictions  of  the  dead.    When  the   conflict  lies  closer  to  home,  however,  the  photographer  is  expected  to  show  greater   sensitivity,  in  part  because  the  images'  subjects  are  seen  as  more  relatable.    No   family  member,  friend  or  spouse  of  a  First  World  soldier  wants  to  see  the   photographed  remains  of  dead  combatants,  just  as  no  family  member,  friend  or   spouse  of  an  Third  World  genocide  victim  wants  to  see  the  photographed  remains  of   other  victims.    And  yet  the  exhibition  of  atrocity  photographs  from  other  countries   continues,  oblivious  to  the  considerations  that  deter  such  displays  of  our  own   victims.    What  is  worse,  such  exhibitions  sometimes  originate  in  the  country  in   which  the  conflict  occurred,  having  been  facilitated  by  European  or  Western  funding   and/or  curatorial  input,  as  is  the  case  with  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre.     These  exhibitions  are  seldom  sufficiently  tailored  to  the  wants  and  needs  of  their   traumatized  audience  because  the  Other,  even  when  not  considered  an  enemy,  is   regarded  simply  as  someone  to  be  seen,  rather  than  someone  who  also  sees.47    This   unintentional  tendency  to  other,  having  also  been  alluded  to  in  the  discussion  of   Aegis  UK's  influence  over  the  exhibitions  and  overall  structure  of  the  KGMC,  has  the   potential  to  negatively  impact  the  evolution  of  memorialization  within  developing                                                                                                                   
47  Sontag,  Regarding  the  Pain  of  Others,  72.  

  

40  

nations.    However  necessary  the  financial  assistance  and  advice  of  European  or   Western  memorial  museums  may  be,  it  inevitably  carries  with  it  colonial   implications.    By  aiding  in  the  establishment  of  museums  and  archives  within   developing  nations,  First  World  institutions  imply  that  their  approach  is  the  correct   one,  and  that  the  native  population's  seemingly  intuitive  tendency  to  display  human   remains  and  personal  effects,  for  example,  is  incorrect.    Thus,  as  more  memorials   within  the  developing  world  establish  or  amend  their  exhibitions  to  adopt  the   "correct"  approach,  not  only  are  culturally  specific  methods  of  mourning  and   memorialization  being  lost,  but  atrocity  images  ­with  all  of  their  associated   problems­  are  being  interpreted  as  the  best  way  to  tell  a  people's  tragic  story.     Rather  than  reclaiming  their  history  through  memorial  museums,  victims  of   genocide  are,  in  essence,  being  re-victimized  through  the  perpetuation  of   sensationalistic  photographs.                                         With  the  complex  problems  associated  with  the  dissemination  and  exhibition   of  atrocity  photographs  outlined,  the  next  issue  will  be  to  analyze  the  various   alternatives  to  the  traditional  memorial  museum  approach.    Just  as  improvements  in   photographic  technology  catalyzed  public  interest  in  photojournalistic  images  of   war  in  the  1920's  and  30's,  improvements  in  computer  technology  are  generating   interest  in  another  area  of  photography  today.    The  sudden  accessibility  of   institutional  archives  afforded  by  the  Internet,  among  other  factors,  has  contributed   to  what  French  philosopher  Jacques  Derrida  identified  in  1996  as  archive  fever,  "a   compulsive,  repetitive,  and  nostalgic  desire  for  the  archive,  an  irrepressible  desire   to  return  to  the  origin."48    Derrida's  meditation  on  archives  deconstructs  what  they   mean,  what  they  contain,  and  how  they  come  to  be  constructed.    It  also  provides  the   starting  point  for  the  discussion  of  alternatives  to  the  traditional  atrocity  image   exhibition  model.           

                                                                                                                
48  Jacques  Derrida,  Archive  Fever:  A  Freudian  Impression  (Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1996),  90.  

  

41  

8.  

Archive  Fever  and  Alternatives  to  the  Exhibition  of  Explicit  Atrocity   Photographs   With  all  that  has  been  said,  the  question  remains:  if  the  true  reality  of  war  

cannot  possibly  be  understood  through  atrocity  images,  then  what  inarguable   purpose  do  they  serve?    And  is  it  preferable,  or  even  possible,  to  successfully   substitute  less  graphic  imagery  for  the  kinds  of  photographs  museum  visitors  have   become  so  accustomed  to  viewing?    An  immediate  concern  with  this  approach  is   that  non-violent  images  will  not  be  sufficiently  shocking,  nor  real  enough  to  remain   impactful.    With  so  many  modern  distractions  to  divert  attention  away  from  the   cause,  how  might  museums  approach  the  exhibition  of  genocide-related  imagery   without  resorting  to  the  depiction  of  violence?  The  institutional  response  to  this   query  has  been  arrived  at  only  recently,  and  through  a  certain  degree  of  self- reflexivity.        It  was  Jacques  Derrida  who  argued  that  the  archive  emerges  at  the  

disintegration  point  of  the  very  memory  it  seeks  to  preserve.49    This  is  true  of  the   Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre  as  well  as  Rwanda's  remaining  six  national   genocide  memorials,  all  situated  on  sites  where  the  most  violent  chapter  of   Rwandan  history  came  to  a  close.    According  to  Derrida,  not  only  does  the  resultant   archive  assure  the  ongoing  possibility  of  memorization,  repetition,  reproduction  and   re-impression,  but  inherent  within  it  is  a  repetition  compulsion50,  which  both  creates   the  archive  and  is  nurtured  by  it.  To  combine  these  two  assertions  is  to  surmise  that   the  emergence  and  evolution  of  the  archive  is  almost  inevitable;  that  the  dormant   repetition  compulsion,  when  catalyzed  by  the  traumatic  dissolution  of  a  reality  into   a  memory  (as  in  the  reduction  of  one  million  living  Rwandans  to  mere  photographs   of  one  million  dead  Rwandans),  yields  an  archive.    That  archive,  in  turn,  is  fed  by  the   repetition  compulsion  to  grow,  and  certainly  this  is  what  archives  have  done.    For   Derrida,  however,  the  repetition  compulsion  is  indivisible  from  the  Freudian  death                                                                                                                   
49  Derrida,  Archive  Fever:  A  Freudian  Impression,  11.     50  In  Freudian  terms,  repetition  compulsion  is  a  psychological  phenomenon  in  which  a  person  repeats  a  

traumatic  event  or  its  circumstances  over  and  over  again.    Derrida's  Archive  Fever:  A  Freudian  Impression  draws   on  this  theory  in  its  discussion  of  the  archive.      

  

42  

drive,  or  the  drive  towards  self-destruction,  thus  the  archive  necessarily  harbours   destructive,  anti-archival  intentions.51    Although  the  alleged  existence  of  a  death   drive  within  an  institution  intended  to  keep  memories  alive  appears  counter- productive  and  therefore  false  in  theory,  in  practice  it  has  proven  itself  to  be  true.     While  perhaps  unintentional,  the  archivist's  obsessive  interest  in  preserving   memories  often  renders  those  memories  ­or  at  least  the  tangible  manifestations   thereof­  inaccessible  to  the  general  population  and  therefore  destined  for   obsolescence.    To  preserve  photographic  memories  is  to  put  them  where  they   cannot  be  damaged  by  heat,  humidity  or  the  human  hand,  but  in  endeavoring  to   preserve  more  and  more  memories,  archivists  may  create  more  work  than  they  can   handle.    While  many  photographs  may  enter  into  the  archive,  few  will  see  the  light   of  day  in  exhibition.    But  what  is  the  purpose  of  a  photograph,  however  precious,  if   not  to  be  seen?    Perhaps  it  is  the  archive's  contradictory  status  as  a  bottomless  well   of  untouchable  information  that  has  led  to  the  overwhelming  contemporary   academic,  artistic,  and  pop  cultural  compulsion  to  mine  it;  as  to  mine  the  archive  is   to  make  accessible  the  memories  of  people  who  can  no  longer  voice  them.    One  of   the  earliest  instances  of  this  can  be  witnessed  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Cambodian   genocide,  wherein  meticulous  record-keeping    ­in  combination  with  their   extraordinarily  quick  establishment  of  a  memorial  museum  and  archive,  and  the   timely  emergence  of  a  widespread  interest  in  the  archival­  resulted  in  the  use  of   bureaucratic  archival  images  of  genocide  rather  than  traditional  atrocity   photography  in  an  especially  significant  local  and  international  exhibition.       

                                                                                                                
51  Derrida,  Archive  Fever:  A  Freudian  Impression,  12.  

  

43  

9.  

The  Archival  Mode:     Photographs  from  S-21  at  The  Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Crimes     The  Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Crimes  is  located  in  the  Cambodian  

capital  of  Phnom  Penh.  As  with  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre,  the  museum's   location  is  itself  historically  significant.    It  occupies  the  former  site  of  Security  Prison   21  (S-21),  the  most  notorious  interrogation  and  detention  centre  in  the  former   Democratic  Kampuchea,  which  operated  between  1975  and  1979.    It  was  in  January   of  1979  that  a  cache  of  documentation  was  first  discovered  at  the  abandoned  prison   site  by  incoming  Vietnamese  forces  during  the  fall  of  Democratic  Kampuchea.  The   site  was  rapidly  reconfigured  into  a  genocide  museum,  and  officially  opened  to  the   public  in  1980.  Incorporated  into  its  permanent  exhibition  are  thousands  of   photographic  portraits  of  prisoners  created  by  S-21's  documentation  sub-unit   between  1975  and  1979.    These  portraits,  used  primarily  for  identification  purposes   within  the  camp,  were  taken  of  every  incoming  S-21  prisoner  and  attached  to   written  copies  of  their  forced  confessions.52    Like  the  Rwandan  identification  card   portraits,  these  images  would  become  emblematic  of  the  deliberateness  and   organization  with  which  the  killings  in  Cambodia  took  place.    Unlike  the  Rwandan  ID   portraits,  however,  which  were  taken  by  the  government  and  only  later  employed   by  genocidaires,  the  S-21  prisoner  portraits  were  themselves  rendered  by  members   of  Pol  Pot's  murderous  regime.    In  addition  to  these  portraits,  the  regime  created   thousands  of  documents,  including  confessions,  internal  memos,  other  photographic   prints  and  negatives  of  the  prisoner  portraits,  all  of  which  were  relegated  to  the   museum's  archives.    

                                                                                                                
52  Confessions  were  sought  in  the  pursuit  of  traitors,  which  the  leadership  believed  threatened  the  entire  

revolutionary  state.    However,  many  Cambodians  had  committed  no  real  offenses  to  which  they  could  confess.    

  

44  

  
Fig.  12.  Unknown  photographer,  "Identification  photographs  at  the  Tuol  Sleng   Museum  of  Genocide  Crimes,"  2001.    Courtesy  of  the  Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of   Genocide  Crimes.        

     

   In  1993,  two  North  American  photojournalists,  Douglas  Niven  and  Christopher  

Riley  of  the  Photo  Archive  Group,  visited  the  Tuol  Sleng  Museum,  and  on  viewing  its   archive  conceived  of  an  initiative  to  clean,  catalogue  and  print  the  archived  S-21   photographs.    In  their  project  proposal,  the  Photo  Archive  Group  argued  that  Tuol   Sleng's  collection  was,  "threatened  by  a  volatile  political  situation,  years  of  neglect,  a   lack  of  resources  and  the  absence  of  trained  staff,"53  thus  the  goal  was  both  to   "rescue"  the  archive  and  to  train  local  Cambodians  in  photographic  preservation  so   as  to  sustain  its  operation  long  term.    Permission  for  the  project  was  granted  by  the   Cambodian  government,  and  financial  support  was  secured  from  various  American   donors.    The  project  encompassed  approximately  6,000  photographic  negatives,  one   hundred  of  which  were  eventually  selected  for  reproduction  in  six  editions.    Those   specific  negatives  were  chosen  for  their  "photographic  quality,  historical  value  and   to  present  an  accurate  cross-section  of  Tuol  Sleng's  victims."54    It  is  important  to   note,  however,  that  only  two  of  the  six  one  hundred-print  editions  remained  in                                                                                                                   
53  Photo  Archive  Group,  "Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Photo  Archive  Project  Proposal,"  (Boston:  

unpublished,  1993),  2.    

54  Photo  Archive  Group,  "Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Project  Summary,"  (Boston:  unpublished,  1993),  4.    

  

45  

Cambodia,  the  remaining  four  having  been  brought  out  of  the  country  for   safekeeping.55    Not  only  were  those  sets  of  one  hundred  images  made  the  physical   property  of  the  Photo  Archive  Group,  but  their  intellectual  property  as  well.    Niven   and  Riley  were  granted  copyright  over  the  images,  which  enabled  them  to  later  sell   fine  art  prints  to  buyers  including  New  York's  Museum  of  Modern  Art.    Curiously,   the  granting  of  image  rights  was  neither  noted  in  the  Photo  Archive  Group's  Project   Proposal  or  Project  Summary,  nor  reported  in  local  press.56    What  the  Project   Proposal  did  state,  however,  was  that  "[i]t  is  in  humanity's  interest  that  [the   portraits]  be  preserved  and  seen  by  as  wide  an  audience  as  possible."57        To  that  end,  twenty-two  of  the  S-21  prisoner  portraits  went  on  public  display   at  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art  from  May  15  to  September  30,  1997.  The  exhibition,   entitled  Photographs  from  S-21:  1975­1979,  was  curated  by  the  Department  of   Photography  and  installed  in  Gallery  Three.    The  accompanying  wall  text  briefly   chronicled  the  history  of  Cambodia  from  1975-1979  and  introduced  Niven  and  Riley   as  the  "discover[ers]"  of  the  photographs,  who  "recognized  that  these  powerful   images  warranted  viewing  by  a  larger  audience."58    The  Museum  of  Modern  Art  was   not  the  only  institution  to  foreground  Niven  and  Riley's  role  in  bringing  the  S-21   photographs  to  light.    The  group's  work  was  featured  in  numerous  publications   including  Time  Magazine,  The  New  York  Times,  and  American  Photo,  while  the  British   Broadcasting  Corporation  (BBC)  televised  a  documentary  on  the  project  in  May  of   1996.    In  the  same  year,  art  book  publishers  Twin  Palms  released  The  Killing  Fields,   a  pricey  124-page  text  that  reproduced  seventy-eight  individual  portraits  as   photogravures.    The  Killing  Fields,  like  most  of  these  publications  and  programs,   reinforced  the  notion  that  Niven  and  Riley  discovered  the  negatives,  thereby   dismissing  their  actual  discovery  by  Vietnamese  forces  and  positioning  the  Photo                                                                                                                   
55  Photo  Archive  Group,  "Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Project  Summary,"  9.   56  Gretchen  Peters,  "Restoration  Project  Immortalises  Haunting  Images  of  S-21,"  The  Cambodia  Daily,  October  

12,  1994,  16.  
57  Photo  Archive  Group,  "Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Photo  Archive  Project  Proposal,"  7.   58  The  Museum  of  Modern  Art.  "An  Exhibition  of  Photographs  of  Khmer  Rouge  Prisoners  Opens  This  Month  at  

the  Museum  of  Modern  Art,."  Last  modified  February  25,  2009,  http://press.moma.org/images/press/   PRESS_RELEASE_ARCHIVE/khmer_rouge.pdf    

  

46  

Archive  Group  as  American  heroes  to  the  Cambodian  victims.59    This  outcome  was   perhaps  most  alarming  to  Cambodians  themselves;  local  scholars  considered  the   Photo  Archive  Group  to  have  taken  control  of  the  archive  away  from  the  community,   thereby  shifting  the  focus  away  from  Cambodia  and  on  to  themselves.60        Interest  surrounding  the  MoMA  show  came  as  much  from  the  celebrity  of   Niven  and  Riley  as  it  did  from  current  events.    In  light  of  renewed  speculation  during   the  summer  of  1997  that  Khmer  Rouge  leader  Pol  Pot  could  be  tried  for  his  crimes   under  international  law,  MoMA's  exhibition  was  regarded  as  timely  and  relevant.     Thus,  many  museum-goers  and  professional  reviewers  felt  compelled  to  see  and   respond  to  the  show.    The  exhibition's  set-up  encouraged  this  dialogue;  two  benches   and  a  table  in  the  middle  of  the  gallery  invited  visitors  to  rest,  write  comments  and   peruse  a  number  of  publications  including  The  Killing  Fields.    Written  visitor   comments  were  largely  directed  at  other  museum  patrons,  the  exhibition's  curators,   or  themselves,  and  dealt  with  such  themes  as  the  sacred  nature  of  the  images,  their   status  as  art  versus  document,  the  context  in  which  they  were  created  and  shown,   and  both  the  political  and  personal  ramifications  of  their  exhibition.    From  those   comments,  it  would  appear  that  public  reaction  to  the  exhibition  was  mixed.    Of  the   visitors  who  specifically  found  fault  with  the  show,  however,  feedback  was  often   emotionally  charged.    Wrote  one  patron,  "I  don't  believe  MoMA  had  the  intention  to   completely  objectify  these  terrible  images,  but  this  mute  and  `neutral'  exhibition   does  that  in  the  coldest  possible  way...  As  a  child  of  Holocaust  survivors,  I  feel  that   this  kind  of  behavior  is  at  best  indicative  of  a  smugness  and  an  intellectual  laziness  ­   AT  WORST  IT  IS  INHUMANE."61    That  the  word  mute  also  appeared  repeatedly  in   formal  reviews,  both  positive  and  negative,  (New  York  Times  critic  Michael   Kimmelman  deemed  the  images  "mute"  and  "tricky  to  judge,"62  while  Dominique                                                                                                                   
59  Rachel  Hughes,  "The  Abject  Artefacts  of  Memory:  Photographs  from  Cambodia's  Genocide,"  Media,  Culture  &  

Society  Vol.  25  (2003):  33.  

60  Youk  Chhang,  the  prominent  Cambodian  researcher  and  Executive  Director  of  the  Documentation  Center  of  

Cambodia,  has  stated  in  interview  that  the  unprecedented  access  awarded  to  North  Americans  Niven  and  Riley   was  unjust:  "it  is  the  history  of  Cambodia,  and  everyone  should  have  access  equally"  (Hughes,  33).  
61  The  Museum  of  Modern  Art,  "Gallery  Three"  (internal  document),  April  1997.   62  Michael  Kimmelman,  "Hypnotized  by  Mug  Shots  That  Stare  Back:  Are  They  Windows  or    

  

47  

Nahas  of  The  Critical  State  of  Visual  Art  in  New  York  Review  identified  a  "mute   dignity"63  to  the  photographs)  is  telling.    The  primary  definition  of  the  word  mute   infers  that  the  images  are  incapable  of  communicating,  and  thus  cannot  be  easily   understood  by  their  viewers.    That  viewers  did  appear  to  understand  the  images,   though,  suggests  a  sort  of  surrogate  voice  was  lent  to  them,  likely  by  MoMA's   curatorial  team.  And  while  giving  voice  to  the  voiceless  seems  an  admirable   accomplishment,  it  simultaneously  opens  Photographs  of  S-21  up  to  the  kinds  of   criticism  hitherto  reserved  for  graphic  atrocity  images.              First,  of  the  charge  of  voyeurism,  Photographs  from  S-21  is  only  slightly  less   guilty  than  exhibitions  of  explicitly  violent  photojournalism.    If  voyeurism  is   understood  as  the  practice  of  seeking  stimulation,  sexual  or  otherwise,  by  visual   means,  then  the  viewing  of  these  formulaic,  repetitive,  and  non-violent  portraits   does  not  immediately  register  as  voyeuristic.    It  is  the  implication  of  violence,   though,  and  not  its  outright  depiction,  that  makes  the  S-21  photographs  enticing.    It   is  the  power  of  seeing  others  who  are  simultaneously  about  to  die  and  already  dead.     Of  the  estimated  17,000  prisoners  detained  at  S-21,  only  seven  are  known  to  have   escaped  death,  meaning  that  virtually  every  portrait  in  Tuol  Sleng's  archive  depicts   the  victim  of  a  torturous  end.    Of  the  small  percentage  of  those  portraits  exhibited  at   MoMA,  all  pictured  the  deceased.    It  was  Roland  Barthes  who  stated  that  viewing   images  of  those  known  to  have  died  inevitably  alludes  to  the  anterior  future,   wherein  it  is  understood  "both  that  this  person  is  going  to  die,  and  that  [s]he  is   already  dead."64    Thus,  it  is  being  privy  to  the  final  photograph  of  a  murder  victim  ­ and  technically  before  that  murder  victim  is  necessarily  aware  of  his  or  her  fate­   that  makes  the  S-21  images  titillating  and  therefore  voyeuristic  to  behold.    Second,   albeit  in  a  different  manner  than  explicit  atrocity  images,  archival  photographs  of   genocide  also  have  the  potential  to  desensitize  their  viewers.    In  situ  at  Tuol  Sleng,                                                                                                                   
Mirrors?"  The  New  York  Times,  August  27,  1997,  C12.    
63  Dominique  Nahas,  "Haunting  Images  of  Impending  Death,"  The  Critical  State  of  Visual  Art  in  New  York  Review,  

June  15,  1997,  2.     

64  Roland  Barthes,  Camera  Lucida:  Reflections  on  Photography  (New  York:  Hill  and  Wang,  1981),  96.  

  

48  

as  well  as  in  The  Killing  Fields  publication  featured  at  the  MoMA  exhibition,  the  S-21   prisoner  photographs  were  presented  in  a  grid  format,  simultaneously  referencing   the  Pol  Pot  regime's  indiscriminate  violence  and  the  institution's  egalitarian   treatment  of  the  victims  thereof.    The  grid  format's  refusal  to  foreground  any  one   victim  can  indeed  be  interpreted  as  both  negative  and  positive.    In  particular,  the   negative  being  that  the  grid  format  is  intrinsically  repetitive  and  apt  to  create   feelings  of  fatigue  or  numbness  in  the  viewer.    It  is  also  likely  to  reduce  the  viewer's   ability  to  differentiate  one  victim  from  another,  effectively  creating  a  composite  or   "massified"  victim  to  whom  the  viewer  cannot  individually  relate.    In  fact,  critics  of   MoMa's  S-21  exhibition  charged  that  it  only  reinforced  that  depersonalized  victim   label,  specifically  through  its  omission  of  the  sitters'  names.    While  five  of  the   portraits  included  in  the  exhibition  arrived  at  MoMA  accompanied  by  what  Riley   and  Niven  listed  as  the  "the  names  we  have,"65  these  names  were  never  included  in   the  exhibition  labels.    Instead,  the  labels  read:                        Photographer  unknown.  Untitled.  1975-79.   Gelatin-silver  print.  14  x  11"  

Many  basic  contextualizing  elements  were  noticeably  absent  from  the  MoMA  

exhibition,  including  the  photographer's  name.    That  MoMA's  senior  and  assistant   curators  of  photography,  Susan  Kismaric  and  Adrienne  Williams,  failed  to   communicate  with  Nhem  Ein,  the  Khmer  Rouge  photographer  who  originally  took   many  of  the  pictures,  inevitably  raised  questions  about  the  images'  authorship  and   therefore  their  ownership.    This,  of  course,  being  a  tricky  subject,  as  Niven  and  Riley   instead  owned  their  copyright.    Many  visitors  also  lamented  the  absence  of  hard   facts  such  as  statistics,  maps  or  official  statements  that  would  assist  in  situating  the   images  within  the  overarching  social  and  political  history  of  Southeast  Asia.    Indeed,   the  exhibition  appeared  to  be  mediated  neither  by  fact  nor  opinion.    In  response,   critics  argued  that  by  taking  an  apolitical  stance,  the  exhibition  did  not  actively  

                                                                                                                
65  Christopher  Riley, "Facsimile Communication to Adrienne Williams," MoMA Department of Photography Files,

April 21, 1997.

  

49  

facilitate  the  refusal  of  victimhood  nor  the  questioning  of  truth.66    They  further   implied  that  if  the  forum  in  which  the  work  was  shown  was  not  prepared  to  add   anything  to  the  discussion,  perhaps  the  work  aught  not  to  be  exhibited  there.     Indeed,  many  who  viewed  the  show  felt  that  MoMA  was  an  inappropriate  venue.   One  visitor  suggested  that  the  exhibit  would  be  better  shown  "at  the  site  where   these  atrocities  took  place,"67  the  irony  being  that  the  images  were  already  on   exhibition  at  Tuol  Sleng  and  had  been  for  years.    The  alleged  inappropriateness  of   MoMA  as  a  venue  and  the  general  ignorance  of  the  images'  use  outside  of  America   alludes  to  two  additional  charges  against  traditional  atrocity  images,  namely  their   aestheticization  of  human  suffering  and  their  colonial  implications.    It  would  appear   these  are  charges  to  which  the  S-21  exhibition,  despite  its  use  of  implicit  archival   images,  is  guilty.          That  many  visitor  comments  referred  to  the  Tuol  Sleng  photographs   specifically  as  art  has  as  much  to  do  with  their  curation  as  with  the  Museum  of   Modern  Art's  moniker.    Although  Niven  and  Riley  did  not  expressly  state  that  their   selection  of  the  one  hundred-print  edition  images  (from  which  MoMA's  twenty-two   portraits  were  taken)  was  based  on  aesthetics,  at  least  one  image  adheres   questionably  close  to  art  historical  standards.    The  depiction  of  an  imprisoned   mother  holding  her  infant  child  is  exhibition-worthy  for  a  number  of  reasons.    While   Niven  and  Riley  were  perhaps  right  to  include  this  image  in  "present[ing]  an   accurate  cross-section"  of  victims,  it  was  likely  chosen  more  for  its  iconicity  than  its   variety.    That  it  indirectly  references  the  stoic  maternality  of  the  Madonna  and  child,   an  artistic  subject  familiar  to  the  Western  world,  creates  a  necessary  link  between   the  documentary  image  and  its  artistic  surroundings.    It  is  an  image  not  unlike   Dorothea  Lange's  "Migrant  Mother",  the  photograph  of  a  Depression  era  pea  picker   taken  for  the  Farm  Security  Administration  that  transcended  its  documentary   beginnings  to  become  an  iconic  work  of  art.    Of  all  the  prisoner  portraits,  the  mother   and  child  is  perhaps  the  most  likely  to  be  considered  beautiful,  if  only  for  the  fact                                                                                                                   
66  Hughes,  "The  Abject  Artefacts  of  Memory:  Photographs  from  Cambodia's  Genocide,"  36.   67  The  Museum  of  Modern  Art,  "Gallery  Three"  (internal  document),  April  1997.  

  

50  

that  so  many  images  like  it  have  already  been  deemed  beautiful  by  art  historians.    In   other  words,  it  is  the  image's  comparability  to  iconic  artworks  that  gives  us   permission  to  find  it  attractive.    Finally,  contrasting  this  notion  of  the  familiar  is  the   inherent  exoticism  of  the  S-21  photographs.  Like  colonial  spoils,  these  images  are  of   exotic  geographical  and  cultural  origin.  Their  removal  from  Cambodia  and   appearance  at  MoMA  was  primarily  due  to  the  actions  of  two  expert  collectors,   neither  of  whom  are  of  the  same  nationality  as  the  peoples  portrayed.68  It  is  in  this   way  that  they  can  be  similarly  interpreted  as  exploitative.        

        
        

     

  

Fig.  13.  Nhem  Ein,  Untitled  (14-5-7-8),  c.  1975.    Courtesy  of  The  Photo  Archive  Group.  

                                                                                                                
68  Hughes,  "The  Abject  Artefacts  of  Memory:  Photographs  from  Cambodia's  Genocide,"  36.  

  

51  

  

In  comparing  the  arguments  against  explicit  atrocity  photographs  with  those  

against  the  implicit  archival  image,  it  seems  little  is  gained  by  the  memorial   museum's  substitution  of  one  for  another  in  exhibition.    Issues  of  voyeurism  and   desensitization,  context  and  aestheticization,  colonialism,  re-victimization  and   othering  all  apply  to  the  exhibition  of  comparatively  benign  archival  photographs   just  as  much  as  sensationalistic  atrocity  pictures.    Supposing  all  third-party   depictions  of  human  suffering  are  inherently  plagued  by  these  representational   problems,  the  search  for  a  conflict  photograph  that  somehow  fails  to  offend  is  a   fool's  errand.    Thus,  instead  of  abandoning  the  archival  image  in  pursuit  of  an  even   more  suitable  sub-genre  of  photograph  with  which  to  illustrate  genocide,  perhaps  a   more  productive  strategy  would  be  to  abandon  the  approach  by  which  those  images   are  shown.    If  the  intent  of  memorial  museums  is  to  exhibit  conflict  photographs  as   evidence,  and  if  evidence  must  be  seen  to  be  believed,  then  it  behooves  them  to   exhibit  those  photographs  to  as  wide  an  audience  as  possible.    Given  the  remoteness   of  Third  World  memorials,  this  often  necessitates  exhibiting  them  outside  of  the   memorial  museum's  walls.    Of  course,  one  of  the  primary  complaints  with  the   Photographs  from  S-21  exhibition  was  the  alleged  inappropriateness  of  MoMA  as  a   venue  for  non-artistic  images.    This  is  not  to  say  that  the  exhibition  of  such  images   cannot  be  tailored  to  other  types  of  institutions,  merely  that  they  weren't   sufficiently  tailored  in  that  instance.    Indeed,  it  is  possible  for  both  violent  and   nonviolent  photographs  of  conflict  to  be  appropriately  shown  outside  of  the   memorial  museum  context,  and  even  to  great  acclaim.    In  using  fragments  of  Alfredo   Jaar's  Rwanda  Project:  1994-2000  as  a  second  case  study,  it  is  possible  to   deconstruct  the  unconventional  exhibition  strategies  by  which  war  and  genocide   images  have  been  successfully  shown  in  a  more  conceptual  context.    Further,  it  is   possible  to  use  these  successes  as  an  inspirational  point  of  departure  for  the   discussion  of  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre's  impending  inaugural  exhibition.

  

52  

10.  

The  Conceptual  Mode:     Alfredo  Jaar's  Rwanda  Project:  1994-2000   Despite  the  numerous  criticisms  of  Photographs  from  S-21,  the  fundamental  

suitability  of  archival  identity  photographs  within  an  exhibition  was  never   specifically  called  into  question.    Perhaps  this  is  because  the  identity  photograph's   intrinsic  relationship  to  personhood  makes  it  a  logical  fit  for  memorial  museum   exhibitions,  specifically  as  their  emphasis  on  personal  stories  grows.69    Certainly,  in   contrast  to  the  aforementioned  massifying  effect  that  archival  images  such  as  the  S- 21  identity  photographs  can  have  when  exhibited  as  grids,  when  presented  as   unique  objects  they  can  also  serve  to  make  the  relationship  of  viewer  to  victim  a   more  personal  one  by  symbolically  reducing  the  scale  of  a  tragedy.  This  is  a  strategy   often  employed  by  Chilean-born  artist,  architect  and  filmmaker  Alfredo  Jaar,   specifically  in  his  widely  exhibited  body  of  work,  the  Rwanda  Project:  1994-2000.     Jaar's  intent  with  the  project  was  to  "reduce  the  scale  to  a  single  human  being  with  a   name,  a  story.  That  helps  the  audience  to  identify  with  that  person.  And  this  process   of  identification  is  fundamental  to  create  empathy,  solidarity,  and  intellectual   involvement."70    However,  instead  of  utilizing  an  archival  identification  portrait  for   this  purpose,  Jaar  selected  as  source  material  his  own  documentary  photographs  of   the  genocide's  immediate  aftermath;  images  that  inevitably  referenced  the   sensationalistic  photojournalism  he  found  issue  with.        In  August  of  1994,  immediately  following  the  end  of  the  genocide,  Alfredo  

Jaar  traveled  to  Rwanda  where  he  and  an  assistant  interviewed  survivors  and   captured  close  to  3,500  images  of  the  conflict's  aftermath.    Upon  returning  to  New   York,  Jaar  took  the  next  six  years  to  process  the  photographs,  both  physically  and   emotionally,  and  it  was  during  this  time  that  he  conceived  of  twenty-one  projects   through  which  to  reconcile  his  attempted  representation  of  the  unrepresentable.     Said  Jaar,  "If  I  spent  six  years  working  on  this  project,  it  was  trying  different                                                                                                                   
69  Williams,  Memorial  Museums:  The  Global  Rush  to  Commemorate  Atrocities,  52.   70  PBS.  "Art21,  Alfredo  Jaar  `The  Rwanda  Project'."  Accessed  March  12,  2010.  http://www.pbs.org/art21  

/artists/jaar/clip1.html  

  

53  

strategies  of  representation.  Each  project  was  a  new  exercise,  a  new  strategy,  and  a   new  failure...  Basically,  this  serial  structure  of  exercises  was  forced  by  the  Rwandan   tragedy  and  my  incapacity  to  represent  it  in  a  way  that  made  sense."71    While  to   analyze  all  of  Jaar's  Rwanda  projects  and  their  different  representational  strategies   would  indeed  be  illuminating,  it  is  beyond  the  purpose  and  scope  of  this  paper.     Instead,  the  focus  will  be  on  three  of  the  better-known  projects,  "Real  Pictures"   (1995),  "The  Eyes  of  Gutete  Emerita"  (1996)  and  a  second  version  of  "The  Eyes  of   Gutete  Emerita",  referred  to  in  this  paper  as  "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu"72  (1996),   that  apply  the  same  source  material  to  three  different  exhibition  strategies.     Commissioned  by  Chicago's  Museum  of  Contemporary  Photography  and   exhibited  there  first  in  January  of  1995,  "Real  Pictures"  is  comprised  of  550   photographic  storage  boxes,  arranged  into  stacked  "monuments"  of  varying   dimensions  and  spot  lit  on  the  gallery  floor.    The  top  of  each  black  linen  box  is   silkscreened  with  white  text,  which  allegedly  describes  the  image  (one  of  550  direct   positive  color  photographs)  housed  within  it.    Although  the  boxes  are  not  sealed,   viewers  are  not  intended  to  open  them  and  thus  it  is  impossible  to  know  whether   the  image  described  at  all  resembles  the  image  contained.    In  some  instances,  the   audience  is  also  denied  the  mere  description  of  the  photograph,  as  each  stacked  box   covers  up  the  presumed  inscription  of  the  box  below.    The  inscriptions  provide  not   only  a  physical  description  of  the  photograph,  but  a  narrative  as  well,  which  seeks  to   situate  the  unseen  image  within  the  events  of  the  Rwandan  genocide,  namely  the   massacre  at  Ntarama  Church  and  the  establishment  of  refugee  camps  along  the   Zaire  border.    One  of  the  narratives  included  in  "Real  Pictures"  reads  as  follows:   Gutete  Emerita,  30  years  old,  is  standing  in  front  of  the  church.   Dressed  in  modest,  worn  clothing,  her  hair  is  hidden  in  faded  pink   cotton  kerchief.  She  was  attending  mass  in  the  church  when  the                                                                                                                   
71  Nicole  Schweizer,  "The  Politics  of  the  Image,"  in  Alfredo  Jaar:  La  Politique  des  Images,  ed.  Jacques  Rancière,  

(Zürich:  JRP  Ringier,  2008),  13.   72  The  reinstallation  of  "The  Eyes  of  Gutete  Emerita"  in  Berlin  and  Madrid  in  1997  substituted  the  eyes  of  Gutete   Emerita  for  those  of  Nduwayezu,  a  Rwandan  orphan  who  had  witnessed  the  killing  of  his  mother  and  father  and   remained  mute  for  one  month  as  a  result.    For  the  sake  of  differentiating  the  two  iterations  of  "Eyes",  this  paper   refers  to  the  latter  as  "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu."          

  

54  

massacre  began.  Killed  with  machetes,  in  front  of  her  eyes,  were  her   husband  Tito  Kahinamura  (40)  and  her  two  sons  Muhoza  (10)  and   Matirigari  (7).  Somehow,  she  managed  to  escape  with  her  daughter   Marie-Louise  Unamararunga  (12),  and  hid  in  a  swamp  for  three   weeks,  only  coming  out  at  night  for  food.  When  she  speaks  about   her  lost  family,  she  gestures  to  corpses  on  the  ground,  rotting  in  the   African  sun.  

  
Fig.  14.  Alfredo  Jaar,  "Real  Pictures,"  (installation  shot),  1995.  Courtesy  of  Galerie  Lelong.       

Jaar  would  revisit  Gutete  Emerita's  story  twice  more  in  the  installations,  "The   Eyes  of  Gutete  Emerita"  and  in  a  different  iteration  of  "Eyes",  later  re-titled  "The   Silence  of  Nduwayezu."    First  exhibited  at  the  City  Gallery  of  Contemporary  Art  in   Raleigh,  North  Carolina  in  June  of  1996,  the  original  version  of  "The  Eyes  of  Gutete   Emerita"  employs  two  wall-mounted  light  boxes  with  six  black-and-white  text   transparencies  and  two  color  photographic  transparencies.    The  two  light  boxes,   placed  side  by  side,  illuminate  the  text  and  images  at  timed  intervals,  creating  an  

  

55  

almost  cinematic  experience.    The  narrative  begins  with  a  block  of  white  text  on  a   black  background,  one  in  each  of  the  two  light  boxes.  There  are  ten  lines  of  text  in   each  box,  and  they  remain  illuminated  for  forty-five  seconds.  They  read,  "Gutete   Emerita,  30  years  old,  is  standing  in  front  of  a  church  where  400  Tutsi  men,  women   and  children  were  systematically  slaughtered  by  a  Hutu  death  squad  during  Sunday   mass.    She  was  attending  mass  with  her  family  when  the  massacre  began.    Killed   with  machetes  /  in  front  of  her  eyes  were  her  husband  Tito  Kahinamura,  40,  and  her   two  sons,  Muhoza,  10,  and  Matirigari,  7.    Somehow,  Gutete  managed  to  escape  with   her  daughter  Marie  Louise  Unumararunga,  12.    They  hid  in  a  swamp  for  three   weeks,  coming  out  only  at  night  for  food."    This  text  dissolves  and  more  text  appears,   five  lines  in  each  box,  for  the  duration  of  thirty  seconds:  "Her  eyes  look  lost  and   incredulous.    Her  face  is  the  face  of  someone  who  has  witnessed  an  unbelievable   tragedy  and  now  wears  it.    She  has  returned  to  this  /  place  in  the  woods  because  she   has  nowhere  else  to  go.    When  she  speaks  about  her  lost  family,  she  gestures  to   corpses  on  the  ground,  rotting  in  the  African  sun."    This  text  also  disappears,  and  is   replaced  by  two  more  lines:  "I  remember  her  eyes.  /  The  eyes  of  Gutete  Emerita".     These  last  two  lines  appear  for  only  fifteen  seconds  and  are  suddenly  replaced  with   an  image  of  Gutete's  eyes.    As  an  extreme  close-up,  the  eyes  fill  the  two  frames   entirely,  one  eye  in  each.    Then  as  quickly  as  they  appear,  Gutete  Emerita's  eyes  are   gone.       

  

56  

  
Fig.  15.  Alfredo  Jaar,  "The  Eyes  of  Gutete  Emerita,"  1996.    Courtesy  of  Galerie  Lelong.  

Four  months  earlier,  Jaar's  "The  Eyes  of  Gutete  Emerita"  (later  reworked  as   "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu")  utilized  a  different  representational  strategy,  this  one   more  architectural  than  cinematic.    "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu"  was  first  presented   at  the  National  Gallery  of  Australia  in  Canberra  in  February  of  1996.    This   installation  consists  of  the  exact  same  narrative  employed  by  "The  Eyes  of  Gutete   Emerita":  "Gutete  Emerita,  30  years  old,  is  standing  in  front  of  a  church.  .  .'',  this  time   as  a  single  line  of  white  lettering  on  a  black  wall.    At  the  end  of  the  wall  and  around  a   dark  corner  lies  a  sixteen  by  sixteen  foot  light  table,  on  which  is  piled  a  mountainous   arrangement  of  one  million  35mm  colour  slides:  one  million  slides  representing  the   estimated  one  million  victims  of  the  Rwandan  genocide.      Magnifying  loupes   arranged  around  the  table  invite  the  viewer  to  inspect  the  individual  slides,  all  of   which  reveal  themselves  to  be  exactly  the  same.    They  are  one  million  images  of   Gutete  Emerita's  eyes.    

  

57  

  
Fig.  16.  Alfredo  Jaar,  "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu,"  (installation  shot),  1996.  Courtesy  of   Galerie  Lelong.    

  

  

  

  
Fig.  17.  Alfredo  Jaar,  "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu,"  (detail),  1996.                 Courtesy  of  Galerie  Lelong.    

   Jaar's  status  as  an  artist  (and  not  a  photojournalist-cum-artist  as  so  many   before  him)  does  not  automatically  exclude  his  photographs  from  being  interpreted   as  atrocity  images.    While  the  source  photograph  for  all  three  projects  is  never   shown  in  its  entirety,  it  is  known  from  Jaar's  own  description  to  depict  dead  bodies.     Thus  it  could  easily  be  subject  to  the  same  scrutiny  as  graphic  photojournalistic  

  

58  

images  of  genocide.    However,  it  is  Jaar's  refusal  to  adhere  to  the  expected  mode  of   display  (and  to  thereby  perpetuate  the  stereotypes  of  atrocity)  that  ultimately   reduces  the  potential  charges  against  him.    While  referencing  and  even   incorporating  graphic  images  of  atrocity,  Jaar's  works  cannot  be  read  in  the  same   way  as  other  exhibitions  of  atrocity  photography.    Through  their  presentation,  they   address  the  criticisms  of  atrocity  photography  without  succumbing  to  them.     For  example,  if  voyeurism  can  indeed  be  defined  as  the  search  for  stimulation   or  gratification  by  visual  means,  then  none  of  the  projects  can  be  correctly   interpreted  as  voyeuristic.    "Real  Pictures"  in  particular  provokes  and  then  disables   voyeuristic  intent  by  denying  the  viewer  the  image  itself.    The  feeling  of  fulfillment   that  would  surely  accompany  the  opening  of  the  boxes  and  viewing  of  the  images  is   forever  out  of  reach.    Thus  the  viewer  must  find  another  reason,  beyond  self- satisfaction,  to  engage  with  the  subject  matter.    For  Jaar  that  reason  is  genuine   understanding  and  empathy,  which  he  believes  can  be  achieved  without  re- victimizing  the  victim.    Says  Jaar,  "There  must  be  a  way  to  talk  about  suffering   without  making  the  victim  suffer  again.  How  do  you  represent  this,  respecting  the   dignity  of  the  people  you  are  focusing  on?"73    Within  these  three  projects,  Jaar   answers  his  own  question  by  supplanting  the  viewer's  desire  to  see  the  horrifying   event  with  the  survivor's  need  to  live  beyond  it.74  While  one  could  argue  that  the  use   of  evocative  language  atop  "Real  Pictures"'  boxes  ("she  gestures  to  corpses  on  the   ground,  rotting  in  the  African  sun")  is  an  equally  exploitative  surrogate  for  the   shocking  photograph  within,  the  purpose  served  by  words  and  photographs  is   intrinsically  different,  specifically  within  these  circumstances.    If  the  testimony  of   Gutete  Emerita  comes  closest  to  the  event  itself,  then  the  photograph  of  her   testimony  represents  one  degree  of  removal.    The  written  description  of  the   photograph  in  turn  represents  a  second  degree  of  separation,  or  an  interpretation  of   an  interpretation.    By  withholding  the  photograph,  Jaar  therefore  raises  questions                                                                                                                   
73  PBS.  "Art21,  Alfredo  Jaar  `The  Rwanda  Project'."  Accessed  March  12,  2010.  http://www.pbs.org/art21  

/artists/jaar/clip1.html  

74  Olivier  Chow,  "Alfredo  Jaar  and  the  Post-Traumatic  Gaze,"  Tate  Papers:  Tate's  Online  Research  Journal  (2008),  

accessed  on  March  25,  2011,  http://www.tate.org.uk/research/tateresearch/tatepapers/08spring/chow.shtm.    

  

59  

regarding  the  veracity  of  both  his  words  and  his  images  and,  inevitably,  their   combined  use  within  print  media  as  a  whole.    Jaar  is  not  opposed  to   photojournalism  per  se,  in  fact  he  has  described  himself  in  interview  as  a  "frustrated   journalist",  however  he  states,  "The  problem  is  not  in  the  photojournalists,  but  in  the   distribution  of  their  images  [...]  They...take  their  pictures  and  immediately  have  to   send  them  to  the  central  agencies,  which  in  turn  distribute  them  to  the  media  [...]   There  are  several  editing  processes  that  take  place,  beginning  when  the  scene  was   photographed  to  the  moment  it  is  published...  This  is  where  the  problem  lies."75     Within  "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu",  it  is  the  moment  when  the  viewer  first  looks   through  the  magnifying  loupe,  when  the  eye  of  that  viewer  directly  meets  the  eye  of   the  victim,  that  the  distance  imposed  by  the  media's  various  degrees  of  separation  is   both  literally  and  metaphorically  collapsed.76    What  is  truly  significant  within  this   work  is  that  it  is  the  hand  of  the  viewer  that  willingly  draws  Emerita  closer.     Comparatively,  within  "The  Eyes  of  Gutete  Emerita",  the  proximity  of  Emerita's  eyes   to  her  audience  comes  as  an  unexpected  shock.    For  a  split  second,  the  roles  of  the   watcher  and  the  watched  are  reversed,  as  Emerita  symbolically  bears  witness  to  the   surprise,  fear,  and  confusion  of  the  viewer  just  as  they  bore  witness  to  hers.    It  is  in   this  way  that  both  bodies  of  work  resist  othering,  by  acknowledging  that  Emerita  is   someone  who  also  sees.  Further,  it  is  this  element  of  surprise  that  also  derails  the   numbing  effect  created  by  the  exhibition  of  both  repetitive  archival  images  and   desensitizing  atrocity  photos.     That  all  three  works  either  invite  or  demand  a  certain  amount  of  interactivity   (touching,  reading,  reacting)  not  only  keeps  them  engaging,  but  suggests  that  at  the   very  least  Jaar  is  conscious  of  this  obligation  to  educate:  "I'm  trying  always  to  create   a  balance  between  information  and  spectacle,  between  the  content  and  the   visuals."77    That  these  visuals  take  the  form  of  filmic,  architectural,  or  literary                                                                                                                   
75  Guy  Lane,  "Alfredo  Jaar:  Picturing  Silence,"  8  Magazine,  August  19,  2008,  accessed  February  12,  2011,  

http://www.foto8.com/new/online/blog/609-alfredo-jaar-picturing-silence-.  
76  Olivier  Chow,  "Alfredo  Jaar  and  the  Post-Traumatic  Gaze,"  Tate  Papers:  Tate's  Online  Research  Journal  (2008),  

accessed  on  March  25,  2011,  http://www.tate.org.uk/research/tateresearch/tatepapers/08spring/chow.shtm.  
77  PBS.  "Art21,  Alfredo  Jaar  `The  Rwanda  Project'."  Accessed  March  12,  2010.  http://www.pbs.org/art21  

/artists/jaar/clip1.html  

  

60  

interpretations  rather  than  irrefutable  facts  such  as  statistics  or  maps  theoretically   makes  Jaar  guilty  of  aestheticizing  human  suffering.    However,  that  Jaar   simultaneously  adheres  to  and  undermines  the  expectation  of  aestheticization   within  a  gallery  context  enables  him  to  create  an  important  dialogue.    That  dialogue   includes  the  notion  of  artistic  intention.    Certainly,  in  openly  referring  to  himself  as   an  artist  and  in  creating  works  specifically  for  exhibition  in  arts  institutions,  Jaar's   work  appears  to  fare  better  against  accusations  of  aestheticization  than  Photographs   from  S-21,  wherein  works  created  for  documentary  purposes  were  later  exhibited  as   art.     Given  Alfredo  Jaar's  ability  to  avoid  criticism  through  forthright  statements   about  his  motivations  and  artistic  intent,  it  appears  crucial  that  curators  of  violent   or  otherwise  difficult  images  of  war  justify  why  it  is  that  they  approach  their   exhibitions  in  the  way  that  they  do.    While  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  a  curator   could  resolve  the  many  concerns  associated  with  the  exhibition  of  genocide   photography,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  he  or  she  address  them.    By   acknowledging  that  they  have  given  thought  to  the  long  list  of  problems  plaguing   such  imagery  ­either  explicitly  in  a  curatorial  statement,  or  implicitly  through  the   selection  of  an  atypical  mode  of  display­  curators  exercise  due  diligence.    Indeed,   the  knowledge  that  an  artist  or  curator  has  approached  controversial  photographs   responsibly  does  much  to  mitigate  the  faults  that  audiences  and  critics  will   inevitably  find  within  exhibitions.    It  is  therefore  the  purpose  of  the  paper's  final   section  to  exercise  the  same  due  diligence  by  summarizing  the  successes  and   failures  of  Photographs  from  S-21  and  of  Alfredo  Jaar's  "Real  Pictures",  "The  Eyes  of   Gutete  Emerita"  and  "The  Silence  of  Nduwayezu"  and  by  finally  applying  what  has   been  learned  thus  far  to  the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre's  inaugural  exhibition   of  state  identity  card  photographs.             

  

61  

11.  

The  Anatomy  of  An  Exhibition     Given  the  arguments  that  surround  the  types  of  genocide  photography  that  

should  or  should  not  be  exhibited,  as  well  as  the  potential  ways  in  which  they  could   be  shown,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  a  concrete  plan  for  the  Kigali  Genocide   Memorial  Centre's  identification  card  photographs.    However,  to  echo  the  sentiment   expressed  by  Niven  and  Riley  upon  their  rediscovery  of  the  S-21  photographs,  it  is   certainly  in  the  interest  of  humanity  that  they  be  seen.        Of  the  two  modes  of  display  cited  as  case  studies,  the  approach  employed  by   MoMA  and  the  Photo  Archive  Group's  Photographs  from  S-21  exhibition  initially   seems  more  applicable  to  the  KGMC's  inaugural  show.    First  of  all,  the  similarities   between  the  headshots  at  the  Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Crimes  and  those  at   the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre  are  striking.    Both  are  vast  collections  of  small- scale  black  and  white  photographic  portraits  of  genocide  victims  (or  presumed   genocide  victims,  in  the  case  of  the  KGMC).    Both  were  originally  created  as  a  means   of  identification,  of  exerting  control,  and  of  ultimately  inflicting  harm  on  their   subjects.    Both  were  absorbed  into  the  archives  of  their  respective  memorial   museums  only  to  be  reinvestigated  by  Westerners  on  the  grounds  that  the  images   deserve  to  be  seen  by  a  wider  audience,  and  that  they  stand  to  promote  the   preservation  initiatives  of  those  museums.    Both  would  become  the  focus  of   exhibitions.    Beyond  that,  through  their  status  as  implicit  images  of  genocide,  both   deviate  from  the  traditional  tendency  to  exhibit  problematic  atrocity  photographs  in   explaining  the  events  and  implications  of  war.    In  theory,  then,  the  identity  card   photographs  at  the  KGMC  could  be  exhibited  in  exactly  the  same  way  as   Photographs  from  S-21.    They  could  be  enlarged,  reprinted,  edited,  and  exhibited  in   frames  and/or  as  a  grid.    They  could  be  shown  in  a  variety  of  institutions  with   minimal  mediation  or  contextualizing  information.    They  could  begin  as  little  known   documents  and  end  up  as  much  publicized  (and  thereby  much  criticized)  artworks.     Or  rather  they  could  be,  had  this  paper's  analysis  of  the  S-21  exhibition  not  revealed   its  mode  of  display  to  be  an  issue;  had  it  not  revealed  the  show  to  be  just  as   problematic  as  exhibitions  of  explicit  atrocity  photography.    To  compare  the   complaints  against  atrocity  photographs  with  those  against  Photographs  from  S-21      62  

is  to  determine  what  has  been  stated  time  and  again:  that  what  matters  is  not   necessarily  the  kind  of  genocide  photography  that  is  exhibited,  but  the  way  in  which   it  is  shown.    Approaching  the  KGMC's  inaugural  exhibition  in  the  same  way  as   Photographs  from  S-21  would  therefore  subject  it  to  the  exact  same  charges  of   voyeurism,  of  densensitization,  of  aestheticization,  of  re-victimization  and  othering.     And  it  is  in  acknowledging  this  fact  that  Alfredo  Jaar's  treatment  of  his  Rwanda   Project  seems  to  represent  the  more  suitable  mode  of  display.              Supposing  it  is  indeed  the  presentation  and  not  the  image  itself  that  matters   most,  if  Alfredo  Jaar  is  capable  of  exhibiting  what  qualifies  as  an  explicit  atrocity   photograph  in  such  a  way  as  to  mitigate  the  criticisms  thereof,  then  surely  it  is   possible  to  do  the  same  with  a  less  graphic  archival  image.    It  is  a  matter  of  talking   through  the  problems  common  to  the  exhibition  of  all  conflict  photographs  and   determining  how  they  can  similarly  be  avoided  by  the  KGMC's  exhibition.    For   example,  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  they  are  inexplicit  images  and  that  their  subjects   are  not  definitively  known  to  be  dead  or  alive,  the  KGMC  identity  card  photographs   arguably  resist  charges  of  voyeurism.    However,  as  previously  suggested,  voyeurism   is  a  hard  concept  to  define;  it  can  apply  both  to  the  outright  depiction  and  to  the   mere  implication  of  violence.    As  with  Jaar's  Real  Pictures,  the  only  way  the  identity   card  photos  can  avoid  accusations  of  voyeurism  entirely  is  by  being  withheld  from   the  viewer.    But  how  does  one  exhibit  the  identity  card  photographs  without   actually  showing  them?    Using  the  KGMC's  identity  card  photographs  as  source   material  for  an  interpretive  project,  in  the  way  that  Jaar  used  Gutete  Emerita's   photograph  as  source  material  for  his  three  projects,  would  effectively  withhold   them  from  a  voyeuristic  viewer  and  similarly  free  them  from  the  insurmountable   task  of  representing  the  unrepresentable.    Of  course,  to  use  Rwandan  identity   photographs  as  the  source  material  for  an  art  project  initiated  by  a  Westerner  is   equally  troubling,  as  it  inevitably  carries  colonial  implications.    That  Alfredo  Jaar  is   able  to  speak  on  behalf  of  Rwandan  victims  to  little  criticism  is  due  primarily  to  his   unique  artistic  approach,  but  secondarily  to  his  status  as  a  Chilean,  since  Chile  has   also  experienced  its  fair  share  of  political  violence.    Somehow,  the  resident  of  one   troubled  nation  speaking  to  the  experiences  of  residents  from  another  troubled      63  

nation  is  less  offensive  than  a  privileged  Westerner  doing  the  same.    Regardless,   what  would  be  most  logical  is  to  have  Rwandans  speak  for  themselves.    And  this  is   where  plans  for  the  KGMC's  exhibition  finally  take  root.   The  preliminary  suggestion  for  the  KGMC's  inaugural  exhibition  is  to  solicit   the  involvement  of  Rwandan  survivors  in  creating  their  own  artistic  interpretations   of  the  state  identification  card  photos.    As  the  Centre  already  operates  a  number  of   social  outreach  programs  for  survivors,  their  participation  could  be  requested   through  these  existing  community  contacts.    The  creation  of  both  the  individual   artworks  and  the  exhibition  as  a  whole  could  be  workshopped  at  the  Documentation   Centre  over  a  period  of  weeks.    During  the  workshop,  survivors  would  be  invited  to   tour  the  National  Documentation  Centre  and  its  archives.    This  would  provide  the   exhibition's  participants  with  an  understanding  of  the  kinds  of  objects  housed  there,   and  would  reinforce  the  significance  of  the  identification  card  photos  within  that   overall  collection.    Following  workshops  would  do  well  to  encompass  a  discussion  of   why  photographs  such  as  those  housed  by  the  centre  are  made  in  the  first  place,  and   how  they  come  to  be  seen  by  both  Rwandans  and  the  rest  of  the  world.    This  could   include  a  brainstorming  session  on  the  venues  where  images  of  war  and  genocide   are  shown  (newspapers  and  magazines,  electronic  media,  museums,  art  galleries,   etcetera)  and  the  positive  and  negative  consequences  of  showing  them  there.    It   could  also  include  an  exercise  wherein  participants  are  given  a  selection  of   photographic  objects  from  the  archive  and  asked  what  venue  they  would  ideally   show  them  in  and  why.    This  would  help  to  gauge  the  survivors'  impression  of  the   appropriateness  or  inappropriateness  of  both  violent  and  nonviolent  imagery  to   certain  applications.    A  subsequent  workshop  could  expose  the  participants  to   sample  photographic  exhibitions  such  as  those  discussed  in  this  paper.    A  slideshow   of  individual  images  and  installation  shots  there  from  would  facilitate  the  discussion   of  where  and  how  the  photos  were  shown,  as  well  as  what  the  workshop   participants  think  of  the  exhibitions.    The  assignment  at  the  end  of  this  workshop   would  then  be  to  consider  how  the  KGMC's  own  collection  of  identification  card   photographs  could  be  shown.    The  following  discussion  workshop  would  map  out   how  and  why  the  participants  would  elect  to  present  the  KGMC's  ID  photographs  in      64  

a  certain  way.    Theirs  could  either  be  a  group  project  proposal  or  a  series  of   proposals  for  individual  projects  that  could  then  be  presented  as  a  group  exhibition.     The  subsequent  workshops  would  then  be  primarily  production  based,  with  the   participants  reporting  on  their  progress  from  week  to  week  and  soliciting  feedback   from  the  group.    As  the  project(s)  neared  completion,  another  brainstorming  session   would  focus  on  the  kinds  of  contextualizing  information  necessary  to  the  audience's   understanding  of  the  finished  works.    This  would  entail  the  compilation  of   information  to  be  used  on  object  labels,  wall  text,  and  promotional  materials,  as  well   as  the  discussion  of  whether  to  reveal  or  conceal  the  identities  and  fates  of  the   people  pictured.    Finally,  the  participants  would  work  as  a  team  under  curatorial   supervision  to  organize  and  install  their  works  within  the  space,  where  a  private   viewing  and  wrap-up  session  would  be  held  to  discuss  what  the  participants  learned   through  the  experience  and  how  they  feel  about  their  individual  works  or  about  the   exhibition  overall.                           Inviting  Rwandan  genocide  survivors  to  create  artistic  interpretations  of   photographed  Rwandan  genocide  victims  would  solve  a  number  of  problems  by   grounding  the  KGMC's  inaugural  exhibition  in  real  objects  from  its  archives  while   still  acknowledging  that  the  archive  contains  only  traces  of  the  original  tragedy,  not   the  thing  itself.    For  the  tragedy  itself  cannot  be  contained.    In  Rwanda,  as  in  all  post- conflict  nations,  the  suffering  does  not  stop  once  photographic  evidence  of  it  is  put   to  rest  in  a  museum  or  an  archive;  it  continues  on.    Freud's  repetition  compulsion,  in   addition  to  fueling  Derrida's  writings  on  archive  fever,  describes  how  genocide   victims  come  to  revisit  the  tragic  event  over  and  over.    However,  in  the  case  of   Rwandan  survivors  taking  an  active  role  in  the  creation  of  the  KGMC's  exhibition,   perhaps  this  re-visitation  of  the  tragedy  can  be  interpreted  as  a  way  of  working   through  the  traumatic  event.    Indeed,  this  proposed  mode  of  display  would  address   many  other  problems  inherent  to  the  exhibition  of  genocide  photography.    First,  it   would  mitigate  accusations  of  colonialism  because  the  persons  controlling  the   unfolding  of  a  history  (insofar  as  that  complex  history  can  be  conveyed  through   photographs)  are  not  Europeans  or  Westerners,  rather  they  are  the  persons  to   whom  that  history  belongs.    Whereas  the  Aegis  Trust  UK  controls  the  contents  of  the      65  

KGMC's  permanent  exhibitions,  Rwandans  themselves  could  control  the  contents  of   the  traveling  exhibition.    To  that  end,  it  is  unlikely  that  a  Rwandan  who  suffered   similar  indignities  would  seek  to  either  trivialize  or  sensationalize  the  related   suffering  of  someone  else.    It  is  in  this  way  that  an  exhibition  of  conceptual  works  by   Rwandans  themselves  would  at  least  put  a  caution  on  the  issue  of  re-victimizing   victims.    As  in  the  work  of  Alredo  Jaar,  these  interpretations  could  similarly  supplant   the  viewer's  interest  in  seeing  evidence  of  the  tragedy  with  the  survivor's  interest  in   living  beyond  it.    Photographs  depicting  Rwandans  who  are  either  known  or   presumed  to  have  died  suggest  finitude,  both  for  the  victims  themselves  and  for   Rwanda  as  a  whole.  To  the  international  community,  it  remains  a  nation  known,  and   thus  defined,  by  its  greatest  tragedy.    But  while  many  lost  their  lives  in  the  genocide,   there  are  still  survivors;  while  the  country  was  all  but  destroyed,  it  has  been  rebuilt.     Creating  artworks  based  on  images  of  mortality  helps  to  defy  that  finitude  by   signifying  the  continuation  of  Rwandan  arts  and  culture,  supposed  hallmarks  of  civil   society.    The  artworks  would  also  work  to  resolve  the  issue  of  desensitization  that   has  been  proven  to  accompany  the  repeated  viewing  of  both  sensational  atrocity   photography  and  banal  archival  images.    When  no  two  interpretations  look  exactly   alike,  it  becomes  much  harder  to  view  the  victims  as  an  anonymous  mass.    And   when  no  single  interpretation  employs  the  all  too  familiar  tactic  of  shock  and  awe,  it   becomes  much  harder  to  look  away.      Nonetheless,  the  use  of  the  identity  card   photographs  as  a  cohesive  set  of  source  materials  would  create  a  necessary  sense  of   continuity  within  what  are  likely  to  be  very  different  interpretations.    In  the  same   way  that  Jaar's  three  projects  were  linked  via  their  source  material,  these  projects   would  also  exhibit  a  logical  through-line,  making  them  easier  for  the  audience  to   connect  together,  and  thereby  to  read  and  understand.    Finally,  as  with  Alfredo  Jaar,   the  alleged  aestheticization  of  human  suffering  would  be  made  less  offensive  by  the   fact  that  the  images  were  curated  by  Rwandan  citizens  specifically  as  artistic   interpretations.    This  differs  from  the  incongruous  exhibition  of  unmediated   documents  within  an  artistic  institution,  as  in  the  case  of  Photographs  from  S-21   appearing  at  MoMA.    The  headshots,  when  reinterpreted  as  artistic  works  by   Rwandan  survivors,  could  theoretically  appear  in  a  variety  of  institutions  so  long  as      66  

adequate  contextualizing  information  was  provided.    And  indeed,  this  last  assertion   is  key.    For  if  there  is  one  major  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  two  case  studies  and   their  respective  modes  of  display,  it  is  the  importance  of  contextualizing  those   original  images.    This  includes  providing  information  about  where,  when,  why  and   by  whom  the  photographs  were  made;  information  about  how  and  why  they  came   to  be  featured  in  exhibition;  and  most  importantly,  adequate  justification  for  the   institutions  in  which  they  are  shown  and  the  approach  by  which  they  shown  there.                       

  

67  

12.   Conclusion   Photographs  associated  with  atrocious  events  will  always  be  controversial,   as  will  the  act  of  disseminating  those  photographs  through  exhibition.    As  the   discussion  surrounding  depictions  of  human  suffering  inevitably  continues,  the   attitudes  and  approaches  towards  displaying  those  depictions  will  continue  to   evolve.    In  analyzing  the  way  that  violent  atrocity  images  initially  came  to  be   normalized,  first  in  the  press  and  then  in  memorial  museums  and  other  affiliated   institutions,  this  paper  seeks  to  examine  the  ongoing  use  of  violent  imagery.     However  it  does  not  necessarily  seek  to  either  condemn  or  condone  it.    Instead  this   paper  suggests  that  it  is  not  the  severity  of  war-  and  genocide-related  photography   that  matters,  but  the  way  in  which  the  impact  of  that  photography  is  either   amplified  or  reduced  by  its  context.    The  matter  of  context  is  of  course  paramount   when  conceiving  of  a  traveling  exhibition;  complex  photographs  (such  as  those   created  in  a  conflict-ridden  nation)  only  become  more  complex  when  they  are  made   to  travel  outside  of  it.    But  rather  than  lament  the  existence  of  archives  whose   contents  are  too  controversial  to  be  exhibited,  this  paper  deconstructs  the   motivations,  the  methodology  and  the  critical  reception  of  comparable  past   exhibitions  and  arrives  at  a  solution  for  the  KGMC's  collection  based  on  that   information.    Whether  or  not  the  KGMC's  inaugural  exhibition  is  itself  a  success  ­it   may  easily  fall  victim  to  the  exact  same  criticisms­  it  is  starting  off  on  the  right  foot,   so  to  speak,  by  practicing  due  diligence  and  taking  an  informed  curatorial  approach.     There  are  issues  with  exhibiting  collections  such  as  the  KGMC's  identity  card   photographs,  and  this  paper,  as  a  prelude  to  their  actual  exhibition,  acknowledges   them.    Again,  it  is  merely  a  starting  point;  it  is  one  thing  to  conceive  of  an  exhibition,   and  another  thing  entirely  to  execute  it.    Nonetheless,  it  represents  the  first  step   towards  facilitating  what  will  hopefully  become  a  successful  inaugural  exhibition  for   the  Kigali  Genocide  Memorial  Centre,  a  facility  of  great  significance  housing  a   collection  that  the  international  community  deserves  to  see.                                     

  

68  

BIBLIOGRAPHY      Abzug,  Robert  H.  Inside  the  Vicious  Heart:  Americans  and  the  Liberation  of  Nazi   Concentration  Camps.  Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1987.   Art21.  "Art21,  Alfredo  Jaar  `The  Rwanda  Project'."  PBS.  http://www.pbs.org/art21   /artists/jaar/clip1.html  (accessed  March  12,  2010).      Barthes,  Roland.  Camera  Lucida:  Reflections  on  Photography.  New  York:  Hill  and   Wang,  1981.      Batchen,  Geoffrey.  Picturing  Atrocity:  Photography  in  Crisis.  London:  Reaktion  Books,   2011.   Bourke-White,  Margaret.  Dear  Fatherland,  Rest  Quietly.  New  York:  Simon  and   Schuster,  1946.      Bourke-White,  Margaret.  Portrait  of  Myself.  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1963.      Brandon,  Laura.  Art  and  War.  London:  I.B.  Tauris,  2006.      Brennen,  Bonnie,  and  Hanno  Hardt.  Picturing  the  Past:  Media,  History,  and   Photography.  Champaign,  IL:  University  of  Illinois  Press,  1999.      Briggs,  Phillip.  Rwanda.  London:  Bradt  Travel  Guides,  2006.      Caldwell  Sorel,  Nancy.  The  Women  Who  Wrote  the  War:  The  Compelling  Story  of  the   Path-breaking  Women  War  Correspondents  of  World  War  II.  New  York:   Arcade  Publishing,  2011.      Chow,  Olivier.  "Alfredo  Jaar  and  the  Post-Traumatic  Gaze."  Tate  Papers:  Tate's  Online   Research  Journal  (Spring  2008),  accessed  on  March  25,  2011,   http://www.tate.org.uk/research/tateresearch/tatepapers/08spring/chow. shtm.        Cook,  Terry.  "Archival  Science  and  Postmodernism:  New  Formulations  for  Old   Concepts."  Archival  Science  (2001):  3-24.      Dallaire,  Roméo.  Shake  Hands  with  the  Devil:  The  Failure  of  Humanity  in  Rwanda.   Toronto:  Random  House  Canada,  2003.        De  Duve,  Thierry.  "Art  in  the  Face  of  Radical  Evil."  October  (Summer  2008):  3-23.   Derrida,  Jacques.  Archive  Fever:  A  Freudian  Impression.  Chicago:  University  of   Chicago  Press,  1996.       

  

69  

Doss,  Erika.  Looking  at  Life  Magazine.  Washington,  DC:  Smithsonian,  2004.        Duganne,  Erina,  Holly  Edwards,  and  Mark  Reinhardt.  Beautiful  Suffering:   Photography  And  the  Traffic  in  Pain.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,   2007.      French,  Lindsay.  "Exhibiting  Terror."  Representation  and  Human  Rights.  New   Brunswick,  NJ:  Rutgers  University  Press,  2002.        Fussell,  Jim.  "Group  Classification  on  National  ID  Cards  as  a  Factor  in  Genocide  and   Ethnic  Cleansing",  (paper  presented  during  the  Seminar  Series  of  the  Yale   University  Genocide  Studies  Program,  New  Haven,  Connecticut,  November   15,  2001).      Gardner,  Alexander.  Gardner's  Photographic  Sketch  Book  of  the  Civil  War.  New  York:   Dover  Publications,  1959.      Genocide  Archive  Rwanda.  "Photographs."  Genocide  Archive  Rwanda.   http://www.genocidearchiverwanda.org.rw/index.php/Category:   Photographs  (accessed  March  11,  2011).  
  

Griffin,  Tim.  "Photographs  from  S-21:  1975­1979."  Time  Out  New  York,  September      11,  1997.      Gross,  Larry,  John  Stuart  Katz,  and  Jay  Ruby.  Image  Ethics:  The  Moral  Rights  of      Subjects  in  Photographs,  Film,  and  Television.  New  York:  Oxford  University      Press,  1988.      Hamber,  Brandon.  "Remembering  to  Forget:  Issues  to  Consider  when  Establishing      Structures  for  Dealing  with  the  Past."  Past  Imperfect:  Dealing  with  the  Past  in      Northern  Ireland  and  Societies  in  Transition.  INCORE:  Northern  Ireland,  1998.      Harris,  Verne.  "Claiming  Less,  Delivering  More:  A  Critique  of  Positivist  Formulations      on  Archives  in  South  Africa."  Archivaria  (October  1997):  132-41.          Hodgkin,  Katharine  and  Susannah  Radstone.  Contested  Pasts:  The  Politics  of  Memory.      London:  Routledge,  2002.      Hornstein,  Shelly.  Image  and  Remembrance:  Representation  and  the  Holocaust.   Bloomington,  IN:  Indiana  University  Press,  2002.        Hughes,  Rachel.  "The  Abject  Artefacts  of  Memory:  Photographs  from  Cambodia's   Genocide,"  Media,  Culture  &  Society  Vol.  25  (2003):  23-44.      Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada.  "Rwanda:  Procedure  for  obtaining  or   replacing  a  national  identification  card  including  a  description  of  the  card      70  

   Kiernan,  Ben.  The  Pol  Pot  Regime:  Race,  power,  and  Genocide  In  Cambodia  Under  the   Khmer  Rouge.  New  Haven,  CT:  Yale  University  Press,  2002.      Kigali  Memorial  Centre.  "Data  Acquisition  Project."  Kigali  Memorial  Centre.   http://www.kigalimemorialcentre.org/old/doccentre  /index.html  (accessed   May  26,  2001).      Kigali  Memorial  Centre.  "Education  Project."  Kigali  Memorial  Centre.   http://www.kigalimemorialcentre.org/old/doccentre  /index.html  (accessed   May  26,  2011).      Kimmelman,  Michael.  "Hypnotized  by  Mug  Shots  That  Stare  Back:  Are  They   Windows  or  Mirrors?"  The  New  York  Times,  August  27,  1997,  C1  and  C12.        Kirshenblatt-Gimblett,  Barbara.  Destination  Culture:  Tourism,  Museums  and  Heritage.      Berkeley  and  Los  Angeles,  CA:  University  of  California  Press,  1998.        Jaar,  Alfredo.  It  is  Difficult:  Ten  Years.    Barcelona:  Actar,  1998.      Lacey,  Marc.  "10  Years  Later  in  Rwanda,  the  Dead  are  Ever  Present,"  The  New  York   Times,  February  26,  2004,  A8.      Lane,  Guy.  "Alfredo  Jaar:  Picturing  Silence."  8  Magazine  (August  19,  2008)  accessed   February  12,  2011,  http://www.foto8.com/new/online/blog/609-alfredo   jaar-picturing-silence-.      Ledgerwood,  Judy.  "The  Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocidal  Crimes:  National      Narrative."  Museum  Anthropology  (January  21,  1997):  82­98.            Levi  Strauss,  David,  and  Ben  Okri.  Let  There  Be  Light:  The  Rwanda  Project  1994   1998.  Barcelona:  Actar,  1998.      Linenthal,  Edward  T.  Preserving  Memory:  The  Struggle  to  Create  America's  Holocaust   Museum.  New  York:  Columbia  University  Press,  2001.      Linfield,  Susie.    The  Cruel  Radiance:  Photography  and  Political  Violence.  Chicago:   University  of  Chicago  Press,  2010.      Liss,  Andrea.    Trespassing  Through  Shadows:  Memory,  Photography,  and  the   Holocaust.  Minneapolis,  MN:  University  of  Minnesota  Press,  1998.         71  

and  information  on  the  `attestation  d'identité'  signed  by  a  burgomaster."   UNHCR  The  UN  Refugee  Agency.   http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/47d65476c.html  (accessed  June  3,   2011).  

McDowell,  R.  "Lens  Captures  Khmer  Rouge  Genocide."  The  Bangkok  Post,  February  7,      1997,  C6.      Milton,  Sybil.  "Photographs  of  the  Warsaw  Ghetto."  Simon  Wiesenthal  Center  Annual   3  (1986):  307.        Mirzoeff,  Nicholas.  "Invisible  Again:  Rwanda  and  Representation  After  Genocide."   African  Arts  (Autumn  2005):  36-39  and  86-91.      Moller,  Frank.  "Rwanda  Revisualized:  Genocide,  Photography,  and  the  Era  of  the   Witness."  Alternatives:  Global,  Local,  Political  (April  1,  2010):  113-137.      The  Museum  of  Modern  Art.  "An  Exhibition  of  Photographs  of  Khmer  Rouge   Prisoners  Opens  This  Month  at  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art."  The  Museum  of   Modern  Art.   http://press.moma.org/images/press/PRESS_RELEASE_ARCHIVE/khmer_ro uge.pdf  (accessed  March  30,  2011).        The  Museum  of  Modern  Art.  "Gallery  Three."  (internal  document),  April  1997.      Nahas,  Dominique.  "Haunting  Images  of  Impending  Death."  The  Critical  State  of      Visual  Art  in  New  York  Review  (June  15,  1997):  1­2.      Odom,  Thomas  Paul.  Journey  into  Darkness:  Genocide  in  Rwanda.  College  Station,  TX:   Texas  A&M  University  Press,  2005.      Péan,  Pierre.  Black  Furies,  White  Liars.  Rwanda,  1990-1994.  Paris:  Mille  et  une  Nuits,   2005.        Peters,  Gretchen.  "Restoration  Project  Immortalizes  Haunting  Images  of  S-21."  The      Cambodia  Daily,  October  12,  1994:  16.        Phillips,  Patricia  C.  "The  Aesthetics  of  Witnessing:  A  Conversation  with  Alfredo  Jaar."      Art  Journal  (Fall  2005):  6-27.      Photo  Archive  Group.  "Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Photo  Archive  Project      Proposal."  Boston,  MA:  unpublished,  1993.        Photo  Archive  Group.  "Tuol  Sleng  Museum  of  Genocide  Project  Summary."  Boston,      MA:  unpublished,  1993.        Pinchbeck,  Daniel.  "Jottings  of  Death  in  Gallery  Three."  The  New  York  Observer,  July      21,  1997,  D9.        Rancière,  Jacques.  Alfredo  Jaar:  La  Politique  des  Images.  Zürich:  JRP  Ringier,  2008.         72  

Riley,  Christopher.  "Facsimile  Communication  to  Adrienne  Williams."  Museum  of   Modern  Art  Department  of  Photography  Files,  April  21,  1997.      Riley,  Christopher,  and  Douglas  Niven.  The  Killing  Fields.  Santa  Fe,  NM:  Twin  Palms   Publishers,  1996.      Scanlan,  Joe.  "Alfredo  Jaar,  Museum  of  Contemporary  Photography,  Chicago,  USA."   Frieze  (May  1995):  37.      Silverman,  Jonathan.  For  the  World  To  See:  The  Life  of  Margaret  Bourke-White.  New   York:  The  Viking  Press,  1983.        Simon,  Roger  I.  "A  Shock  to  Thought:  Curatorial  Judgment  and  the  Public  Exhibition   of  `Difficult  Knowledge'."  Memory  Studies  (February  21,  2011):  68-74.      Smith,  C.S.  "Profiting  from  his  Shots  of  Pol  Pot's  Terror."  The  Wall  Street  Journal,      September,  1997,  H4.        Sontag,  Susan.  On  Photography.  New  York:  Farrar,  Straus  &  Giroux,  1973.        Sontag,  Susan.  Regarding  the  Pain  of  Others.    New  York:  Farrar,  Straus  and  Giroux,   2003.      Struk,  Janina.  Photographing  the  Holocaust:  Interpretations  of  the  Evidence.  London:   I.B.  Tauris,  2004.      Strauss,  Scott.  Intimate  Enemy:  Images  and  Voices  of  the  Rwandan  Genocide.  New   York:  Zone  Books,  2006.      "The  Week's  Events:  The  German  Atrocities."  Life  magazine,  May  7,  1945.      Trebay,  Guy.  "Killing  Fields  of  Vision:  Was  Cambodia's  Genocide  Just  a  Moment  of        Photographic  History?"  The  Village  Voice,  June  3,  1997.      Von  Dewitz,  Bodo.  Kiosk.  A  History  of  Photojournalism.  Göttingen:  Steidl,  2008.      Williams,  Paul.  Memorial  Museums:  The  Global  Rush  to  Commemorate  Atrocities.   Oxford:  Berg  Publishers,  2008.      Zelizer,  Barbie.  Remembering  To  Forget:  Holocaust  Memory  Through  The  Camera's   Eye.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  2000.      Zelizer,  Barbie.  About  to  Die:  How  News  Images  Move  the  Public.  Oxford:  Oxford   University  Press,  2010.     

  

73  

                                                    

  

74  

