              

ADDRESSING  CHALLENGES  TO  MOBILITY  HUB  IMPLEMENTATION  AT  SUBURBAN   COMMUTER  RAIL  PARKING  LOTS  IN  GREATER  TORONTO  

  

        
by      Marcus  Bowman,  BA(hons),  Queen's  University,  2009         A  Major  Research  Paper     presented  to  Ryerson  University      in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of        Master  of  Planning   in     Urban  Development                 Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2012                              ©  Marcus  Bowman  2012                 

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper. This is a true copy of the major research paper, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my major research paper may be made electronically available to the public.

Marcus Bowman, BA(hons), MPl(candidate)

  

ii  

Addressing Challenges to Mobility Hub Implementation at Suburban Commuter Rail Parking Lots in Greater Toronto
©  Marcus  Bowman  2012      Master  of  Planning   in     Urban  Development     Ryerson  University  

ABSTRACT This paper examines the issue of parking demand and station area office development at station area mobility hubs. Metrolinx, the Provincial regional transit-planning agency in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area, has identified mobility hubs at locations with high transit connectivity and potential for mixed-use intensification. The Mobility Hub Guidelines provide a vision that emphasizes placemaking and station functionality. Attracting the desired form of development to mobility hubs will require a new approach to parking management and station access. This must address market realities and the double parking burden between the station and new developments. A variety of approaches are considered which could be implemented in various combinations at different mobility hub locations. These approaches include fine-tuning parking standards, reducing parking demand and facilitating a modal split shift in station access. The paper highlights that a number of innovative approaches are available, but will require proactive involvement from interested agencies.

Key Words: Mobility Hubs, Parking Demand Management, Office Development

  

iii  

   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Thank you to my supervisor professor David Amborski at the Ryerson School of Urban and Regional Planning for your help and guidance and your willingness to take on this extra burden. Sincere thanks as well to my second reader Elana Horowitz from Metrolinx for her helpfulness and willingness to selflessly assist with student research. Furthermore, thank you to all of the key informants who took time out of their busy schedules to share with me their tremendous insights into this complex issue.

  

iv  

   INTRODUCTION METHODOLOGY POLICY REVIEW

Contents 1 2 6
7 8 9 11

Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe Urban Growth Centers The Big Move Mobility Hub Guidelines

THE CURRENT SITUATION

Parking as a Barrier to Mobility Hum Implementation The Scale of GO Transit Parking Operations Comparisons with Other Systems Current Station Access Modal Splits The Context for a Review of Parking Supply Approach

15
15 18 21 23 27

LITERATURE REVIEW
Conceptualizing Station Area Development Specific Parking Standards for TOD Areas Office Development Ridership Increases Parking Demand Management Parking Demand Reduction Strategies Attracting Office Development Implementation of Station Area Development

30
31 32 34 35 39 44 46

A NEW APPROACH
Correcting Incentive Signals ­ Paid Parking Addressing Feasibility Concerns Reducing Minimum Parking Standards

48
49 51 54

IMPROVING STATION ACCESS MODAL SPLIT

Existing Efforts to Encourage Local Transit Ridership Challenges for Local Transit Paying for Improvements to Local Transit Service

56
57 58 60

STATION AREA DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY

Making Parking Arrangements Work for Development Considering Future Market Conditions An Overall Strategy

62
62 63 64

CONCLUSION & RECOMMENDATIONS

67

  

v  

List of Tables
            Table  1:  Amount  of  Parking  Spaces  at  GO  Train  Stations   Table  2:  Comparing  Parking  &  Ridership  Across  North  America   Table  3:  Station  Access  at  Mobility  Hubs     Table  4:  Effectiveness  of  Parking  Demand  Management  Strategies     Table  5:  Potential  Phasing  at  Surface  Parking  Lots   19   21   23   43   65    

List of Figures
            Figure  1:  Locations  of  Urban  Growth  Centres   Figure  2:  BIG  MOVE  Priority  Action  7.20   Figure  3:  Mobility  Hub  Locations  Map     Figure  4:  Parking  at  Oakville  GO  Station  Map     Figure  5:  Parking  at  Cooksville  GO  Station  Map   8   11   12   15   15  

Appendix
   Surface  Parking  at  Mobility  Hub  Station  Area  Maps   71  

  

  

Bibliography

77

  

vi  

1. INTRODUCTION    Recognizing  that  a  wearing  congestion  problem  in  the  region  is  significantly  rooted   in   employment   location   and   commuting   patterns,   Ontario   has   embarked   on   a   vision   of   comprehensive   land-use   and   transit   planning   around   mobility   hubs.   Identified   through   the   Provincial   regional   transportation   agency,   Metrolinx,   these   hubs   are   envisioned   as   places   of   high   connectivity   and   intensified   land-use.   The   concept   offers   the   promise   of   improving   commuting   efficiency   while   simultaneously   enhancing   rider   experience   and   the   prominence   the   public   transit   network.   With   planning  still  in  its  infancy,  areas  identified  as  mobility  hubs  take  a  wide  variety  of   forms   with   differing   levels   of   existing   placemaking   and   a   typology   distinguishing   certain   contextual   characteristics.   This   paper   concerns   mobility   hubs   situated   within  emerging  suburban  centers  that  are  currently  surrounded  by  large  amounts   of  surface  parking.  It  is  a  set  up  which  is  not  conducive  to  the  vision  established  in   the  Mobility  Hub  Guidelines.  To  overcome  the  challenge  presented  by  surrounding   surface  parking  planners  will  have  to  utilize  a  comprehensive  new  approach.  While   in  the  past,  free  parking  capacity  has  been  viewed  as  a  driver  of  ridership  growth,   this  paper  will  assert  why  this  paradigm  should  be  discarded  in  favour  of  converting   surface   parking   into   transit   supportive   developments   that   support   the   mobility   hub   concept.   Acknowledging   the   challenges   to   achieving   this   new   approach,   the   paper   will  provide  a  robust  conceptualization  of  the  parking  conversion  issue  and  discuss   a   variety   of   strategies   towards   it.   Various   combinations   of   these   strategies   will   be   necessary  at  different  mobility  hubs  sites  in  order  to  achieve  the  envisioned  urban   form.  Yet  a  sustained  dedication  to  the  new  approach  will  be  needed.    

  

1  

2. METHODOLOGY    It  is  not  yet  fully  understood  how  mobility  hubs  in  the  Great  Golden  Horseshoe  will   be  realized.  A  number  of  questions  remain  to  be  answered  as  the  focus  move  to  the   site-specific   level.   The   great   extent   of   work   completed   to   date   largely   consists   of   visioning.   Accordingly,   the   focus   must   now   switch   to   implementation   and   translation  of  the  mobility  hub  principles  so  that  they  can  be  imbedded  in  local  land- use  policies.  Implementation  must  involve  the  formulation  of  a  development  regime   in   station   areas   that   can   prioritize,   coordinate   and   advocate   for   station   area   development.   Broad   questions   concerning   parking   demand   management,   station   access  and  the  scope  of  agency  mandate  are  currently  being  considered.        This   paper   works   within   this   context   to   discuss   the   consideration   of   future   approaches   to   development   on   lands   currently   occupied   by   surface   parking   lots.     This   issue   will   be   addressed   above   a   site-specific   level   to   comment   on   the   broad   issue   of   how   surface   parking   can   successfully   be   turned   into   desirable   development   at   GO   parking   lots   in   general.   The   objective   is   to   amalgamate   the   multitude   of   complex   facets   of   this   issue   into   a   single   conceptual   element   of   mobility   hub   implementation.   This   will   be   accomplished   by   splitting   the   issue   into   the   two   core   areas  of  station  area  office  development  and  station  access  strategies.        Station  area  office  development  will  be  assessed  based  on  a  literature  review  of  its   implementation   in   other   locations   and   the   market   realities   within   the   Greater   Golden  Horseshoe.  The  literature  analysis  will  be  divided  into  an  assessment  of  the  

  

2  

necessary   characteristics   of   successful   station   areas   as   well   as   their   role   within   regional   employment   and   economic   strategies.   Key   informant   interviews,   examination   of   related   development   proforma   and   analysis   of   market   conditions   have   been   used   to   comment   on   the   potential   for   suburban   station   area   office   clusters   and   related   challenges.   A   similar   literature   review   was   conducted   around   station   area   access   strategies.   Findings   from   this   literature   review   were   combined   with   an   analysis   of   station   access   statistics   provided   by   GO   Transit   in   order   to   comment   on   the   nature   of   the   station   access   problem   and   potential   courses   of   action.   Key   informant   interviews   also   included   discussions   of   station   access   and   were   used   to   guide   research   and   discussions.   The   overall   process   of   the   literature   review  and  discussions  with  key  informants  was  guided  by  the  research  questions.        Research  questions  were  developed  with  regard  to  Metrolinx  presentations  on  the   subject  of  mobility  hub  implementation.  Informal  consultation  with  Metrolinx  staff   isolated   a   problem   that   was   current   and   relevant   and   that   addressed   an   apparent   conflict  between  functional  and  development  concerns.  Methods  of  attracting  office   development  and  strategies  for  replacing  parking  were  two  key  areas  identified  to   focus  research.  Accordingly,  the  research  questions  were  established  to  focus  on  the   central   question   of   how   to   develop   lands   currently   use   by   parking   without   compromising   mobility.   This   is   the   core   question   of   this   research.   Additional   research  questions  identify  more  specific  elements  of  this  initial  question  including   the  use  of  phasing  to  convert  parking  lots,  types  of  uses  and  a  specific  focus  on  office   development.  The  question  involving  office  development  should  not  be  construed  as  

  

3  

precluding   other   land-uses   but   is   meant   to   identify   that   high-density   employment   uses   are   of   particular   interest   in   station   areas.   The   final   research   question   is   intended   to   encapsulate   others   before   it   in   a   way   that   specifically   ties   back   to   a   holistic  consideration  of  the  approach  towards  this  issue.        Research Questions: -    -       -    -       Building   on   the   research   questions,   the   literature   review   was   further   focused   on   several   subjects   necessary   to   understand   all   parts   of   the   issue.   The   first   focus   involved   theoretical   work   around   the   role   of   station   areas,   their   role   in   the   city   as   well   as   work   around   the   design   of   such   areas   and   interaction   between   business   and   urban   design.   Another   important   focus   was   on   parking   demand   management   and   reduction   strategies,   including   critical   assessments   of   the   role   and   effects   of   excessive  parking  supply.  This  pertained  both  to  commuter  rail  park  and  ride  lots  as   well  as  to  the  types  of  development  that  could  be  built  within  them.  A  final  general   topic  was  the  management  and  development  regime  of  such  station  areas.   How  can  transit  agencies  and  local  municipalities  coordinate  phasing  to  convert   surface  parking  into  developable  land  without  compromising  station   functionality?     What  types  of  uses  could  and  should  be  attracted  to  mobility  hub  areas?     What  impediments  exist  to  attracting  these  uses?     How  can  more  office  development  be  realized  in  station  areas?   How  should  Metrolinx  conceptualize  its  role  in  station  area  development  and   management  of  the  surface  parking  land  bank?  

  

4  

   A  total  of  seven  key  informant  interviews  were  conducted  with  individuals  involved   in   a   range   of   expertise.   These   included   planners   with   public   agencies,   experts   in   parking   demand   management,   commercial   leasing   brokers   and   academics.   Informants   were   selected   so   as   to   range   from   a   close   understanding   of   GO   Transit   parking  lots  to  more  abstract  expertise  in  the  general  concepts  involved.    Interviews   focused   both   on   the   issue   of   managing   demand   for   commuter   parking   lots   and   strategies  for  attracting  development.  Confidentially  was  a  condition  of  consent  for   all   interview   subjects   and   insights   have   been   neither   quoted   nor   sourced   accordingly.   Interviews   have   instead   been   used   primarily   to   guide   research   direction  and  assess  potential  recommendations.          

  

5  

3. POLICY REVIEW    The impetus for mobility hub planning comes from within a broad shift in Ontario's land use planning framework. Beginning in 2005 the provincial government began a concerted effort to consolidate growth and infrastructure planning in a way that utilized existing assets while promoting desirable development. The effort resulted in the Growth Plan for the Greater Horseshoe, a document that guides all municipal Official Plans and broadly directs the future patterns of growth in the region. This policy shift created a focus on intensification, directing substantial amounts of growth into the existing build boundary. A significant step towards this was the identification of Urban Growth Centers (UGC) at locations already well served by required infrastructure. This recognition  of  the  role  of   infrastructure,   especially   with   regards   to   public   transit,   included   a   commitment   to   direct   infrastructure   spending   on   projects   that   are   conducive   to   the   Growth   Plan   and   its   principles.   Facilitating   increased   transit   ridership   by   linking   land   use   and   infrastructure  investment.        The   new   land-use   planning   regime   was   initiated   through   the   Places   to   Grow   Act.   This   legislation   set   the   objective   that   future   growth   be   accommodated   in   a   coordinated  manner  that  enhances  global  competitiveness,  values  public  investment   and   makes   use   of   existing   infrastructure.   This   legislation   gave   the   Province   the   ability   to   initiate   broad   plans   and   to   direct   and   enforce   their   conformity   on   municipalities.   The   Growth   Plan   for   the   Greater   Golden   Horseshoe   (Growth   Plan)   acted  on  this  new  power  in  2006.

  

6  

Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe The   Growth   Plan   brought   about   a   substantial   change   and   posed   many   new   challenges  to  municipalities  and  local  governments.  A  central  component  of  the  plan   was   the   allocation   of   residential   and   employment   growth   planning   numbers   to   each   upper-tier   and   single-tier   municipality   in   the   region.   All   municipal   governments   have   been   required   to   update   their   Official   Plans   to   plan   to   their   share   of   the   province's  growth  targets;  this  process  remains  ongoing  and  is  at  various  stages  in   different   municipalities   throughout   the   region.   The   challenge   for   municipalities   is   further  increased  by  the  Growth  Plan's  requirement  that  40%  of  all  new  residential   growth   must   take   place   within   the   existing   urban   boundary   starting   in   2015.   New   development   occurring   on   greenfield   land   is   required   to   follow   the   principles   of   `complete   communities.'   Overall   development   averages   across   a   municipality   must   meet  a  density  standard  of  at  least  50  jobs  and  residents  per  hectare.        The   Places   to   Grow   Act   contains   provisions   allowing   the   province   to   make   amendments   to   municipal   plans   without   recourse   for   appeal.   This   fact   crystallizes   the   considerable   pressure   on   municipalities   to   meet   residential   and   employment   growth   targets   through   infill   development.   For   many   municipalities   in   the   region,   the   prescribed   growth   pattern   represents   a   substantial   shift   away   from   what   had   become  customary.  The  need  to  facilitate  growth  at  key  infill  locations  identified  as   mobility  hubs  must  be  considered  within  this  context.  Municipalities  and  developers   must   look   for   new   forms   of   development   in   order   to   meet   the   ambitious   growth   requirements   put   forward   by   the   province.   Addressing   mobility   hub  

  

7  

implementation  should  therefore  be  considered  as  an  important  way  of  meeting  the   challenges  of  the  Growth  Plan  and  creating  new  best  practices  in  infill  development.   Although  mobility  hubs  are  not  specifically  part  of  the  growth  they  compliment  the   spirit  of  its  policy  direction  and  indirectly  support  its  implementation.      

Urban  Growth  Centers     The   Growth   Plan   included   the   identification   of   25   different   Urban   Growth   Centres   (UGC).   Section   2.2.4   of   the   Growth   Plan   lays   out   the   concepts   behind   UGCs   and   their   corresponding  requirements.  The  province,  in  consultation  with  each  municipality,   established   the   locations   and   clarified   the   approximate   borders   of   the   UGCs   in   a   2008   technical   paper.   Many   of   these   areas   are   congruent   with   sites   identified   as   mobility  hubs.     Figure  1:  Locations  of  Urban  Growth  Centres  

  

Source:  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Infrastructure.  Size  and  Location  of  Urban  Growth  Centres  in  the   Greater  Golden  Horseshoe,  2008.    

  

  

8  

The  growth  plan  indicated  that  UGCs  would  serve  distinct  but  complimentary  roles   for  the  public  and  private  sectors.  For  the  public  sector  they  serve  as  focal  points  for   institutional   and   public   service   investments   including   supportive   transit   infrastructure.   For   the   private   sector,   UGCs   are   intended   as   magnets   for   attracting   investment   from   significant   employment   uses   and   as   places   that   could   absorb   substantial  amounts  of  new  residential  and  employment  growth.        Finally,   the   Growth   Plan   established   specific   density   requirements   for   UGCs   which   differed   depending   on   their   location   relative   to   the   centre   of   the   region.   Those   within   the   city   of   Toronto   were   mandated   a   minimum   of   400   jobs   and   residents   per   hectare.  This  number  decreased  to  200  jobs  and  residents  per  hectare  for  the  rest  of   the  municipalities  on  the  Toronto  side  of  the  Greenbelt  and  150  jobs  and  residents   per  hectare  for  the  outer  municipalities,  on  the  far  side  of  the  Greenbelt  relative  to   Toronto.      It   should   be   noted   that   for   the   purposes   of   this   paper,   the   target   of   150   jobs   and   residents   hectare   applies   to   the   suburban   mobility   hubs   in   question.   While   mobility   hubs   are   not   legally   bound   to   Urban   Growth   Centres   they   have   deeply   complimentary   objectives   and   vision.   The   mobility   hub   can   be   seen   as   seeking   ways   to  constructively  implement  Growth  Plan  principles.        The  Big  Move     Working within this policy emphasis of coordinating infrastructure and land-use planning, Metrolinx, the Province's regional transportation agency, has developed plans to guide transit planning and maximize the potential of station areas. Transportation

  

9  

planning in the Greater Golden Horseshoe is described in the visioning document The Big Move, the regional transportation plan (RTP) produced by Metrolinx in late 2008. The RTP creates a vision for a broad transportation across the region over the next several decades, laying out plans for improved customer experience and a more comprehensive network across the entire region. The RTP identifies nine `big moves' as priority areas that will have a transformative impact. The seventh big move is "a system of connected mobility hubs" (Metrolinx, 2008).

Mobility hubs are mentioned throughout The Big Move as focal points for improvement of customer experience, promotion of active transportation, support of high-density development and as anchors of major services. In support of this priority action, the document proposes several courses of action to pursue the realization of mobility hubs within a strategy of creating transit supportive communities. Parking is mentioned considerably in this section through two recommendations. The first is to create multistakeholder roundtable to create a comprehensive study on parking standards, designs, costs and implementation. This point notes specifically that the transition from free to paid parking and the segregation of parking costs from fare revenue should be studied. The second major reference to parking references updating municipal parking and zoning by-laws to include a variety of new ways of recognizing parking, establishing maximum parking and reducing minimum requirements.

Regarding implementation, the RTP recommends increasing public investments towards mobility hubs and taking full advantage of development tools such as TIFs. Perhaps more

  

10  

noteworthy however there is also mention of developing a "transit related urban development capability to lead or facilitate development (Metrolinx 2008, pg 47). Finally, the RTP also lays out the foundations for a set of guiding principles around the objective of mobility hub design. These are listed under strategy 7.20 and are transcribed in Figure 1 and guide the mobility hub guidelines.

   Stations  on  the  regional  rapid  transit  network  shall  be  planned,  located  and  designed  to:  

Figure  2:  BIG  MOVE  Priority  Action  7.20    

Maximize  transit  ridership     Maximize  integration  of  transportation  service   Prioritize  access  by  transit,  walking  and  cycling;   Optimize  transit  cost-effectiveness  and  operational  considerations;     Maximize  integration  with  the  surrounding  neighbourhood     to  create  a  walkable  environment;      · Optimize  development  opportunities.     · · · · ·
        

Source  (Metrolinx  2008,  pg51)  

Mobility  Hub  Guidelines   The Metrolinx Mobility Hub Guidelines (MHG) were released in early 2011 and represent a continuation of the work proposed in the RTP as well as previous green papers. The guidelines themselves are a compliment to The Big Move. While some municipalities have begun to incorporate mobility hubs into the Official Plans, the guidelines themselves are not legally binding. Explicit within their preamble is a mention of their position within the framework of the Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe and the Greenbelt Act. This is most obvious in the overlap between the MHG and the urban growth centers identified in the Growth Plan. Mobility hubs help to address

  

11  

Figure  3:  Mobility  Hub  Locations  in  the  GTHA  

Source:  Metrolinx.  Mobility  Hub  Guidelines.  2011    

  

12  

how they will interact with the new public transit infrastructure considered necessary for their successful implementation. Within this policy context, the guidelines themselves are highly subordinate. They are not binding on municipalities. Instead they are meant to coordinate planning at transit hubs across the region and demonstrate how to maximize land use and interconnectedness at centralized and important parts in the regional system.

The guidelines identify mobility hubs as "places of connectivity where different modes of transportation ­ from walking to riding transit ­ come together seamlessly and where there is an intensive concentration of working, living, shopping and/or playing" (Metrolinx 2011, pg 4). Broadly, the guidelines focus on the objectives of `seamless mobility' and `placemaking.' A third objective is included regarding implementation. Parking is discussed as one of the four objectives relating to seamless mobility. The guidelines for parking include a focus on both establishing proper sizes of the commuter parking implementing area based parking approaches. Regarding the size of parking, the guidelines speak to reconciling parking with very specific needs as well as long term development and ridership potential. There is also a reference to reducing parking demand through local transit agencies. Regarding parking management the guidelines address the inclusion of pricing as part of transportation demand management program that includes area-wide standards and modal split considerations. The guidelines create extensive visioning of placemaking and give emphasis to cultivating vibrancy through high-density mixed-use built form that is pedestrian supportive. Emphasis is also placed on the specific of creating an attractive public realm and prioritizing environmental sustainability.

  

13  

Interestingly, the guidelines also discuss implementation strategies that include ways to build partnerships and attract private investment. A core theme of this includes potential strategies to attract developers. Such strategies are mentioned as ideas and are not developed great in great detail. Approaches mentioned include: tax grants, municipal bonds, density exchanges, application fast tracking, development permit systems, flexible zoning, parkland dedication provisions, infrastructure financing and the development of special management bodies.    Finally,  the  guidelines  contain  a  typology  of  mobility  based  on  both  transportation   and   placemaking   criteria.   Placemaking   typology   is   noted   as   `Urban   Context'   and   ranges  from  those  in  downtown  Toronto  to  `unique  destinations.'  For  the  purposes   of  this  paper  two  types  of  mobility  hubs  will  be  examined  `emerging  urban  growth   centers'   and   `suburban   transit   nodes.'   It   should   be   noted   that   several   suburban   mobility   hubs   fit   within   the   category   `historic   suburban   town   centers'   and   are   not   necessarily  surrounded  by  large  amounts  of  surface  parking.  Data  from  GO  Transit   indicates   that   these   stations   tend   to   have   lower   ridership   levels.   Mobility   hub   implementation   at   these   stations   will   largely   be   a   different   issue   from   what   is   being   discussed  in  this  paper.  

  

14  

4. THE CURRENT SITUATION      Against   the   policy   backdrop   of   Mobility   Hubs   and   the   Growth   Plan   for   the   Greater   Golden  Horseshoe  is  a  very  different  existing  situation  on  the  ground.  Fittingly,  the   mobility  hubs  of  tomorrow  face  their  greatest  challenges  from  the  troubled  mobility   models   of   the   past.   Some   of   the   most   promising   sites   that   could   one   day   be   developed  into  hubs  that  fit  the  Mobility  Hub  Guidelines  are  currently  occupied  by   large   amounts   of   surface   parking.   Table   1   outlines   the   parking   provisions   at   GO   Stations  on  the  rail  network.  Many  of  these  stations  include  parking  lots  in  excess  of   2000  spaces.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  locations,  these  spaces  are  entirely  surface   parking,  usually  of  utilitarian  design  that  does  very  little  for  placemaking.        As   the   previous   review   of   the   mobility   hub   guidelines   indicated,   these   areas   are   envisioned   to   consist   of   a   high   quality   public   realm   that   enhances   the   rider   experience,   while   promoting   connectivity   and   pedestrian   priority.   The   guidelines   give  a  significant  emphasis  to  placemaking  and  intelligent  parking  management  that   is  not  currently  present  at  most  stations.  Overall,  the  current  parking  arrangement   at  most  stations  is  in  conflict  with  the  guidelines  for  several  reasons.  These  reasons   are  strong  enough  that  they  justify  the  need  for  a  new  approach  to  parking  despite   its  current  importance  in  station  access.               

  

15  

Parking  as  a  Barrier  to  Mobility  Hub  Implementation     Firstly,  many  of  the  parking  lots  in  their  current  state  pose  a  problem  for  walkability   for  station  access.  Because  many  of  the  suburban  mobility  hubs  are  surrounded  by   such  a  large  degree  of  surface  parking,  access  to  the  stations  for  those  using  active   means   of   transportation   are   impeded.   The   experience   of   walking   through   a   large   parking  lot  is  not  conducive  to  vibrant  place  making.  Secondly,  the  parking  lots  are   aesthetically  unfavourable  from  a  perspective  of  urban  design.  Designed  along  lines   of   utility   the   parking   lots   are   drab   and   grey   and   convey   a   sense   of   temporary   use,   effects  that  are  counterproductive  to  placemaking.        The  final,  and  most  significant  problem  posed  by  surface  parking  is  its  fundamental   contradiction  with  the  central  mobility  hub  goal  of  integrating  station  functionality   with  surrounding  use.  A  high  degree  of  functional  integration  is  what  distinguishes   the   mobility   hub   concept   in   a   addition   to   the   notion   of   Transit   Oriented   Development   (Horowitz,   2011).   Station   infrastructure   is   envisioned   directly   and   seamlessly   connecting   with   the   land   uses   around   it.   Yet   because   of   the   sheer   footprint   of   existing   surface   parking   surrounding   uses   have   the   feeling   of   being   highly   separated   from   the   transit   station   itself.   At   many   stations   the   nearest   alternate  land  use  to  the  station  building  can  only   be  accessed  after  crossing  large   parking  lots  with  few  pedestrian  amenities  and  little  animating  activity.  In  order  to   integrate  the  function  and  placemaking  aspects  of  transit  stations,  surrounding  uses   will   have   to   be   brought   much   closer   to   station   facilities.   These   three   assumptions  

  

16  

are  not  meant  as  an  exclusive  list  but  as  indication  of  the  assumptions  guiding  the   need  to  convert  existing  surface  parking.          As   GO   Transit   solidified   its   core   service   as   a   commuter   connection   between   the   suburbs   and   the   central   business   district   it   continuously   expanded   free   surface   parking  lots  to  attract  more  riders.  The  size  and  scale  of  the  parking  provided  by  GO   Transit  should  not  be  understated.  The  agency  has  come  to  think  about  parking  as  a                                                      Figure  5:  Parking  at  Cooksville  Mobility  Hub   Figure  4:  Parking  at  Oakville  GO  Mobility  Hub  

  

17  

   driver   of   ridership   growth.   New   parking   spaces   fill   up   quickly   meaning   that,   providing  more  parking  is  a  safe  way  to  increase  the  number  of  people  willing  to  use   the   service.   This   notion   has   been   empirically   grounded   in   other   jurisdictions   (Merriman,   1998),   with   some   caveats   and   will   be   discussed   later.   The   doctrine   of   adding   parking   for   ridership   growth   has   long   influenced   investment   decisions.   Significant   amounts   of   recent   stimulus   funding   for   GO   Transit   have   been   allocated   towards   new   parking   resulting   in   a   further   substantial   increase   in   spaces   both   in   structures  and  surface  lots.  This  situation  has  lead  to  facetious  suggestions  that  GO   is  a  parking  agency  that  also  runs  a  transit  system.  (Munro,  2011)      The  Scale  of  GO  Transit  Parking  Operations     A  review  of  unofficial  parking  information  on  GO's  station  profiles  revealed  a  total  of   55,7421   parking  spaces  at  rail  stations  system-wide.  This  information  is  presented   in  complete  detail  in   Table  1.  A  common  municipal  zoning  requirement  for  parking   spaces   is   that   they   be   of   a   minimum   size   of   16.5m2   (City   of   Burlington,   2012),   if   this   were  the  case  at  GO  it  would  mean  that  approximately  92ha   of  space  is  devoted  to   parking  lots  system  wide.  Of  the  system  wide  number,  18,575  parking  spaces,  about   33%   of   the   total,   are   located   at   stations   identified   as   mobility   hubs.   To   put   this   in   perspective,  the  analysis  in   Table  1  labeled  17  stations  as  mobility  hubs,  translating   into  roughly  30%  of  the  56  rail  stations  system  wide.  From  this  simplistic  analysis   we  can  make  the  assumption  that  mobility  hubs  are  not  currently  unique  in  terms  of                                                                                                                    1  This  number  was  reached  by  adding  the  number  of  parking  spaces  listed  on  the  station  profile  
available  on  the  `Stations'  section  of  the  GO  Transit  website.  (www.gotransit.ca)  

  

18  

their  amounts  of  parking  and  if  anything  may  be  places  with  slightly  more  parking   provision   than   the   system   average.   Using   the   figure   of   16.5m2   as   the   size   of   one   parking  stall,  it  can  be  estimated  that  there  is  about  30.6ha   of  land  at  mobility  hubs   currently  devoted  to  surface  parking;  a  significant  development  potential.        At  some  of  the  stations  with  the  highest  potential  for  mobility  hub  implementation   the   total   number   of   parking   spaces   is   substantial.   Oakville   GO   Station,   the   center   for   the   Oakville   Midtown   Urban   Growth   Center,   currently   has   2724   parking   spaces   at   four  different  lots;  the  third  largest  parking  facilities  in  the  system.  The  Langstaff  GO   Station,   an   anchor   for   the   Langstaff   Gateway   intensification   project   currently   has   1137   spots.   Cooksville   Station,   the   closest   station   to   Mississauga   City   Centre   and   with  connections  to  the  proposed  Hurontario  LRT  has  1459  spots.           Despite  the  substantial  number  of  parking  spaces  currently  available  in  the  system,   trends   in   recent   years   have   shown   an   increased   push   to   build   even   more   parking   based   on   capital   subsidy   from   higher   levels   of   government.   In   February   2009   the   federal  and  provincial  governments  jointly  announced  a  spending  package  of  $500   million   for   parking   lot   enhancement   at   12   different   sites   in   the   GO   system   (Flynn   2009).  This  package  included  funding  for  a  1000  space  parking  structure  at  Oakville   GO   (ibid).   In   2011   alone,   GO   added   3500   parking   spaces   at   nine   different   stations   (McNeil,   2012).   Parking   expansion   continues   across   the   system   with   six   different   stations   identified   as   targets   for   parking   lot   expansion   projects   in   the   near   future   (McNeil,  2012).  A  full  account  of  parking  at  GO  Train  stations  is  included  in  Table  1.  

  

19  

Table  1:  Amount  of  Parking  Spaces  at  GO  Train  Stations     GO Train Station WHITBY   CLARKSON   OAKVILLE*   BRONTE   APPLEBY   BURLINGTON*   OSHAWA*   AJAX     BRAMALEA*   PICKERING*   AURORA     ALDERSHOT   MEADOWVALE   UNIONVILLE*   COOKSVILLE*   GUILDWOOD   STREETSVILLE   RICHMOND  HILL   MAPLE   LANGSTAFF*   MILTON*   ROUGE  HILL   RUTHERFORD   BRAMPTON*   MOUNT  JOY   PORT  CREDIT*   EGLINTON   EAST  GWILLIMBURY   LISGAR   DIXIE   ERINDALE   MILIKEN   SCARBOROUGH                           Number of Parking Spaces 2,958   2,878   2,724   2,424   2,422   2,273   2,242   2,148   1,991   1,958   1,725   1,619   1,600   1,506   1,459   1,348   1,329   1,229   1,146   1,137   1,082   1,041   983   962   953   922   840   839   788   778   770   725   635                        20   BARRIE  SOUTH   GEORGETOWN   MOUNT  PLEASANT   ETOBICOKE  NORTH   MALTON   OLD  CUMMER   KING  CITY   BRADFORD     AGINCOURT     ORIOLE   LONG  BRANCH   MARKHAM   NEW  MARKET*   STOUFFVILLE   MIMICO   ALLANDALE   LINCOLNVILLE   WESTON   HAMILTON*   BLOOR*   DANFORTH*   KIPLING*     UNION*    
    

623   614   611   530   525   439   358   322   308   286   281   266   265   243   173   150   150   110   54   0   0   0   0  
    

TOTAL      Mobility  Hub  Sub  Total     

55,742      18,575  

Source:  www.gotransit.ca  Station  Profile  Information    

      *  Shaded  stations  indicate  those  identified  as   part  of  a  mobility  hub                             

   Comparisons  with  Other  Systems     To  better  understand  the  numbers  involved  with  GO  Transit's  parking  facilities  it  is   useful   to   look   at   other   comparable   North   American   transit   operations.   This   paper   proposes   four   systems   comparable   to   GO   Transit;   MBTA   in   Greater   Boston,   MTA   Metro-North   in   New   York,   BART   in   the   Bay   Area   and   METRA   in   Chicago.   All   of   these   operations  run  commuter  rail  systems  oriented  to  bring  suburban  populations  into   a   central   business   district,   operate   in   large   metro   regions   and   all   have   substantial   parking   assets.   Limitations   to   the   comparison   include   each   agency's   differing   governance  structure  and  market  area.  BART  is  a  cross  between  commuter  service   and   local   subway   while   the   MBTA   in   Boston   deals   with   commuter   rail   amongst   a   variety  of  other  local  services.  A  comparison  of  the  provision  of  parking  along  with   factors   indicating   a   transit   system's   size,   number   of   annual   trips   and   number   of   stations,  can  be  found  in  Table  2.        From   this   comparison,   several   noteworthy   observations   can   be   drawn.   The   comparison   does   seem   to   establish   reasonable   grounds   that   GO   may   have   an   over   supply   of   parking.   This   is   most   notable   in   the   comparison   with   the   MTA's   Metro- North   rail   service   that   offers   a   comparable   amount   of   parking   to   a   substantially   larger   amount   of   riders.   When   ridership   numbers   are   divided   across   the   days   of   the   year,   it   is   shown   that   GO   provides   roughly   one   parking   space   for   every   2.4   riders   whereas  New  York's  MTA  roughly  offers  a  space  for  every  3.6  riders.  Overall,  GO's   parking  number  appears  relatively  high  when  compared  to  the  ridership  levels  of  its   peers.   Only   Boston   has   a   lower   daily   rider   to   parking   space   ratio   that   may   be  

  

21  

   explained  by  smaller  weekend  ridership.  Secondly,  GO  Transit  is  the  only  operator   of   the   high-profile   commuter   oriented   operations   described   here   that   does   not   charge   for   parking.   This   should   not   be   construed   that   GO   is   the   only   operator   to   offer   free   parking,   as   the   list   of   comparable   agencies   shown   here   is   far   from   complete.  It  does  however  indicate  that  in  several  American  centers  comparable  to   Toronto  charge  for  commuter  parking  is  the  standard  practice.  Several  of  these           Table  2:  Comparing  Parking  and  Ridership  across  North  America    
Annual Passenger Commuter Rail Trips (millions) Total Number of Parking Spaces Daily Passengers to Parking Space Ratio2

Operation

Number of Stations

Parking Lot User Fees

Parking Lot Management

GO Transit3
MBTABoston4 MTA Metro North- New York BART ­ San Francisco Bay Area METRA Chicago10

48.8
10.7

55,742
31,400

2.39
0.93

58
133

Free
Paid

Public
Public / Private Mix Public / Private Mix Public Private

74.75 107.68 81.4

57,2006 40,0009 54,00011

3.57

1207 448 240

Paid Mixed Paid

7.37 4.13

                                                                                                                
2  Calculated  by  dividing  annual  ridership  by  365,  then  further  dividing  by  number  of  parking  spaces  

SOURCES:  
3  McNeil,  Gary.  "GO  Transit  President's  Board  Update."  February  16,  2012   4  Massachusetts  Bay  Transportation  Authority.  "Ridership  and  Service  Statistics  ­  12  Edition"  2009.   5z  MTA.  Metro-North  Railroad  Total  Ridership  [2011  actual  figures].  Retrieved  February  2012.  

http://mta.info/persdashboard/agencies/mnr/cp/55512_chartmth.htm    
6  MTA.  MNR  Parking  Information.  Retrieved  February  2012.  www.mta.info/mnr/html/parking.htm     7  MTA.  "About  Metro-North  Railroad."  Retrieved  February  2012.  mta.info/mnr/html/aboutmnr.html     8  BART  December  2011  Ridership  Report.  173.236.146.14/ridership/Ridership_December2011.xlsx     9  Wilson,  Richard.  Strategies  for  Action  in  Bart  Station  Areas.  BART.  October  2000.     10  METRA.  "Ridership  Report  2011  Factsheet."  2011.     11  Illinois  Regional  Transportation  Authority.  "Metra  system  wide  commuter  rail  parking  inventory  

assessment:  final  report."  1987.  

  

22  

   jurisdictions   also   contract-out   the   management   of   all,   or   part   of   their   parking   assets   to  private  operators.      These   two   key   observations   suggest   that   free   parking   has   caused   a   distortion   in   parking   demand   relative   to   comparable   systems,   which   have   been   able   to                                           accommodate   larger   ridership   with   less   parking.   Related   to   this   is   another   observation   that   is   not   indicated   in   Table   2.   GO   Transit   is   distinguished   by   its   exceptionally   high   cost   recovery   which   sits   at   over   90%   of   its   operating   budget   (GO   2020).  By  comparison,  most  other  North  American  systems  hover  at  or  around  the   50%  cost  recovery  mark  with  both  the  Metro-North  and  MBTA  commuter  systems   falling   below   it   (GO   2020).      This   comparison   indicates   that   because   GO   receives   a   comparatively   low   operating   subsidy   there   is   likelihood   that   the   costs   of   its   high   amount   of   parking   are   included   in   fares.   This   fact   is   compounded   by   the   fact   that   American  systems  have  greater  access  to  subsidy  from  the  Federal  government.        Current  Station  Access  Modal  Splits      A  picture  of  the  current  situation  with  the  identified  mobility  hub  sites  would  not  be   complete   without   a   discussion   of   the   numbers   around   station   access.      These   numbers  are  provided  in   Table  3   divided  into  both  urban  and  suburban  groups  for   mobility  hubs.  Without  this  distinction  the  overall  average  numbers  would  be  highly   skewed  as  both  types  of  station  locations  have  very  different  characteristics.  While   the  urban  situated  stations  demonstrate  a  critical  potential  for  a  high  walking  modal   share,   these   stations   currently   account   for   very   little   actual   ridership.   Thus   the  

  

23  

   suburban  stations,  with  their  large  amounts  of  land  and  ridership  base  are  the  best   focus  of  analysis  on  the  station  access.      Table  3:  Station  Access  at  Mobility  Hubs  (2009-2010)  
Method of Arriving at Station (%) Station Driver of Vehicle Drop-Off Local Transit GO Bus Carpool Bicycle Walking

Suburban Context
LANGSTAFF MILTON UNIONVILLE OSHAWA BURLINGTON BRAMALEA PICKERING BRAMPTON OAKVILLE COOKSVILLE PORT CREDIT NEW MARKET Suburb Average HAMILTON BLOOR DANFORTH KIPLING Urban Average Overall Average 69.9 68.4 64.9 62.6 61.7 59.3 55.5 52.5 50.3 46.4 45.8 32.9 55.9 15.4 13.6 11.7 29.2 17.5 46.3 15.0 17.4 15.1 15.0 13.5 16.0 16.6 20.1 19.7 19.7 16.5 29.4 17.8 20.3 13.6 0.0 46.0 20.0 18.4 1.6 4.1 15.1 4.9 7.8 11.8 18.1 7.4 21.5 11.9 11.9 7.9 10.3 34.0 0.0 6.0 8.4 12.1 10.8 0.0 0.7 0.5 14.2 9.0 7.8 0.2 7.6 1.0 0.6 0.6 1.9 3.7 1.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 2.9 3.1 3.8 2.7 2.3 2.5 4.5 2.1 3.9 1.8 4.2 1.1 1.9 2.8 0.6 0.0 0.0 4.0 1.2 2.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.0 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 1.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.2 10.3 4.4 0.0 0.2 3.9 0.7 6.6 7.6 4.5 1.2 23.4 18.6 6.8 25.1 72.7 76.3 12.4 46.6 16.7

Urban Context

Source:  GO  Transit  2009-2010  Biannual  Ridership  Survey  

   The  most  obvious  figure  presented  here  is  that  station  access  overwhelmingly  relies   on   the   automobile,   with   a   full   73.7%   of   riders   relying   on   a   private   vehicle   to   get   them   to   the   station.   This   number   is   encouraging   for   a   future   strategy   of   diverting   parking   towards   passenger   drop-off   lanes   but   does   little   to   address   long   term      24  

   concerns  around  the  infrastructure  restraints  of  station  areas  at  peak  times.  Further   trends   in   the   data   are   difficult   to   discern   as   some   stations,   such   as   Langstaff   include   a  high  rate  of  riders  who  drive  but  also  a  significant  amount  of  people  who  walk.  The   variable   nature   of   the   numbers   reveals   that   each   station   context   is   fundamentally   important   to   understanding   its   access   characteristics.   While   there   is   a   connection   between  modal  split  and  amount  of  parking  available  it  is  not  definitive.  Oakville  has   the   largest   number   of   spaces   but   ranks   in   the   bottom   half   of   the   top   single   occupant   modal  splits  boasting  a  large  significant  amount  of  transit  ridership.        The  Oakville  example  highlights  a  few  different  areas  where  specific  analysis  should   be   undertaken   to   determine   the   best   practices   that   have   lead   to   station   access   anomalies.   Pickering   and   Unionville   are   also   stations   that   have   been   able   to   achieve   a   level   transit   ridership   well   above   the   average   for   GO   Stations.   The   data   further   reveals  that  carpooling  may  be  a  potential  for  future  reduction  of  parking  demand,   as  it  is  currently  quite  low  at  only  2.8  of  riders.  This  is  a  segment  that  would  have   substantial  incentive  to  grow  if  GO  were  to  start  charging  for  parking,  as  currently   there  is  little  enticement  for  riders  on  the  relatively  short  drive  to  park  for  free  at   the   station.   Bramalea   and   Cooksville   stand   out   as   stations   that   should   be   studied   regarding  their  higher  than  average  rates  of  carpooling.          Active   transportation   access   numbers   are   relatively   low   across   the   suburban   hubs   especially   in   the   category   of   cycling,   averaging   only   0.2%   of   riders.   This   low   statistics   underscores   the   challenges   of   providing   safe   cycling   accessibility   in   the  

  

25  

   busy   traffic   areas   that   surround   stations   as   a   result   of   their   large   parking.   It   also   speaks  to  the  challenges  of  providing  secure  bike  parking  and  of  attracting  cyclists   amongst  GO's  core  ridership.  Pedestrian  access  is  considerably  higher  and  presents   more   reason   for   optimism   about   station   area   development.   Pedestrian   access   is   highest  amongst  locations  that  fall  under  the  category  of  `historic  suburban  center'   but   is   also   substantial   in   areas   that   have   hosted   relatively   new   intensification   and   development.   These   trends   compliment   the   literature   surrounding   Transit   Oriented   Development   (TOD),   which   suggests   that   development   in   close   proximity   to   a   station  area  tends  to  attract  self-identifying  transit  users  who  will  walk  to  commuter   rail  stations  (Cervero,  2010).  These  trends  are  reason  for  optimism  about  ridership   growth  from  intensification  and  development  of  station  areas.        GO's   station   access   information   underscores   the   need   to   understand   the   very   specific  community  context  and  the  nature  of  the  GO  rider.  With  the  agency's  core   business   centered   on   taking   commuters   into   the   central   business   district   certain   assumptions   about   the   GO   rider   as   an   office   worker   apply.   The   requirements   of   working  in  an  office  are  likely  part  of  the  reason  for  the  low  modal  split  from  cycling.   It   is   also   essential   to   note   that   the   GO   rider   is   a   choice   rider,   with   around   80%   of   passengers  having  access  to  a  personal  automobile  (GO  2020).  The  realities  of  living   in   a   suburban   environment   mean   that   it   is   reasonable   to   assume   that   many   GO   riders  require  a  personal  vehicle  and  associated  expenses  as  a  matter  of  daily  life.          

  

26  

   The  Context  for  a  Review  of  Parking  Supply  Approach     The   context   for   the   issue   of   surface   parking   is   framed   by   two   converging   forces   that   exist   across   the   region,   currently   in   solitude   of   one   another.   These   two   forces   are   trends  in  job  sprawl  and  the  future  of  station  accessibility.  Land  use  planners  have   long  struggled  to  attract  new  office  development  into  planned  centers  or  established   downtowns.   For   very   practical   financial   reasons,   office   development   has   instead   largely   tended   to   avoid   established   areas   in   favour   of   greenfield   locations   with   access  to  provincial  highways  and  the  opportunity  to  build  low-cost  surface  parking.   Several  factors,  including  the  policy  shift  described  in  the  previous  chapter  may  be   changing  this  force  in  ways  relevant  to  mobility  hub  implementation.        Over   the   past   two   decades   office   development   in   the   GTA   has   concentrated   in   the   suburbs  along  major  provincial  freeway  corridors  that  are  poorly  served  by  public   transit   (CUI,   2011).   This   phenomenon   that   may   be   described   as   job   sprawl,   is   a   significant   factor   in   the   level   of   congestion   in   the   GTA.   Significant   office   clusters   have   been   developed   around   highway   407   in   Markham,   Meadowvale   in   Mississauga   and   the   Airport   Corporate   Center.   The   low   public   transit   modal   split   in   this   new   office  developments  combined  with  the  large  land  parcels  required  to  accommodate   surface   parking   has   begun   to   hamper   their   future   development.   Traffic   congestion   into   these   areas   is   reducing   the   desirability   to   employees   while   low-density   development   is   leading   to   a   future   scarcity   of   developable   land.   As   the   areas   that   have   been   the   focus   of   office   development   over   the   past   decade   reach   build-out,   the   there  is  a  unique  opportunity  to  direct  future  office  growth  in  a  way  that  supports  

  

27  

   sustainable   transportation   and   promotes   more   desirable   work   places.   Regional   planners   will   have   the   choice   of   designating   new   office   lands   along   freeway   corridors  to  attempting  to  direct  this  development  to  attractive  station  areas.        The   other   important   consideration   is   station   accessibility,   a   looming   and   unanswered  question.    It  is  commonly  acknowledged  that  parking  lots  cannot  grow   indefinitely   and   as   the   number   of   vehicles   has   expanded,   so   have   congestion   problems   around   stations   areas   at   peak   periods.   This   congestion   has   created   an   unsustainable   situation   for   both   local   municipalities   and   GO's   customer   base.   As   parking   has   continued   to   expand   rapidly   the   number   of   riders   arriving   by   local   transit   has   remained   stagnant   (GO   2020).   Improvements   in   local   transit   services   feeding  into  the  GO  network  have  failed  to  keep  pace  with  the  increased  capacity  of   GO  services.  As  congestion  around  stations  increases  transit  to  the  station  becomes   less  reliable  as  buses  are  stuck  in  traffic.  This  reduction  in  transit  reliability  further   encourages   riders   to   arrive   by   personal   vehicle.   It   is   a   problem   that   stands   to   be   greatly   exacerbated   in   the   future   as   the   Ontario   Government   has   promised   all   day   two-way   service   on   all   GO   lines.   If   this   improvement   is   implemented   it   will   increase   traffic   accessing   stations   and   place   further   strain   on   the   surrounding   infrastructure.   Furthermore,   the   Toronto   Transit   Commission   (TTC),   the   region's   largest   transit   operator,  has  recently  successfully  eliminated  its  free  parking  lots  for  monthly  pass   holders  and  has  begun  charging  extra  for  parking  in  its  commuter  lots.         

  

28  

   Heading  into  a  period  of  major  expansion,  GO  Transit  faces  a  potential  turning  point   similar   to   the   potential   shift   in   regional   office   development.   The   opportunity,   and   need   for   a   new   approach   to   station   access   is   clearly   presented.   With   the   TTC   having   begun  charging  parking,  GO  has  an  opportunity  to  follow  suite  and  end  its  subsidy  of   those  who  choose  to  drive.  Furthermore,  the  large  amounts  of  infrastructure  dollars   being  poured  into  parking  facilities,  included  large  new  structured  parking,  provides   a  unique  opportunity  for  a  shift  in  policy  that  matches  a  shift  in  rider  experience.                                                                                         

  

29  

   5. LITERATURE REVIEW      The  study  of  station  area  development  as  it  relates  to  challenges  of  surface  parking   and  station  accessibility  necessitates  a  range  of  considerations.  Beginning  with  the   general   concept   of   the   station   area   itself,   its   role   in   the   city   and   the   unique   challenges   of   development   regimes   in   these   areas.   Scoping   to   a   practical   lens   this   analysis   focuses   on   the   concept   of   Transit   Oriented   Development   and   its   applications   in   North   America.   As   has   been   previously   outlined,   TOD   and   station   area   development   are   highly   reliant   on   access,   which   in   many   circumstances   must   mean   parking.   In   light   of   this,   there   is   a   need   to   explore   the   concept   of   parking   demand   management;   its   principles   and   tenets   as   well   as   its   potential   implementation   tools.   Having   been   extensively   applied   in   a   variety   of   contexts   TOD,   and  parking  management  can  be  further  analyzed  to  distill  some  expectation  of  its   effects  on  ridership  and  resident  behaviour.    The  importance  of  this  information  can   be   viewed   in   a   cyclical   relationship.   Transit   operators   must   understand   the   ridership  offset  potential  from  TOD  while  planners  must  understand  the  thresholds   for   possible   reduction   of   parking   requirements.   Parking   requirements,   in   turn,   are   fundamental   considerations   in   the   final   piece   of   the   puzzle:   the   attraction   of   office   development.  While  many  mobility  hubs  sites  are  already  prime  sites  for  residential   intensification,  special  attention  is  required  to  attract  high  quality  employment  uses.   This   requires   understanding   the   barriers   to   development   and   providing   the   framework   needed   to   shift   the   current   pattern   of   job   sprawl   an   office   market   that   is   transit   supportive.   Finally,   the   study   must   include   practical   implementation,  

  

30  

   examining   the   most   productive   forms   development   partnerships   and   management   regimes  and  the  best  role  for  public  agencies.           Conceptualizing  Station  Area  Development      The   concept   of   station   area   development   has   been   explored   at   large   in   various   contexts   throughout   the   world   in   locations   ranging   from   international   business   centers   to   relatively   modest   suburban   transit   oriented   developments.   A   common   theme   is   that   station   areas   are   exceptional   locations   not   only   in   their   potential   to   attract  investment  but  in  their  social  and  psychological  roles.  These  unique  roles  of   station   areas   underlie   their   economic   importance   and   connection   to   city-region   competiveness.  Bertolini  describes  the  Place-Node  model  of  understanding  the  role   of   station   areas.   This   theory   identifies   a   balance   between   placemaking   and   station   function   as   a   formula   for   successful   station   areas   (Bertolini,   1999).   Placemaking   features   in   the   public   realm   include   a   live   mix   of   destinations   and   uses   such   as   residents,  commerce  and  employment  activity.  The  station  element  refers  to  transit   infrastructure  and  function  wherein  a  station  must  have  multiple  lines,  serve  as  an   important   point   of   connection   and   have   the   appropriate   degree   of   accessibility.   Against  the  backdrop  of  long-term  trends  of  urban  decentralization,  the  station  area   is   the   last   vestige   of   interaction   between   actors   not   otherwise   connected.   The   station   area   therefore   becomes   an   essential   location   of   interaction   for   those   economic   activities   that   require   intensive   personal   interaction   (Bertolini,   1999).   Through   its   position,   outlying   the   central   city   but   strongly   connected   to   it,   station  

  

31  

   areas   can   become   critical   tools   to   shaping   decentralization   forces   in   favourable   ways  that  promote  compact  urban  form  and  efficient  mobility  (Bertolini  1999).        Bertolini's  assertions  regarding  the  need  for  office  concentration  are  backed  by  an   extensive   body   of   employment   research   arguing   that   forces   of   globalization   have   lead  to  increased  focus  of  industry  and  occupational  clusters.  Predominant  scholars   have   pinned   this   phenomenon   as   a   defining   feature   of   the   contemporary   economy   (Porter,  2000;  Morgan,  2007;  Nolan,  2011).    Within  the  context  of  the  Toronto  area's   mobility   hubs,   this   notion   underscores   the   role   that   station   areas   can   play   in   regional  employment  planning.  Successful  station  areas  must  be  have  proximity  to  a   healthy   central   business   district   and   furthermore   must   be   able   to   capture   decentralization  forces  in  strategic  ways  (Bertolini,  1999).  Both  of  these  situations   are   clearly   present   in   the   GGH   where   the   GO   network   provides   the   most   direct,   effective   connections   to   a   thriving   CBD   while   being   situated   in   a   vast   region   of   decentralization.   The   Toronto   area   continues   to   be   strongly   shaped   by   decentralizing  forces  and  should  leverage  the  opportunity  to  focus  development  in   order  to  promote  better  mobility.        Specific  Parking  Standards  for  TOD  Areas      Studies   about   the   effects   of   TOD   on   transportation   habits,   and   in   turn   parking   demand  show  mixed  results  based  on  the  types  of  uses.  Generally,  residential  TODs   show   encouraging   trends   of   reduction   in   automobile   trips   while   office   developments   are   less   effective.   Residential   areas   have   been   the   focus   of   TOD  

  

32  

   transportation  habit  studies  and  have  generally  found  that  residents  are  five  to  six   times  more  likely  to  take  transit  than  average  (Cervero,  2006).  These  numbers  are   qualified  however  by  the  notion  that  decision  to  locate  in  these  areas  likely  indicates   a  predisposition  towards  transit  use  (Cervero,  2010).  Studies  show  that  residential   development   in   TOD   areas   tends   to   retain   excessive   parking   supply   because   municipalities   almost   always   fail   to   adjust   parking   standards   (Cervero,   2010).   Importantly,  it  was  also  found  that  while  transit  ridership  increases,  many  residents   retain   possession   of   at   least   one   automobile   for   trips   outside   of   their   commute   (Cervero,  2010).        A   2004   study   in   California   showed   that   effectiveness   of   TOD   Office   parks   is   also   mitigated  by  a  continued  supply  of  free  parking  (Lund  et  al.,  2004;  Cervero,  2006).   In   San   Diego   it   was   found   that   83%   of   commuters   were   still   offered   free   parking   while  only  17%  were  offered  a  transit  pass  subsidy  (Lund  et  al.,  2004).  The  difficulty   comes   back   to   the   market   conditions;   TOD   remains   situated   within   a   broader   development   context   where   free   parking   remains   the   standard   (Shoup,   2005).   Residents  of  TOD  areas,  generally  considered  more  open  to  using  public  transit,  still   drove  to  work  95%  of  the  time  when  their  employer  offered  free  parking  (Lund  et   al.,   2004).   This   can   be   contrasted   with   45%   of  TOD  residents  opting  to  use  transit   when  their  employer  does  not  offer  free  parking  (Lund  et  al.,  2004).  Suburban  office   ridership   studies   have   been   carried   out   in   Washington,   DC   and   San   Francisco.   (Cervero,  2006).  In  San  Francisco  it  was  found  that  one  in  six  workers  at  suburban   office   locations   commuted   using   higher   order   transit   (Cervero,   2006).   Significant  

  

33  

   factors   influencing   commuter   onto   transit   included:   availability   of   free   parking,   feeder  bus  service  quality,  and  employer  transit  subsidies  (Cervero,  2006).  The  most   predominant   deterrent   to   taking   transit   was   found   to   be   `trip   chaining,'   in   which   commuters  had  to  stop  at  various  locations  along  their  trip,  most  often  at  places  to   drop  off  or  pick  up  children  (Cervero,  2006).  This  final  barrier  could  be  addressed   through  land-use  at  mobility  hubs  that  compliments  rider  trip  chaining  needs.        Office  Development  Ridership  Increases   An   important   consideration   in   station   area   planning   is   the   increased   ridership   facilitated  by  park  and  ride  facilities.  In  some  cases,  it  may  be  argued  that  parking   capacity   is   a   necessary   way   to   increase   transit   ridership.   Studies   have   shown   that   increased   parking   capacity   often   does   correlate   to   increased   ridership   levels   (Merriman,   1998).   Office   densities   around   station   areas   in   suburban   settings   have   however   also   been   found   to   increase   ridership   levels.   It   is   estimated   that   every   additional   100   employees   per   acre   can   increase   rail   ridership   by   2.2%   on   average   (Cervero,   2006).   This   observation   is   qualified   by   a   general   consensus   amongst   writers  on  the  subject  that  office  development  must  be  in  close  proximity  to  stations   for   this   correlation   to   apply   (Cervero,   2006;   Jones   Lang   Lasalle,   2011).   The   office   ridership   situation   underscores   the   need   to   incorporate   employment   in   transit   corridors   as   a   ridership   generator   and   to   have   those   station   areas   include   high   quality   connections   to   office   locations.   This   information   is   also   essential   in   understanding  station  area  parking  replacement  ratios  for  developments  on  existing   surface  parking  lots  as  ridership  loss  from  parking  can  be  offset  by  the  development.    

  

34  

   Parking  Demand  Management   A  considerable  body  of  literature  is  emerging  around  the  issue  of  parking  demand   management.   A   segment   of   this   literature   argues   that   current   attitudes   towards   parking  lead  to  its  oversupply  with  great  detriment  to  other  planning  goals  (Shoup,   2005;   Littman,   2006;   Blais,   2010).   The   route   of   this   problem   is   seen   be   the   separation  of  cost  from  demand;  a  phenomenon  which  upsets  the  natural  balance  of   the  market  distorting  the  creation  of  an  efficient  interaction  of  demand  and  supply.   The   provision   of   parking   facilities   comes   at   enormous   cost,   yet   estimates   for   the   amount  of  this  cost  that  is  borne  by  user  fees  ranges  from  1%-5%(Shoup,  2005)  to   5%-13%  (Blais,  2010).    This  low  level  of  direct  recuperation  means  that  the  cost  of   providing   parking   must   be   passed   on   in   other   ways   including   through   higher   housing  prices  and  the  cost  of  goods  (Blais,  2010).  The  cost  of  providing  this  parking   is   considerable   and   is   estimated   at   around   $2000/   space   for   surface   parking   and   $20,000/space   for   structured   parking   in   North   America   (Victoria   Transport   Policy   Institute,  2011).  In  the  GTA  specifically  construction  costs  for  parking  structures  is   estimated   at   $70/square   foot   for   above   ground   and   $130/square   foot   for   underground   facilities   (Altus   Group,   2011).   Although   the   costs   of   parking   vary   considerably  based  on  local  land  value,  these  construction  costs,  when  bundled  with   operating   and   maintenance   expenses   mean   that   each   parking   space   can   cost   between  $30  and  $200  every  month  (Victoria  Transport  Policy  Institute,  2011).          Yet   the   costs   of   parking   over-supply   extend   much   further   through   their   effect   on   built   form,   where   decreases   in   density   lead   to   an   increase   in   vehicle   miles   travelled.  

  

35  

   This   phenomenon   is   a   key   driver   of   urban   sprawl   (Blais,   2010;   Shoup,   2005)   and   its   associated  social,  economic  and  health  impacts.  Shoup  has  described  the  system  as  a   self   perpetuating   loop   in   which   more   parking   leads   to   less   density,   greater   car   dependence  and  even  more  parking  (Shoup,  2005:  129).  One  study  of  the  effects  of   implementing   minimum   parking   standards   for   residential   apartment   buildings   in   Oakland,  California  revealed  a  18%  increase  in  housing  costs  and  a  30%  decline  in   density  (Shoup,  2005;  145).          Aside  from  the  removal  of  market  conditions,  the  oversupply  of  parking  is  ensured   by  both  the  standards  of  most  municipal  planning  department  and  by  perceptions  of   demand   from   developers.   Municipal   parking   standards   penalize   developers   who   would   otherwise   attempt   to   minimize   surface   parking   (Blais,   2010).   These   minimum  parking  standards  are  usually  based  on  peak-demand  figures  provided  by   the   Institute   of   Transport   Engineers.   The   figures   are   largely   assessed   on   locations   that   are   not   accessible   by   transit   or   in   more   dense   environments   conducive   to   walking;   the   goal   being   to   cover   the   worst-case   scenario   of   parking   demand   (Shoup,   2005).  Comprehensive  studies  of  office  developments  in  California  and  Chicago  with   parking   at   minimum   local   requirements   revealed   an   actual   peak   parking   demand   was   only   56%   and   68%   of   supply   respectively   (Wilson,   2000;   Shoup,   2005).   This   points  to  the  necessity  for  refined  parking  standards  based  on  the  specific  inputs  of   a   building   site   (Shoup,   2005);   something   that   could   have   a   significant   effect   when   applied   to   sites   in   mobility   hubs,   which   will   have   an   inherently   high   degree   of   transit  accessibility.    

  

36  

      Based   on   the   figure   of   56%   peak   parking   occupancy,   as   described   above,   further   extrapolations  can  be  made  about  the  cost  of  the  minimum  parking  standards.  These   costs  are  driven  by  the  reduction  in  density  as  building  envelopes  become  smaller  in   order   create   room   for   parking   (Shoup,   2005).      If   the   minimum   parking   standards   found   in   the   California   study   had   reflected   the   actual   demand   for   spaces,   the   buildings  could  have  been  able  to  achieve  a  42%  increase  in  size,  a  48%  increase  in   land   value   and   a   37%   increase   in   property   tax   revenue   (Wilson,   2000).      These   figures   speak   to   the   lost   development   potential   in   the   office   sector   borne   both   by   developers   and   the   public.   The   reduction   in   built   form   capacity   reduces   the   profitability   and   potential   size   of   a   building   while   also   decreasing   the   amount   it   could  contribute  back  to  the  city.        Despite   the   benefits   of   reduced   parking   standards,   many   developers   remain   convinced   of   the   necessity   to   provide   parking,   likely   viewing   it   as   an   important   consideration   for   tenants   and   buyers.   Minimum   parking   standards   in   and   of   themselves  are  however  only  one  side  of  the  issue  of  parking  over-supply.  Studies   from  the  UK  demonstrate  that  even  in  central  London,  parking  spaces  are  listed  as   an   important   consideration   by   residential   homebuyers   (Shoup,   2005).   Perhaps   nowhere   can   this   more   clearly   be   seen   however   then   in   the   retail   sector,   which   views   parking   as   fundamental   to   business   viability;   setting   minimum   standards   based   on   demand   during   19   hours,   spread   over   ten   days   each   year      (Urban   Land   Institute,   1999).   To   counteract   these   conditions   scholars   point   to   the   need   to  

  

37  

   introduce  paid  parking,  or  where  this  is  inappropriate  implement  a  tax  on  parking   spaces;  something  practiced  in  many  parts  of  the  world  (Blais,  2010).          Paid  parking  is  the  most  direct  and  effective  solution  to  the  problem  of  parking  over   supply  (Shoup,  2005,  Metropolitan  Transportation  Commission,  2007).  When  users   are   charged   for   the   use   of   a   parking   space,   the   subsidy   is   either   reduced   or   eliminated  helping  to  restore  a  more  natural  market.  Because  it  is  deeply  ingrained   in   the   local   market,   the   effectiveness   of   paid   parking   can   vary   based   on   the   conditions   of   a   very   specific   area.   Studies   from   the   regional   transportation   planning   agency   in   the   San   Francisco   Bay   Area   show   that   depending   on   the   price   of   the   parking   fee   and   the   availability   of   alternate   options,   paid   parking   can   reduce   demand   between   5-30%   (Metropolitan   Transportation   Commission,   2007).     Willingness  to  pay  for  parking  is  based  on  an  intricate  array  of  user  considerations   about   the   value   of   convenience   (Shoup,   2005).   As   such,   it   is   not   necessarily   a   regressive  tax  because  it  bases  its  charge  on  how  much  an  individual  is  will  to  pay   for  extra  convenience  in  each  particular  situation  (Shoup,  2005).  San  Francisco  is  a   notable   example   where   intelligent   parking   systems   are   being   deployed   to   match   parking  charges  carefully  to  demand,  helping  to  ensure  that  spots  will  be  available   for  those  who  need  them  most  (Berg,  2012).  Revenue  from  parking  can  and  should   effectively   be   invested   back   into   the   local   community.   The   introduction   of   parking   fees   has   been   tied   to   Parking   Benefit   Districts   in   several   cities   including   Pasadena   and   Austin,   Texas   (Shoup,   2005).   In   both   of   these   cases   parking   benefit   districts   helped   to   reduce   central   area   decline   and   are   generally   supported   by   stakeholder.  

  

38  

   Investing   the   revenue   from   a   parking   district   back   into   the   area   that   it   serves   provides   a   direct   and   tangible   benefit   to   those   affected,   building   consensus   and   support  for  a  potential  controversial  situation.            Parking  Demand  Reduction  Strategies   Drivers  naturally  do  not  want  to  pay  for  parking;  a  preference  that  manifests  itself  in   commercial   decisions   and   the   culture   of   local   planning   (Shoup,   2005;   23).   Considering   this   ingrained   culture   of   parking   over   supply,   it   its   unlikely   that   the   phenomenon  will  be  easily  broken  by  an  education  of  costs  or  a  single  shift  in  policy.   Yet   the   need   to   for   a   new   approach   to   parking   for   developments   in   mobility   hubs   remains  necessary  to  realization  of  the  vision  established  through  the  mobility  hub   guidelines.  Therefore  public  agencies  and  planners  must  consider  a  variety  of  other   proactive   approaches   to   parking   demand   reduction.      The   literature   identifies   two   central  tenets  of  a  centralized  parking  reform  approach.  The  first  involves  building   community  buy-in  through  stakeholder  consultation  and  active  involvement  (Shoup,   2005;  Littman,  2006;  TriMet  2007)  while  the  second  identifies  the  need  to  tie  new   features   to   direct   tangible   benefits   (Shoup,   2005).      Alternative   potential   strategies   include  shared  parking,  unbundled  parking,  car  sharing  and  transit  eco  passes.        Shared  parking  involves  the  very  simple  idea  of  using  the  same  parking  lot  for  two   adjacent   uses   that   have   alternating   peak   parking   demand   periods.   The   key   to   this   approach  is  the  times  that  parking  is  used  and  the  spatial  relationship  between  uses.   Before   implementing   shared   parking,   planners   must   carefully   understand   the  

  

39  

   specific  situation  and  ensure  that  there  is  not  a  significant  amount  of  time  overlap   (Smith,   2005;   Metropolitan   Transportation   Commission,   2007).   In   GO   Station   lots,   peak-parking   demand   corresponds   with   that   of   peak   office   time,   eliminating   the   possibility  of  shared  parking  in  this  regard.  The  static  nature  of  GO  parking,  in  which   vehicles  remain  in  place  for  an  entire,  essentially  eliminates  the  possibility  of  shared   parking   with   working   hour   parking   demands.   Restaurants   and   entertainment   facilities   however   are   found   to   have   a   peak   parking   demand   period   in   evenings   (Smith,  2005),  opening  up  possibilities  for  shared  parking  arrangements  with  uses   such  as  movie  theaters  and  other  entertainment  facilities.  Residential  developments   are   another   land   use   with   parking   demands   periods   mirroring   GO   stations.   While   residential   spaces   are   usually   tied   to   a   specific   use,   there   are   opportunities   for   sharing  of  visitor  parking  requirements.  While  retail  centers  do  not  offer  sufficient   demand   distinction   from   GO,   they   are   common   locations   for   shared   park   and   ride   facilities.  A  1999  survey  of  select  large  U.S.  shopping  centers  indicated  that  13%  of   respondents  provided  transit  park  and  ride  facilities  (Urban  Land  Institute,  1999).   Overall,  the  shared  parking  approach  allows  for  a  reduction  in  total  parking  spaces   by  reducing  inefficiencies  providing  separate  peak  period  parking  for  all  uses.  In  GO   Station   areas   it   may   reduce   the   parking   requirements   for   certain   entertainment   uses.        Unbundled  parking  involves  removing  all  or  some  of  the  parking  requirements  for  a   specific   development   and   replacing   it   with   a   separate   fee   that   is   then   used   to   provide   shared   parking.   In   residential   properties   unbundled   parking   refers   the  

  

40  

   separation  of  the  price  of  a  parking  spot  from  the  price  of  the  residential  unit;  thus   underscoring   the   true   cost   of   providing   parking   and   restoring   market   conditions   (Metropolitan   Transportation   Commission,   2007).   This   clear   articulation   of   the   cost   of   providing   parking   is   one   of   the   greatest   benefits   of   unbundled   parking   (Shoup,   2005).  While  developers  usually  intimately  understand  these  costs,  they  may  be  less   clear  to  planners,  the  process  of  setting  in-lieu  fees  for  parking  clarifies  the  issue  for   all   involved   (Shoup,   2005).   In   commercial   and   office   development   unbundled   parking  usually  takes  the  form  of  cash  in-lieu  payments  which  allow  developers  to   avoid   minimum   parking   requirements   by   contributing   to   the   cost   of   shared   parking   structures.        This   approach   yields   several   advantages   including   flexibility   for   developers,   single   stop   parking,   historic   preservation,   consolidated   infill,   reduced   variances   and   better   urban  design  (Shoup,  2005;  231).  By  providing  a  single  location  for  parking,  those   using   an   area   need   only   to   park   once   to   visit   multiple   destinations,   improving   convenience   and   reducing   traffic.   Facilitating   flexibility,   in-lieu   fees   can   allow   for   development   approaches   that   work   with   site   specifics   such   as   historic   structures   and  removing  surface  parking  to  allow  new  infill  development.  The  in-lieu  fee  paid   by   a   developer   is   used   to   build   shared   parking,   usually   in   the   form   of   a   neighbourhood   parking   structure.   Planners   have   the   option   of   allowing   public   or   private  ownership  of  shared  parking  facilities  depending  on  specific  conditions  and   goals.   Public   management   may   result   in   higher   construction   costs   but   allows   for   a   higher   quality   of   design   and   economies   of   scale   in   parking   management   (Shoup,  

  

41  

   2005).   The   most   important   component   of   in-lieu   fees   for   planners   is   the   price   at   which  these  fees  are  set.  The  price  of  each  parking  space  offset  should  be  set  at  the   cost  of  providing  the  space  minus  the  capital  value  of  owning  the  space  had  it  been   included   in   the   property   (Shoup,   2005;   237).   This   situation   provides   the   proper   incentive   to   developers   to   accept   the   in-lieu   option.   Importantly,   a   cash   in-lieu   program   must   also   be   met   with   a   reduction   in   parking   requirements   as   higher   square  feet  to  parking  spot  ratios  necessarily  lead  higher  and  potentially  off-putting,   in-lieu  charges  (Shoup,  2005).  Cash  in-lieu  fees  have  successfully  been  used  in  Santa   Monica,  California  to  meet  the  parking  demands  of  a  commercial  and  office  district   using   a   network   of   publically   owned   parking   structures   (Shoup,   2005;   235).   Unbundled   parking   can   help   reduce   parking   demand   as   part   of   comprehensive   process   that   exposes   the   parking   subsidy,   promotes   flexibility   and   incorporates   a   simultaneous  reduction  in  minimum  standards.        The  other  main  component  of  demand  reduction  strategies  is  the  idea  of  a  parking   spot   cash-out   usually   in   the   form   of   transit   Eco   Passes.   The   idea   of   parking   cash   out   involves  providing  users  the  option  of  receiving  a  monetary  benefit  in  place  of  the   resources  that  would  otherwise  be  required  to  building  and  maintain  their  parking   space.   This   cash-out   hinges   on   the   ability   of   employers   to   reduce   their   parking   supply   (Blais,   2010).      It   is   an   approach   that   provides   a   financial   incentive   to   employees   to   use   alternate   means   of   commuting   while   removing   the   subsidy   that   transit  users  pay  to  those  who  choose  to  drive  (Blais,  2010).  California  has  had  a  law   in   place   since   1993   requiring   that   eligible   employers   offer   a   cash-out   option   to  

  

42  

   employees  (Shoup,  2005;  Blais,  2010).  Review  of  its  effectiveness  has  shown  a  12%   take-up   rate   with   a   17%   reduction   in   single   occupancy   driving   (Blais,   2010)   and   13%  reduction  in  parking  demand  (Shoup,  2010;  263).  Cash-out  programs  may  also   offer   employees   transit   passes   instead   of   a   parking   space;   an   option   that   is   most   effective  in  locations  already  served  by  transit.  This  approach  converts  a  subsidy  of   parking  spaces  into  a  subsidy  for  the  transit  system,  helping  to  sustain  local  transit   operators.   The   largest   limitation   on   this   program   is   that   its   financial   benefit   is   dependent   on   existing   excess   capacity   on   the   transit   system.   Because   of   the   high   marginal   cost   of   increasing   service   capacity,   transit   eco-passes   become   less   viable   when  they  result  in  the  need  for  new  transit  capital  costs  (Shoup;  2010).  Combining   this   program   with   unbundled   parking   approaches   can   increase   the   number   of   eligible  employers  who  are  able  to  reduce  their  allowance  within  shared  parking.        `Car  sharing'  programs  are  seeing  increasing  use  in  major  North  American  centers,   offering  members  low-cost,  short-term  access  to  an  automobile.  Research  indicates   that  car  share  programs  tend  to  attract  uses  who  already  have  between  0-1  cars  and   that   they   are   successful   in   reducing   dependence   on   second   vehicles.   A   study   conducted  after  the  first  two  years  of  a  San  Francisco  Car  Sharing  program  indicated   that  21%  of  members  had  reduced  their  total  number  of  vehicles  (Cervero  and  Tsai,   2003).  Although  the  overview  in  Table  4  indicates  a  low  demand  reduction  from  Car   Sharing,   such   programs   do   offer   reasonably   reliable   ways   to   reduce   parking   demand.         Portland,   Seattle   and   San   Francisco   all   have   programs   in   place   to   offer  

  

43  

   employee   transit   pass   programs   through   local   transit   operators   (Metropolitan   Transportation  Commission,  2007).      Table  4:  Effectiveness  of  Parking  Demand  Strategies       Policy  Option   Parking  Pricing   Shared  Parking     Reduced  Minimum  Parking  Requirements     Unbundled  Parking/  Cash  Out   Transit  Passes  and  Incentives   Car  Sharing     Reduction  in  Parking  Demand   5-30%   10-20%   10-15%   10-15%   5-10%   3-5%  
Source:  Metropolitan Transportation Commission, 2007

      Attracting  of  Office  Development      Literature   suggests   that   the   cost   of   providing   parking   at   mobility   hubs   in   order   to   accommodate   the   burden   of   increased   density.   An   initial   assessment   of   land   value   would   suggest   that   office   development   should   be   naturally   attracted   to   station   areas.     GO   rail   services   have   been   estimated   to   bring   about   a   20%-50%   premium   within   800m   of   the   station   area   (Metrolinx,   2009b).      Further   studies   indicate   that   development   potential   is   increased   with   more   frequent,   all-day   services   and   with   station   area   accessibility   infrastructure   (Metrolinx,   2009a).   Planned   capital   improvements   to   GO   Train   services   should   therefore   further   increase   station   area   land   value.   An   analysis   in   Greater   Vancouver   found   that   suburban   office   locations   within  500m  of  a  rapid  transit  station  had  around  1/3  the  vacancy  rate  and  an  8%   higher   rental   rate   than   those   further   from   transit   (Jones   Lang   Lasalle,   2011).   Yet   while  these  increased  values  are  largely  beneficial  in  many  ways,  they  pose  distinct      44  

   challenges   for   the   office   market   where   competition   to   find   low   rent   is   important.   Increased   land   values   can   serve   to   reduce   a   developer's   return   on   investment   in   a   market  where  commercial  rates  are  highly  competitive.        A  pro  forma  analysis  was  conducted  by  the  Canadian  Urban  Institute  examining  why   office  development  has  stalled  in  the  Mississauga  City  Centre  while  it  was  flourished   in   nearby   Meadowvale   and   Airport   Corporate;   both   with   no   higher   order   transit.     The  analysis  found  that  the  City  Centre  location  provided  unprofitable  opportunities   for   development   largely   because   of   the   increased   value   and   the   added   cost   of   structured  parking  (CUI,  2008).  Apart  from  these  two  factors,  the  development  pro   forma   was   largely   comparable.   Yet   the   cost   of   building   structured   parking,   which   was   almost   $17million   higher,   led   the   City   Centre   development   to   represent   a   net   loss  on  investment  while  a  comparable  site  elsewhere  offered  nearly  an  8%  return   (CUI,   2008).   With   these   market   conditions   it   is   easy   to   understand   why   office   development   in   Mississauga   City   Centre   has   been   stalled   for   several   decades   (CUI,   2008).           Office   development   in   the   Toronto   region   has   seen   several   significant   trends   in   recent   years,   the   most   predominant   being   decentralization   into   the   suburban   area   known  by  its  905  area  code  (CUI,  2011).  In  1981  almost  two  thirds  of  the  region's   office  space  was  located  in  the  financial  district,  within  close  proximity  to  the  city's   subway   lines,   today   54%   of   office   development   is   located   at   distance   from   higher   order   transit   (CUI,   2011).   Growth   in   the   905   regions   has   focused   in   several   broad  

  

45  

   clusters   including   Meadowvale,   Airport   Corporate   Centre,   the   Burlington-Oakville   corridor,  and  the  407/404  cluster  (CUI,  2011).  Notably,  none  of  these  clusters  are  in   urban  growth  centers  and  few  overlap  with  any  long-term  transit  plans.  The  trends   pushing  office  growth  to  this  area  include  tax  policy  discrepancies  and  lower  rents   (CUI,  2011).    Although  some  employers  cite  difficulty  attracting  young  employees  to   suburban   office   locations   (CUI,   2011),   the   trend   towards   growth   in   these   areas   remains  strong.  Compounding  decentralization  of  the  office  market,  the  traditional   CBD   has   highly   specialized   around   the   financial   services   sector   at   the   expense   of   other  economic  clusters  (CUI,  2011).    These  trends  in  the  GTHA  can  be  seen  as  part   of   broader   global   trends   towards   employment   decentralization   (Bertolini,   1998).   This   decentralizing   emphasis,   in   which   lower   rents   are   valued   higher   than   the   amenities   of   the   CBD   is   telling   for   efforts   to   attract   development   to   mobility   hubs.   These  areas  will  have  to  find  ways  to  reduce  the  cost  of  parking  provision  in  order   to  become  competitive,  as  it  is  unlikely  they  will  otherwise  be  financial  competitive   with  other  office  clusters.        Implementation  of  Station  Area  Development       Several   jurisdictions   in   North   America   have   developed   detailed   station   area   development   policies   and   procedures.   These   agencies   have   made   policy   commitments   to   play   an   active   role   in   station   area   implementation.   In   Portland,   Oregon  transit  operators  have  entered  in  public-private  partnerships  (P3)  with  local   economic   development   corporations   in   order   to   facilitate   development   on   station   park  and  ride  facilities  including  a  large  medical  office  complex  (TriMet,  2007).  Such   projects   demonstrate   the   potential   of   P3   arrangements   in   station   area   development      46  

   with  proactive  work  by  transit  agencies.  The  Bay  Area  Rapid  Transit  (BART)  system   has   developed   comprehensive   methodology   for   encouraging   transit-oriented   development   and   studying   the   parking   replacement   ratio   by   which   a   development   must   replace   the   spots   on   which   it   was   built.   The   focus   of   these   guidelines   is   to   determine   where   the   parking   replacement   ratio   can   be   reduced   without   compromising   station   ridership   (Wilson,   2005).   Finally,   the   Washington   Metropolitan   Area   Transit   Authority   (WMATA)   has   a   detailed   site   a   station   access   manual   to   guide   station   site   and   access   planning   (WMATA,   2008).   This   manual   provides   criteria   for   establishing   a   hierarchy   of   station   access,   station   design   attributes  and  necessary  features  of  join  development.        Clear  articulations  of  the  role  of  state  in  station  area  development  come  largely  from   European  sources.  In  these  cases  the  vision  for  state  involvement  appears  to  take  a   high-level   coordination   approach   in   setting   the   goals   and   parameters   of   development  corporations  (Bertolini,  1998).  There  is  recognition  that  station  areas   are   unique   and   different   policy   goals   and   visions   will   be   present   in   each   location.   Development   schemes   in   station   areas   are   comprehensive   in   nature,   taking   place   over  many  years  and  phases.  As  such,  it  is  important  that  development  partnerships   be   established   to   enhance   longevity   through   political   and   economic   cycles   (Bertolini,  1998).  Governments  can  also  play  a  role  ensuring  appropriate  parcel  size   divisions  to  prevent  against  stagnant  or  overly  monotonous  areas  (Trip,  2007).       

  

47  

   6. A NEW APPROACH    The   two   forces   of   demand   for   office   development   and   the   need   to   find   a   more   sustainable  way  to  accommodate  station  access,  are  both  fundamentally  intertwined   with   the   issue   of   parking.   Accordingly,   this   chapter   will   discuss   ways   to   alter   the   comprehensive   approach   to   parking   management   within   station   areas   including   the   needs  of  station  access  for  commuter  parking  and  new  uses  anticipated  within  the   station  area.            To   move   beyond   the   current   situation   of   parking   dependent   ridership   numbers   and   hampered   development   potential   two   core   strategies   may   be   employed.   These   strategies   involve   targeting   both   of   the   core   problems   around   station   area   access   and   development.   The   first   strategy   must   focus   on   reducing   the   parking   requirements   of   GO   riders   themselves.   To   this   end,   the   transportation   modal   split   for   station   access   must   be   shifted   more   towards   local   transit.   This   can   be   accomplished   by   correcting   the   demand   imbalance   caused   by   the   subsidy   of   free   parking   and   using   the   corresponding   funds   to   provide   incentives   for   transit   users.   The  second  core  strategy  must  deal  with  the  parking  requirements  of  the  new  uses   that   mobility   hubs   hope   to   attract.   A   double   burden   of   parking   needs   in   mobility   hubs   means   that   station   area   development   will   not   be   able   to   use   traditional   suburban  parking  patterns.  Alternative  approaches  will  have  to  be  implemented  to   appropriately   reduce   the   parking   needs   of   station   area   development   while   providing  incentive  to  developers  and  tenants.     

  

48  

   Correcting  Incentive  Signals  ­  Paid  Parking   In   attempting   to   shift   the   station   access   behaviour   of   riders,   agencies   should   pay   careful   attention   to   the   way   that   policy   decisions   incentivize   certain   actions.   Providing   free   parking   is   a   policy   that   not   only   gives   incentive   to   drive   to   transit   stations  but  inadvertently  is  a  disincentive  to  the  use  of  public  transit  (Blais,  2010;   145).   Because   the   provision   of   parking   facilities   is   a   considerable   cost   to   transit   operators,  providing  these  facilities  for  free  amounts  to  a  subsidy  of  driving  to  the   station   (Blais,   2010;   145).      Because   GO   Transit   obtains   over   90%   of   its   operating   budget   through   fares   (GO   2020)   the   cost   of   providing   this   subsidy   to   parking   is   borne  by  all  who  use  the  system.  The  parking  subsidy  therefore  increases  the  fare   burden   for   those   who   choose   alternate   means   of   station   access   meaning   that   they   are   taxed   to   help   pay   for   parking   spaces   that   they   do   not   use.   This   amounts   to   a   penalization   of   desired   behaviour   in   order   to   reward   what   is   less   desired.   This   model   is   designed   for   a   system   so   reliant   on   riders   parking   at   stations   that   other   considerations  are  negligibly  marginal.        Referring   back   to   the   station   access   modal   splits   discussed   previously   it   is   readily   apparent   that   this   model   no   longer   applies   to   GO's   mobility   hubs.   At   busy   stations   like  Oakville,  Cooksville  and  Port  Credit  only  half  or  less  of  riders  benefit  from  this   parking   subsidy.   Providing   free   parking   at   GO   stations   amounts   to   providing   a   disincentive   for   riders   to   chose   alternative   means   of   station   access.      Funding   a   means   of   station   access   that   competes   with   local   transit   operators   inadvertently   hinders  the  goal  of  shifting  the  modal  split  more  towards  transit.    

  

49  

      This   fact   alone   provides   a   compelling   case   for   implementing   paid   parking   at   GO   stations.  Yet  the  case  for  paid  parking  can  also  be  made  in  a  variety  of  other  ways.  As   parking  is  a  very  tangible  issue  affecting  a  wide  constituency,  special  attention  will   have   to   be   paid   to   political   optics.   North   America's   oversupply   of   parking   likely   originates   at   least   in   part   from   its   popularity   (Shoup,   2005;   22).   Overcoming   this   popularity  can  accomplished  through  a  mix  of  strategies  that  tie  new  revenues  into   tangible   benefits.   It   may   also   be   accomplished   by   appealing   to   the   encompassing   range   of   actors   advocating   paid   parking.   Many   economists   recognize   that   parking   is   a   form   of   subsidy   and   that   charging   for   parking   is   an   effective   means   of   taxation   (Shoup,  2005;  512).  When  then  Mayor  of  Toronto,  David  Miller  commissioned  a  blue   ribbon  panel  into  fiscal  stability  in  2008  its  report  back  included  recommendations   to  make  better  use  of  the  cities  assets  including  its  large  parking  facilities  (Mayor's Fiscal Review Panel, 2008).        Addressing  Feasibility  Concerns     The  perception  that  charging  for  parking  could  drive  away  riders  was  an  argument   long   considered   by   the   Toronto   Transit   Commission   as   well.   With   sizable   parking   assets  around  some  its  stations  at  the  end  of  subway  lines,  the  TTC  was  concerned   that  removal  of  free  parking  would  cause  suburban  riders  to  return  to  their  cars.  In   the  wake  of  paid  parking  implementation  on  the  TTC  in  2009  ridership  levels  have   continued   to   increase   with   late   2011   ridership   up   5.2%   over   the   same   period   in   2010  (TTC,  2011).  Through  the  parking  charge  the  TTC  also  gained  a  significant  new  

  

50  

   revenue   source   that   was   projected   to   generate   $9.47   million   in   2011   (TTC,   2011).   This  new  revenue  source  was  obtained  through  relatively  modest  parking  fees  of  $5   in  the  morning  and  $2  in  the  afternoon;  parking  is  free  on  weekends  and  evenings.        Although   there   are   significant   differences   between   GO   Transit   and   the   TTC   the   later's   experiment   with   paid   parking   demonstrates   an   important   point   about   the   factors   influencing   commuter   travel   decisions.   The   majority   of   the   TTC's   large   commuter  lots  are  located  at  the  fringes  of  its  heavy  rail  services  and  can  be  said  to   cater   to   commuters   using   them   as   access   points   to   the   transit   system,   largely   for   commutes  into  the  central  business  district.  That  commuters  are  still  willing  to  pay   for  parking  at  the  edges  of  the  central  city  and  continue  the  rest  of  their  commute  by   public  transit  speaks  to  the  price  elasticity  of  demand  for  parking.          In   order   to   consider   price   elasticity   of   demand   it   is   necessary   to   consider   parking   demand  management  within  the  context  of  the  overall  commuter  shed.  Demand  for   parking  at  GO  Stations  would  only  decrease  with  the  introduction  of  paid  parking  if   those   using   the   lots   could   find   alternatives.   For   commuters   to   be   able   to   change   their  travel  patterns  they  would  have  to  access  the  station  by  alternative  means  or   find  parking  in  the  central  business  district  (CBD).  To  be  able  to  change  commuting   patterns  to  park  in  the  CBD  there  would  have  to  exist  there  a  supply  of  parking  large   enough   to   accommodate   a   significant   change   in   demand.   Commuters   cannot   change   their   travel   patterns   if   the   parking   supply   in   downtown   Toronto   cannot   accommodate  them  at  an  appropriate  price  point.  The  case  of  the  TTC  implementing  

  

51  

   paid   parking   without   experiencing   a   decline   in   ridership   demonstrates   that   the   supply   of   parking   the   CBD   is   likely   already   insufficient   to   facilitate   a   high   price   elasticity   of   demand   at   commuter   parking   lots   in   the   suburbs.   The   figures   for   parking   supply   in   Toronto's   CBD   further   support   this.   A   1999   study   of   parking   supply   in   major   global   CBDs   showed   that   Toronto   CDB   had   a   parking   space   to   job   ratio   of   only   0.11,   a   figure   much   lower   than   the   international   average   of   0.34   (Kenworth   and   Laube,   1999).   That   the   CDB   only   has   enough   parking   to   accommodate   approximately   one   tenth   of   its   employees   shows   that   demand   for   transit   is   unlikely   to   shift.   A   change   in   the   price   of   parking   at   suburban   commuter   lots   should   not   decrease   the   demand   for   spaces   in   these   lots   because   of   limited   alternative  options  and  latent  demand.  Commuters  that  deemed  paying  for  parking   unacceptable   would   likely   be   driven   onto   local   transit   instead;   a   favourable   policy   outcome.        It  may  be  argued  parking  price  elasticity  of  demand  is  greater  on  GO  Transit  because   it   offers   less   frequent   and   more   expensive   service   than   the   TTC.   Yet   the   physical   supply   of   parking   in   the   CBD,   coupled   with   the   capacity   constraints   of   the   roads   leading  there  remain  constant.  From  a  cost  perspective  it  is  intuitively  unlikely  that   downtown   will   be   able   to   compete   with   suburban   parking   pricing,   especially   considering   that   the   large   capital   investments   to   build   the   suburban   parking   supply   have   already   been   made.   Furthermore,   within   the   Toronto   context,   significant   development   pressure   in   the   downtown   core   continues   to   reduce   the   supply   of   cheap  surface  parking.    

  

52  

      Finally,   the   case   study   of   the   TTC   reveals   that   charging   for   parking   will   likely   be   limited   to   peak   periods   for   inbound   commuters.   The   assumptions   about   price   elasticity   described   here   apply   to   riders   traveling   to   the   CBD   on   traditional   work   schedules.  This  is  likely  why  the  TTC  charges  for  parking  only  on  weekday  mornings   and  afternoons.  The  result  of  a  large  concentration  of  office  parking  downtown  is  a   parking   oversupply   during   non-business   hours   that   dramatically   drives   down   prices.  In  the  long-term,  regional  planners  should  consider  ways  to  reduce  parking   over  supply  across  the  region  as  a  means  of  reducing  the  price  elasticity  of  demand   at  commuter  stations.        Despite   the   merits   of   removing   the   parking   subsidy   by   passing   on   the   true   cost   of   parking  to  those  using  it,  the  issue  must  also  be  considered  in  the  broader  context.   The  significant  degree  of  car  ownership  amongst  GO  riders  combined  with  the  auto   dependent  skewed  modal  splits  in  the  GTA's  outer  regions  means  that  parking  will   be   an   important   consideration   for   the   foreseeable   future.   While   a   significant   shift   in   station   access   modal   splits   may   be   possible,   new   uses   being   attracted   to   mobility   hubs   will   carry   their   own   parking   requirements.   Using   current   parking   requirements  and  practices  at  mobility  hub  sites  will  create  an  unattainable  double   burden   of   parking.   Because   of   this,   any   strategies   to   address   the   mobility   hub   parking   problem   will   also   require   considerations   for   reducing   the   parking   requirements  of  station  area  development.              53  

   Reducing  Minimum  Parking  Standards        As   is   outlined   in   the   literature   review,   parking   standards   are   usually   set   using   external   figures   from   the   Institute   of   Transport   Engineers   who   make   calculations   based   on   the   worst   possible   scenario   and   do   not   account   for   context.   A   study   in   California   revealed   that   only   around   3%   of   municipalities   conducted   their   own   parking  studies  (Cervero,  2010).  A  national  survey  in  the  United  States  revealed  that   75%   of   cities   maintained   or   exceeded   suburban   parking   standards   in   TOD   areas,   leading   to   a   parking   over   supply   (Cervero,   2010).   As   was   also   discussed   in   the   literature   review   there   is   a   solid   body   of   research   demonstrating   that   TOD   can   reduce   parking   requirements,   showing   a   link   between   office   parking   demand   and   proximity  to  higher  order  transit  (Cervero,  2006).  This  connection,  when  considered   within   the   general   oversupply   of   parking   created   by   the   current   lack   of   pricing   (Shoup,   2005;   Blais,   2010)   demonstrates   that   minimum   parking   should   be   removed   from   station   area   development.   Removing   minimum   standards   does   not   mean   however  mean  abandoning  parking  considerations.  Automobiles  should  be  seen  as   an   essential   part   of   the   transportation   mix,   and   an   adequate   supply   of   parking   should   subsequently   be   considered   essential   to   station   area   success   and   vitality.   Office   developments   look   to   provide   parking   because   their   tenants   demand   it,   removing  parking  will  reduce  the  competitive  advantages  of  station  areas  relative  to   other  potential  office  locations.          Parking   should   therefore   be   accommodated   using   a   variety   of   alternative   means   that  combine  with  strategies  to  reduce  demand  such  as  modal  split  and  parking  fees.  

  

54  

   Maximum  parking  standards  should  not  be  relied  upon  exclusively  as  they  may  be   circumvented   through   minor   variance   and   do   not   naturally   utilize   the   market.   Unbundled   parking   will   be   an   important   tool   to   facilitate   a   desirable   urban   form   while  meeting  parking  needs.  As  discussed  in  the  literature  review  cash  in-lieu  fees   may   be   charged   in   order   to   contribute   to   the   costs   of   providing   shared   structured   parking   to   serve   an   area.   This   type   of   parking   arrangement   reduces   inefficiencies   and   allows   for   greater   flexibility   to   subsequently   implement   additional   demand   reduction   programs.   Such   programs   may   take   the   form   of   increased   car   sharing   space,  cash-out  in  the  form  of  transit  eco-passes  and  demand  responsive  real  time   pricing.   Phasing   will   have   to   be   carefully   arranged   in   this   regard   to   allow   gradual   price   increases   to   further   reduce   demand,   within   market   parameters,   and   allow   further  intensification  using  existing  parking  facilities.       

  

55  

      7. IMPROVING STATION ACCESS MODAL SPLIT    GO   cannot   sustain   long-term   ridership   growth   based   on   the   model   of   passengers   driving   to   free   parking   lots.   Any   notion   that   parking   can   accommodate   growth   is   dispelled   by   GO's   ambitious   expansion   goals.   These   goals   aim   to   shift   80-85%   of   passengers  travelling  into  the  CBD  from  the  regions  surrounding  the  City  of  Toronto   onto   transit.   The   agency's   goals   further   include   implementing   service   every   15   minutes   for   peak   and   30   minutes   for   off-peak   times.   A   corresponding   large   increase   of  commuters  cannot  and  should  not  be  parking  in  station  areas.        The   station   access   situation   described   previously   revealed   that   significant   alternative   access   patterns   are   already   found   in   passenger   drop-off,   walking   and   carpooling.   Passenger   drop   off   is   undesirable   as   a   major   strategy   in   the   long   term   because  it  fails  to  address  the  problem  of  traffic  congestion  in  station  areas.  Clogging   local   roads   with   vehicles   dropping   off   passengers   reduces   local   desirability,   hampers   station   area   walkability   and   hurts   the   efficiency   of   local   transit.   While   carpooling   offers   an   attractive   short-term   solution   to   reduce   the   parking   requirement  it  also  falls  short  in  the  long  term.  Parking  supply  is  finite,  regardless  of   reductions  in  the  needs  of  parking  spaces  per  passenger.  While  Metrolinx  has  begun   more   aggressively   pursuing   carpool   strategies,   it   remains   a   relatively   marginal   method  of  station  access.  Walking  is  of  course  a  desirable  method  of  station  access   and   has   great   potential   to   become   a   more   important   feature   of   the   station   access   mix   as   development   in   station   areas   increases.   However,   walking   access   is   limited   by  GO's  inherently  large  station  catchment  areas  that  rely  on  attracting  riders  who      56  

   live   or   work   beyond   walking   distance   from   stations.   Cycling   is   a   promising   alternative   access   mode   that   offers   the   potential   to   relieve   station   area   congestion   and   serve   a   larger   catchment   area.   Currently   fulfilling   a   relatively   small   portion   of   station   access,   cycling   should   be   further   encouraged   by   investing   in   infrastructure   such  as  bike  lanes  and  secure  storage  facilities  at  each  end  of  a  passenger's  trip.          The  only  method  of  station  access  that  can  address  both  large  catchment  areas  and   station   area   traffic   limitations   is   local   transit.   This   section   will   illustrate   how   improving   the   modal   split   towards   a   greater   share   of   riders   accessing   GO   through   local   public   transit   is   the   only   sustainable   long   term   solution   to   accommodate   ridership   growth.   Furthermore,   this   section   will   assess   the   current   state   of   coordination  with  local  transit  providers,  isolating  areas  of  difficulty  and  proposing   ways  to  address  them  using  new  parking  related  revenue  sources.        Existing  Efforts  to  Encourage  Local  Transit  Ridership     Recognizing   the   benefits   of   integration   with   local   transit   operators,   GO   has   initiated   two   core   efforts   to   encourage   this   mode   of   station   access.   The   most   prominent   method   is   the   local   fare   subsidy   which   means   that   riders   taking   the   bus   to   a   GO   Station  are  only  charged  65  cents  as  opposed  to  a  fully  transit  fare.  This  subsidy  to   local  transit  operators  costs  GO  around  $7  million  annually  (GO  2020).  Considered   against   the   cost   of   providing   parking   this   subsidy   represents   excellent   value.   A   structured   parking   space   in   the   United   States   is   estimated   to   have   an   amortized   monthly   cost   of   at   least   $125   (Shoup,   2005;   185)   meaning   that   one   1500   spot  

  

57  

   parking  garage  can  be  estimated  to  cost  around  $2.25  million  annually  on  its  own.   Surface   parking   spaces   also   carry   significant   operating   costs.   Using   a   conservative   estimate  of  $730  annually  for  the  amortized  cost  of  a  surface  parking  spot,  surface   parking  across  the  GO  system  can  be  estimated  as  a  $40  million  annual  burden.        The   relatively   modest   cost   of   subsidizing   local   transit   rides   provides   a   very   tangible   benefit   to   commuters.   As   an   example,   Oakville   Transit,   which   carries   21.5%   of   passengers  to  the  Oakville  GO  Station,  charges  a  regular  fare  of  $3.25  meaning  that   the   special   GO   fare   of   65   cents   provides   a   significant   incentive   to   connecting   commuters.  GO's  other  core  local  transit  integration  initiative,  the  Presto  fare  card,   helps   to   facilitate   this   special   fare   by   automatically   including   the   GO   subsidy   in   appropriate   local   fares.   The   integrated   fare   payment   offered   by   the   new   Presto   system   also   creates   an   improved   level   of   convenience   for   passengers   to   transfer   between  multiple  transit  operators;  enhancing  transit  connectivity  at  mobility  hubs.        Challenges  for  Local  Transit     Despite   these   efforts   however,   rider   take   up   of   the   local   fare   subsidy   has   been   stagnant  across  the  system  for  a  number  of  years  (GO  2020).  This  situation  has  to  do   with   a   number   of   factors   and   helps   to   illustrate   the   need   for   a   comprehensive   approach   to   network   integration.   As   was   discussed   in   Chapter   3   GO's   passengers   can   overwhelmingly   be   classified   as   choice   riders;   80%   of   train   riders   have   a   car   available   to   them.   This   fact   cannot   be   overstated   and   means   that   planners   will   have   to  work  actively  to  provide  the  incentive  to  use  local  transit.  Furthermore,  in  many  

  

58  

   of  the  target  markets  of  GO  Transit,  significant  expansion  of  the  urban  boundary  has   occurred   in   recent   years   continuing   a   pattern   of   non-transit   supportive   development.   Although   GO's   station   catchment   areas   have   gained   new   population   they  have  become  physically  more  challenging  to  serve  using  local  transit.          One   of   most   significant   challenges   to   integrating   local   transit   operations   is   the   coordination  of  schedules.  When  passengers  have  to  wait  considerable  amounts  of   time   at   the   station   in   order   to   board   a   bus   there   is   an   obvious   disincentive.   This   problem   will   become   more   challenging   as   train   frequencies   increase   in   the   future   and   as   two-way   travel   becomes   more   common.   Apart   from   working   with   local   partners   on   coordinating   schedules   a   key   strategy   may   be   to   use   mobility   hubs   themselves   as   a   means   of   improving   the   experience   of   waiting   for   a   connection.   Considering   the   low-density   of   ridership   sheds   feeding   into   GO   Stations   it   is   reasonable   to   assume   that   viable   local   transit   frequencies   will   result   in   some   inevitable   wait   times   between   connections;   despite   best   efforts   at   coordinating   schedules.    If  riders  could  spend  their  time  between  connections  more  productively,   shopping   or   accessing   services   in   a   mixed-use   environment   they   may   be   less.   This   approach  could  include  simply  improving  the  quality  of  local  transit  waiting  areas  as   is  described  within  the  Mobility  Hub  Guidelines.        Another   significant   problem   relates   back   the   recurring   issue   of   traffic   on   the   road   network   around   station   areas.   As   parking   continues   to   expand   traffic   conditions   around   stations   further   deteriorates.   Local   buses   are   caught   in   this   traffic   and  

  

59  

   experience  reduced  reliability  as  a  result.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  this  is  a   major   concern   of   those   who   would   otherwise   be   inclined   to   use   local   transit.   GO's   scheduling   requirements   mean   that   trains   cannot   wait   for   late   local   connections.   This   situation   could   be   improved   through   greater   frequency   on   the   GO   network;   current   headways   can   mean   an   hour   delay   because   of   a   mixed   connection.   A   further   strategy  may  be  to  invest  in  transit  supportive  infrastructure  around  station  areas.      Paying  for  Improvements  to  Local  Transit  Service   Based   on   the   strengths   of   the   argument   for   increasing   the   attractiveness   of   local   transit   a   strong   case   can   be   made   to   make   this   the   beneficiary   or   revenue   gained   from   charging   for   parking.   Discussing   strategies   for   implementing   paid   parking,   experts  in  the  field  emphasize  the  importance  of  providing  using  the  new  revenue  to   provide   tangible   benefits   to   those   burdened   with   the   new   charge   (Shoup,   2005;   .   Considering   the   wide   breadth   of   public   realm   improvements   needed   at   mobility   hubs   there   will   likely   be   significant   competition   amongst   spending   projects   for   parking   revenues.   Despite   the   range   of   needs,   integration   with   local   transit   operators   is   a   highly   compelling   spending   target   because   it   is   applicable   to   all   GO   customers,   is   highly   tangible   and   most   importantly   significantly   advances   other   planning  goals.        Investment   in   local   transit   and   related   infrastructure   will   be   an   important   focus,   especially   early   in   the   implementation   process.   Attracting   more   riders   to   local   transit   could   reduce   parking   demand   thereby   helping   to   increase   station   access.  

  

60  

   Transit   funding   fits   within   the   phasing   strategy   illustrated   in   Table   4.   Parking   experts   also   point   out   that   paid   parking   works   best   in   situations   where   transit   operates   significantly   below   capacity   (Shoup,   2005)   which   is   currently   the   case   in   certain  GTA  suburban  municipalities.        There   are   several   specific   programs   that   meet   the   needs   and   goals   of   Metrolinx   following  the  implementation  of  paid  parking  that  should  be  considered.    The  first  is   transit  support  infrastructure  around  station  areas.  This  could  include  items  such  as   bus   queue   jump   lanes,   bus-only   lanes   and   improved   signage   and   shelters.   Because   these  projects  are  relatively  expensive  funding  from  parking  could  be  used  as  grants   to   fund   cost   sharing   of   such   projects   with   local   municipalities   and   other   partners.   Accompanying  media  can  reinforce  the  connection  between  the  parking  charge  and   new   transit   offerings.   These   local   transit   grants   could   also   be   used   for   marketing   and   branding   campaigns   to   increase   visibility   of   local   transit   the   fare   subsidy.   Another   potential   option   could   be   to   use   parking   revenue   to   increase   the   local   transit  subsidy.  This  should  be  done  in  ways  that  are  most  tangible  to  riders  such  as   free  connections  on  select  days  or  during  certain  periods.          Improving  the  local  transit  modal  share  is  an  essential  component  of  mobility  hub   implementation   that   fits   within   the   context   of   questions   around   the   future   of   GO's   parking   strategy.   Riders   who   currently   park   at   stations   must   be   convinced   to   use   local  transit  and  new  strategies  to  encourage  this  behaviour  must  be  formulated  to   compliment  new  fees  on  parking.    

  

61  

   8. STATION AREA DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY      In   order   to   reach   the   potential   of   the   mobility   hub   site   it   will   be   necessary   to   attract   significant   amounts   of   the   appropriate   type   of   development   as   described   in   the   Mobility   Hub   Guidelines.   Yet   mobility   hubs,   as   station   areas,   face   the   double   challenge   of   accommodating   the   substantial   service   needs   of   two   groups   of   users.   Developing   land   around   station   areas   increases   the   servicing   and   access   needs   of   those  lands  in  addition  to  the  existing  accessibility  pressure  coming  from  increasing   transit   service   and   ridership.   This   situation   almost   certainly   results   in   increased   costs  on  the  site,  something  that  can  be  extremely  challenging  while  trying  to  attract   private   development.   Any   effort   to   attract   quality   private   development   must   pay   careful  attention  to  the  proforma  of  development  proposals.        Making  Parking  Arrangements  Work  for  Development     A  station  area  development  strategy  must  therefore  address  the  challenges  around   parking  in  order  to  achieve  the  desirable  forms  of  private  development.  As  has  been   previously  discussed,  developments  on  existing  surface  parking  in  the  station  area   face   a   double   burden   of   parking   in   which   they   must   provide   for   their   own   needs   while   compensating   for   the   lost   spaces   on   their   land   parcel.   The   cost   of   providing   structured   parking   alone   is   often   enough   to   make   an   office   development   in   a   suburban   context   financial   unviable.   Considering   decentralizing   trends   that   have   seen   strong   growth   in   office   clusters   on   the   urban   periphery,   the   costs   for   office   sites   in   station   areas   must   be   considered   within   a   competitive   environment.   With  

  

62  

   land  values  higher  than  many  greenfield  sites,  station  areas  must  offer  amenities  to   compensate.  The  attractive  public  realms,  density  and  placemaking  sought  in  these   areas   require   alternatives   to   surface   parking.   Yet   in   the   competitive   office   lease   market   developers   are   often   unable   to   pass   the   costs   of   alternative   parking   on   to   tenants.   Recognizing   this   fact   the   GTA   municipalities   of   Mississauga   and   Markham   have   both   begun   to   study   potential   strategies   to   accommodate   office   parking   without  pricing  developments  out  of  competitiveness  in  Mississauga  City  Centre  and   around  Unionville  Mobility  Hub  in  Markham.        Advantageous   alternative   parking   arrangements   can   be   used   in   various   combinations   to   overcome   the   disadvantage   of   the   double   burden   for   parking.   Applying  these  strategies  to  station  areas  must  be  accomplished  in  a  way  that  does   significantly  increase  station  costs.  Parking  strategies  that  can  reduce  demand  and   facilitate   flexibility   have   been   discussed   extensively   and   include   items   such   as   unbundled   parking,   parking   cash-outs   and   station   area   access   hierarchies.   By   promoting  alternative  means  of  commuting  into  the  area,  inherently  an  advantage  of   station   districts,   parking   demand   can   be   reduced   allowing   for   the   relaxation   of   minimum   parking   standards.   This   can   be   further   coupled   with   cash   in-lieu   of   parking  options  that  further  benefit  both  the  public  and  the  developer  by  increasing   building  envelopes  while  building  public  assets  and  attractive  urban  form.             

  

63  

   Considering  Future  Market  Conditions     The   tremendous   potential   of   station   areas   and   natural   demand   for   areas   of   high   mobility  and  visibility  should  not  be  forgotten.  Although  current  market  conditions   favour   suburban   locations   with   excess   parking,   the   fundamentals   are   in   place   for   these   conditions   to   change   in   the   mid   to   long   term.   Data   already   clearly   indicates   higher   land   and   values   and   a   rent   in   proximity   to   rail   transit   and   demand   for   residential  units  is  strong.  These  values  suggest  latent  demand  for  space  in  station   areas   if   financial   barriers   can   be   overcome.   Development   strategies   should   leverage   this   demand,   especially   in   the   residential   sector   to   achieve   alternate   goals.   Highly   profitable   residential   components   may   be   included   in   office   proposals   in   order   to   improve   pro   forma   and   pay   for   expensive   parking   structures.   This   approach   was   undertaken   with   the   new   Telus   Gardens   office   tower   in   downtown   Vancouver,   where   there   is   a   feeling   that   the   large   office   project   could   not   have   been   built   without  a  residential  component  (Lazurik,  2012).    Furthermore,  station  areas  have   the  potential  to  utilize  their  position  relative  to  established  business  centers  such  as   the   Toronto   CBD   in   order   to   create   business   corridors   along   GO   Transit   lines.     Viewing   the   entire   corridor   can   allow   for   a   critical   mass   of   transit   ridership   and   a   shift  in  market  demand  for  office  space.  Benefits  analysis  for  the  Lakeshore  West  GO   Train  corridor  already  includes  the  notion  of  a  business  corridor  between  Toronto   and   Hamilton   populated   with   nodes   of   development   along   the   route      (Metrolinx,   2009a).  This  situation  should  be  considered  as  part  of  the  higher  level  planning  for   attracting  office  employment  to  station  areas.         

  

64  

   An  Overall  Strategy   With  the  vision  of  a  business  corridor  in  mind,  station  area  development  must  also   give  consideration  to  the  long-term  potential  of  its  land  bank  assets.  As  congestion   continues   to   increase   public   transit   ridership   there   will   be   pressures   to   maintain   public   lands   in   order   maximize   the   revenue   from   increased   parking   charges   or   to   wait   on   increases   in   land   value   and   improvements   in   market   condition.   It   should   be   noted   however   that   research   on   station   area   access   suggests   that   surface   parking   sties  will  have  to  be  opened  up  to  attract  initial  development  and  build  the  market.   Phasing   approaches   should   be   carefully   planned   to   maximize   public   capture   of   increases  in  land  value.  A  representation  of  these  phasing  approaches  can  be  found   in   Table   5.   However,   surface   parking   is   not   a   viable   long-term   land   use   in   station   areas,   and   in   its   current   state   acts   as   a   hindrance   on   development   potential   and   value  of  public  assets.        Finally,  station  area  development  strategies  must  develop  a  set  of  guiding  principles   and  priorities.  These  principles  should  be  made  publically  available  in  a  document   supportive   of   the   Mobility   Hub   Guidelines   that   outlines   a   methodology   for   approaching   joint   development   in   station   areas   to   make   this   process   clear   to   development   partners.   A   development   strategy   must   necessarily   include   an   articulation   of   the   agency's   mandate   and   its   expectations   of   parking   replacement.   Both   of   these   points   speak   to   the   agencies   perception   about   the   relative   weight   of   station  area  development.  A  transit  agency  must  clearly  decide  whether  facilitating   station  area  development  is  within  its  mandate  and  back  this  position.  In  the  case  of  

  

65  

   Metrolinx  a  strong  case  can  be  made  that  encouraging  and  facilitating  station  area   development   is   within   mandate.   Extensive   work   has   already   been   completed   to   this   regard   and   regional   planning   is   embedded   with   a   clear   understanding   of   the   fundamental  link  between  transit  planning  and  land  use.  This  mandate  ties  in  with   the  methodology  for  creating  a  parking  replacement  formula  in  which  goals  must  be   established  against  which  to  judge  specific  station  area  development  proposals.                          Strategy
Implement Paid Parking at all GO lots Invest Parking Revenue in Local Transit Build Market Conditions for Office Development Eliminate Municipal Minimum Parking Standards Invest in Public Realm Improvements and Unbundled Parking Attract Marquee Projects and Public Buildings Invest in Structured Shared Parking Create TIF zones and incentives in station areas Open Portions of Parking Land to Development Use TIF zones as catalyst for public amenity funding Reduce Over-Supply of Parking Across the Region Transit Oriented Office Corridors

Table  5:  Potential  Phasing  at  Surface  Parking  Sites     Timing Short Term Midterm

Now

Long Term

  

66  

   9. RECOMMENDATIONS & CONCLUSION   RECOMMENDATIONS     The  phasing  strategy  outlined  in   Table  5   provides  an  outline  of  the  kinds  of  actions   that   will   be   needed   to   overcome   the   barriers   posed   by   parking   requirements   and   the   challenges   of   attracting   office   development.   An   important   first   step   will   be   a   move   towards   paid   parking   across   the   GO   system.   This   will   end   the   subsidy   that   inflates   parking   demand   and   provide   a   modest   new   revenue   stream.   Introducing   paid  parking  will  be  an  intricate  process  and  must  be  managed  in  a  way  that  creates   stakeholder   input.   The   benefit   that   can   be   achieved   by   the   new   charge   must   be   articulated  to  system  users  who  should  have  access  to  input  on  setting  priorities  for   how   new   revenue   should   be   spent.   Revenue   from   paid   parking   should   be   used   to   remove  maintenance  funding  from  general  fares.  Remaining  revenue  should  be  used   in   station   areas   to   work   towards   improved   local   transit   access   and   public   realm   quality  in  the  station  area  as  per  the  mobility  hub  guidelines.          A  second  general  step  can  be  described  as  building  the  market  conditions  for  office   development   in   station   areas.   This   must   include   a   comprehensive   approach   that   works   with   local   municipalities   to   ensure   that   cost   barriers   to   office   development   are   addressed.   Recognizing   that   current   market   conditions   do   not   permit   developers   to   profitably   build   underground   or   structured   parking,   cash   in-lieu   programs   should   be   developed   with   the   help   of   Metrolinx.   These   programs   can   coordinate  the  development  of  common  parking  garages  that  remove  or  reduce  the   parking   burden   on   individual   developments,   facilitating   density   and   increasing  

  

67  

   intensification   potential.   As   part   of   the   study   of   parking   options,   Metrolinx   should   also   work   to   explore   the   range   of   other   available   parking   management   strategies   such  as  shared  parking  and  transit  eco-pass  programs.      Beyond   the   issue   of   parking   provision,   Metrolinx   must   also   look   at   ways   of   working   with   municipalities   to   address   infrastructure   deficiencies   in   mobility   hubs   such   as   new   grade   separations,   public   amenities   and   servicing.   Tax   Increment   Financing   (TIF)   zones   have   the   potential   to   help   finance   these   necessary   improvements   but   lack   significant   precedent   in   Ontario.   Metrolinx   should   explore   the   possibility   of   providing   institutional   capacity   for   municipalities   to   form   TIF   zones.   Finally,   an   important  step  to  building  the  office  market  in  mobility  hubs  is  to  have  public  sector   offices  lead  by  example.  Metrolinx  should  work  to  encourage  that  public  offices  be   located  in  station  areas  to  help  spur  a  critical  mass  of  activity.        As  the  office  market  in  station  areas  develops,  Metrolinx  can  begin  to  place  greater   emphasis   on   encouraging   development   within   existing   surface   parking   sites.   Continuing   a   strategy   of   unbundled,   shared   parking   facilities,   coordination   with   local  municipalities  should  reduce  minimum  parking  standards  in  mobility  hubs;  the   eventual  goal  being  their  elimination.  A  key  component  to  development  on  surface   parking   lots   will   be   the   establishment   of   the   parking   replacement   ratio.   This   ratio   should   be   encompassed   within   clear   guidelines   and   process   for   developments   looking  to  build  within  GO  parking  lots.       

  

68  

   Parking   demand   in   station   areas   should   be   reduced   as   much   as   possible   over   the   long  term.  This  facilitates  lower  parking  burdens  for  developments  and  would  allow   for  a  more  favourable  parking  replacement  ratio.  Regardless  of  the  effectiveness  of   parking  demand  management  in  mobility  hubs,  the  ability  to  charge  market  prices   for  parking  is  dependent  on  conditions  in  the  broader  region  as  a  whole.  Thus,  in  the   long   term,   reducing   the   regional   oversupply   of   parking   should   be   considered   an   important  strategy  for  successful  mobility  hub  implementation.        Long  term  actions  on  development  in  mobility  hubs  should  be  guided  by  the  vision   of   establishing   business   corridors   along   major   public   transit   corridors.   Space   around   most   stations   is   limited   and   each   mobility   hub   is   situated   within   its   own   specific   context.   Yet   when   combined   along   a   corridor,   mobility   hubs   have   the   potential   to   reach   a   critical   mass   of   office   and   other   uses.   Planned   fast,   frequent   service   along   transit   lines   can   connect   businesses   within   mobility   hubs   to   other   business   areas   in   a   way   which   gives   them   an   appealing   competitive   advantage.   Market   conditions   should   increasingly   favour   such   corridors   with   increasing   congestion  and  fuel  prices.    This  concept  should  be  pursued  foremost  on  lines  with   established   hubs   at   either   end   such   as   Lakeshore   West,   which   is   anchored   by   the   downtowns  of  both  Toronto  and  Hamilton.  With  increasing  amounts  of  employment   focused   around   transit   and   in   mixed-use   areas,   parking   requirements   can   be   reduced   on   a   regional   scale,   allowing   for   greater   intensification   potential   and   reducing  the  market  inclination  towards  the  subsidy  of  free  parking.       

  

69  

   CONCLUSIONS   Free  surface  parking  around  transit  stations  is  neither  sustainable  in  the  long-term   nor  conducive  the  goals  laid  out  in  the  Mobility  Hub  Guidelines.  Evidence  suggests   that  free  parking  creates  a  distortion  in  demand  and  a  potential  surplus  of  supply.   Across   North   America   many   commuter   transit   services   charge   for   parking.   In   addition  to  offering  a  new  revenue  source,  paid  parking  can  benefit  GO  by  stabilizing   parking  demand  and  providing  funding  for  further  station  area  investment.        Planning   for   transit   oriented   office   development   is   essential   to   regional   mobility,   successful  transit  nodes  and  ridership  growth.  Despite  potential,  market  conditions   and  financial  barriers  currently  impair  progress.  The  prohibitive  cost  of  structured   or   underground   parking   is   one   of   the   most   significant   such   barriers.   Alternative   parking   demand   management   techniques   have   the   potential   to   reduce   these   barriers  and  provide  the  flexibility  needed  to  transition  station  areas  with  changes   in   market   demands.   A   change   in   market   conditions   will   come   slowly   but   can   be   anticipated   based   on   fundamentals   of   increasing   highway   congestion,   fuel   prices,   provincial  policy,  land  availability  and  competitive  advantage.        Implementing   the   necessary   measures   to   facilitate   the   desired   form   of   development   will  take  involvement  from  public  agencies  that  should  clearly  articulate  that  this  is   within   their   mandate.   Station   area   development,   accommodated   through   flexible   approaches  to  parking  management  has  the  potential  to  improve  rider  experience,   transit  agency  financial  stability  and  regional  congestion  problems.  

  

70  

   APPENDIX:    Surface Parking Maps at GTA Mobility Hubs      This  appendix  is  meant  to  give  a  visual  illustration  of  the  physical  layout  of  surface   parking  at  suburban  GO  stations  identified  as  mobility  hubs.  Lands  devoted  to  park   and   ride   facilities   are   shown   in   yellow   while   the   general   area   of   the   station   facilities   are   indicated   in   green.   The   maps   illustrate   the   degree   to   which   surface   parking   tends   to   isolate   the   station   from   its   surrounding   uses.   Aerial   images   also   begin   to   show   the   development   potential   of   the   surfacing   lots   in   places   where   they   occupy   large,   suitably   shaped   parcels   of   highly   desirable   land.   Maps   presented   in   this   appendix  should  be  considered  approximate  and  are  intended  to  provide  a  general   visual  illustration  only.        OAKVILLE

COOKSVILLE

  

71  

   BURLINGTON

BRAMALEA

  

72  

   OSHAWA

BRAMPTON

  

73  

  

MILTON

PORT CREDIT

  

74  

  

LANGSTAFF

UNIONVILLE

  

75  

   NEWMARKET

                                   

  

76  

      Altus Group (2011). Construction Cost Guide 2011

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Avison Young (Canada) Inc. "Avison Young Office Market Report." August 4, 2011. Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART). Transit Oriented Development Policy. July 14, 2005. Belzer, Dena and Gerald Autler. "Countering Sprawl with Transit Oriented Development." Issues in Science and Technology. Fall 2002, pp 51-58 Berg, Nate. "The Future of Intelligent Parking." The Atlantic Cities. Online: http://www.theatlanticcities.com/commute/2012/03/future-intelligentparking/1573/. March 23, 2012. Bertolini, Luca (1998): Station area redevelopment in five European countries: An international perspective on a complex planning challenge, International Planning Studies, 3:2, 163-184 Bertolini, Luca (1999) "Spatial Development Patterns and Public Transport: The Application of an Analytical Model in the Netherlands." Planning Practice & Research, Vol. 14, No. 2, 199-210. 1999. Blais, Pamela. Perverse Cities. Vancouver: UBC Press, 2010. Burda, Cherise and Craham Haines. "Transit Plan for Toronto: Analysis and Recommendations." The Pembina Institute. March, 2011. Board of Trade, Toronto. 2010a. Driving Regional Economic Cooperation and Development. June 2010. Board of Trade, Toronto. 2010b. The Move Ahead: Funding the Big Move. May 2010. Canadian Urban Institute. Mississauga Office Strategy Study. April 24, 2008. Canadian Urban Institute. Location and the Consequences of Business as Usual in the GTA. March 2011. Cervero, Robert. 2006. "Office Development, Rail Transit, and Commuting Choices." Journal of Public Transportation. Vol. 9, No. 5, 2006 Cervero, Robert and Jin Murakami. 2009. "Rail and Property Development in Hong Kong: Experiences and Extensions." Urban Studies. 46(10) 2019­2043, September 2009.

  

77  

   Cervero, Robert and Yu-Hsin Tsai. 2003. "San Francisco's City CarShare: TravelDemand Trends and Second-Year Impacts." Working Paper 2003-5. Institute of Urban and Regional Development. University of California, Berkley. Cervero, Robert. (2010) "Are Suburban TODs Over-Parked?" Journal of Public Transportation, Vol. 13, No. 2, 2010. City of Burlington. By-Law 2020. Updated January 2012. Engel-Yan. Joshua and Amanda Leonard. "Mobility Hub Guidelines: Tools for Achieving Successful Station Areas." ITE Journal. January 2012. Flynn, Kevin (Office of). "News: Governments of Canada and Ontario Announce Parking Lot Enhancements at Oakville GO Transit Station." February 17, 2009. Fillion, Pierre. "The mixed success of nodes as a smart growth planning policy." Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, volume 36, pages 505-521. 2009. Glaeser, Edward et al. "Why do the Poor Live in Cities? The role of public transportation." Journal of Urban Economics. 63 (2008) 1­24. GO Transit. GO 2020. Accessed April 1, 2011. Online: http://www.gotransit.com/public/en/docs/publications/Strategic_Plan_GO_2020_l owres.pdf Jones, Beth. "Feasibility Report for a Network of New Mobility Hubs in the Toronto Region." Moving the Economy. June, 2006. Jones Lang LaSalle. Rapid Transit Office Index. 2011 Horowitz, Elana and Craig Lametti. "Mobility Hubs: Land Use and Transportation Integrated Planning." OPPI Conference. Ottawa Convention Centre. Ottawa, ON. Thursday, October 13, 2011. Kenworthy, Jeffrey and Felix Laube. (1999). An International Sourcebook of Automobile Dependence in Cities 1960-1999. Boulder: University Press of Colorado. Lazurik, Susan. "Telus plan for second-tallest tower in Vancouver now includes condominium units." The Province. March 5, 2012 Online: http://www.theprovince.com/news/Telus+plan+second+tallest+tower+Vancouver +includes+condominium+units/6247708/story.html Litman, Todd. "Parking Management Best Practices" Chicago: American Planning Association, 2006.

  

78  

   Littman, Todd. "Parking Management: Strategies, Evaluation and Planning." Victoria Transport Policy Institute. February 18, 2009. Loo, Becky P.Y., Cynthia Chenb and Eric T.H. Chan. "Rail-based transit-oriented development: Lessons from New York City and Hong Kong." Landscape and Urban Planning. v97 (2010) 202­212. Lorinc, John and Steve Munro. "Lorinc vs. Munro: TTC 2.0 or TTC RIP?" Spacing Toronto. May 9, 2010. Online: http://spacingtoronto.ca/2010/03/09/lorinc-vsmunro-ttc-20-or-ttc-rip/ Lund, Hollie, Robert Cervero and Richard Wilson. 2004. "Travel Characteristics of Transit Oriented Development in California." Mayor's Fiscal Review Panel. Blueprint for Fiscal Stability and Economic Prosperity. Februay 21, 2008. Online. McNeil, Gary. "GO Transit President'sBoard Update." February 16, 2012 Merriman, David. 1998. "How Many Parking Spaces Does It Take To Create One Additional Transit Passenger." Regional Science and Urban Economics. 1998-28 Metrolinx. 2008a. Green Paper #2: Mobility Hub Backgrounder. February, 2008. Metrolinx. 2008b. The Big Move. December 2008. Online: http://www.metrolinx.com/mx/thebigmove/en/index.aspx Metrolinx. 2008c. Draft Investment Strategy. September 2008. Online Metrolinx. 2008d. The Big Move: Transforming Transportation in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area. November 2008. Online. Metrolinx. 2008e. Costs of Road Congestion in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area: Impact and Cost Benefit Analysis of the Metrolinx Draft Regional Transportation Plan. December 1, 2008. Online. Metrolinx 2009a. Lakeshore Express Rail Benefits Case. June 2009. Metrolinx 2009b, Yonge North Subway Extension Benefits Case Analysis. Metrolinx. 2011a. Dundas West Mobility Hub Display Boards. March 23, 2011. Metrolinx. 2011b. Mobility Hub Guidelines. February 18, 2011.

  

79  

   Metropolitan Transportation Commission (San Francisco Bay Area). "Reforming Parking Policies to Support Smart Growth." June 2007. Online: http://www.mtc.ca.gov/planning/smart_growth/parking/parking_seminar/Toolbox -Handbook.pdf Ministry of Transportation (Ontario). Transit Supportive Guidelines: 2011. 2011. Munro, Steve. (2008) "The Psychology of Free Parking." August 30, 2008. Online: http://stevemunro.ca/?p=1070 Munro, Steve. (2009) "GO Transit Contemplates Customer Satisfaction and Station Design." April 9, 2009. Online: http://stevemunro.ca/?p=1987 Munro, Steve. (2011) "Toronto In Question Moving People: Responses to Congestion" Toronto In Question. October 25, 2011. Queen's Printer for Ontario. Public Services For Ontarians: A Path To Sustainability And Excellence. February 2012. Rayman, Richard. "Mobility Best Practices." Rebuilding Place in the Urban Space. http://urbanplacesandspaces.blogspot.com/2008/08/mobility-best-practices.html Salsberg, Lisa. "Planning for Mobility Hubs: Creating Great Transit Places." prepared for: Best Practices in Urban Transportation Planning 2010 Annual Conference of the Transportation Association of Canada. September 26-29. Shoup, Donald C. "An Opportunity To Reduce Minimum Parking Requirements" American Planning Association. Journal of the American Planning Association; Winter 1995; 61, 1; pg. 14 Shoup. Donald C. "The High Cost of Free Parking." Chicago: American Planning Association, 2005. Smith, Mary S. "Shared Parking." 2nd ed. Washington D.C.: Urban Land Institute, 2005. TTC (Toronto Transit Commission). "Chief General Manager's Report Periods 5, 6, 7 & 8." October 19, 2011. Tumlin, Jeffrey and Adam Millard-Bal. How to Make Transit-Oriented Development Work. Planning Magazine. May 2003 TriMet. 2007. Community Building Sourcebook Land use and transportation initiatives in Portland, Oregon. December 2007.

  

80  

   Trip, Jan Jacob (2007). 'The Role of Urban Quality in the Planning of International Business Locations: The Case of Amsterdam Zuidas',Journal of Urban Design,12:2,275 -- 293 Trip, Jan Jacob. "The contribution of HST-related development projects to a competitive urban climate: Rotterdam Centraal and Euralille City Futures Conference, 8-10 July 2004, Chicago Urban Land Institute. Parking Requirements for Shopping Centers. 2nd ed. Washington: Urban Land Institute: 1999. Victoria Transport Policy Institute (2009). "Transportation Cost and Benefit Analysis: Techniques, Estimates and Implications." 2nd ed. January 2009. Victoria Transport Policy Institute (2011). "Transportation Cost and Benefit Analysis II ­ Parking Costs." August 10, 2011. www.vtpi.org/tca/tca0504.pdf Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority. "Station Site and Access Planning Manual." May 2008. Wilson, Richard. (2000). "Reading Between the Regulations: Parking Requirements, Planner's Perspectives and Transit." Jounral of Public Transportation. 3:1 pp 111-128. Wilson, Richard. (2005)"Replacement Parking for Joint Development: An Access Policy Methodology." BART Department of Planning and Real Estate. April 18, 2005. Woo, Leslie. Report back on Metrolinx Land Use Planning Authority at Mobility Hubs & GO Stations ­ Presentation. November 23, 2011. Yeh, Anthony G O. "Leasing Public Land: Policy Debates and International Experiences." American Planning Association. Journal of the American Planning Association; Winter; 71, 1. 2005.

  

81  


