Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Geography Publications and Research Geography

1-1-2013

A Systems Perspective on Volunteered Geographic Information
Claus Rinner
Ryerson University, crinner@ryerson.ca

Victoria Fast
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/geography Recommended Citation
C. Rinner and V. Fast (2013) A Systems Perspective on Volunteered Geographic Information. Abstract and presentation (by V.F.) at the Annual Meeting of the Association of American Geographers (AAG), Los Angeles, USA, 9-13 April 2013

This Conference Presentation is brought to you for free and open access by the Geography at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Geography Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

A Systems Perspective on Volunteered Geographic Information

AAG Los Angeles 10 April 2013

Victoria Fast

PhD candidate, Env.Sci.& Mgmt. vfast@ryerson.ca Department of Geography Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario

Associate Professor crinner@ryerson.ca

Claus Rinner

OUTLINE

VGI GI GIS VGIS

2

VGI


Goodchild (2007) coined VGI based on the  growing phenomenon of user generated  geographic content that is contributed by  citizens/the public using the geoweb.

3

THE DIVERSITY OF VGI


Used in a wide range of domains:
   

Social & environmental research Urban planning Emergency response management Reference map development



Evolving definitions and types:
  

Facilitated VGI (Cinnamon and Schuurman, 2012; Seeger, 2008) Harvested or ambient VGI (Stefanidis, Crooks and Radzikoqski, 2011) Involuntary GI or, iVGI (Fischer, 2012)

4

GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
 

Geographic information is information with  a location component. Vineyard Different  than  geographic  data.
Geographic  Data
5

Geographic  Info

sub block

DATA & GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION


The data we use in a geographic information  system are not considered geographic information.
  

Survey data for base map Field data collection Census results 



The data are then inputted, managed, analyzed,  and presented using GIS to convert them into  usable information.
6

DATA & GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION

Source: Tomlinson (2003)
7

GISYSTEMS


Geographic information, then, is the output  of a system.
COMPONENTS:
Hardware Software Data Applications
Source: Bill & Fritsch (1994)

FUNCTIONS:
Input Management Analysis Presentation
8

APPLYING GIS TO VGI


In many reports, the term "VGI" is used to  characterize what we consider data.
  

Location of incidents Observations of species Photos and comments



However, this does not take into account  the system used to collect and process  these data in order to create VGI.
9

VGI-SYSTEMS



Volunteered geographic information systems  (VGIS) employ hardware, software, data and  application components (HSDA), and input,  management, analysis and presentation (IMAP)  functions, to transform webbased user generated geographic data into information.

10

VGI-SYSTEMS

Parts of a volunteered geographic information system Data
Application

System
Components Functions Input Management Analysis Presentation

Information

VGD

Hardware Software Data

VGI

11

NEXT STEPS


Use the systems approach to: 1. Evaluate other VGI systems 2. Implement a smart growth management  geoweb tool

12

Oshawa

Toronto

The
GREATER TORONTO REGION

Hamilton Niagara

Planning Geoweb is a collaborative, online environment for illustrating, discussing & sharing regional13 scale planning information.


