Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2010

The Specimens Box: A Case Study in Cataloguing at George Eastman House
Tasha Ann Lutek
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Library and Information Science Commons Recommended Citation
Lutek, Tasha Ann, "The Specimens Box: A Case Study in Cataloguing at George Eastman House" (2010). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1223.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

                    

The  Specimens  Box:  A  Case  Study  in  Cataloguing     at  George  Eastman  House      by      Tasha  Ann  Lutek      A  thesis  presented  to  Ryerson  University   in  partial  fulfillment  of     the  requirements  for  the  degree  of     Master  of  the  Arts     in  the  Program  of     Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management        

  

      Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada  2009  and   Rochester,  New  York,  US  2010                 ©Tasha  Ann  Lutek  2010  

                 

                              I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  to  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.            I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  by  photocopying  or   by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.                                                                                 ii  

   The  Specimens  Box:  A  Case  Study  in  Cataloguing  at  George  Eastman  House   Master  of  the  Arts     Tasha  Lutek   Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management  2010   Ryerson  University/George  Eastman  House            ABSTRACT         This  paper  considers  the  theoretical  and  practical  implications  of  cataloguing   with  The  Museum  Systems  database.  Using  the  Specimens  Box  as  an  example,  a  box   containing  a  unique  group  of  objects  related  to  the  history  of  photographic  process   located  at  George  Eastman  House  photographic  collection,  the  paper  covers  areas  of   archive  theory,  object  arrangement,  and  the  responsibilities  held  by  the  cataloguer.   It  is  broken  into  three  sections:  Description,  which  provides  the  background  of  the   Specimens  Box;  Analysis,  which  shows  the  various  trajectories  of  meaning  as  objects   enter  an  archive  and  are  cataloged;  and  Methodology,  which  details  my  steps  taken   to  understand  and  catalogue  the  Specimens  Box.                                                                                 iii  

Acknowledgements      Many  people  have  guided  me  through  the  duration  of  this  project.  I  wish  to   acknowledge  my  first  reader  Mike  Robinson  for  his  enthusiasm  for  photographic   processes  and  my  second  reader  Royal  Ontario  Museum  Registrar  Stephanie  Allen   for  her  support  before  and  during  my  writing  process,  her  positivity,  and   encouragement.  I  wish  to  thank  the  entire  staff  of  George  Eastman  House,  especially   the  following:    My  project  consultants,  Assistant  Curator  of  Photographs  Jamie  M.   Allen  and  Photographic  Archivist  Joe  Struble,  for  their  guidance,  time,  and  access  to   the  collection.  I  am  certain  that  without  their  help  this  project  wouldn't  have  been   possible;  Curator  of  Photography  Alison  Nordstrom;  the  Conservation  Department   at  George  Eastman  House,  especially  Taina  Meller,  Mark  Osterman,  and  Cheryl   Podiski  for  their  assistance  with  process  identification;  Photographer,  Barbara   Galasso;  the  Registrar  office  for  help  locating  seemingly  random  pieces  of   information  during  my  research;  Ryan  Donahue  and  Jessica  Johnston  for  offering   their  technical  skills;  and  Jessica  McDonald  and  Alana  West  for  their  advice  on   writing  and  extreme  editing  expertise.            Of  course,  I  am  very  grateful  for  the  friendship  and  advice  offered  by  my   classmates  and  colleagues  in  the  Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections   Management  program,  notably,  my  dear  friends  Stephanie  Atwood,  Jenn  DiCocco,   and  Emily  McKibbon.  I'd  like  to  thank  Gavin  for  his  observations  and  unique  vision.   Finally,  I  would  like  to  extend  a  special  thank  you  to  Kristofer  Wollinger  for  his   constant  reassurance  and  Eleanor  Roosevelt  for  just  being  there.                                                                 iv  

                                                                                                                                      

For  my  grandmother,  Patricia  Ann  Kirby  

v  

            Part  One                           Introduction            Literature  Review         CONTENTS                                                                                                                    
1   2   9   9   10   11   14   15   17   17   19   20   22  

         Part  Two        

Background                  Description  of  the  Specimens  Box      Evolution  of  the  Specimens  Box      The  George  Eastman  House  Collection   The  Influence  of  Paul  Vanderbilt        and  the  Creation  of  the  Specimens  Box   The  Other  Specimens  Boxes       

  

               Part  Three   Methodology                           Intellectual  Order                        Digitization                           Cataloguing  (Practical)                     Accession  Numbers:  Unique  Tracking  numbers                     Conservation                           The  Future:  reorganization  and  consideration               Conclusion                        Bibliography                        Appendix  I.  Image  Checklist  with  Accession  Numbers     Appendix  II.  Constituent  Biographies         Appendix  III.  Cataloguing  Entries                   

Analysis                     The  Photographic  Archive            Defining  the  Specimens  Box  as  a  "Mixed  Box"   A  Box  of  Many  Meanings            Cataloguing  (Theoretical)           

                          24      24      25                               26        28        29        29           30     32  

  

       33        38                                 39  

vi  

   Introduction      A  photograph  inherently  contains  layers  of  meaning.  As  knowledge  is  gained,   lost,  or  distorted,  the  meanings  attached  to  a  photograph  evolve.  When  people1  view   and  attempt  to  understand  an  object,  various  interpretations  of  the  object  arise,   each  one  adding  another  layer  of  meaning,  making  each  photographic  object   thoroughly  complex.  Through  methods  of  intellectual  organization  and  cataloguing,   those  working  with  collections  have  the  ability  to  study  and  preserve  the   trajectories  of  meaning  attached  to  a  single  image.     The  aim  of  this  paper  is  to  consider  the  complexities  of  individual   photographic  objects,  and  the  affect  cataloguing  has  on  the  meaning  of  photographs.   Using  the  Specimens  Box  from  the  George  Eastman  House's  photographic  archive  as   a  case  study,  I  will  argue  that  that  one  cannot  catalogue  photographic  objects   without  affecting  meaning,  yet  despite  these  changes,  the  cataloguer  must  maintain   each  meaning  attached  to  a  photographic  object.     If  the  cataloguing  process  is  carefully  done,  the  database  can  intellectually   connect  these  multiple  layers  of  an  object  within  a  single  record.  A  cataloguer  can   create  an  entry  that  provides  access  to  each  of  the  layered  meanings  of  a   photographic  object  by  noting  the  various  changes  various  interpretations.  Because   there  is  a  transition  between  the  interpretation  of  data  and  the  separation  of  data  to   be  placed  neatly  within  a  restricted  database,  the  cataloguer's  role  is  important.  A   record  can  preserve  all  the  intellectual  information  attached  to  an  object  both  by                                                                                                                   
              1  I  am  referring  to  the  various  people  that  may  enter  an  archive  and  interact  with  an  object,  such  as  curators,  archivists,   students,  researchers,  conservators,  registrars  etc.  

1  

presenting  information  in  the  database  record  and  by  directing  the  viewer  where  to   gain  further  information.  Ultimately,  cataloguing  allows  better  access  to  the   information  attached  to  an  object.     A  mixed  box,  the  Specimens  Box  contains  unusual  processes  and  experiment   results  throughout  the  history  of  photography.2  Many  objects  represent  indefinable   processes,  emulsion  experiments,  or  examples,  such  as  paper  samples  from  the   Aristo  Paper  Company.  When  I  began  my  research,  viewing  the  box's  objects  did  not   reveal  a  clear  determination  for  object  inclusion,  which  adds  difficulty  when  trying   to  provide  the  best  possible  access  to  this  collection  of  objects.     This  paper  will  describe  the  Specimens  Box  and  how  it  fits  into  the  GEH   collection,  offer  an  analysis  of  the  theoretical  implications  of  cataloguing  and   intellectual  arrangement,  and  present  the  methodology  I  used  to  research  and   create  actual  cataloguing  entries  in  The  Museum  System  (TMS)3  for  the  Specimens   Box.        Literature  Review      In  order  to  better  understand  the  meaning  of  the  Specimens  Box,  I  took   several  approaches  to  my  review  of  relevant  literature.  I  looked  to  resources   detailing  the  technical  process  of  cataloguing  and  best  archival  practices,  sources   describing  the  theoretical  meaning  of  the  role  of  the  archive,  and  literature  that  

                                                                                                                
              2  For  the  purpose  of  this  paper,  the  box  title  "Specimens  Box"  will  always  appear  capitalized,  while  the  term  "specimen"   will  not.  Throughout  the  text  the  term  "specimen"  refers  to  its  definition  as  an  example,  especially  for  use  to  examine  or  study.                 3  There  are  a  variety  of  databases  that  museums  use  to  catalog  their  collections  however  this  paper  will  only  focus  on  The   Museum  System.  

2  

defines  the  study  of  the  photograph  as  an  object,  which  allows  us  to  truly  consider   the  multiple  interpretations  of  these  objects.   The  Photograph,  Anthropology,  and  Culture   The  essay  "Mixed  Box:  the  Cultural  Biography  of  a  Box  of  `Ethnographic'   Photographs,"  written  by  photographic  curators,  Elizabeth  Edwards  and  Janice  Hart,   was  the  departure  point  for  my  research  and  this  project.  Their  writing  combines   the  study  of  photographs  as  objects  with  layered  meaning  with  the  concept  of  the   ubiquitous  mixed  box.  Their  essay  considers  how  a  mixed  box  is  an  object  of  linked   yet  separate  parts.  Using  the  example  of  Box  54  in  the  Pitt  Rivers  Museum,  Edwards   and  Hart  explore  how  materiality  helps  us  understand  the  behavior  of  photographs   within  an  anthropological  setting.  They  establish  the  terms  "natural"  and  "synthetic"   to  describe  two  types  of  objects  that  enter  the  collection.  "Natural"  refers  to  discrete   entries  that  remain  singular  and  independent  in  meaning  within  the  archive.   Whereas  "synthetic"  objects,  such  as  Box  54,  are  "those  objects  whose  sense  and   order  have  been  imposed  in  their  institutional  lifetimes,  and  physically  in  a  way  that   goes  beyond  simple  taxonomic  description."4  The  objects  within  the  Specimens  Box   may  also  be  referred  to  as  "synthetic."  Former  GEH  archivist  David  Wooters  pulled   these  items  together  to  address  a  need  to  study  these  objects  as  specimens.     Drawing  further  upon  their  set  of  definitions,  Hart  and  Edwards  explain  that   the  archive  goes  beyond  the  role  of  location  to  become  an  active  environment  that   has  an  effect  on  the  meaning  of  a  photographic  object.5  Their  essay  then  thoroughly                                                                                                                   
              4  Elizabeth  Edwards  and  Janice  Hart,  "`Mixed  Box'  the  Cultural  Biography  of  a  Box  of  `Ethnographic'  Photographs,"  in  
Photographs  Objects  Histories,  ed.  Elizabeth  Edwards  and  Janice  Hart  (New  York:  Routledge,  2006),  49.                   5  Ibid.,  49.  

3  

describes  the  box,  its  contents,  formation,  and  changes  in  use  over  time.  In  their   conclusion,  they  stress  that  through  the  museum's  organization  within  Box  54,  these   photographs  hold  a  plurality  of  meanings,  which  have  become  their  defining   characteristic.6  By  studying  the  physical  and  intellectual  changes  of  Box  54  we  can   understand  the  temporal  and  spatial  agendas  of  the  museum.  Each  reclassification   of  objects  adds  another  layer  of  meaning,  and  allows  for  a  new  reading  of  the   objects,  but  a  material  trace  remains,  thus  combining  the  physical  and  the   intellectual.     Edwards  and  Hart's  explanation  of  how  photographs  take  on  new  layers  of   meaning  based  on  their  classification  and  arrangement  within  the  archive-housed   box  is  germane  to  my  argument.  As  with  their  exploration  of  Box  54,  I  identify  the   Specimens  Box  as  an  active  box.  Overtime  changes  in  arrangement  and  use  of  the   box  build  up  to  form  a  composite  of  meanings.  However,  there  are  several  key   differences  between  Box  54  and  the  Specimens  Box.  I  argue  that  the  meaning  of   Specimens  box  is  not  as  clear  as  the  meaning  of  Box  54,  which  categorizes   anthropological  images  by  locale.  The  meaning  of  the  Specimens  Box  is  defined  by   the  characteristics  of  the  photographic  processes  represented  within,  but  its  criteria   for  inclusion  remains  nebulous.  Another  difference  is  in  the  unique  qualities  of  the   Specimens  Box.  Explained  in  their  essay,  Edwards  and  Hart  were  attracted  to  Box  54   based  on  its  ubiquitous  qualities.  The  subject  matter  and  organizational  scheme   used  for  their  subject  is  commonplace.  Conversely,  the  subject  matter  Specimens   Box  is  unusual,  as  it  represents  rare  objects  within  the  history  of  photography.                                                                                                                                       Ibid.,  59.  
6

4  

Looking  at  these  two  examples,  one  very  commonplace  and  the  other  unique,  we  see   classification  can  be  complicated  no  matter  the  subject  matter.     Elizabeth  Edwards  also  presented  her  anthropological  investigation  of  the   photograph  as  object,  in  her  previous  publication  Raw  Histories:  Photographs,   Anthropologies,  and  Museums.  In  this  collection  of  essays,  she  argues  that  one  should   look  past  the  surface  description  of  a  photograph  to  realize  the  significance  of  pasts   created  through  inscription  and  archive.  Edwards's  writing  is  crucial  to  the  study  of   the  Specimens  Box  as  she  clearly  lays  the  groundwork  for  understanding  that   attached  to  each  photographic  object  are  multiple  and  contested  histories  that  can   be  studied.7  Additionally,  she  considers  the  location  of  the  archive  and  its  physical   movement.  Edwards  separates  the  archive  into  active  and  inactive  space.  Active   space  refers  to  objects  that  are  frequently  moved  within  the  archive,  such  as  the   Specimens  Box.  Inactive  space  refers  to  objects  or  areas  that  are  stable  in  their   arrangement  or  infrequently  accessed.     If  each  object  may  be  considered  complex,  made  up  of  accumulating  layers  of   meaning,  we  can  study  photographic  objects  as  an  anthropologist  would,  stripping   away  at  each  layer,  allowing  meaning  to  surface.  Art  critic  and  curator,  Okwui   Enwezor  looks  at  this  concept  in  his  introduction  to  the  photographic  exhibition  at   the  International  Center  of  Photography,  "Archive  Fever."  He  explains  that  the   photographic  image,  "...can  be  likened  to  an  anthropological  space  in  which  to   observe  and  study  the  way  members  and  institutions  of  a  society  reflect  their  

                                                                                                                
              7  Elizabeth  Edwards,  Raw  Histories:  Photographs,  Anthropology,  and  Museums  (Oxford:  Berg,  2001),  4.  

5  

relationship  to  it."8  He  asserts  that  the  photographic  object  has  broken  barriers   between  private  and  public,  amateur  and  professional,  virtual  and  real.  Thus  the   photographic  object  represents  the  duality  of  these  themes,  taking  on  the  "aura  of  an   anthropological  artifice  and  the  authority  of  a  social  instrument."9  To  understand   photographic  objects,  we  must  understand  how  we  relate  to  them,  and  how  society   as  a  whole  relates  to  the  object.   Material  Culture   Using  a  vocabulary  from  material  culture  studies  has  been  useful  in  my   consideration  of  the  Specimens  Box.  The  book  Material  Culture:  A  Research  Guide,   edited  by  Thomas  J.  Schlereth  helped  me  to  understand  the  basic  theories  of   material  culture.  In  Schlreteh's  own  essay  from  the  compilation  "Material  Culture   and  Culture  Research,"  he  defines  the  key  terms  involved  in  material  culture  studies.   Each  key  definition  is  linked  to  the  idea  that  material  culture,  despite  its  object- based  focus,  is  dependent  on  an  element  of  human  interaction.  He  explains  that,   "what  is  useful,  therefore,  about  the  term  material  culture  is  that  it  suggests...a   strong  interrelationship  between  physical  objects  and  human  behavior,"10  This  is   relevant  to  the  study  of  the  multilayered  nature  of  photography  as  each  layer  is   dependent  on  human  interpretation.                                                                                                                                 
              8  Okwui  Enwezor  Archive  Fever:  Uses  of  the  Document  in  Contemporary  Art  (New  York:  Steidl/ICP,  2008),  13.                 9  Ibid.                 10   Thomas  J.  Schlereth,  ed.,  Material  Culture:  A  Research  Guide  (Lawrence:  University  Press  of  Kansas,  1985),  3.  

6  

The  Archive   "Every  photograph  is...a  priori  an  archival  object."11      Many  texts  have  been  written  regarding  the  archive,  and  it  is  a  topic  that  has   enjoyed  much  attention  in  recent  years.  Much  of  my  project  and  understanding  of   the  Specimens  Box  involved  looking  at  the  overlap  between  theory  and  practice.     However,  the  majority  of  my  reading  dealt  with  looking  at  the  archive  as  an   idealized  and  theoretical  space,  rather  than  the  actual  location  found  in  institutions.   In  his  anthology  on  theoretical  writings  on  the  art  archive,  aptly  titled  The   Archive,  Charles  Merewether  looks  to  the  writing  of  Foucault.  He  explains  that,  "in   The  Archaeology  of  Knowledge,  the  study  of  the  archive  was  compared  by  Michel   Foucault  to  the  practice  of  learning  about  the  past  through  its  material  remains.  The   `archeologist  of  knowledge'  aims  to  recover  and  reconstruct  the  archive,  to  reveal   how  it  shapes  our  relation  to  the  past  and  the  construction  of  historical   meaning...Thus  who  determines,  and  what  conditions  enable,  a  history  to  be  written   depends  upon  the  definition  of  the  archive."12  Understanding  when  and  why  the   Specimens  Box  was  created  within  the  GEH  archive,  helps  us  to  further  understand   its  meaning  and  significance  within  the  collection.  The  Specimens  Box  was  first   assembled  by  past  George  Eastman  House  archivist  David  Wooters.  Wooters  was   influenced  by  the  writings  of  archivist  and  photographer  Paul  Vanderbilt.  Like  the   archeologist  of  knowledge,  we  can  look  back  into  the  history  of  the  George  Eastman   House  to  see  the  layers  of  meaning  for  the  Specimens  Box.                                                                                                                      
              11   Enwezor  Okwui,  Archive  Fever:  Uses  of  the  Document  in  Contemporary  Art  (New  York:  Steidl/ICP,  2008,  12).                 12   Charles  Merewether,  editor,  The  Archive  (Cambridge:  The  MIT  Press,  2006),  11.  

7  

Practical  Guides      Finally,  the  last  area  of  literature  relevant  to  this  essay  is  from  the  field  of  

library  science.  Information  of  the  practical  aspects  of  cataloguing  and  organization   help  us  understand  the  Specimens  Box  role  within  the  archive.  Part  of  my  argument   is  that  in  certain  ways  cataloguing  may  hinder  the  study  of  the  photographic  object.   Documents  such  as  the  George  Eastman  House  style  manual  are  important  to  see   how  decisions  were  made  by  the  cataloguer,  when  cataloguing  the  collection.   Without  having  a  controlled  vocabulary  and  syntax  to  refer  to  cataloguing  entries   become  cluttered  and  inconsistent.  This  is  important  because  the  cataloguing   entries  are  accessed  through  searching  the  database.  The  GEH  guide  helps  to  ensure   that  there  is  a  consistency  in  cataloguing  records,  despite  having  multiple   cataloguers.  The  guide  is  straightforward.  And  while  cataloguing  involves  important   decision-making,  the  information  provided  by  the  style  manual  allows  for  little   interpretation.      Another  resource  in  cataloguing  was  the  chapter  on  description  and  

cataloguing  written  by  Helena  Zinkham  in  Photographs:  Archival  Care  and   Management.  In  this  practical  resource  to  museum  cataloguing,  Zinkham  describes   how  to  use  best  archival  practices  when  writing  summaries  and  descriptions  of   archival  material.  She  describes  the  various  levels  of  cataloguing  and  how  to  write  a   finding  aid,  which  will  assist  archivists  with  providing  the  best  possible  access  to   their  collections.        

8  

BACKGROUND        Description  of  the  Specimens  Box   At  times,  objects  found  within  a  museum  collection  may  be  difficult  to   categorize.  Those  tasked  with  organizing  and  housing  the  collection  must  find  a   balance  between  how  to  preserve  an  object  and  the  subject  matter  or  significance  of   the  object.  The  Specimens  Box  is  a  16"x20"sized  Solander  box,  which  includes   approximately  100  objects  of  various  sizes  and  processes.  These  objects,  that  range   greatly  in  creation  date  and  intented  use  showcase  unusual  and  important   processes  found  throughout  the  history  of  the  medium.     For  example,  the  box  contains  a  large  sampling  of  images  by  a  Canadian   explorer  named  Charles  Milne.13  The  photographs  are  gelatin  silver  reprints  that   depict  his  explorations  in  the  Yukon  and  part  of  California.  While  these  photographs   represent  an  important  area  of  photographic  history  and  study,  the  exploration   photograph,  they  offer  little  understanding  to  photographic  processes  and  do  not  fit   in  with  the  idea  that  the  Specimens  Box  offers  information  on  unique  and   experimental  processes.  The  overarching  idea  of  the  box,  however,  is  that  these   objects  offer  the  researcher  the  ability  to  consider  the  experimentation  and   exploration  the  medium  of  photography  offers.  Each  object  is  intended  to  ask  a  new   question  regarding  use  or  process.  Ultimately,  the  very  uniqueness  of  these  objects   is  what  connects  them   to  one-another.  Highlights  from  the  box  include  a  heavily  overpainted  collodion                                                                                                                   
              13   The  Accession  numbers  for  these  objects  are  1983:1325:0001through  1983:1325:0016.  

9  

positive  printed  on  a  recycled  daguerreotype  plate,  the  first  platinotype  made  in   America  by  the  process's  inventor  William  Wallis  Jr.,  a  souvenir  photograph  printed   on  copper,  and  examples  of  some  of  the  first  photographs  taken  with  flash.        Evolution  of  the  Specimens  Box:   The  present  definition  of  the  Specimens  Box  is  not  strictly  defined  and  has   potentially  been  diluted  over  time.  Current  archivist,  Joseph  Struble  is  presently   trying  to  adjust  the  box  to  make  its  meaning  more  concrete.  He  has  removed  several   objects  from  the  Specimens  Box,  as  together  we  reconsidered  what  the  working   definition  of  the  Specimens  Box  should  be.  Immediately,  it  became  clear  that  some   objects  were  wrongly  placed  within  the  box.  Unaccessioned  object  GEH_9126,  a   small  booklet  intended  to  act  as  an  album  for  WWI  soldiers  and  unaccessioned   object  referred  to  as  "GEH_9060,"  an  empty  envelope  intended  to  contain  a  baby   photograph  were  removed  from  the  box  before  I  began  to  catalogue  for  this  project   and  placed  in  the  "Ephemera  Box."14  These  objects  were  related  to  photographs  but   did  not  contain  photographic  objects.     This  project  allowed  GEH  staff  to  consider  the  Specimens  Box  objects   carefully.  The  combined  work  of  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art  photographic  fellow,   Russell  Lord  and  Archivist  Joe  Struble  led  to  the  creation  of  the  "Photomechanical   Processes  Box."  Objects  from  the  Specimens  Box  and  elsewhere  in  the  collection   were  pulled  out  and  housed  together  to  showcase  photomechanical  processes.                                                                                                                        
              14   Refer  to  Appendix  I    

10  

The  George  Eastman  House  Collection:   Stepping  back  from  the  Specimens  Box,  it  is  useful  to  understand  where  this   box  fits  within  the  greater  archive.  The  photographic  collection  at  George  Eastman   House,  containing  over  400,000  photographic  objects  spanning  across  all  areas  of   photography  from  its  invention  to  present  day,  is  both  diverse  and  rich.15  The  first   curator  of  George  Eastman  House,  Beaumont  Newhall,  "envisioned  from  the   beginning  the  Eastman  House  would  be  a  repository  and  study  center  for  the  history   of  photography"16  During  his  tenure  at  the  institution,  Newhall  amassed  the   renowned  collection  through  "his  broad  approach  to  collecting."17  Newhall's   approach  to  collecting  for  the  George  Eastman  House  archive  exceeded  the   examples  present  in  his  quintessential  text,  The  History  of  Photography,  to  include   examples  of  advertising  and  commercial  photography,  as  well  as  early  process   examples.18     According  to  past  curator  of  photography,  Therese  Mulligan,  the  approach  to   collecting  the  museum  takes  on  photography  is  that  its  "...history  is  no  longer   singular  nor  exclusive,  but  consists  of  multiple,  intertwining  histories."19    Just  like   each  photographic  object  within  the  collection,  the  history  of  it  accumulation  is  also   created  from  multiple,  intertwining  histories.  At  its  heart,  the  collection  represents  

                                                                                                                
              15   From  the  George  Eastman  House  "Photography  Collection"  pamphlet  printed  for  internal  use  in  1996                 16   Rachel  Stuhlman  and  Sheila  J.  Foster,  "Portrait  of  a  Library,"  in  Imagining  Paradise:  The  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel   Library  at  The  George  Eastman  House  ed.  Manfred  Heiting,  Rachel  Stuhlman,  and  Sheila  J.  Foster  (Göttingen:  Steidl/GEH,  2007),   22.               17   David  Wooters.  "The  Blind  Man's  Elephant,"  in  The  George  Eastman  House  Collection  A  History  of  Photography  From  1839   to  the  Present,  ed.  Therese  Mulligan  and  David  Wooters  (Koln:  Taschen,  2005),  23.                 18   Ibid.,  24.                 19   Therese  Mulligan.  "The  Blind  Man's  Elephant,"  in  The  George  Eastman  House  Collection  A  History  of  Photography  From   1839  to  the  Present,  ed.  Therese  Mulligan  and  David  Wooters  (Koln:  Taschen,  2005),  19.  

11  

the  union  of  several  collections  brought  together  through  the  work  of  five  key   figures,  each  dedicated  to  an  evolving  and  amassing  knowledge  of  photography.  20     The  collectors:    Dr.  Josef  Maria  Eder,  Gabriel  Cromer,  Alden  Scott  Boyer,  Alvin   Langdon  Colburn,  and  Louis  Walton  Sipley  each  had  an  unusual  entrance  to  George   Eastman  House's  Collection.  "What  these  pioneers  shared  in  common  was  a  sense  of   mission,  an  uncommon  energy,  and  a  fascination  with  a  largely  unstudied  field   where  major  discoveries  could  be  made."21  Their  individual  influence  is  present  in   their  collections  that  helped  to  shape  the  George  Eastman  House.       In  their  essay,  "Portrait  of  a  Library"  from  the  comprehensive  text  Imagining   Paradise,  Sheila  J.  Foster  and  Rachel  Stuhlman  detail  the  spectacular  holdings  of  the   George  Eastman  House's  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library.  Intertwined  with  the   library's  is  the  story  of  the  George  Eastman  House  photograph  archive.  Foster  and   Stuhlman  showcase  each  collector's  eccentricities  and  how  these  attributes  are   infused  into  the  collection.  The  first  contributor,  Josef  Maria  Eder,  was  a  Viennese   scientist  who  had  a  collection  which  contained,  "sources  and  original  documents  on   the  history  of  photography,  superb  specimens  of  the  development  of   photomechanical  processes...illustrated  photographic  books,  and  a  collection  of   portraits  of  early  pioneers  in  the  field."22  The  importance  of  Eder's  collection  is  its   examples  of  photographic  specimens.23  Gabriel  Cromer  provided  the  collection  with   a  diverse  array  of  predominately  French  artifacts  related  to  nineteenth-century                                                                                                                   
            20   Rachel  Stuhlman  and  Sheila  J.  Foster,  "Portrait  of  a  Library,"  in  Imagining  Paradise:  The  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel   Library  at  The  George  Eastman  House  ed.  Manfred  Heiting,  Rachel  Stuhlman,  and  Sheila  J.  Foster  (Göttingen::  Steidl/GEH,   2007),  11.               21   Ibid.,  21.               22   Ibid.,  11.               23   David  Wooters.  "The  Blind  Man's  Elephant,"  in  The  George  Eastman  House  Collection  A  History  of  Photography  From  1839   to  the  Present,  ed.  Therese  Mulligan  and  David  Wooters  (Koln:  Taschen,  2005),  23.  

12  

photography,  including  photographs,  books,  and  apparatuses.24  Collector  and   personal  friend  of  Beaumont  Newhall,  Alden  Scott  Boyer  arranged  for  the  gift  of  his   collection  after  the  death  of  his  first  wife.  The  collection,  which  took  six  weeks  to   inventory,  included  photographs,  books,  periodicals,  and  albums.25  An  interesting   element  to  the  Boyer  collection  is  the  fact  that  it  was  a  working  collection.  Boyer's   handwriting  is  found  throughout  the  collection.  Given  his  friendship  with  Beaumont   Newhall,  photographer  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  donated  his  collection  of  negatives   and  prints,  cameras,  lenses,  photographic  scrapbooks,  and  letters  to  the  George   Eastman  House  upon  his  death.26  Louis  Walton  Sipley's  interest  in  photography  led   him  to  open  the  American  Museum  of  Photography  in  Philadelphia,  PA.  It  was  the   first  museum  dedicated  solely  to  the  medium  of  photographic  and  photomechanical   processes.27  In  1977,  the  arrival  of  the  Sipley  collection  to  the  George  Eastman   House  brought  in  approximately  55,000  photographs,  5,000  books  and  periodicals,   300  apparatuses,  and  over  200  motion  pictures."28  Each  collection  represents  a   "distinctive  point  of  a  view...and  [they]  have  imparted  their  personalities  to  the   Museum."29  The  Specimens  Box  fits  nicely  with  the  tradition  of  the  institution's   collection,  as  an  accumulation  of  objects  relevant  to  the  history  of  photography.  Like   the  collection  of  Eder,  which  provided  a  richness  of  photographic  specimen,  the  

                                                                                                                
              24   Rachel  Stuhlman  and  Sheila  J.  Foster,  "Portrait  of  a  Library,"  in  Imagining  Paradise:  The  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel   Library  at  The  George  Eastman  House  ed.  Manfred  Heiting,  Rachel  Stuhlman,  and  Sheila  J.  Foster  (Göttingen::  Steidl/GEH,   2007),  11.                 25   Ibid.,  14.               26   Ibid.,  16.               27   Ibid.,  17.               28   Ibid.,  17.               29   Rachel  Stuhlman  and  Sheila  J.  Foster,  "Portrait  of  a  Library,"  in  Imagining  Paradise:  The  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel   Library  at  The  George  Eastman  House  ed.  Manfred  Heiting,  Rachel  Stuhlman,  and  Sheila  J.  Foster  (Göttingen::  Steidl/GEH,   2007),  11.  

13  

Specimens  Box  allows  researchers  to  study  photography  on  several  layers,  including   the  arrangement  of  photographs  within  an  archive.        The  Influence  of  Paul  Vanderbilt  and  the  Creation  of  the  Specimens  Box   In  1994,  then  archivist  David  Wooters  compiled  the  Specimens  Box.30  During   this  time,  Wooters  went  through  various  Solander  cases  and  reorganized  various   photographic  objects  into  broader  categories,  such  as  "specimens"  or   "transportation."  The  reorganization  was  influenced  by  the  philosophies  of   photographer  and  curator,  Paul  Vanderbilt.31  Vanderbilt  believed  that  storage   should  be  dependent  upon  how  the  collection  was  primarily  used,  rather  than   separated  out  by  artist,  which  could  lead  to  an  abundance  of  "unidentified   photographer"  boxes.  Perhaps  Vanderbilt's  most  important  contribution  to  the   understanding  of  the  arrangement  of  photographs  is  his  Guide  to  the  Special   Collections  of  Prints  &  Photographs  in  the  Library  of  Congress.32  In  his  guide  he  argues   that  a  strong  collection  description  is  crucial  to  how  to  organize  a  collection.  In  his   guide  to  the  collections,  he  points  out  that  in  some  cases,  collections  are  not  easily   organized.  In  the  cases  where  more  information  needs  to  be  gained  to  properly   organize  the  objects,  or  when  the  object  is  not  up  to  archival  standards,  their   organization  should  be  postponed.  He  stated,  "demonstrated  usefulness  of  the   collections  may  well  be  the  leading  factor  in  developing  ways  and  means  of  

                                                                                                                
              30   Joseph  Struble,  e-mail  message  to  author,  April  9,  2010                 31   Interestingly,  Paul  Vanderbilt  gifted  object  1968:0082:0025  to  the  GEH  collection,  which  was  later  arranged  into  the   Specimens  Box.                   32   Paul  Vanderbilt,  introduction  to  Guide  to  the  Special  Collections  of  Prints  &  Photographs  in  the  Library  of  Congress   compiled  by  Paul  Vanderbilt  (  Washington  DC:  The  Library  of  Congress,  1955,  III-V.  

14  

improving  the  physical  condition  of  the  collections  which  need  attention."33   Vanderbilt's  philosophies  of  arrangement  remain  useful.  In  addition  to  preserving   the  objects  the  archive  houses,  its  second  primary  function  is  to  provide  access  to   these  objects.  By  organizing  based  on  the  idea  that  a  researcher  would  be  interested   in  looking  at  a  photographic  specimen,  the  archivist  avoids  having  to  pull  from   multiple  boxes,  thus  increasing  accessibility.    Vanderbilt's  influence  is  further   reflected  in  Wooter's  own  writing  in  "The  Blind  Man's  Elephant."  He  writes  that,  "the   physical  shape  the  collection  is  given,  its  acquisitions  and  arrangement,  grows  out  of   the  collection's  purpose...The  primary  purpose  of  this  collection--  to  preserve   examples  of  what  the  practice  of  photography  looks  like--is  quite  different  from   simply  being  a  picture  collection  with  drawers  of  photographs  arranged  by  subject.   Illustrating  subject  matter  is  not  the  primary  concern"34  At  first  glance,  one  may   assume  the  Specimens  Box  has  been  grouped  according  to  their  subject  matter,  but   this  is  not  the  case.  If  it  were  so,  the  box  could  be  split  into  categories  such  as   "unidentified  portraits"  and  "vernacular  landscapes."  Categorization  can  be  helpful,   but  only  if  it  allows  the  user  to  gain  entry  to  the  various  meaning  of  the  objects,   rather  than  diminish  them,  or  reduce  them  to  a  list  of  subject  headings.        The  Other  Specimens  Boxes      It  is  important  to  note  that  the  Specimens  Box  is  not  completely  unique.  

Within  the  George  Eastman  House  collection  there  are  at  least  three  other  boxes                                                                                                                   
              33   Paul  Vanderbilt,  introduction  to  Guide  to  the  Special  Collections  of  Prints  &  Photographs  in  the  Library  of  Congress,   compiled  by  Paul  Vanderbilt  (Washington  DC:  The  Library  of  Congress,  1955),  III-V.                   34  David  Wooters.  "The  Blind  Man's  Elephant,"  in  The  George  Eastman  House  Collection:  A  History  of  Photography  From   1839  to  the  Present,  ed.  Therese  Mulligan  and  David  Wooters  (Koln:  Taschen,  2005),  29.  

15  

with  similar  properties.  The  first  box  is  a  continuation  of  the  Specimens  Box  on   which  this  thesis  is  centered.  This  box  holds  the  oversized  objects  that  could  not  fit   safely  into  the  Specimens  Box.  For  the  sake  of  clearer  focus,  I  chose  not  to  write   about  this  box,  despite  its  definition  as  an  extension  of  the  Specimens  Box.      The  second  box  is  a  small  but  heavy  8"x10"  box  labeled  "Misc.  

Specimens:  Kodak  Patent  Museum  Collection."  The  collection  from  the  Kodak  Patent   Museum  came  to  the  museum  mostly  with  objects  related  to  the  technology   department.  The  box  contains  a  mix  of  photographic  objects  related  to  process   experimentation  and  a  few  snapshot  style  photographs.  Most  objects  have  been   carefully  housed  within  the  box  and  have  their  own  custom  made  sleeves  and  mats.   The  group  of  Minox  photos  are  housed  in  an  original  Minox  box  which  includes  a   negative  sheet,  prints,  and  an  ordering  slip  from  June  of  1969.  Some  other  objects   include  snapshots  of  a  man  with  his  dog,  glass  negatives  used  to  check  focus  in  a   projection  printer,  the  results  from  experiments  shooting  with  various  levels  of  Agfa   flashlight  powder,  EKC  tests,  and  aerial  photos.  Given  the  combination  of  snapshots   and  technical  objects,  and  the  knowledge  that  Kodak  caters  to  both  a  commercial   consumer  and  industrial  audience,  we  can  speculate  that  the  Kodak  Patent  Museum   included  a  wide  range  of  objects.  Through  this  we  realize  that  a  small  archival   sampling  can  offer  information  on  the  museum  as  a  whole.     The  objects  in  this  box  are  much  clearer  than  the  Specimens  Box  as  examples   of  specimen  and  experiment.  They  were  assembled  into  this  box  at  the  same  time.   As  these  objects  were  housed  together  at  their  time  of  acquisition,  their  position   within  the  archive  is  fairly  stable.  This  box  is  likely  to  be  their  final  residence;  

16  

nothing  will  be  added  or  removed  from  the  box.  Referring  back  to  the  terminology   defined  by  Edwards  and  Hart  we  can  say  that  the  Kodak  Patent  Museum  box  is  an   example  of  a  "natural"  grouping  as  the  objects  were  arranged  according  to  their   acquisition  source.      The  last  specimen  example  box  is  titled  "Specimens  Retouching."  It  is  a  20  x  

24"  contain  only  a  few  objects.  They  are  a  photograph  by  James  Cummings,  one  from   the  Richards  Pittsburg  studio,  two  mounted  photographs  by  Gatchel  and  Manning,   and  a  portrait  of  an  unidentified  man.  All  the  photographs  are  mounted  on  a  thick   board  and  heavily,  and  visibly  retouched.  Contained  inside  the  note  that  reads,  "For   other  specimens  of  RETOUCHING,  see  also:  Elias  Goldensky35  (box  of   retouching/copy  work)/  CUMMINGS,  James  77:704:3,  23-25  (family  group   storage)."  This  note  proves  that  the  boxes  purpose  was  carefully  considered.  This   box  would  be  an  easy  way  to  provide  a  researcher  with  access  to  examples  of   photographic  retouching.  In  this  case,  image  content  and  photographer  are  less   meaningful  than  the  object's  role  as  a  specimen.        ANALYSIS   The  Photographic  Archive   It  is  worthwhile  in  our  analysis  of  the  Specimens  Box  to  consider  the   archive's  role  in  understanding  the  objects  it  contains.  In  our  analysis  of  what  the   Archive  is,  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  there  is  a  disconnect  between  theory   and  practice.  Museum  workers  do  not  operate  in  the  world  of  critical  theory,  where                                                                                                                   
              35   Several  objects  within  the  Specimens  Box  have  been  attributed  to  Goldensky,  providing  an  interesting  link  between  these   two  boxes.  

17  

practice  may  not  always  meet  proposed  standards  and  theory  doesn't  constantly   need  to  be  applied.  Theoretical  ideas,  which  do  indeed  help  us  understand  the   archive,  need  to  work  in  tandem  with  the  physical  space  of  the  archive.   The  archive  is  a  place  where  various  parts  are  joined  together.  There,  objects   are  stored  together  physically  and  tied  to  one  another  through  meaning.    As   Anthony  Alan  Shelton  argues,  if  forming  "a  collection  is  the  process  of  the  museum's   creation  [and]  the  living  act  that  the  museum  embalms..."36  then  the  archive  is   where  this  living  act  resides.  If  a  complete  collection  is  a  dead  collection,  then  an   inactive  archive,  where  researchers  do  not  study  and  access  is  denied,  is  a  dead   archive.  The  Specimens  Box  is  an  example  of  an  active  box.  As  clearer  and  more   suitable  homes  present  themselves,  objects  enter  and  leave  the  box  to  assist  in  the   access  to  these  objects.  The  box  itself  represents  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  archive.  Its   objects  have  moved  around  the  archive,  and  each  time  an  object  is  placed  in  a  new   location,  it  is  assigned  a  new  meaning.    As  the  box  is  active,  the  interpretations   associated  with  these  objects  are  also  active.  Interpretations  attached  to   photographs  are  perpetually  accumulating.  Of  course,  changes  within  the  archive   are  not  random.  The  archive  is  created  through  the  calculated  organization  of   objects.  This  organization  affects  the  meanings  of  each  object.     A  theoretical  consideration  of  the  archive,  Carolyn  Steedman's  Dust  analyzes   Derrida's  Archive  Fever.  In  his  writing,  Derrida  compares  the  physical  Freud  archive   to  human  memory.  However,  Steedman  argues  that  this  comparison  is  weak,  as  the   archive  cannot  behave  as  human  memory  does  because  it  does  not  encompass                                                                                                                   
              36   Anthony  Alan  Shelton,  "Museums  and  Museum  Displays,"  in  Handbook  of  Material  Culture,  ed.  Chris  Tilley,  Webb  Keane,   Susanne  Küchler-Fogden,  Mike  Rowlands,  and  Patricia  Spyer  (London:  Sage  Publications,  2006),  481.  

18  

everything.  She  explains  that  the  archive  is  "made  from  selected  and  consciously   chosen  documentation  from  the  past  and  also  from  the  made  fragmentations  that  no   one  intended  to  preserve  but  just  ended  up  there."37  We  can  apply  this  reasoning  to   the  creation  of  the  Specimens  Box,  which  contains  objects  plucked  from  various   areas  of  the  archive  and  placed  within  a  single  box.  Conscious  decisions  were  made   in  the  creation  of  this  box  and  each  object  had  to  be  reconsidered  as  a  specimen.    For   example,  object  1983.0365.0001  is  an  example  of  early  flash  photography,  recording   a  theater  set  at  night.  The  archivist  must  determine  what  location  is  most  suitable  to   provide  access  to  this  object  simply  and  in  a  way  that  best  suits  the  needs  of  the   institution.        Defining  the    "Specimens  Box"  as  a  "Mixed  Box"   Within  the  Specimens  Box,  each  object  is  both  an  example  of  a  specimen  and   a  photographic  object  depicting  an  image.  Adding  to  the  complexity  of  each  object's   dual  role  in  providing  meaning  as  an  image  and  as  a  specimen,  the  box  may  also  be   described  as  a  "mixed  box."  Thus  objects  within  the  box  are  placed  together  not   because  they  have  so  much  in  common  with  each  other,  but  rather,  because  they   have  little  in  common  with  anything  else.  Placing  these  objects  in  a  mixed  box   imposes  order  upon  them;  this  adds  yet  another  layer  of  meaning.  If  a  researcher   views  an  object,  unaware  of  its  location  or  home  within  the  archive,  it  is  possible   that  only  one  of  the  many  meanings  will  emerge.    

                                                                                                                
              37   Carolyn  Steedman,  Dust:  The  Archive  and  Social  History,  (New  Brunswick:  Rutgers  University  Press,  2002),  68.  

19  

At  the  onset  of  this  project  the  concept  of  the  mixed  box  posed  two  problems.   First,  how  should  one  discuss  the  mixed  box  when  a  controlled  vocabulary  had  not   yet  been  established?  Second,  is  the  Specimens  Box  truly  a  mixed  box,  and  if  yes,  had   it  been  intended  to  be  so?  The  first  question  was  somewhat  solved  by  using  the   Janice  Hart  and  Elizabeth  Edwards's  essay  described  earlier,  as  a  source  for   terminology.  However,  using  one  source  is  not  enough.  As  this  topic  is  further   explored  and  the  need  for  a  more  universal  manner  to  discuss  mixed  boxes  will   emerge.  The  second  question  is  more  complicated.  The  Specimens  Box  does  not  hold   clear  criteria  for  object  inclusion  and  it  is  difficult  to  describe  what  is  inside  the  box   as  a  collection.  However,  the  Specimens  Box  had  a  specific  agenda  for  its  creation,  to   provide  easy  access  a  box  that  offered  example  specimens  for  learning  about  various   photographic  processes.  Over  time,  this  meaning  became  diluted  as  objects  entered   the  box  that  were  not  properly  defined  as  specimen  examples.  I  believe  that  it  is   during  this  time  of  diluting  that  the  box  slowly  became  more  of  a  mixed  box.  Despite   its  definition  as  a  box  of  specimens,  the  box  still  represents  an  assortment  of  objects   and  these  objects  do  not  have  a  place  elsewhere  within  the  collection.  These  two   details  allow  the  Specimens  Box  to  meet  the  criteria  of  the  mixed  box,  and  may  be   described  as  such.  Furthermore,  as  a  mixed  box,  we  can  understand  it  as  a  box  with   imposed  meanings  as  it  has  been  created  and  did  not  enter  the  archive  organically.     A  Box  of  Many  Meanings   There  are  a  variety  of  ways  to  approach  a  section  regarding  the  multiplicity   of  meanings  of  a  single  photograph.  Photographs  easily  cross  over  genres,   potentially  serving  many  roles  at  once.  Strangely  there  is  a  reluctance  to  study  art  

20  

and  science  together  in  the  field  of  photographic  history.38  There  is  a  desire  amongst   collection  managers  to  break  objects  into  genres  such  as  "scientific"  "vernacular"   and  "fine  art."  Such  categorization  is  necessary  at  times  for  archive  access  to  boxes,   however,  at  an  item  level,  is  too  specific  to  understand  an  object.     Photographs  are  not  only  mercurial  in  meaning;  they  are  constantly  asking   us  questions.  Referring  back  to  former  GEH  archivist  David  Wooters,  "photographs   and  photographic  collections  challenge  us  to  ask  better  questions  and  to  look  at  old   pictures  in  new  ways."39  Wooters  looks  at  the  trajectory  of  photographs  using  the   example  of  Timothy  O'Sullivan.  He  explains  that  the  photograph  can  one  day  be  an   example  of  an  albumen  print,  the  next  day  represent  Manifest  Destiny.  He  stresses   that  "photographs  are  not  fixed  in  meaning,  and  neither  can  collections  of  them   be."40  The  same  is  true  for  the  objects  within  the  Specimens  Box  and  elsewhere  in   the  GEH  collection   With  almost  every  object  within  the  Specimens  Box  we  see  examples  of  the   photograph's  changing  trajectory.  A  small  halftone  image  of  Lake  Superior  printed   on  copper,  object  1968:0082:0025  began  as  a  tourist  object  for  visitors  to  Lake   Superior,  though  once  placed  within  the  Specimens  Box,  its  process  becomes  more   significant,  as  it  is  a  halftone  printed  on  copper.  Photographic  object   1983:0408:0001  is  a  collodio-chloride  emulsion  experiment  by  G.  Wharton   Simpson.  The  image  depicts  a  woman  with  ringlets  in  her  hair.  When  looking  simply   at  the  image,  it  is  easy  to  lump  the  object  with  the  ubiquitous  cart-  de-visite  of  an                                                                                                                   
              38   Kaplan,  Daile  Kaplan,   Pop  Photographica:  Photography's  Objects  in  Everyday  life  1842-1969  (Toronto:  The  Art  Gallery  of   Ontario,  2003),  9.               39   David  Wooters.  "The  Blind  Man's  Elephant,"  in  The  George  Eastman  House  Collection  A  History  of  Photography  From  1839   to  the  Present,  ed.  Therese  Mulligan  and  David  Wooters  (Koln:  Taschen,  2005),  30.               40   Ibid.,  21.  

21  

unidentified  woman.  However,  knowledge  of  provenance  elevates  the  image.   Further  investigation  reveals  that  the  object  is  an  early  experiment  of  colliodio- chloride  emulsions  by  Simpson,  who  first  introduced  the  process.  It  is  not  important   to  reduce  the  object  to  a  singular  meaning;  as  the  Specimens  Box  evolves,  each   object's  multilayered  meanings  become  their  dominant  characteristic.41     Cataloguing  (theoretical)   At  its  essence,  cataloguing  is  about  description.  The  catalogue  entry  contains   a  variety  of  fields  and  each  institution  can  alter  its  database  to  suit  its  needs.  The   most  useful  fields  for  the  GEH  photographic  archive  are  Title,  Date,  Classification,   Constituent,42  Attributes,  and  Location.43     Within  the  archive,  the  first  point  of  entry  for  a  researcher  to  an  object  is   often  through  the  database.  In  the  example  of  GEH,  this  database  is  The  Museum   System  (TMS).  TMS  allows  its  users  to  search  through  a  variety  of  fields,  and  to   refine  searches,  thus  presenting  the  user  with  a  multitude  of  options  and   information.  Using  the  database  as  an  access  point  is  not  only  a  matter  of   convenience  but  of  preservation.  Through  the  ability  to  access  all  the  known   information  about  an  object,  and  to  preview  the  object,  the  user  can  determine  if   handling  the  object  is  completely  necessary;  in  some  cases  a  facsimile  is   appropriate.  Because  the  catalogue  entry  acts  as  a  primary  point  of  access  to  a  user,   it  is  important  that  the  cataloguer  is  aware  of  the  responsibility  to  provide  a  clear,   sound,  reliable  description  of  the  object  to  the  best  of  their  knowledge  at  the  time  of                                                                                                                   
                41  Edwards,  Elizabeth  and  Janice  Hart,  "'Mixed  Box'  the  Cultural  Biography  of  a  Box  of  `Ethnographic'  Photographs,"  in   Photographs  Objects  Histories,  ed.  Elizabeth  Edwards  and  Janice  Hart  (New  York:  Routledge,  2006),  59.                 42   This  refers  to  any  person  associated  with  the  object:  original  maker,  printer,  publisher,  curator  etc.                 43   Meaning  the  location  within  the  archive.    

22  

creating  a  record.  Because  photographs  are  multilayered,  a  thorough  catalogue   entry  should  reflect  the  various  meanings.  Thus  the  cataloguer  has  to  find  a  way  to   make  complex  information  be  deconstructed  in  order  to  neatly  fit  within  the   institutions  database  categories.     Generally,  any  information  that  does  not  neatly  fit  in  a  category  can  be   transcribed  into  the  "notes"  field  or  entered  in  brackets,  as  described  in  the  GEH   Style  Manual.44  However  there  is  an  imbalance  between  careful  observation  and   study  that  can  be  provided  by  a  researcher  and  the  manner  in  which  database  sorts   this  information.  One  should  realize  that  there  are  always  limitations  to  entering   information  in  this  manner.  Of  course,  objects  have  tactility  and  presence;  there  is   no  substitution  for  viewing  the  actual  object.  But  in  terms  of  cataloguing,  the   greatest  limitations  arise  both  in  the  database  and  the  cataloguer  herself.  The   database  is  objective  and  utilitarian.  It  must  be  able  to  account  for  a  variety  of   information  types.     With  this  careful  cataloguing,  an  attempt  is  made  to  preserve  the  meanings  of   each  object.  We  can  make  a  record  of  something  as  ephemeral  as  an  interpretation.   We  can  collect  meanings  and  place  them  into  this  entity  that  becomes  the  record.   The  cataloguer  can  tell  the  stories  such  as  provenance  and  usage.  After  identifying   and  accumulating  information  related  to  an  object,  the  cataloguer  can  note  where   these  explanations  intertwine  and  how  various  conclusions  were  reached.   Additionally,  with  the  assistance  of  technology,  the  fields  can  be  altered  easily.  Much   improved  from  the  days  of  card  cataloguess,  TMS  entries  can  always  be  updated  and                                                                                                                   
44

  Copies  of  the  GEH  Style  Manual  are  only  available  at  the  institution  as  needed  by  employees.  

23  

cross-referenced  as  needed.  Information  can  be  added  as  it  surfaces.  No  cataloguing   entry  is  ever  complete,  however  changes  made  to  the  entry  should  be  tracked  within   the  database.         METHODOLOGY      Relating  back  to  the  intersection  between  theory  and  practice,  while  analysis  

helped  me  to  understand  the  objects  within  the  Specimens  Box,  half  of  this  project   had  a  practical  result.  The  following  section  details  the  process  taken  to  complete   the  practical  portion  of  this  thesis.  The  end  result  of  the  project  was  a  complete   cataloguing  of  the  objects  within  the  Specimens  Box.  Appendix  II  includes  a  report   generated  from  these  cataloguing  entries.  While  this  process  has  been  broken  down   into  steps,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  it  is  difficult  to  work  in  a  purely   chronological  manner;  in  many  cases  steps  were  taken  simultaneously.  Ideal   situations  are  rare  within  institution's  operations.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that   constant  compromises  occur,  whether  they  are  between  the  access  and  preservation   of  an  object  or  between  workflow  operations.        Intellectual  Order:      Upon  first  inspection  of  the  Specimens  Box,  there  appeared  to  be  no  

connection  between  the  objects  within  the  box.  Their  organization  appeared  to  be   random.  Even  the  categorization  of  these  objects  as  specimens  was  questionable.   Therefore  the  first  task  of  the  project  was  to  gain  an  understanding  of  the  objects,   and  to  understand  why  they  represent  the  category  "specimen."  I  researched  each   object  and  the  object's  constituents  to  make  the  best  possible  cataloguing  entry.  In  

24  

his  work  Objectification,  Material  Cultural  scholar  Christopher  Tilley  writes  about   the  importance  of  biographical  research  and  its  relationship  to  object   understanding.  Because  the  biographies  of  people  and  the  biographies  of  things  may   be  completely  intertwined,  it  was  important  for  me  to  research  and  attach  the  most   complete  and  current  constituent  information  as  possible.45  Researching   constituents  was  a  large  part  of  my  object  research.  A  list  of  constituent  biographies   is  attached  as  Appendix  II.      Digitization:      The  digitization  of  the  objects  within  the  Specimens  Box  was  actually  the  first  

task  performed  once  this  box  was  selected  for  the  project.  I  submitted  a  request  for   images  form  to  George  Eastman  House  photographer  Barbara  Galasso,  who   performed  the  task  of  individually  photographing  each  object.46  After  each  object  is   photographed,  a  high-resolution  file  is  created  a  named  to  match  each  object's   accession  number.  Once  the  image  files  were  renamed  according  to  their  accession   number,  a  master  checklist,  attached  as  appendix  I,  was  created  showing  a   thumbnail  version  of  each  image  file  and  the  file  name.  This  document  became  a  key   reference  in  each  stage  of  the  project.  After  this  step,  where  the  images  are   approved,  files  go  into  a  Data  Asset  Management  System  (DAM)47  inbox/folder  and   tombstone  information  is  pulled  from  TMS.  The  digitization  aspect  is  important   because  it  allows  a  researcher  to  have  a  visual  image  of  the  object  without  having  to                                                                                                                   
              45   Christopher  Tilley,  "Objectification,"  in  Handbook  of  Material  Culture,  ed.  Chris  Tilley,  Webb  Keane,  Susanne  Küchler- Fogden,  Mike  Rowlands,  and  Patricia  Spyer  (London:  Sage  Publications,  2006),  68.                 46   Typically  file  sizes  are  80-120MB  Tiffs,  generally  3000  pixels  on  the  longest  side                 47   Digital  Asset  Management  system  

25  

handle  a  rare  or  fragile  object.  Furthermore,  it  is  likely  that  a  researcher  will  pay   more  attention  to  a  query  filled  with  images  rather  than  a  data  list.  Having  a  visual   reference  is  increases  ease  and  access.        Cataloguing  (practical)      After  creating  an  object  package  in  TMS  containing  all  of  the  objects  within  

the  Specimens  Box,  I  began  to  catalogue  the  entries.48  Cataloguing  was  the  largest   and  most  time  consuming  aspect  of  this  project.  While  some  objects  were  partially   catalogued  or  contained  basic  "tombstone"  information,  every  object  needed  to  be   reconsidered  for  this  project.  Each  object  required  its  own  research  that   unfortunately  could  not  benefit  another  object.  I  catalogued  the  project  in  two   sections,  as  not  every  object  had  been  given  an  accession  number  at  the  time  of  the   project's  inception.  In  order  to  catalogue  each  object,  it  had  to  be  described   physically  and  analyzed.    The  major  fields  in  TMS  are  title,  medium,  date,   constituents,  location.49        The  George  Eastman  House  Style  Manual,  developed  by  GEH  staff,  was  

essential  to  cataloguing  the  Specimens  Box.  In  order  to  create  a  correct  entry,  I  had   to  follow  standardized  rules  and  formats.  Wording  is  important  to  make  information   accessible  and  clear.  For  example  GEH  standards  ask  for  descriptive  titles  to  use   "Unidentified  man  and  woman"  rather  than  "portrait  of  unidentified  man  and   woman."50  Portrait  is  redundant.  And  unidentified  is  preferred  over  unknown,                                                                                                                                   In  the  appendix  a  list  of  all  the  entries    
48

            49   GEH  TMS  User's  Guide  and  Style  Manual,  2010               50   GEH  Object  moduel  style  Manual,  2010  

26  

because  it  is  more  positive  and  allows  room  for  this  information  to  be  discovered.   The  subject  is  not  forgotten;  she  simply  has  yet  to  be  identified.     Looking  at  the  example  of  1981.2491.0004,  a  photograph  of  an  unidentified   woman  wearing  a  green  dress,  we  can  see  that  the  object  has  gone  through  a  series   of  evaluations  by  museum  staff,  each  altering  its  meaning.  However,  knowing  the   trajectory  the  object  has  taken  is  essential  to  understanding  it.  It  is  important  to   realize  that  the  object's  meaning  was  not  immediately  clear  to  a  viewer.  It  is  an   object  that  required  several  minds  to  uncover  the  truth  of  the  matter.  In  the  TMS   notes  section  of  this  object  is  a  note  describing  previous  findings  on  the  object.51   Further  research  provided  by  Daguerreotype  scholar  Mike  Robinson  revealed  that   the  photograph  is  actually  collodion  on  a  varnished  recycled  daguerreotype  plate.52   The  fact  that  it  is  recycled  materials  adds  complexity  to  its  meaning.  Should  the   object  be  titled  according  to  image,  or  the  fact  that  it  is  a  specimen?  When  we  search   for  objects,  when  do  we  want  this  one  to  appear  in  search  results?  As  an  example  of   a  portrait?  An  example  of  overpainting?  An  example  of  the  experimental  nature  of   photography?  When  cataloguing,  it  always  comes  back  to  access;  we  have  to   consider  how  the  researcher  will  want  to  access  this  object,  what  terms  will  one   search  for.  Therefore,  it  is  reasonable  to  attach  multiple  titles  to  an  object  and  to   provide  a  full  description.  This  object  is  given  a  descriptive  title  but  has  extra   information  attached.  The  information  is  provided  to  the  database  user,  but  in  order   to  view  the  complete  record  they  have  to  view  different  modules  in  the  database.                                                                                                                   
              51   "This  image  was  formerly  classified  as  a  tintype.  Mark  Osterman  and  Grant  Romer  have  determined  that  it  is  a   daguerreotype,  heavily  overpainted."               52   So  a  second  note  has  been  added  to  the  catalog  entry  with  the  date.  The  original  note  has  been  left  in  order  to  show  how   understanding  of  the  object  changed  over  time.    

27  

Attributes  were  also  a  complicated  aspect  of  cataloguing.  Using  the   controlled  vocabulary,  we  have  to  use  the  attributes  that  are  already  there.  Often  the   perfect  word  is  not  there  or  we  have  written  in  the  database  superfluous  words   such  as  "homes,  houses,  house,  home"  which  clutters  the  attributes  and  creates  a   challenge  for  the  cataloguer.  However,  this  is  resolved  through  a  controlled   vocabulary  and  careful  attention  paid  to  the  oversight  and  regulation  of  the   database.   Accession  Numbers:  Unique  Tracking  Numbers     The  accession  number  is  a  unique  number  used  to  track  an  object.  Ideally,  as   soon  as  an  object  enters  a  collection,  it  is  given  a  number.53  This  number  is  needed   in  order  to  create  a  catalogue  entry  in  the  database.  Some  objects  within  in  the   Specimens  Box  had  not  been  given  an  accession  number.  For  these  objects,  archivist   Joe  Struble  and  assistant  curator  Jamie  Allen  arranged  the  objects  into  various  lots.  
54In  creating  the  lots,  Struble  referred  to  the  acquisition  source  of  the  objects.55  

Many  of  the  objects  within  the  Specimens  Box  had  not  been  researched  or   completely  catalogued  since  their  acquisition,  which  for  the  majority  of  objects  was   between  1960-1975.  When  objects  enter  the  collection,  the  registrar  creates  a  "lot"   record  which  is  a  record  that  acts  as  an  overview  record  for  several  objects.  For   example,  if  10  objects  with  related  information  are  acquired  simultaneously,  the   registrar  may  create  a  "lot"  record  for  these  objects  rather  than  creating  ten                                                                                                                   
              53   Sometimes  objects  are  given  temporary  numbers,  but  once  an  object  is  officially  acquired  it  is  given  a  permanent   number.  However,  it  is  common  for  this  number  to  include  the  year  of  acquisition.               54   A  lot  is  a  grouping  of  objects  that  share  information  within  an  accession  number.  For  example  with  accession  numbers   1968.0334.0037  and  1968.0334.0038,  the  common  number  "0334"  is  their  shared  lot  number.  Not  all  institutions  accession   their  objects  the  same  way.               55   Objects  were  separated  into  various  parts:  Boyer,  Cromer,  Sipley,  and  three  sections  from  unknown  sources  

28  

individual  records.  This  saves  time  but  does  not  allow  for  detailed  cataloguing  until   the  individual  records  are  created.56      Conservation  Department   The  conservation  department  assisted  with  the  identification  of  the  objects   within  the  Specimens  Box.  At  times,  conservators  could  not  identify  the   photographic  process.  For  example,  conservators  worked  to  identify  object   GEH_9068,  a  photograph  of  a  German  castle  that  had  been  completely  dyed  red,   under  a  powerful  microscopic  view.  Even  powerful  magnification  didn't  allow  for   the  object  to  be  identified  past  speculation,  however.  In  this  case  we  plan  to  use  X- Ray  Fluorescence  (XRF)  testing  to  study  the  chemical  makeup  of  the  object.57            The  Future:  Reorganization  and  re-consideration            Recommendations  for  how  the  box  could  be  better  defined.  Keeping  in  mind   that  this  is  a  box  of  special  processes,  every  object  within  it  should  represent  an   important  moment  in  the  history  of  photographic  material.  It  could  be  separated  out   into  paper  samples,  examples  of  coatings,  and  unusual  processes.    The  greatest   problem  facing  the  Specimens  Box  is  a  lack  of  definition.  Once  the  term  "specimen"   is  truly  defined  for  this  box's  purpose,  objects  can  be  reassigned  accordingly.  In  this   case,  it  may  be  possible  that  the  box  could  be  broken  into  sections.  Such  as  examples   of  flash  photography,  one-of-a-kind  processes,  examples  of  common  notable   processes,  and  unusual  subject  matter                                                                                                                   
            56   Some  institutions  do  not  use  the  term  "lot"  record  as  this  term  could  easily  be  confused  with  auction  lots.  Other  term   examples  are  "open  series"  and  "parent  records"                       57   At  the  time  of  this  thesis,  the  XRF  testing  has  not  been  completed.    

29  

Conclusion   Looking  at  my  work  with  the  Specimens  Box  from  a  general  perspective,  it  is   clear  that  the  database  does  increase  access  to  objects,  but  only  in  a  particular  way.   The  database,  with  its  specific  deconstructive  qualities  can  only  take  an  object's   interpretation  so  far.  It  is  important  to  remember  this  both  while  adding   information  to  the  database  and  while  using  it  as  a  researcher.  While  an  institution's   style  manual  is  clear  and  objective,  the  act  of  cataloguing  is  not.  The  database   presents  information  objectively,  yet  the  information  that  enters  the  database  may   be  subjective,  dependant  on  the  cataloguer.  The  cataloguer  must  find  the  best   balance  between  these  two  areas  in  order  to  provide  the  best  information  and   access  possible  to  each  object.  To  understand  photographic  objects,  we  must   understand  how  we  relate  to  them,  and  how  society  as  a  whole  relates  to  the  object.   This  information  will  be  reflected  in  the  cataloguing  entry.  Because  the  importance   of  the  archive  is  not  just  to  preserve  and  protect  these  objects,  but  also  to  enlighten   the  researcher  and  provide  information  related  to  these  objects.        At  the  completion  of  my  work  with  the  Specimens  Box,  I  feel  that  I  have  only  

begun  to  delve  into  the  amount  of  research  that  could  be  done  on  these  objects.  My   hope  is  that  the  work  done  thus  far  to  shed  light  on  the  box  and  elevate  its   importance  in  the  memory  of  the  GEH  archive,  will  aid  future  researchers  or   perhaps  prompt  others  to  further  study  these  objects  and  their  role  within  the   archive.  Cataloguing  is  a  perpetual  process.  There  is  always  more  to  understand   about  any  object.  There  is  always  a  related  object  that  can  be  further  researched.   Additionally,  I  hope  that  my  research  assists  with  the  reorganization  of  the  

30  

Specimens  Box,  allowing  the  objects  to  enter  a  home  that  fits  them  best.  I  hope  that   my  work  of  trying  to  better  understand  these  objects  and  perform  better  research   has  provided  better  access  to  the  Specimens  Box.     
  

    

                                                         31  

Bibliography     Edwards,  Elizabeth  and  Janice  Hart.  "Mixed  Box:  the  cultural  biography  of  a  box  of  `     ethnographic'   photographs."   In   Photographs   Objects   Histories:   On   the   Materiality   of   Images,   edited   by   Edwards,   Elizabeth   and   Janice   Hart,   47-61.   New  York:  Routledge,  2004.        Edwards,  Elizabeth.  Raw  Histories:  Photographs,  Anthropology  and  Museums.  Oxford:     Berg,  2001.      Falk,  Patricia,  Stefanie  Dennis  Hunker  Cataloguing  Outside  the  Box.  New  York:  Neal-   Schuman  Publishers,  Inc.,  2010.      Kaplan,  Daile.  Pop  Photographica:  Photography's  Objects  in  Everyday  life  1842-1969.     Toronto:  The  Art  Gallery  of  Ontario,  2003.      Kingery,  W.  David,  ed.,  Learning  From  Things:  Method  and  Theory  of  Material  Culture     Studies.  Washington:  Smithsonian  Institution  Press,  1996.      Merewether,  Charles,  ed.  The  Archive:  Documents  of  Contemporary  Art.  Cambridge:     The  MIT  Press,  2006.        Moutu,  Andrew.  "Collection  as  a  Way  of  Being."  In  Thinking  Through  Things  edited     by  Henare,  Amiria,  Martin  Holbraad,  and  Sari  Wastell,  93-187.  New  York:     Routledge,  2007.        Lavédrine,  Bertrand.  Photographs  of  the  Past  Process  and  Preservation.  Los  Angeles:         The  Gerry  Conservation  Institute,  2009.        Okwui,  Enwezor.  Archive  Fever:  Uses  of  the  Document  in  Contemporary  Art.  New     York:    Steidl/ICP,  2008.      Rabinow,  Paul,  ed.  The  Foucault  Reader.  New  York:  Pantheon  Books.  1984.        Schlereth,  Thomas  J.  ed.  Material  Culture:  A  Research  Guide.  Lawrence:  University     Press  of  Kansas.  1985.      Tilley,  Chris,  Webb  Keane,  Susanne  Kuchler,  Mike  Rowlands,  and  Patricia  Spyer,  ed.,     The  Handbook  of  Material  Culture.  London:  Sage  Publications  Ltd.,  2006.                       32  

Appendix  I.     Image  Checklist  

  

  

33  

  

  

34  

  

  

35  

  

  

36  

                  37  

  

Appendix  II.   Constituent  Biographies      Addie  Genevieve  Eliott   Alternate  name:  Addie  Genevieve  Elvira   Birthdate:  March  11,  1873   Addie  Genevieve  was  born  in  Somerville.  Her  mother,  Mary  Elliott,  is   referenced  in  the  book  Representative  women  of  New  England  by  Julia  Ward  Howe,   Mary  Hannah  Graves,  Mary  Elvira  Elliott,  Mary  A.  Stimpson,  Martha  Seavey  Hoyt.         Benjamin  J.  Falk     [b.  1853-  d.  May  21,  1925]   Professional  name:  B.J.  Falk   Studio  location:  949  Broadway  NY,NY   BJ  Falk  was  active  during  the  late  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  centuries.   His  photographic  work  was  mainly  portraiture  focused  on  wealthy,  prominent  New   Yorkers,  especially  the  German-Jewish  community  and  the  theater.  The  New  York   Public  Library  holds  a  large  collection  of  his  work  featuring  portraits  of  the   Guggenheims,  Lillie  Langry,  Richard  Mansfield,  Julie  Marlowe,  Alla  Naximova,  Lillian   Russell,  Thomas  Edison,  Henry  Ford,  Jay  Gould,  Helen  Keller,  and  Annie  Sullivan,   among  others.  (source  the  NYPL  accession  sheet  1989)  Falk  was  also  involved  with   several  cases  involving  early  copyright  laws  when  his  images  were  illegally   duplicated.      Gustave  Hermans     [b.  1856-  d.  1934]   Studio  address:  98  Rue  Dambrugge  Anvers      J.J.  Higgins   Title-  A.M.,  M.D.   Wrote  extensively  on  Lantern  Negatives  for  the  1890  New  York  publication   Photographic  Mosaics.        James  S.  Mc  Corkle   Alternate  name:  James  H.  McCorkle,  "S"  middle  initial  may  be  an  error  in  TMS   James  H.  McCorkle  experimented  in  platinotype  printing   and  pinhole  photography.  Lectured  at  the  Portland,  Maine  Camera  Club.  In  his   address,  Mr.  McCorkle  said  that  he  regarded  the  camera  as  the  best  preventive  of     He  was  the  inventor  of  the  1903  McCorkle  Needle-Hole  Attachment,  which  was   available  from  the  Century  Camera  Company.  The  model  attachment  offered  needle- holes  No.  10,  II  and  12,  and  a  separate  focusing  aperture  to  achieve  perfect  pinholes.        Charles  G.  Milne   Born  in  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  immigrated  to  Canada.  There  he  unsuccessfully   attempted  to  establish  a  portrait  studio  in  Medicine  Hat,  AB,  Canada.  He  was  the   38  

father  of  Gilbert  Milne,  who  followed  his  father's  interest  in  photography,  and  later   became  a  photographer  for  the  Toronto  Star.      J.  George  Nussbaumer   Born  in  Buffalo,  NY.  Author  of  the  article  "Courage  in  Art  Practice"  in  the   publication  Photographic  Mosaics.      F.A.  Oppenheim      Active  1850s,  Dresden      Oppenheim  studied  under  Gustave  Le  Gray.      H.C.  Phillips      Alternate  name:  Henry  C.  Phillips      Studio  address:  Broadbent  &  Phillips,  1206  Chestnut  St.  Philadelphia,  PA   Operated  a  portrait  studio  in  Philadelphia,  PA,  c1850-1880.  His  son,  Ryland   Phillips,  was  also  a  photographer.        Ryland  Phillips   Son  of  Philadelphia  portrait  photographer,  H.C.  Phillips.  Phillips  wrote  and   lectured  about  photography  for  the  publications  such  as  "The  Photographic  Journal   of  America."  With  his  brother  Howard  Magill  Phillips,  he  operated  a  portrait  studio   in  Philadelphia,  PA.  His  wife  was  Annette  Hall  Phillips.      Vernon  Royle   "Paterson,  NJ  Dec  17-  Vernon  Royle,  president  and  treasurer  of  John  Royle  &   Sons,  machinery  manufacturers  of  this  city,  died  of  pneumonia  this  morning  at  his   home.  618  East  Twenty-eighth  Street.  He  was  88  years  old.  Mr.  Royle  held  100   patents  on  inventions  dealing  with  photoengraving,  jacquard  card  cutting,  fire  hose   weaving  and  similar  processes.  His  soon  Vernon  E.  Royle  and  three  granddaughters   survive."   --  New  York  Times  Dec  18  1934      C.  Vandyk      Alternate  name:  Carl  Vandyk   Studio  address:  125  Gloucester  Rd,  London,  England  &  37  Buckingham   Palace  Rd,  London,  England   Carl  Vandyk  was  a  commercial  photographer,  active  in  the  1880s,  in  London.      Richard  Wetherill     [b.  1858-  d.  1910]   Wetherwill  was  a  Colorado  rancher  and  explorer.  He  was  an  early  discovered   of  Cliff  Palace  in  Mesa  Verde  and  Chaco  Canyon.  Today,  there  is  controversy   surrounding  Wetherwill's  excavation  and  handling  of  ancient  artifacts.  During  his   lifetime  preservation  was  not  yet  a  major  concern  at  excavation  sites.    In  1910,  he   was  killed  by  gunshot.  It  is  unclear  if  he  was  murdered  by  a  Navajo  debtor  or  shot   accidently  by  his  own  hand.   39  

Appendix  III.   Cataloguing  Entries      Entries  are  arranged  numerically  by  accession  number,  information  not  relevant  to   this  thesishas  been  removed  in  some  cases.  

   1968:0082:0025  
   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Photography   Greetings  from  Copper  County   Print   Unidentified   Lake  Superior,  Keweenaw,  MI,  US   photoengraving  on  copper   View  of  Lake  Superior  Shore  Scene,  Keweenaw  County,   Michigan  printed  on  a  thin  piece  of  copper,   accompanied  by  small  paper  envelope  with  the  name  De   Boos.   Generic  Subject:  lake  frontlandscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  halftone   Image:  4.4  x  8.6  cm   Overall:  8.8  x  12.5  cm   recto  (printed  in  black):  MICHIGAN  COPPER/  A  Lake   Superior  Shore  Scene,  Keweenaw  Country,  Michigan/   GREETINGS  from  the  Copper  Country      [On  envelope]  recto  (written  in  black  ink):  De  Boos   recto  (written  in  pencil):  EPHEMERA  BOX      [On  envelope]  verso  (embossed  into  paper,  in   decorative  font):  H   196800820025.0001   196800820025.0002   Transfer  from  The  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin  

Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):                  Media:   Media:   Credit  Line:     

1968:0334:0037  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Attributed  to:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Photography   Unidentified  Woman  with  hair  in  bun   Photograph   Elias  Goldensky,  American,  b.  Russia  1867  -  1943   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   Radomysl,  Russia   40  

Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

ca.  1905   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Profile  of  woman  with  her  her  done  up  in  a  bun,   wearing  a  dress  with  gold  trim   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  23.5  x  18.3  cm   [no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0038  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Attributed  to:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:      Photography   Unidentified  Woman  with  hair  in  bun   Photograph   Elias  Goldensky,  American,  b.  Russia  1867  -  1943   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   Radomysl,  Russia   ca.  1905   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Profile  of  woman  with  her  her  done  up  in  a  bun,   wearing  a  dress  with  gold  trim   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  23.5  x  18.3  cm   [no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0047  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Attributed  to:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:            Photography   Profile  of  Unidentified  woman   Photograph   Elias  Goldensky,  American,  b.  Russia  1867  -  1943   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   Radomysl,  Russia   ca.  1905   United  States   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Profile  of  woman  wearing  a  draped  dress  in  front  of   backdrop  with  trees  and  clouds   Functional  Type:  commercial  portraiture   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG  

41  

   Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

22.8  x  17.4  cm.   [no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0048  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Attributed  to:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:               Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:      Photography   Profile  of  Unidentified  woman   Photograph   Elias  Goldensky,  American,  b.  Russia  1867  -  1943   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   Radomysl,  Russia   ca.  1905   United  States   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Profile  of  woman  wearing  a  draped  dress  in  front  of   backdrop  with  trees  and  clouds   Functional  Type:  commercial  portraiture   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG   22.8  x  17.4  cm.   [no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0049  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Attributed  to:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:               Photography   Profile  of  Unidentified  woman   Photograph   Elias  Goldensky,  American,  b.  Russia  1867  -  1943   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   Radomysl,  Russia   ca.  1905   United  States   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Profile  of  woman  wearing  a  draped  dress  in  front  of   backdrop  with  trees  and  clouds   Functional  Type:  commercial  portraiture   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG  

42  

Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

22.8  x  17.4  cm.   [no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0050  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Attributed  to:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:               Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:      Photography   Profile  of  Unidentified  woman   Photograph   Elias  Goldensky,  American,  b.  Russia  1867  -  1943   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   Radomysl,  Russia   ca.  1905   United  States   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Profile  of  woman  wearing  a  draped  dress  in  front  of   backdrop  with  trees  and  clouds   Functional  Type:  commercial  portraiture   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG   22.8  x  17.4  cm.   [no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0051  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Attributed  to:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:               Dimensions:   Photography   Profile  of  Unidentified  woman   Photograph   Elias  Goldensky,  American,  b.  Russia  1867  -  1943   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   Radomysl,  Russia   ca.  1905   United  States   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Profile  of  woman  wearing  a  draped  dress  in  front  of   backdrop  with  trees  and  clouds   Functional  Type:  commercial  portraiture   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG   22.8  x  17.4  cm.  

43  

Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

[no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0052  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Attributed  to:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:               Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:      Photography   Unidentified  Woman  with  hair  in  bun   Photograph   Elias  Goldensky,  American,  b.  Russia  1867  -  1943   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   Radomysl,  Russia   ca.  1905   United  States   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Profile  of  woman  with  her  her  done  up  in  a  bun,   wearing  a  dress  with  gold  trim   Functional  Type:  commercial  portraiture   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  23.5  x  18.3  cm   [no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0053  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Attributed  to:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:               Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Photography   Unidentified  woman  wearing  large  hat  with  feather   Photograph   Elias  Goldensky,  American,  b.  Russia  1867  -  1943   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   Radomysl,  Russia   ca.  1905   United  States   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Woman  in  3/4  profile  wearing  a  large  hat  with  a  feather   in  it  and  a  shawl  covering  her  entire  outfit.   Functional  Type:  commercial  portraiture   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG   22.8  x  17.4  cm.   [no  inscription  verso]  

44  

Credit  Line:     

Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0056  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:      Photography   Unidentified  Woman  with  hair  in  bun   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1905   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Profile  of  woman  with  her  hair  done  up  in  a  bun,   wearing  a  dress  with  gold  trim   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  23.5  x  18.3  cm   [no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

1968:0334:0057  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Attributes:      Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:      1968:0372:0089      Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:  

Photography   Unidentified  woman  wearing  large  hat  with  feather   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1905   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Source:  GEH_REG   22.8  x  17.4  cm.   [no  inscription  verso]   Museum  Collection  

Photography   Cliff-Dwellings   Photograph   Richard  Wetherill,  American,  1858  -  1910   Chaco  Canyon,  NM,  US   Chester,  PA,  US   ca.  1894   Houvenweep,  UT,  US   collodion  silver  print   View  of  the  ruined  fortress  at  the  National  Park  in   Houvenweep,  Utah  printed  on  Aristo  Jr.  paper,  mounted   45  

Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):           

horizontally  on  a  support  with  printed  caption  running   vertically   Generic  Subject:  fortress  wallsarchitecture   Generic  Subject:  ruinarchitecture   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.5  x  16.3  cm     Overall:  24.1  x  15.3  cm   recto  (printed  in  brown):  NEGATIVE  BY  RICHARD   WETHERILL/  PRINTED  ON  AMERICAN  "ARISTO,"  JR.   CLIFF-DWELLINGS.      verso  (written  pencil):  Runied  Fortress,  on  the   Houvenweep,  Utah/  A.  Miller  

1970:0049:0009  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Photography   Building  in  Arques,  France   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1855   albumen  print  from  paper  negative   View  of  a  cathedral  in  Arques,  France   Generic  Subject:  cathedral  facadesarchitecture   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  14.4  x  19.9  cm     Mount:  30.3  x  40  cm   recto  (in  pencil  on  mount):  Arques/    [illegible  writing]/   albumine  [illegible  writing]  

1970:0049:0041  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:   Credit  Line:  

Photography   Vue  du  Pont  de  Dresden   Photograph   F.A.  Oppenheim   ca.  1853   Dresden,  Germany   albumen  print   "DRESDEN",  MOUNTED  ALBUMEN  PRINT,  NO  DATE   Source:  GEH_REG   Gift  of  Eastman  Kodak  Company,  ex-collection  Gabriel   Cromer  

46  

1972:0199:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Later  printer:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:  

Photography   Group  of  4  military  cadets  under  a  tent  opening   Photograph   Pach  Bros.,  American,  active  ca.  1860s  -  1900s   William  Willis  Jr.,  1840/1-1923   Brasted  Chart,  England   St.  Austell,  England   ca.  1865   platinotype  print   First  platinum  print  made  in  America,  1877,  by  William   Willis  Jr.,  inventor  of  the  process,  from  a  negative  of   military  cadets,  made  previously  by  Pach  Brothers   Studio.   Generic  Subject:  militaryportrait   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  18.1  x  23.7  cm     Mount:  20.4  x  25.5  cm   (mount  verso,  ink):  First  Platinotype  print  made  in   America  by  William  Willis  Jr.,  inventor,  in  1877.  The   laboratory  in  which  he  worked  was  at  39-41  Park  Place,   New  York,   (mount  recto,  printed):  Stephen  Henry  Horgan  RPS  /  7   Spencer  Hill  /  Wimbleton  London  /  S.W.  19  /  Associate   Editor  /  The  Inland  Printer  /  Chicago  IL,  USA   Previously  owned  by  Stephen  Henry  Horgan,  1854- 1941  

   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):  

   Ex-collection:     

1973:0108:0001  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:  

Attributes:  

Photography   Queen  Victoria's  Jubliee   Print   Unidentified   June  22,  1897   Devon,  England   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   From  a  collection  of  3  PHOTOS/12  NEGS  taken  with  a   Kodak  pocket  camera  of  Queen  Victoria's  Diamond   Jubilee  taken  with  a  Kodak  pocket  camera.  Street  scene   with  dog  and  ladder.   Generic  Subject:  jubileeevent  

47  

         Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Generic  Subject:  royaltypeople   Source:  GEH_REG   Overall:  4  x  5.5  cm   verso  (written  in  black  ink):  Queen  Victoria's  Jubilee   Lustleigh,  Devon,  1897   Gift  of  Alban  W.  Cooper  

1973:0108:0002  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:  

Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Photography   Parade  during  Queen  Victoria's  Jubliee   Negative   Unidentified   June  22,  1897   Devon,  England   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   From  a  collection  of  3  PHOTOS/12  NEGS  taken  with  a   Kodak  pocket  camera  of  Queen  Victoria's  Diamond   Jubilee  taken  with  a  Kodak  pocket  camera.  View  of   photographer's  set  up  in  the  street.   Generic  Subject:  jubileeevent   Generic  Subject:  Victoria,  Queenroyalty  /  personage   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  3.4  x  5.1  cm     Overall:  4.1  x  5.3  cm   [no  inscription  on  verso]   Gift  of  Alban  W.  Cooper  

1973:0108:0003  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Photography   Parade  during  Queen  Victoria's  Jubliee   Negative   Unidentified   June  22,  1897   Devon,  England   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   From  a  collection  of  3  PHOTOS/12  NEGS  taken  with  a   Kodak  pocket  camera  of  Queen  Victoria's  Diamond   Jubilee  taken  with  a  Kodak  pocket  camera.  View  of   soldier  on  horse  leading  parade  of  other  soldiers.   Generic  Subject:  jubileeevent   Generic  Subject:  Victoria,  Queenroyalty  /  personage  

Attributes:     

48  

      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  3.4  x  5.1  cm     Overall:  4.1  x  5.3  cm   [no  inscription  on  verso]   Gift  of  Alban  W.  Cooper  

1977:0224:0010  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:   Inscription(s):            Photography   Unidentified  man  with  beard   Photograph   C.  Vandyk   ca.  1900   Close  up  portrait  of  elderly  man  with  beard  and  hat  and   accompanying  envelope  with  photographer's  stamp  and   logo  providing  a  studio  address   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  43  x  32.4  cm   recto  (writen  in  pencil):  Vandyk  London  [artist   signature]   verso  (writen  in  ink):  430223   (written  in  pencil):  86461  G   recto  (printed  on  envelope):  H.M.  The  King/  H.R.H.  The   Prince  of  Wales/  H.M.  The  Queen/  By  Appointment/   Vandyk  41  Buckingham  Palace  London  S.W.  1/  Court   Photographer/Portrait  Painter   197702240010.0001   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

Media:   Credit  Line:     

1978:0607:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Associated:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Attributes:     

Photography   Church  of  St.  Sulpice,  Paris   Print   Unidentified,  French   Hippolyte  Fizeau,  1819-1896   Venteuil,  France   Paris,  France   ca.  1840   Fizeau  process  engraving  from  a  daguerreotype   Proper  Subject:  St.  Sulpicechurches  /  architecture   Source:  GEH_PHOTO  

49  

      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):         Notes:  

Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  7.5  x  10  cm     Overall:  19.7  x  28.5  cm   recto,  Cromer  inscription  (pencil):  Journal  [?]  et  serie   des......      recto,  Cromer  inscription  (pencil):  Un  des  vues   [illegible]  le  procedé  Fizeau  /  trés  rare   Image  was  made  using  a  process  invented  by  Hippolyte   Fizeau  in  which  the  original  daguerreoptype  was  made   into  an  intaglio  printing  plate  through  the  use  of  acid  to   etch  the  image.      Until  Fizeau  discovered  a  method  of  chemically  etching   the  daguerreotype  plate  itself,  any  reproduction  of  the   daguerreian  image  was  a  product  of  manual  translation   of  the  photograph  to  a  copper  plate  that  could  hold   printing  ink.   Gift  of  Eastman  Kodak  Company,  ex-collection  Gabriel   Cromer  

     

Credit  Line:     

1978:0607:0005  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Associated:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):            Notes:  

Photography   Church  of  St.  Sulpice,  Paris   Print   Unidentified,  French   Hippolyte  Fizeau,  1819-1896   Venteuil,  France   Paris,  France   ca.  1840   Fizeau  process  engraving  from  a  daguerreotype   Proper  Subject:  St.  Sulpicechurches  /  architecture   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  7.5  x  10  cm     Overall:  19.7  x  28.6  cm   recto,  Alden  Scott  Boyer's  hand  (pencil):  Excessively   rare  and  valuable  /   Original  -  Fizeau  -  Daguerreotype  -  Engraving  -  1840  /   The  2  [British  pound  sign]  5.50  $21.00  Boyer      verso  (pencil):  13341   Image  was  made  using  a  process  invented  by  Hippolyte  

50  

     

Credit  Line:   PHOTOGRAPHER   Old  Reg  Maker  ID:     

Fizeau  in  which  the  original  daguerreoptype  was  made   into  an  intaglio  printing  plate  through  the  use  of  acid  to   etch  the  image.      Until  Fizeau  discovered  a  method  of  chemically  etching   the  daguerreotype  plate  itself,  any  reproduction  of  the   daguerreian  image  was  a  product  of  manual  translation   of  the  photograph  to  a  copper  plate  that  could  hold   printing  ink.   Gift  of  Alden  Scott  Boyer   9999  

1979:0556:0011  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Notes:  

Photography   Henry  Blanchard  Curran   Photograph-Cabinet  Card   H.C.  Phillips   ca.  1896   albumen  print   Henry  Blanchard  Curran,  business  partner  of  Samuel   Castner  Jr.,  wearing  a  suit  and  tie   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  14.2  x  10.3  cm     Mount:  16.4  x  10.7  cm   recto  (printed  in  grey  on  mount):  Phillips  Philada   verso  (stamped  in  black  ink):  PHILLIPS  STUDIO  1206   CHESTNUT  STREET  PHILADELPHIA   This  object  is  related  to  H.C.  Phillips's  son  Ryland   Phillips'  platinum  print  of  the  same  image.  In  order  to   make  his  print,  Ryland  must  have  made  a  copy  negative   from  this  original  image.   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

Credit  Line:     

1980:0270:0001  

      Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Death:  

Photography   Russian  Honeymoon   Photograph   B.J.  Falk,  American,  1853  -  1925   New  York,  NY,  US  

51  

Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:  

Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):         Notes:     

May  1,  1883   New  York,  NY,  US   gelatin  silver  print   A  large  group  of  actors  gathered  on  stage  centered  on   the  action  of  a  soldier  holding  a  riffle  and  a  woman   pointing.  Taken  during  Act  2,  the  last  scene  of  the  play   "Russian  Honeymoon"  performed  on  May  1,  1883  at  the   Madison  Square  Theater.  Made  on  an  Eastman  dry  plate   negative   Generic  Subject:  theaterevent   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  flash  illuminated   Image:  8.8  x  14.2  cm  (3  7/16  x  5  9/16  in.)   Mount:  14.6  x  23  cm  (5  3/4  x  9  1/16  in.)   recto  (printed  in  blue):  Negative  by  FALK  At  Midnight.   RUSSIAN  HONEYMOON.  (Copyrighted)  Made  on   EASTMAN's  Special  Dry  Plate.        verso  (written  in  blue  ink):  Taken  by  the  light  of  30   [illegible]/  Exposure  6  sec.  Anthony's  Phot.  Bul.  June,   1883  p  190  [p  125  written  and  crossed  out]   One  of  the  first  theater  photographs  made  by  flash  

1980:0277:0001  
   Department:   Published:   Descriptive  Title:   Photography   Un  des  Bas-Reliefs  de  Notre-Dame  de  Paris   Bas-Relief  at  Notre-Dame  Cathedral  in  Paris,  Apostles  at   the  Tomb  of  the  Virgin   Book:   Excursions  daguerriennes:  Vues  et  monuments  les  plus   remarquables  du  globe  (plate  84)   Classification:   Print   Original  photographer:   Noël-Marie-Paymal  Lerebours,  1807  -  1873   Place  of  Death:   Neuilly,  France   Place  of  Birth:   Neuilly,  France   Publisher:   Noël-Marie-Paymal  Lerebours,  1807  -  1873   Place  of  Death:   Neuilly,  France   Place  of  Birth:   Neuilly,  France   Associated:   Hippolyte  Fizeau,  1819-1896   Place  of  Death:   Venteuil,  France   Place  of  Birth:   Paris,  France   Date  Label:   ca.  1841   Medium:   Fizeau  process  engraving  from  a  daguerreotype   Description:   loose  plate  84  from  "Excursions  daguerriennes:  Vues  et  

52  

Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):         Notes:  

monuments  les  plus  remarquables  du  globe"   Generic  Subject:  Notre  Dame  Cathedralcathedral  /   architecture   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  17.6  x  14.1  cm     Overall:  29  x  23.9  cm   recto,  Cromer  inscription  (pencil):  trés  rare  /  1iére   gravure  photographique  (procedé  Fizeau)  le  [illegible]      one  of  several  reproductions  made  for  the  1840-1844   series  "Excursions  daguerriennes:  Vues  et  monuments   les  plus  remarquables  du  globe"  using  a  process   invented  by  Hippolyte  Fizeau  in  which  the  original   daguerreoptype  was  made  into  an  intaglio  printing   plate  through  the  use  of  acid  to  etch  the  image.      Until  Fizeau  discovered  a  method  of  chemically  etching   the  daguerreotype  plate  itself,  any  reproduction  of  the   daguerreian  image  was  a  product  of  manual  translation   of  the  photograph  to  a  copper  plate  that  could  hold   printing  ink.   198002770001.0001   198002770001.0002   Gift  of  Eastman  Kodak  Company:  ex-collection  Gabriel   Cromer  

     

Media:   Media:   Credit  Line:     

1981:1284:0001  
   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:            Photography   Anvers,  Le  Calvaire  a  l'Eglise  St-Paul   Photograph   Gustave  Hermans,  1856  -  1934   Berchem,  Belgium   Antwerp,  Belgium   ca.  1890   Le  Calvaire  a  l'Eglise  St-Paul,  Anvers,  Belgium   albumen  print   Sideview  of  a  large  brick  cathedral  with  religious   sculpture  arrangement   Generic  Subject:  artreproduction   Generic  Subject:  biblicalallegory   Generic  Subject:  cathedral  facadesarchitecture   Source:  GEH_REG  

53  

   Dimensions:      Inscription(s):         Credit  Line:     

Image:  28.5  x  23.4  cm   Overall:  43  x  35.6  cm   recto  (printed  in  white  on  black  border):  No  38/   ANVERS.-  Le  Calvaire  a  l'Eglise  St-Paul.  G.H.  phot  [rest   cut  off]      verso  (stamped  in  blue  ink):  FREDERICK  W.   HERENDEEN.   Gift  of  George  C.  Pratt  

1981:1284:0004  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Photography   La  Legende  de  la  Ste-Famile   Photograph   Gustave  Hermans,  1856  -  1934   Berchem,  Belgium   Antwerp,  Belgium   ca.  1890   albumen  print   ALBUMEN  PRINTS,  ARCHITECTURE  &  ART   REPRODUCTIONS   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  21.7  x  28.2  cm     Overall:  26  x  35  cm   recto  (printed  in  white  on  border):  No  408  ANVERS.-La   Legende  de  la  Ste-Famille.  (stalles  de  la  Cathedrale)  G.H.   phot.   Gift  of  George  C.  Pratt  

1981:1284:0005  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Publisher:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:  

Photography   Anvers,  Le  Calvaire  a  l'Eglise  St-Paul   Photograph   Unidentified   Stengel  &  Co.   ca.  1890   Anvers,  Le  Calvaire  a  l'Eglise  St-Paul,  Anvers,  Belgium   albumen  print   Sideview  of  a  large  brick  cathedral  with  relgious   sculpture  arrangement   Generic  Subject:  artreproduction  

54  

            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Generic  Subject:  biblicalallegory   Generic  Subject:  cathedral  facadesarchitecture   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  27.5  x  22.7  cm     Overall:  34.6  x  26  cm   recto  (printed  in  black  on  border  of  print):  4020.   Anvesr.  St.  Paul,  le  Clavaire./  Edite  par  Stengel  &   Markert,  Dresde.   Gift  of  George  C.  Pratt  

1981:1288:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Associated:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):                        Notes:  

Photography   Portrait  of  seated  young  man,  boy  standing  by  his  side   Print   Unidentified,  English   Hippolyte  Fizeau,  1819-1896   Venteuil,  France   Paris,  France   1844   France   Fizeau  process  engraving  from  a  daguerreotype   Object  Process:  engraving  from  a  daguerreotype   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  9  x  6.8  cm     Overall:  28.8  x  20  cm   recto,  Alden  Scott  Boyer's  hand  (pencil):  Excessively   rare  and  valuable  /   Original  -  Fizeau  -  Daguerreotype  -  Engraving  /  One  of   Two  [underlined]      verso  (pencil):  Distributed  by  Fizeau  at  the  close  of  his   meeting  at  Academy  of  Science,  1844.  See  A.  Marshall,   Complete  Photog.,  p.  1783  /  [13341]  [crossed  out]      verso  (pencil):  Acc.  No.  13341      verso  (pencil):  2  [encircled]   Image  was  made  using  a  process  invented  by  Hippolyte   Fizeau  in  which  the  original  daguerreoptype  was  made   into  an  intaglio  printing  plate  through  the  use  of  acid  to   etch  the  image.  

55  

Credit  Line:     

Gift  of  Alden  Scott  Boyer  

1981:1908:0001  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Attributes:   Credit  Line:      Photography   Royal  Palace  at  Dresden,  Stairway  (Exterior)   Photograph   F.A.  Oppenheim   ca.  1853   albumen  print   Source:  GEH_REG   Gift  of  Eastman  Kodak  Company,  ex-collection  Gabriel   Cromer  

1981:2347:0001  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Photography   House  on  a  rocky  hillside   Photograph   William  Kuehn   ca.  1880   calotype  print   light  image  of  a  house  with  a  polygonal  shaped   structure  attached  to  the  rest  of  the  building.  Image  is   printed  on  artist's  own  stationery.  Accompanied  by  two   blank  receipt  papers  with  artist  logo  and  a  paper  with   ornate  artist  letterhead.   Generic  Subject:  building  facadesarchitecture   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  12.7  x  17.8  cm   Overall:  13.5  x  18.7  cm   verso  (printed  in  black):[partially  cut  off  at  top]  William   Kuehn,  Dr.  ARTIST  IN  Tranferable  Oil  Pictures  Prcoess   Pictures  and  Process  Lettering  N.E.  Cor.  Warner  &   Wheeler  Sts.  

Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):  

  

1981:2491:0004  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Photography   Unidentified  woman  with  green  dress   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1855   collodion  on  varnished  daguerreotype  plate   56  

Description:  

Attributes:         Dimensions:   Inscription(s):      Notes:        

Collodion  printed  on  varnished  daguerreotype  plate   with  overpainted  color  of  woman  wearing  a  large  green   dress  with  a  long  gold  chain  reaching  down  from  her   collar.  A  ring  on  a  her  right  hand  is  clearly  visible.   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Technique:  overpainting   Image:  11  x  8  cm   [no  inscription]   This  image  was  formerly  classified  as  a  tintype.  Mark   Osterman  and  Grant  Romer  have  determined  that  it  is  a   daguerreotype,  heavily  overpainted.      Further  consideration  and  microscope  views  of  this   object  have  lead  to  the  reclassification  of  this  object  to   be  a  collodion  on  varnished  recycled  daguerreotype   plate.  [TLutek  07/2010]  

1981:2713:0009  
   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Book:  

Photography   France  /  Hotel-de-Ville  de  Paris   Excursions  daguerriennes:  Vues  et  monuments  le  plus   remarquables  du  globe  (plate  79)   Classification:   Print   Original  photographer:   Noël-Marie-Paymal  Lerebours,  1807  -  1873   Place  of  Death:   Neuilly,  France   Place  of  Birth:   Neuilly,  France   Associated:   Hippolyte  Fizeau,  1819-1896   Place  of  Death:   Venteuil,  France   Place  of  Birth:   Paris,  France   Printer:   Tarlé   Publisher:   Goupil  &  Vibert   Publisher:   Hector  Bossange   Date  Label:   1840-1844   National  Origin:   France   Geo  Place:   Paris,  France   Medium:   Fizeau  process  engraving  with  applied  color  from  a   daguerreotype   Description:   Loose  plate  79  (hand  colored)  from  "Excursions   daguerriennes:  Vues  et  monuments  le  plus   remarquables  du  globe"  Engraving  with  applied  color   made  from  a  daguerreotype  using  the  Fizeau  process.   Attributes:   Functional  Type:  published  topographic      Generic  Subject:  bridgearchitecture  

57  

                  Dimensions:      Inscription(s):                  Related  Works:   Notes:  

Generic  Subject:  riverlandscape   Object  Process:  engraving   Proper  Subject:  Hotel  de  Ville  de  Parishotel  /   architecture   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Technique:  applied  color   Image:  13.7  x  19.1  cm     Overall:  25.6  x  37  cm   recto-(printed)  "France"  "Hotel-De-Ville  De  Paris"   "Daguerreotype   Lerebours"  "Imp.  par  Tarlé"  "Grave  par  le  procede   Fizeau."  "Publie   par  N.P.  Lerebours,  Place  du  Pont-Neuf,  13."  "Hr.   Bossange,  Quai   Voltaire,  11."  "Goupil  &  Vibert,  Boulevd.  Montmartre,   15."   (in  pencil,  Cromer  inscription):  rarissime  epreuve   colour  d'époque,  sur  procédé  Fizeau  rétouché   from:  "Excursions  Daguerriennes"   one  of  several  reproductions  made  for  the  1840-1844   series  "Excursions  daguerriennes:  Vues  et  monuments   les  plus  remarquables  du  globe"  using  a  process   invented  by  Hippolyte  Fizeau  in  which  the  original   daguerreoptype  was  made  into  an  intaglio  printing   plate  through  the  use  of  acid  to  etch  the  image.      Until  Fizeau  discovered  a  method  of  chemically  etching   the  daguerreotype  plate  itself,  any  reproduction  of  the   daguerreian  image  was  a  product  of  manual  translation   of  the  photograph  to  a  copper  plate  that  could  hold   printing  ink.      Catalogued  10/88,  DZ.   Updated  3/10  JRS   Gift  of  Eastman  Kodak  Company;  ex-collection  Gabriel   Cromer  

     

         Credit  Line:     

1981:2713:0010  
   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Book:   Photography   France  /  Hotel-de-Ville  de  Paris   Excursions  daguerriennes:  Vues  et  monuments  les  plus   remarquables  du  globe  (plate  79)  

58  

Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Associated:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Printer:   Publisher:   Publisher:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):                              Notes:  

Print   Noël-Marie-Paymal  Lerebours,  1807  -  1873   Neuilly,  France   Neuilly,  France   Hippolyte  Fizeau,  1819-1896   Venteuil,  France   Paris,  France   Tarlé   Goupil  &  Vibert   Hector  Bossange   1840-1844   Fizeau  process  engraving  from  a  daguerreotype   Loose  plate  79  from  "Excursions  daguerriennes:  Vues  et   monuments  le  plus  remarquables  du  globe"  Engraving   made  from  a  daguerreotype  using  the  Fizeau  process.   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  13.5  x  19.2  cm     Overall:  26  x  33.6  cm   recto,  Cromer's  hand  (pencil):  gravé  par  le  procedé   Fizeau........partie  de  Excursions  daguerriennes        recto  (pencil):  IV      IX    1      recto-(printed)  France  /  Hotel-De-Ville  De  Paris  /   Daguerreotype   Lerebours  /  Imp.  par  Tarlé  /    Gravé  par  le  procede   Fizeau.  /    Publie   par  N.P.  Lerebours,  Place  du  Pont-Neuf,  13.  /    Hr.   Bossange,  Quai   Voltaire,  11./    Goupil  &  Vibert,  Boulevd.  Montmartre,   15./        one  of  several  reproductions  made  for  the  1840-1844   series  "Excursions  daguerriennes:  Vues  et  monuments   les  plus  remarquables  du  globe"  using  a  process   invented  by  Hippolyte  Fizeau  in  which  the  original   daguerreoptype  was  made  into  an  intaglio  printing   plate  through  the  use  of  acid  to  etch  the  image.      Until  Fizeau  discovered  a  method  of  chemically  etching   the  daguerreotype  plate  itself,  any  reproduction  of  the   daguerreian  image  was  a  product  of  manual  translation   of  the  photograph  to  a  copper  plate  that  could  hold   printing  ink.   59  

     

   Credit  Line:  

   Gift  of  Eastman  Kodak  Company;  ex-collection  Gabriel   Cromer  

   1982:1421:0001  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:      Description:   Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):               Photography   Unidentified  man  wearing  top  hat   Tintype   Unidentified,  German   1891   Frankfurt,  Germany   tintype   Unidentified  man  in  gold  frame  with  matching  gold  card   advertising  the  photographic  process  and  patent   Object  Process:  tintype   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  7.5  x  6  cm   Mount:  9.4  x  7  cm   recto  (printed  in  grey  on  gold  mount):  PHOTOGRAPHIE   AUOMAT  Internat  Electrotechn  Ausstellung   FRANKFURT  A/M  1891.      verso  (printed  in  black  on  mount):  AUGUSTA   VISTORIA/  INTERN  ELCTROTECN  ISCHE   AUSSTELLUNG  ZU  FRANKFURT  A/M  1891      recto  (printed  on  accompanying  advertisment  card):   GOLDENE  MEDAILLE  PHOTOGRAPHIE  AUTOMAT   RADERS  PATENT  D.R.P  51081  In  allen  Lundern   patentirt.  ZUe  Weinnweung  Internat.  Elctrotechnishe   Ausstellung  1891  FRANKFURT  A/M  1891  

      1982:1517:0014  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:  

Photography   Unidentified  young  man   Tintype   Unidentified   ca.  1880   tintype   60  

Description:  

Attributes:         Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

an  unusual  example  of  what  might  be  termed  an  "albino   tintype",  a  technique  described  in  literature  of  the   period  but  apparently  quite  rare.  The  blackened   "japanned"  iron  support  (of  the  typical  tintype)  is   painted  white,  upon  which  a  collodion  negative  is   exposed  and  the  plate  developed  and  toned.   Object  Process:  tintype   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Image:  9.1  x  6.1  cm   [no  inscription]   Gift  of  Alden  Scott  Boyer  

1982:2179:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Photography   View  of  lake  and  drees  from  cliff   Photograph   Vernon  Royle   1916   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   View  of  several  tall  trees  and  cliff  overlooking  lake.  A   silver  chloride  print  made  from  wet  collodion.   Generic  Subject:  lake  frontlandscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.5  x  19.7  cm   verso  (written  in  black  ink):  1866  Wet  collodion,  by   Vernon  Royle.  silver-chlor.  dev  print  1916.  Good   example  of  physical  development-fineness  of  grain!   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

1982:2180:0001  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:   Photography   U.S.  Treasury,  New  York   Photograph   James  S.  McCorkle   1903   New  York,  New  York,  US   platinum  print,  from  pinhole  camera   View  of  the  U.S.  Treasuery  building  made  with  a  pinhole   camera   Generic  Subject:  building  facadesarchitecture  

61  

         Dimensions:   Inscription(s):         Media:   Credit  Line:     

Generic  Subject:  municipal  plazacityscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  14.5  x  19.5  cm   verso  (written  in  black  ink):  Pinhole  negative,  U.S.   Treasury,  New  York  Platinum  print.  James  S.  McCorkle,   1903.      (written  in  pencil):  yellowing  of  whites  due  to  imperfet   elimination  of  ion  salts/2N   198221800001.0001   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

1983:0365:0001  
   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Photography   The  London  Gaiety  Co.  in  "Faust  up  to  date."  as   Photoraphed  by  Flash-light   Classification:   Photograph   Original  photographer:   Rothengatter  &  Dillon   Date  Label:   January  25,  1890   Geo  Place:   Nixon  &  Zimmerman's  Broad  St.  Theater,  Philadelphia,   PA,  US   Medium:   albumen  print   Description:   Group  photograph  created  by  flashlight  of  the  London   Gaiety  Co.'s  cast  of  "Fasut  up  to  date"  on  stage,  and  in   costume.   Attributes:   Generic  Subject:  actorspeople      Generic  Subject:  theatricalgenre      Source:  GEH_REG      Technique:  flash  illuminated      Dimensions:   Image:  15  x  20.5  cm        Mount:  25.2  x  30.5  cm   Inscription(s):   recto  (printed  on  mount):  Rothengatter  &  Dillion,   Photos./  912  Arch  St,  Phil'a./  The  London  Gaiety  Co.  in   "Faust  up  to  date."  as  Photographed  by  Flash-light/At   Nixon  &  Zimmerman's  Broad  Street  Theater.  Saturday   Evening,  January  25th,  1890.   Media:   198303650001.0001   Credit  Line:   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

     

62  

1983:0408:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):        

Photography   Collodio-chloride  emulsion  experiment   Photograph   G.  Wharton  Simpson,  1824  -  1880   1864   collodion  silver  print   circular  image  of  a  woman  with  ringlets  in  her  hair  with   notes  written  in  pencil  beneath  the  image   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  10  x  5.5  cm   Overall:  35.5  x  28  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil  on  image):  collodio-chloride   with  [illegible  writing]  was  a  poor  one  given  [illegible   writing]  prints      (written  in  black  ink  on  paper  separate  from  image):   German  c.d.c.  collodio  chloride  emulsion  1870  [crossed   out]  An  early  (1864)  experiement  in  collidio-chloride   emulsion  by  G.  Wharton  Simpson,  who  first  introduced   the  process  in  1864-5-  [illegible  writing]   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

Credit  Line:     

1983:0409:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):        

Photography   Experiment  with  eburneum  process   Photograph   J.M.  Burgess   1865   collodion  positive   vignetted  portrait  of  woman  wearing  dress  with  large   collar  and  hairpiece,  an  example  of  Burgess'   experimentation  with  his  own  eburneum  process   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  9.5  x  5.3  cm     Overall:  35.6  x  28  cm   recto  (embossed  on  image):  BURGESS  EBURNEUM   PROCESS      (written  in  black  ink  on  paper):  mutilated  vignetetd  

63  

Credit  Line:     

print  Eburneum  process.  JM  Burgess  1865  Colliodin   positive,  backed  with  mixture  of  gelatine  and  zinc  oxide   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

1983:0411:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Photography   Woman  scolding  cherub   Print   Unidentified   ca.  1876   woodburytype  on  tin  foil   Woman  in  Classical  setting,  taking  a  bow  from  a  cherub,   moving  him  to  tears.  Object  is  described  on  folder  as  a   stannotype.   Generic  Subject:  loveallegory   Generic  Subject:  mythallegory   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  7.4  x  5.3  cm   Mount:  10  x  8.1  cm   [no  inscription]   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

1983:0412:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Attributes:      Dimensions:   Inscription(s):         Credit  Line:   Donor:  

Photography   Woman  in  peasant  dress,  profile   Print   Unidentified   ca.  1875   woodburytype  on  fabric  with  oil  paint   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  8.6  x  6.8  cm   verso  (ink):  An  old  specimen  of  an  attempt  at  photo  in   oil  colors.  [illegible]  was  its  [illegible]      note  with  image  (museum  hand):  "Woodburytype  on   fabric,  oil  colored"  before  1876   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley   3M  Foundation  

64  

  

1983:0414:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Notes:  

Photography   Christian  religious  images:  The  Holy  Family  /  Pietà   Print   Unidentified   1873   collotype  print   Two  small  printed  images  side-by-side  on  one  sheet,   probably  collotype  copies  of  an  earlier  copper   engraving.   Source:  GEH_REG   Each  Image:  3.2  x  2.2  cm     Overall:  6.2  x  4.6  cm   recto  (ink):  Alberts  process  /  1873   Albertype  Company,  owned  by  Herman  L.  Wittemann,   published  souvenir  books,  pamphlets,  and  postcards   from  1890  to  1952,  using  a  process  invented  by   Austrian  photographer  Joseph  Albert  (1825-1886).  The   process  using  a  collotype  coating  on  glass  plates   permitted  high  speed  mass  production  of  photographs   for  the  first  time.  Albertype  photos  also  have  an   advantage  that  although  the  paper  may  yellow,  the  inks,   unlike  normal  photographs,  do  not  fade.  The  company   would  have  photographs  taken  by  its  own  agents  and   would  also  arrange  to  utilize  photographs  taken  by   others.           Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

         Credit  Line:     

1983:0955:0001  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Photography   Photo  of  unidentified  woman  on  page  with  floral   cutouts   Classification:   Photograph   Original  photographer:   B.J.  Falk,  American,  1853  -  1925   Place  of  Death:   New  York,  NY,  US   Date  Label:   ca.  1900   Medium:   gelatin  silver  print,  on  decorative  mount  

65  

Description:  

Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Photograph  of  woman  wearing  ornate  cape  with   flowers  pasted  onto  mat  board  with  flowers  and   decorative  designs  cut  out.  With  original  envelope  with   photographer's  logo  in  blue   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  carved   Technique:  collage   Image:  14.4  x  9.7  cm   Overall:  29.7  x  21  cm   (printed  in  blue  on  envelope):  Falk/  WALDORF- ASTORIA/  NEW  YORK  

1983:1125:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Photography   Unidentified  male  with  head  covering  and  mustache   Photograph-Commercial  Card  Mounted   J.  George  Nussbaumer,  1866-1948   Buffalo,  NY,  US   Westfield,  NY,  US   ca.  1900   platinotype  print   studio  portrait  of  a  man  with  a  large  mustache,  wearing   a  keffiyeh  with  textured  bands   Generic  Subject:  headdressdress   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  13.7  x  9.5  cm     Mount:  24.1  x  15.1  cm   recto  (printed  in  brown  on  mount):  NEGATIVE  BY   NUSSBAUMER,  BUFFALO  PRINTED  ON  THE  AMERICAN   ARISTOTYPE  CO'S  AROSTO-PLATINO.  STUDIO  WORK.  

1983:1187:0001  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:  

Photography   Steamer  Purtian   Photograph   J.J.  Higgins   August  7,  1889   gelatin  silver  print   A  view  of  the  Puritan  ship  from  Boston  sailing  in  the   water.   Generic  Subject:  shipsseascape  

66  

         Dimensions:   Inscription(s):  

Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  16.1  x  21.6  cm   recto  (printed  in  black  on  white  paper,adhered  to  grey   card):  STEAM  PURITAN  Aug.  7th  1889,  passing   Blackwell's  island  E.  50th  St.  6:15  P.M.  (Mr.s  President   Harrison,  en  route)  Lens  R.R.  13inc.  Stop  F/13  Plate   Seed  26,  WHITE  LIGHT  DEVELOPMENT,  J.J.  Higgins   M.D./  INSTATNEOUS  From  GELATINE-NEGATIVE  J.J.   Higgins  M.D.  

  

1983:1325:0001  
   Department:   Series:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:               Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):         Photography   Scow  on  White  Horse  Rapids   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   White  Horse  Rapids,  Yukon  River,  Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   Group  of  men  riding  on  a  scow  through  turbulent   waters  with  trees  in  the  distance.         Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Generic  Subject:  rafttransportation   Generic  Subject:  riverswaterscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   recto  (written  in  blue  ink):  scow  on  White  Horse  Rapids   (stamped  in  black):  282  

1983:1325:0002  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Photography   Two  scows  on  the  Yukon  River   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950  

67  

Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:         Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Yukon  River,  Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   Two  groups  of  men  riding  on  scows  on  a  river.      Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Generic  Subject:  rafttransportation   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription]  

1983:1325:0003  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:         Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):        

Photography   Unidentified  man  on  raft  in  the  Yukon   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Yukon  River,  Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   Two  men  rowing  on  a  large  raft  with  a  smaller  rowboat   floating  beside  them      Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Generic  Subject:  rafttransportation   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription  on  verso]  

1983:1325:0004  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geography:  

Photography   Unidentified  men  carrying  bundles  in  the  Yukon   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Yukon,  Canada  

68  

Medium:   Description:         Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

gelatin  silver  print   Two  men  carrying  large  bundles  on  their  shoulders  in   the  middle  of  a  snowy  field.  A  boat  is  slightly  visible  in   the  distance.      Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Generic  Subject:  snow  fieldlandscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription  on  verso]  

1983:1325:0005  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Maker:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:         Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Photography   Group  of  unidentified  men  on  scow  rowing  through  the   Yukon   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   gelatin  silver  print   Group  of  men  riding  a  scow  loaded  with  bundled  goods.      Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Generic  Subject:  rafttransportation   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription]  

1983:1325:0006  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:  

Photography   Unidentified  man  riding  dog  sled  in  the  Yukon   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print  

69  

Description:         Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Man  riding  on  a  five  dog  pulled  sled  with  snow  and  bare   trees  in  the  background      Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Generic  Subject:  dog  sledtransportation   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription  on  verso]  

1983:1325:0007  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:      Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Photography   Two  dogsled  teams  riding  in  the  Yukon   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   Four  unidentified  men  walking  bedside  two  teams  of   dogsleds  in  the  Yukon   Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Generic  Subject:  dog  sledtransportation   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription]  

1983:1325:0008  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Photography   Unidentified  man  on  dog  sled,  outside  log  cabin  in  the   Yukon   Classification:   Photograph   Original  photographer:   Charles  G.  Milne   Date  Label:   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Geo  Place:   Yukon,  Canada   Medium:   gelatin  silver  print   Description:   A  man  wearing  a  hat  about  to  ride  a  dog  sled  outside  a  

70  

         Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

cabin  in  the  Yukon.  There  is  a  second  man  in  the   distance  and  laundry  hanging  outside  the  cabin.   Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.      Generic  Subject:  dog  sledtransportation   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription]  

1983:1325:0009  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:            Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Photography   Man  and  his  Outfit  at  Atlin,  British  Columbia   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Atlin,  British  Columbia,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   A  man  standing  next  to  a  donkey  loaded  with  supplies,   outside  a  row  of  tents.     Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.      Generic  Subject:  minerportrait   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   recto  (written  in  pencil):  Miner  and  his  outfit  at  Atlin   British  Columbia,  ca.  1898  Probably  Col.  Charles  Milne  

1983:1325:0010  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Photography   Unidentified  men  outside  Parsons  Produce  Co.   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950  

71  

Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:  

Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   Four  unidentified  men  with  dogs  standing  outside  a   small  shop  with  a  banner  reading  "Parsons  Produce  Co."   Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Generic  Subject:  minerpeople   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription  on  verso]  

1983:1325:0011  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:        

      Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Photography   Group  of  unidentified  men  on  a  boat   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   Group  of  eleven  men  seated  on  a  boat.      "Group  of  Sourdoughs  [term  for  experienced  miners]   leaving  for  the  ouside  on  last  boat-1898.  Alex  McDonald   (Klondike  Kid),  Jack  Dallen  of  Dallon  trail,  Dick  Lane   who  staked  a  quarter  of  a  claim,  Ronald  Morrison,   Charles  Milne  in  back  row,  Mr.  Munsey  of  Seattle."-  Mrs.   Charles  Milne      Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription  verso]  

1983:1325:0012  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Photography   Two  unidentified  women  outside  gold  claim  

72  

Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geography:   Medium:   Description:  

Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   Two  women  and  a  dog  standing  outside  a  gold  claim.   Possibly  the  Liffin  Claim.  Images  were  made  with  a   Kodak  portable  stand  camera,  bellows  type.  Col.  Charles   Milne  purchased  the  camera  on  the  eve  of  his  departure   for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription  verso]  

1983:1325:0013  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:      Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Photography   Totem  Pole  outside  house   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   View  of  a  totem  pole  in  the  lawn  of  a  house.   Images  were  made  with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,   bellows  type.  Col.  Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera   on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription  verso]  

1983:1325:0014  
   Department:   Compilation:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geography:   Medium:   Description:   Photography   View  of  the  Yukon  River   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1900,  printed  ca.  1950   Yukon  River,  Yukon,  Canada   gelatin  silver  print   View  of  a  river  through  large  sticks.  Images  were  made  

73  

Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

with  a  Kodak  portable  stand  camera,  bellows  type.  Col.   Charles  Milne  purchased  the  camera  on  the  eve  of  his   departure  for  Dawson  City  in  1998.   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  9  cm     Mount:  14  x  9.8  cm   [no  inscription  verso]  

1983:1325:0015  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):        

Photography   Nevada  Falls   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1915,  printed  ca.  1950   Nevada  Falls,  Yosemite  National  Park,  California,  US   gelatin  silver  print   View  of  Nevada  Falls  from  a  distance   Generic  Subject:  Nevada  Fallswaterfalls  /  landscape   Generic  Subject:  Yosemite  National  Parkparks  /   landscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  8.8  cm   Mount:  12  x  9.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  Nevada  Falls  Thirty  Points   (stamped  in  black):  20  

1983:1325:0016  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:  

Photography   Glacier  Point   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1915   Glacier  Point,  Yosemite  National  Park,  CA,  US   gelatin  silver  print   View  of  a  mountain  from  a  distance  with  a  single  tree   present  in  the  foreground   Generic  Subject:  Yosemite  National  Parkparks  /   landscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  8.8  cm  

74  

   Inscription(s):        

Mount:  12  x  9.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  From  Glacier  Point  

1983:1325:0017  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Photography   River  with  mountain  in  the  distance   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1915   Yosemite  National  Park,  CA,  US   gelatin  silver  print   View  of  river  and  trees  in  front  of  mountain   Generic  Subject:  river  banklandscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  8.8  cm   Mount:  12  x  9.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  The  Do[illegible  writing]  River   in  foreground  

1983:1325:0018  
   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Photography   Sentinel  Rock   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1915   Sentinel  Rock,  Yosemite  National  Park,  CA,  US   gelatin  silver  print   View  of  Sentinel  Rock  with  trees  silhouetted  in  the   foreground   Generic  Subject:  Sentinel  Rock  formation  /  landscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  8.8  cm   Mount:  12  x  9.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  Sentinel  Rock  

1983:1325:0019  
   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Photography   Mirror  Lake   Photograph   75  

Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      1983:1325:0020      Department:   Series:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:      Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1915   Mirror  Lake,  Yosemite  National  Park,  CA,  US   gelatin  silver  print   View  of  mountains  and  trees  reflected  in  Mirror  Lake.   Generic  Subject:  Mirror  Lakelake  /  landscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  8.8  cm   Mount:  12  x  9.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  Mirror  Lake  

Photography   Yosemite  Falls   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1915   Yosemite  Falls,  Yosemite  National  Park,  CA,  US   gelatin  silver  print   View  of  Yosemite  falls  with  woman  pulling  child  in  the   distant  foreground   Generic  Subject:  Yosemite  National  Parknational  parks  /   landscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  8.8  cm   Mount:  12  x  9.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  Yosemite  Falls  

1983:1325:0021  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:        

Photography   Bridal  Veil  Falls   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1915   gelatin  silver  print   View  of  large  waterfall  with  trees  in  the  foreground   Generic  Subject:  Bridal  Veil  Fallsfalls  /  landscape   Generic  Subject:  Yosemite  National  Parknational  parks  /   landscape   Source:  GEH_REG  

76  

   Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Image:  11.4  x  8.8  cm   Mount:  12  x  9.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  Bridal  Veil  Falls  

1983:1325:0022  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:      Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      1983:1325:0023      Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      1983:1536:0001      Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:  

Photography   California  Palms   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1915   California,  US   gelatin  silver  print   Woman  sitting  in  rocking  chair  beneath  palm  trees   Generic  Subject:  palm  treelandscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  8.8  cm   Mount:  12  x  9.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  California  Palms  

Photography   Joshua  Trees   Photograph   Charles  G.  Milne   ca.  1915   gelatin  silver  print   Small  child  stranding  beneath  Joshua  trees   Generic  Subject:  treelandscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  11.4  x  8.8  cm   Mount:  12  x  9.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  Joshua  trees-  Cal.  

Photography   View  of  trees  in  yard   Photograph-Cabinet  Card   Addie  Genevieve  Eliot   77  

Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):  

October  21,  1893   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   View  of  cherry  trees  in  a  yard  taken  from  a  window   Generic  Subject:  yardlandscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  16.5  x  11.3  cm   Overall:  17.5  x  12.5  cm   verso  (written  in  black  ink):  Picture  No.  7  7th,  and  last,   view  of  the  trees  with  the  leaves  on.  Taken  from  Ella's   window,  Oct  21,  1893.  Over  exposed  (conditions   agreeing  with  pictures  3)  but  developed  +  finished  at   Blair's  +  so  saved.  The  two  cherry  trees,  are  the  one   furthest  from  the  lane,  +  the  centre  one.  Addie   Genevieve  Eliot  Nov.  18,  1893/  Stanley  plate,  1st  box   (written  in  red  ink)  Choicer  collection,  no.  7  

     

1983:1887:0001  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):                  Notes:   Credit  Line:  

Photography   Dans  La  Serre   Photograph   Goupil  et  Cie,  French,  active  ca.  1850s  -  1890s   ca.  1870   carbon  print   Art  reproduction  showing  two  women  sitting  in  a  green   house  with  a  girl  and  her  sleeping  dog.   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  25.9  x  19.6  cm     Mount:  40.2  x  32.5  cm   recto  (pritned  on  mat):  PEINT  PAR  TONY  FAIVRE  1558   PHOTOGRAPHIE  PAR  GOUPIL  &  Cie/  DANS  LA  SERRE   (Salon  de  1875)/  Galerie  Photographique        PUBLIC  par  GOUPLE  &  [illegible  printin]/  PARIS,   BERLIN,  [illegible  printing]      verso  (in  pencil):  7392/  CARBON  PRINT/  247-  1  of  9   (stamped  in  black):  400524  BRADY-SIPLEY   COLLECTION   Goupil  &  Cie  were  notable  art  reproduction   photographers  in  France,  digital  copies  of  their  ledgers   can  be  found  on  the  Getty  website   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton  

78  

Sipley     

1983:2054:0001  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Photography   Unidentified  men  riding  boat  at  Coney  Island   Photograph   Carl  Dietz   ca.  1900   Coney  Island,  Brooklyn,  NY,  US   gelatin  silver  print   A  large  group  of  men  riding  in  a  small  speed  boat  along   the  water  at  Coney  Island.  The  photograph  was  taken  at   night  and  illuminated  by  flash  and  taken  with  an  early   model  of  a  multispeed  shutter.   Generic  Subject:  boardwalklandscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  flash  illuminated   Overall:  10  x  15  cm   verso  (written  in  black  ink):  This  remarkable  Flashlight   made  at  Coney  Island  at  night  was  given  to  by  the   Inventor  Carl  Dietz   (stamped  in  blue  ink):  MADE  WITH  THE  MULTI  SPEED   SHUTTER  (BETWEEN  LENSES)     (written  in  black  ink):  [written  in  different  handwriting]   and  flashlight  attachment   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

Attributes:            Dimensions:   Inscription(s):         Credit  Line:     

1983:2166:0001  
   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Photography   Sample  Photograph  made  with  Premo  B.   Street  scene  with  streetcar   Sample   Rochester  Optical  Co.   ca.  1887   Rochester,  NY,  US   albumen  print   View  looking  down  a  city  street  with  a  street  car  in  the   center.  A  horse  drawn  carriage  is  to  the  right,  and  a   group  of  women  walking  is  to  the  left.  An  example  of  a   sample  from  the  Rochester  Optical  Co.   Generic  Subject:  streetscenecityscape  

Attributes:  

79  

      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  9.7  x  12  cm   Overall:  10.1  x  13.1  cm   recto  (printed  in  brown):  SAMPLE  PHOTOGRAPH  MADE   WITH  PREMO  B.  MANUFACTURED  BY  ROCHESTER   OPTICAL  COMPANY  ROCHESTER,  N.Y.  

1983:2166:0002  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

Photography   Sample  Photograph  made  with  Long  Focus  Premo   View  of  house  facade  from  the  street   Sample   Rochester  Optical  Co.   ca.  1887   Rochester,  NY,  US   albumen  print   View  of  a  large  home  on  a  residential  street.  An  example   of  a  sample  from  the  Rochester  Optical  Co.   Generic  Subject:  homesarchitecture   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  9.7  x  12  cm   Overall:  10.1  x  13.1  cm   recto  (printed  in  brown):  SAMPLE  PHOTOGRAPH  MADE   WITH  LONG  FOCUS  PREMO  MANUFACTURED  BY   ROCHESTER  OPTICAL  COMPANY  ROCHESTER,  N.Y.  

1983:2167:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Associated:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:  

Photography   Specimen  Prints  on  "Aristo  "  paper   Photograph   Baker's  Art  Gallery   American  Aristotype  Co.,  American,  1889  -  1909   ca.  1900   Jamestown,  NY,  US   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Woman  wearing  dress  adorned  with  flowers  holding  a   fan  made  of  feathers  and  gazing  at  a  flower  she  holds  in   her  hand   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  14  x  9.6  cm  (5  1/2  x  3  3/4  in.)  

80  

   Inscription(s):                 

Notes:        

Mount:  16.4  x  10.7  cm  (6  7/16  x  4  3/16  in.)   verso  (printed  in  black  on  monut):  BAKER'S  ART   GALLERY.  COLUMBUS,  O./  MANUFACTURED  ONLY  BY   AMERICAN  ARISTOTYPE  Co.,  JAMESTOWN,  N.Y.      (printed  in  silver  on  mount):  SPECIMEN  PRINT  ON   "ARISTO-PLATINO"         recto  (printed  in  black):  BETTER  Than  Carbon!  EASIER   to  handle  than  Albumen  is  ARISTO-PLATINO./  IT  IS   ENTIRELY  UNLIKE  ANYTHING  HERETOFORE   PRODUCED  IN  THE  PAPER  LINE.  A  PRINTING-OUT   PAPER,  EASIER  TO  HANDLE  THAN  ALBUMEN  PAPER,   ANY  TONE  FROM  SEPIA  TO  A  DEAD  BLACK  MAY  BE   PRODUCED.  AT  THE  ST.  LOUIS  CONVENTION  ALL  THE   PRINCIPAL  AWARDS  WENT  TO  ARISTO-PLATINO.  THE   CRAMER  CUP,  AND  GOLD  MEDALS  IN  CLASSES  A  AND  C   AWARDED  TO  PIRIE  MACDONALD;  THE  DIAMOND   BADGE,  FOR  THE  GRAND  PRIZE,  AWARDED  TO   S.K.STEIN;  SILVER  CUP  FOR  TH  SPECIAL  PRIZE,   AWARDED  TO  FRANK  A.  PLACE;  ALL  FOR  PRINTS  ON/   ARISTO-PLATINO/  PRICE:  SAME  AS  AMERICAN   "ARISTO"-CABINETS  $2.00  PER  GROSS,  OTHER  SIZES  IN   PROPORTION/MANUCATURED  BY  AMERICAN   ARISTOTYPE  CO.  JAMESTOWN,  N.Y.   #1983:2167:1  was  returned  for  Conservation  Dept.   6/06   JRS  

1983:2167:0002  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Associated:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:  

Photography   Specimen  Prints  on  "Aristo  "  paper   Photograph   Baker's  Art  Gallery   American  Aristotype  Co.,  American,  1889  -  1909   ca.  1900   Jamestown,  NY,  US   gelatin  silver  print  (POP)   Woman  in  lavish  dress  with  feather  boa  leaning  back   into  an  ornate  chair  with  her  feet  up  on  a  low  ottoman   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  14  x  9.6  cm  (5  1/2  x  3  3/4  in.)  

81  

   Inscription(s):                 

Notes:      Credit  Line:              

Mount:  16.4  x  10.7  cm  (6  7/16  x  4  3/16  in.)   verso  (printed  in  black  on  monut):  BAKER'S  ART   GALLERY.  COLUMBUS,  O./  MANUFACTURED  ONLY  BY   AMERICAN  ARISTOTYPE  Co.,  JAMESTOWN,  N.Y.      (printed  in  silver  on  mount):  SPECIMEN  PRINT  ON   "ARISTO-PLATINO"         recto  (printed  in  black):  BETTER  Than  Carbon!  EASIER   to  handle  than  Albumen  is  ARISTO-PLATINO./  IT  IS   ENTIRELY  UNLIKE  ANYTHING  HERETOFORE   PRODUCED  IN  THE  PAPER  LINE.  A  PRINTING-OUT   PAPER,  EASIER  TO  HANDLE  THAN  ALBUMEN  PAPER,   ANY  TONE  FROM  SEPIA  TO  A  DEAD  BLACK  MAY  BE   PRODUCED.  AT  THE  ST.  LOUIS  CONVENTION  ALL  THE   PRINCIPAL  AWARDS  WENT  TO  ARISTO-PLATINO.  THE   CRAMER  CUP,  AND  GOLD  MEDALS  IN  CLASSES  A  AND  C   AWARDED  TO  PIRIE  MACDONALD;  THE  DIAMOND   BADGE,  FOR  THE  GRAND  PRIZE,  AWARDED  TO   S.K.STEIN;  SILVER  CUP  FOR  TH  SPECIAL  PRIZE,   AWARDED  TO  FRANK  A.  PLACE;  ALL  FOR  PRINTS  ON/   ARISTO-PLATINO/  PRICE:  SAME  AS  AMERICAN   "ARISTO"-CABINETS  $2.00  PER  GROSS,  OTHER  SIZES  IN   PROPORTION/MANUCATURED  BY  AMERICAN   ARISTOTYPE  CO.  JAMESTOWN,  N.Y.   #1983:2167:1  was  returned  for  Conservation  Dept.   6/06   JRS   Gift  of  Dr.  Henry  Ott  

1983:2168:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:  

Photography   Unidentified  woman  in  front  of  floral  background   Print   Artograph  Screen  Co.   ca.  1920   halftone,  photoengraving  print   Woman  facing  her  left,  seated  in  front  of  floral   wallpaper  with  boatneck  top   Source:  GEH_REG  

82  

      Dimensions:   Inscription(s):        

Technique:  halftone   Image:  10  x  7.5  cm   recto  (stamped  in  purple  ink):  ARTOGRAPH  SCREEN  Co.   500  FIFTH  AVENUE  NEW  YORK   verso  (stamped  in  purple  ink):  ARTOGRAPH  SCREEN   Co.  500  FIFTH  AVENUE  NEW  YORK  

1983:2320:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:        

Photography   Bowl  of  tomatoes   Photograph   Witanowski   ca.  1985   color  print,  from  pinhole  camera   Tomatoes  in  a  white  bowl  in  front  of  a  wooden  fence,   made  with  a  pinhole  camera   Generic  Subject:  tomatoesstill  life   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  12.7  x  10.8  cm     Overall:  14  x  11  cm  

1984:0866:0006  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Title  on  Object:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Subject  of  photograph:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:                 

Photography   Edwin  D.  Warner   Ping  Pong  Photos   Horizontal  series  of  five  variant  portraits  of  a  man   Photograph   Lynch,  American,  active  1890s   Edwin  D.  Warner   ca.  1895   United  States   gelatin  silver  print,  Ping  Pong  Photos   Five  variant  images  of  man  on  one  strip  of  paper   accompanied  by  an  envelope  with  advertising  and   studio  information.   Functional  Type:  commercial  portraiture   Generic  Subject:  identportrait   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Proper  Subject:  Warner,  Edwin  D.ident  /  portrait   Proprietary  or  Trade  Name:  "Ping  Pong  Photos"   Source:  GEH_PHOTO  

83  

         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Notes:        

Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  photomontage   Each  Image:  3.3  x  2.8  cm   Overall:  3.3  x  13.9  cm   verso  (stamped  in  black):  Lynch  Photographer,  57  No.   Pearl  St.,  ALBANY,  N.  Y.  [five  times]   5  poses  on  1  strip  in  small  descriptive  (process)   envelope.   Man  in  photo  is  father  of  Marion  Warner.  [Cataloged   11/84,  DZ.]  

1987:0871:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):        

Photography   Two  unidentified  woman  talking  on  house  walkway   Print   Unidentified   1965   color  print,  Kodak  polytrans   View  of  two  women,  wearing  colorful  dresses  talking   while  standing  on  the  walkway  outside  a  house.   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  10.3  x  13.5  cm   Overall:  11.5  x  14.6  cm   [no  inscription]  

1987:0871:0002  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Photography   Three  unidentified  men  watching  fire   Print   Unidentified   1965   color  print,  Kodak  polytrans   Group  of  three  men  standing  between  two  trees   watching  a  fire  closeby.   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  10.1  x  12.6  cm   Overall:  11.5  x  13.3  cm   [no  inscription]  

84  

1987:0871:0003  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Photography   Unidentified  man  and  woman  holding  hands,  standing   under  a  tree   Classification:   Print   Original  photographer:   Unidentified   Date  Label:   1965   Medium:   color  print,  Kodak  polytrans   Description:   A  woman  wearing  a  purple  and  white  striped  shirt  with   purple  shorts  holds  hands  with  a  man  wearing  a  red   shirt  and  jeans.  They  are  standing  under  a  tree  in  a  park.      Attributes:   Generic  Subject:  couplepeople      Source:  GEH_REG      Dimensions:   Image:  13.7  x  13.9  cm      Overall:  51.1  x  15  cm   Inscription(s):   [no  inscription]      1987:0871:0004      Department:   Photography   Descriptive  Title:   Unidentified  couple  leaning  on  car   Classification:   Print   Original  photographer:   Unidentified   Date  Label:   1965   Medium:   color  print,  Kodak  polytrans   Description:   Woman  in  yellow  dress  and  man  in  white  shirt  and   jeans  leaning  on  a  blue  car  on  a  mountaintop      Attributes:   Generic  Subject:  coast  lineslandscape      Generic  Subject:  coupleportrait      Source:  GEH_REG      Dimensions:   Image:  13.7  x  13.9  cm      Overall:  15.1  x  15  cm   Inscription(s):   [no  inscription]      1987:0871:0005      Department:   Photography   Descriptive  Title:   Woman  standing  amongst  flowering  tree   Classification:   Print   Original  photographer:   Unidentified   85  

Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:      Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):     

1965   color  print,  Kodak  polytrans   Woman  with  yellow  plaid  dress  and  large  white   earrings  standing  amongst  flower  blossoms   Generic  Subject:  young  womanportrait   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  13.7  x  13.9  cm     Overall:  15.1  x  15  cm   recto  (written  in  blue  ink):  litho  printing  =  research  lab.  

1987:0871:0006  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Photography   Woman  feeling  sailor's  muscles   Print   Unidentified   1965   color  print,  Kodak  polytrans   Woman  wearing  yellow  costume  feeling  the  muscle  of  a   man  wearing  a  red  and  white  striped  suit  and  salior  hat   Generic  Subject:  couplepeople   Generic  Subject:  sailorportrait   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  13.7  x  13.9  cm   Overall:  15.1  x  51  cm   [no  inscription]  

1987:0871:0007  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:   Photography   Front  view  of  a  blue  house   Print   Unidentified   1965   Rochester,  Monroe,  NY,  US   color  print,  Kodak  polytrans   View  of  the  front  steps  and  facade  of  a  blue  house  in   Rochester,  NY   Generic  Subject:  houselandscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  17.5  x  13.5  cm    

86  

   Inscription(s):     

Other:  19  x  15  cm   [no  inscription]  

1987:0871:0008  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):  

Photography   Colorful  boats  docked  outside  Italian  restaurant   Print   Unidentified   1965   Italy   color  print,  Kodak  polytrans   Green,  red,  white,  and  yellow  boats  docked  outside  an   Italian  restaurant  along  the  coast   Generic  Subject:  boatsseascape   Generic  Subject:  coastseascape   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  23.5  x  18.4  cm   Overall:  25.4  x  20.1  cm   [no  inscription]  

   1987:0871:0009  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Photography   Plate  of  food  with  daffodils  and  coffee   Photograph   Unidentified   November  20,  1968   color  print,  Kodak  polymer   Still  life  of  plate  with  oranges,  grapes,  cherries,  jello,  and   whipped  cream  in  front  of  bread  basket,  daffodils,  and   cup  of  coffee  made  on  a  Kodak  Polymer  Proof  Sheet,   earlier  photek.   Generic  Subject:  fruitfood  /  still  life   Source:  GEH_REG   Image:  19.5  x  25  cm   Overall:  22  x  27.4  cm   verso  (written  in  blue  ink):  November  20,  1968  Jodak   polymer  proofing  (earlier,  photek)  Heated  (225  F  +/-   51)  Vandercook  plate  cross  link  transferred  polymer  by   xenon  [illegible  word]  5  mins  to  prepare  4  [illegible   word]  from  4  screen  pros  5  mins  to  transfer  on  [illegible   word]   87  

Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):  

1988:0630:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Attributes:                        Dimensions:   Notes:        

Photography   River  scene  with  horses   Photograph   J.  Benton  Curtis   ca.  1905   United  States   toned  gelatin  silver  print   Functional  Type:  creative  expression   Functional  Type:  personal  record   Generic  Subject:  horse  drawntransportation   Generic  Subject:  riverlandscape   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Technique:  toned,  sepia   43.3  x  25.5  cm.   Catalogued  8/88,  DZ.   Print  was  made  from  Mr.  Benton's  negative  by  Eastman   Kodak  Company.  

1988:0630:0002  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   National  Origin:   Medium:   Attributes:                        Dimensions:   Notes:            Photography   Fishing  scene   Photograph   J.  Benton  Curtis   ca.  1905   United  States   toned  gelatin  silver  print   Functional  Type:  creative  expression   Functional  Type:  personal  record   Generic  Subject:  fishingpeople   Generic  Subject:  pondlandscape   Object  Process:  gelatin  silver  print   Source:  GEH_PHOTO   Technique:  toned,  sepia   25.5  x  43.5  cm.   Catalogued  8/88,  DZ.   Print  was  made  from  Mr.  Benton's  negative  by  Eastman   Kodak  Company.  

88  

1995:0108:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:         Attributes:         Dimensions:      Notes:  

Photography   Close  up  of  tropical  flowers   Print   Unidentified   1943   photoengraving  print   "WESCAETTES",  [1943]      Close  up  of  yellow,  white,  red,  and  purple  flowers   mounted  in  a  cardboard  frame  with  attached  stand   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  halftone   Image:  8.5  x  5.7  cm  (3  3/8  x  2  1/4  in.)   Mount:  13.9  x  9.1  cm  (5  1/2  x  3  9/16  in.)   It  can  be  assumed  that  all  images  have  the  logo  "Let's  Go   USA!  Keep  em  flying!"  printed  on  the  verso.  This  was  the   slogan  of  the  US  air  corps  during  WWII  in  order  to   inspire  people  to  enlist.  It  is  possible  that  these   commercially  produced  cards  were  sold  with  the   intention  to  donate  a  portion  of  the  proceeds  to  the  air   corps.  

  

1995:0108:0002  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:      Attributes:            Dimensions:      Notes:   Photography   Bridalveil  Falls  in  Yosemite  National  Park   Print   Unidentified   1943   photoengraving  print   MOUNTED  "WESCAETTES",  [1943]   View  of  Bridalveil  Falls  in  Yosemite  National  Park   mounted  in  a  cardboard  frame  with  attached  stand   Generic  Subject:  Bridal  Veil  Fallswaterfalls  /  landscape   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  halftone   Image:  8.5  x  5.7  cm  (3  3/8  x  2  1/4  in.)   Mount:  13.9  x  9.1  cm  (5  1/2  x  3  9/16  in.)   It  can  be  assumed  that  all  images  have  the  logo  "Let's  Go   USA!  Keep  em  flying!"  printed  on  the  verso.  This  was  the   slogan  of  the  US  air  corps  during  WWII  in  order  to  

89  

  

inspire  people  to  enlist.  It  is  possible  that  these   commercially  produced  cards  were  sold  with  the   intention  to  donate  a  portion  of  the  proceeds  to  the  air   corps.  

1995:0108:0003  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:      Attributes:         Dimensions:      Notes:  

Photography   Unidentitfied  man  sitting  in  front  of  lake   Print   Unidentified   1943   photoengraving  print   "WESCAETTES",  [1943]   Image  of  a  man  wearing  red  shirt  sitting  in  front  of  lake   mounted  in  a  cardboard  frame  with  attached  stand   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  halftone   Image:  8.5  x  5.7  cm  (3  3/8  x  2  1/4  in.)   Mount:  13.9  x  9.1  cm  (5  1/2  x  3  9/16  in.)   It  can  be  assumed  that  all  images  have  the  logo  "Let's  Go   USA!  Keep  em  flying!"  printed  on  the  verso.  This  was  the   slogan  of  the  US  air  corps  during  WWII  in  order  to   inspire  people  to  enlist.  It  is  possible  that  these   commercially  produced  cards  were  sold  with  the   intention  to  donate  a  portion  of  the  proceeds  to  the  air   corps.  

  

1995:0108:0004  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:      Attributes:         Dimensions:  

Photography   View  of  mountain  range   Print   Unidentified   1943   photoengraving  print   "WESCAETTES"   View  of  mountain  top  from  a  distance  with  lake  and  fall   leaves  in  the  foreground  mounted  in  a  cardboard  frame   with  attached  stand   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  halftone   Image:  8.5  x  5.7  cm  (3  3/8  x  2  1/4  in.)  

90  

   Notes:  

Mount:  13.9  x  9.1  cm  (5  1/2  x  3  9/16  in.)   It  can  be  assumed  that  all  images  have  the  logo  "Let's  Go   USA!  Keep  em  flying!"  printed  on  the  verso.  This  was  the   slogan  of  the  US  air  corps  during  WWII  in  order  to   inspire  people  to  enlist.  It  is  possible  that  these   commercially  produced  cards  were  sold  with  the   intention  to  donate  a  portion  of  the  proceeds  to  the  air   corps.  

  

1995:0108:0005  

   Department:   Compilation:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:      Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Notes:  

Photography   View  of  mountain  range  with  sunflowers   Print   Unidentified   1943   photoengraving  print   "WESCAETTES"   View  of  mountain  range  in  the  distance  with  sunflowers   and  a  field  in  the  foreground  mounted  in  a  cardboard   frame  with  attached  stand   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  halftone   Image:  8.5  x  5.7  cm  (3  3/8  x  2  1/4  in.)   Mount:  13.9  x  9.1  cm  (5  1/2  x  3  9/16  in.)   recto:  (circular  stamp  with  blue  ink):  Let's  Go  USA!  Keep   em  flying!   It  can  be  assumed  that  all  images  have  the  logo  "Let's  Go   USA!  Keep  em  flying!"  printed  on  the  verso.  This  was  the   slogan  of  the  US  air  corps  during  WWII  in  order  to   inspire  people  to  enlist.  It  is  possible  that  these   commercially  produced  cards  were  sold  with  the   intention  to  donate  a  portion  of  the  proceeds  to  the  air   corps.   Museum  Collection  

Credit  Line:     

1995:0108:0006  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:  

Photography   Road  through  small  town  with  mountaintop  in  distance   Print   Unidentified   1943   photoengraving  print  

91  

Description:      Attributes:         Dimensions:      Notes:  

"WESCAETTES"   A  view  of  a  small  road  cutting  through  a  town  movnig   toward  a  moutnain  range  in  the  distance.  A  billboard  on   the  side  of  a  building  reads  "trupak"   Source:  GEH_REG   Technique:  halftone   Image:  8.5  x  5.7  cm  (3  3/8  x  2  1/4  in.)   Mount:  13.9  x  9.1  cm  (5  1/2  x  3  9/16  in.)   It  can  be  assumed  that  all  images  have  the  logo  "Let's  Go   USA!  Keep  em  flying!"  printed  on  the  verso.  This  was  the   slogan  of  the  US  air  corps  during  WWII  in  order  to   inspire  people  to  enlist.  It  is  possible  that  these   commercially  produced  cards  were  sold  with  the   intention  to  donate  a  portion  of  the  proceeds  to  the  air   corps.  

  

1998:1555:0001  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Maker:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Photography   Credit  Card  template  for  Commonwealth  Scientific  and   Industrial  Research  Organisation  (CSIRO)  with  diffusion   color  (hologram?)  design.   Transparency-Diffraction   Unidentified   ca.  1996   Holograph  on  plastic  support   SAMPLE  2D  ARRAYS  OF  SMALL  GRATINGS  BACKED  ON   WHITE  CREDIT  CARD   Source:  GEH_REG   Overall:  5.3  x  8.6  cm   verso:  (holographic  stamp  with  printed  text)  CSIRO   AUSTRALIA  

2010:0053:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:  

Photography   Heidelberg  Castle  at  night   Photograph   Karl  Lange   August  4,  1891   Heidelberg  Castle,  Heidelberg,  Germany   collodion  or  gelatin  printing  out  paper  print   Heidelberg  Castle  at  night,  1891,  toned  gelatin  silver   print  

92  

Attributes:         Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Notes:     

Generic  Subject:  Heidelberg  Castlecastle  /  architecture   Technique:  tinted   Image:  9.7  x  15.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  Heidlberg  illuminated  Aug  4,   91  a  notable  example  Boyer   [June  10,  10.  Process  is  undetermined,  may  be  a   collidion  print]  

2010:0054:0001  
      Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Photography   Small  circular  collodion  glass  plate  positives:  barge  on   the  Seine,  Paris   Classification:   Transparency-Black  &  White   Original  photographer:   René  Prudent  Patrice  Dagron,  French,  1819  -  1900   Date  Label:   ca.  1890   Medium:   transparency,  collodion  on  glass   Attributes:   Generic  Subject:  artreproduction      Technique:  photomicrograph      Dimensions:   Overall:  3.2  cm  (diameter)   Inscription(s):   on  original  box,  Cromer's  hand  (ink):  Petite  positifs   [illegible]  par  Dagron  (usage  indeterminé)   Credit  Line:   Gift  of  Eastman  Kodak  Company;  ex-collection  of   Gabriel  Cromer      2010:0054:0001-0006      Department:   Photography   Descriptive  Title:   Small  circular  collodion  glass  plate  positives:  Art   reproductions  and  views  of  Paris   Classification:   Transparency-Black  &  White   Original  photographer:   René  Prudent  Patrice  Dagron,  French,  1819  -  1900   Date  Label:   ca.  1890   Medium:   transparency,  collodion  on  glass   Description:   6  small  circular  discs.  There  are  2  images  of   reproductions  of  classical  paintings,  1  gallery  wall,  1   sculpture  of  a  nude  woman  kneeling,  and  2  of  examples   of  Parisian  architecture.  Also  included  are  6  circles  with   no  printed  image.  Objects  are  held  in  a  small  cardboard   box  with  lid.   Attributes:   Generic  Subject:  artreproduction      Technique:  photomicrograph  

93  

   Dimensions:   Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Overall:  3.2  cm  (diameter)   on  original  box,  Cromer's  hand  (ink):  Petite  positifs   [illegible]  par  Dagron  (usage  indeterminé)   Gift  of  Eastman  Kodak  Company;  ex-collection  of   Gabriel  Cromer  

2010:0055:0001  
Tuesday,  July  13,  2010      Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Death:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:   Inscription(s):         Credit  Line:   Photography   Bridal  Veil  Falls   Photograph   Daniel  H.  Briggs,  1822-1898   Germantown,  PA,  US   Norton,  MA,  US   1875   Bridal  Veil  Falls,  Yosemite,  California,  US   gelatin  silver  contact  print,  toned  blue   View  of  Shoshone  Falls  toned  blue.  from  below.  Briggs,   Dr.  D.H.,  Yosemite,  1875,  (1)  contact  print  from  original   wet  plate  negative   Generic  Subject:  Bridal  Veil  Fallsfalls  /  landscape   Technique:  toned,  blue   Image:  21  x  19.5  cm   verso  (written  in  blue  ink):  Contact  Print  from  Original   wet  plate  negative  made  by  Dr.  D.H.  Briggs  ni  Yosemite   in  1875      (stamped  in  black):  Give  Credit  to  SIPLEY-BR[writing   covered  by  adhesive]SCO  PICTURES   Gift  of  3M  Foundation;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton   Sipley  

2010:0056:0001  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Birth:   Subject  of  photograph:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Medium:  

Photography   John  C.  Browne   Photograph   Samuel  J.  Castner,  1878-1960   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   John  C.  Browne,  1838-1918   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   ca.  1916   Kallitype  

94  

Description:   Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Credit  Line:  

  

portrait  of  balding  man  with  beard  wearing  a  suit  with  a   gold  pocket  watch  chain  visible   Image:  20.5  x  16  cm   Overall:  21.4  x  16.3  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  John  C  Borwne  Kallitype  SJC   (stamped  in  blue):  440115  BRADY-SIPLEY  COLLECTION   Museum  Collection;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton  Sipley  

2010:0056:0002  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Credit  Line:     

Photography   Unidentified  woman  with  hat   Photograph   Samuel  J.  Castner,  1878-1960   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   ca.  1916   Kallitype   Woman  wearing  large  hat  with  a  lace  scarf  and  lace   collar   Generic  Subject:  womanpeople   Image:  20.6  x  15.6  cm     Overall:  21.4  x  16.4  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  Home  Made  Kallitype  on  Bond   Paper  c  1916-1917   (stamped  in  black  ink):  440115  BRADY-SIPLEY   COLLECTION   Museum  Collection;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton  Sipley  

2010:0056:0003  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Place  of  Birth:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Dimensions:   Inscription(s):      Credit  Line:     

Photography   Unidentified  woman  with  hat   Photograph   Samuel  J.  Castner,  1878-1960   Philadelphia,  PA,  US   ca.  1916   platinum  print   Woman  wearing  large  hat  with  a  lace  scarf  and  lace   collar   Image:  20.2  x  15.2  cm   recto  (written  in  pencil):  50C/  Platinum  in  SJ  Caster   (stamped  in  black):  440115  BRADY-SIPLEY   Museum  Collection;  ex-collection  of  Louis  Walton  Sipley  

95  

2010:0057:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:  

Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Credit  Line:     

Photography   Country  landscape  taken  with  amateur  equipment   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1890   albumen  print   Photograph  of  a  dirt  road  with  wooden  fences  and  trees.   Image  is  identified  as  having  been  taken  by  a  lady  with   Anthony's  photographic  amateaur  equipment.  Object   appears  to  have  been  part  of  a  book  or  booklet.   Generic  Subject:  country  lanelandscape   Image:  10.5  x  9  cm     Overall:  18.1  x  12.9  cm   recto(printed  in  gold  with  decorative  border):  Taken  by   a  Lady  with  Anthoy's  Ten  Dollar  Amateur  Equipment   verso  (written  in  pencil):  Emil  Premru,  Gorham,  N.Y.   Museum  Collection  

2010:0058:0001  

   Department:   Title  on  Object:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Photography   Broadway,  N.Y   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1900   Broadway,  New  York,  New  York,  US   gelatin  silver  print   Bird's  eye  view  of  Broadway  with  cars  and  pedestrians.   Object  has  been  removed  from  a  book  or  booklet.   Generic  Subject:  aerial  viewcityscape   Generic  Subject:  streetscenecityscape   Image:  9.5  x  15  cm     Overall:  12.5  x  18.6  cm   recto  (printed  in  black  on  border):  Made  on  ANTHONY'S   Glossy  Rapid  Printing  Paper/  BROADWAY,  N.Y./  From   one  of  EASTMAN'S  SPECIAL  Dry  Plate  Negatives   Museum  Collection  

        
96  

2010:0059:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:         Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:      Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:   Inscription(s):     

Photography   Fountain  with  sculptures  in  front  of  palace   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1897   gelatin  silver  print,  on  silver  paper   Palace  with  eleaborate  fountains  printed  on  silver  paper   Generic  Subject:  foutainarchitecture   Generic  Subject:  sculpturearchitecture   Image:  9.4  x  21  cm     Overall:  10  x  12.6  cm   verso  (written  in  pencil):  From  H.L.  Gibson/  1897   Museum  Collection2010:0060:0001   Photography   Portrait  of  M.J.  Kilderry  on  Stamp   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1920   gelatin  silver  print   36  photographic  stamps  showing  a  portrait  of  M.J.   Kilderry,  who  is  wearing  a  pinstripe  suit   Generic  Subject:  stampsartifact   Overall:  15.2  x  12.8  cm,  each  2.4  x  2   recto  (printed  in  black,  under  each  image):  M.J.   KILDERRY  

2010:0061:0001-0004  
      Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Photography   Unidentified  man  wearing  derby  hat   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1895   collodion  or  gelatin  printing  out  paper  print   Series  of  (4)  gem  photos  of  young  man  in  derby  hat,   collodion  POP,  ca.  1895.  Photos  are  housed  in  a   decorative  textured  grey  mount  with  a  border  of  scrolls   and  flowers  around  each  photo   Overall:  24  x  8  cm,  2  x  2.4  (each  image)   97  

Dimensions:  

Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

[no  inscription]   Museum  Collection  

2010:0062:0001  

Tuesday,  July  13,  2010      Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Geo  Place:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:      Dimensions:      Inscription(s):      Credit  Line:     

Photography   Portrait  of  Phillipine  Welser  with  pressed  flowers   Photograph   C.A.  Czichna   ca.  1875   Innsbruck,  Austria   albumen  print   Portrait  of  Phillippine  Weiser  taken  by  C.A.  Czichna  on  a   card,  displayed  in  a  larger  mount  decorated  with   pressed  flowers   Technique:  collage   Image:  10.5  x  7  cm   Mount:  20.1  x  15.5  cm   recto  (printed  in  black  ink):  Innsbruck/  Tyrol/   Phillipinia  Weiser   (printed  in  black  ink,  on  image  card):  Veriag  von  C.A.   Czichna/  Deponirt/  TIROL/  Philippine  Weiser   Museum  Collection  

2010:0063:0001  

   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Classification:   Original  photographer:   Date  Label:   Medium:   Description:   Attributes:            Dimensions:      Inscription(s):   Credit  Line:     

Photography   Boy  holding  chicken  and  egg  in  yard   Photograph   Unidentified   ca.  1930   photoengraving  on  metal   Three-dimensional  halftone  photomenchanical  print  of   a  boy  wearing  overalls  holding  a  chicken  and  an  egg   Generic  Subject:  boypeople   Generic  Subject:  farm  yardlandscape   Technique:  halftone   Image:  25.2  x  19.1  cm   Overall:  26.3  x  20.2  cm   [no  inscription]   Museum  Collection  

98  

2010:0065:0001  
   Department:   Descriptive  Title:   Photography   Ticka  Watch  camera  images:  roll  of  12  small  contact   prints,  views  of  a  tennis  match,  "Big  Ben",  London   architecture   Classification:   Photograph   Original  photographer:   Unidentified   Date  Label:   ca.  1917   Geo  Place:   London,  England   Medium:   gelatin  silver  print   Description:   Scroll  begins  with  images  of  a  tennis  match;  the  last   three  images  are  of  Big  Ben.  Images  are  housed  in  a   cardboard  cylinder   Attributes:   Generic  Subject:  Big  Benclock  tower  /  architecture      Generic  Subject:  tennissport      Dimensions:   Each  Image:  1.7  x  2.2  cm        Overal  (strip):  35  x  2.4  cm   Inscription(s):   recto  (written  in  pencil,  crossed  out):  1303   Notes:   Old  GEH  #  3564:3   Alternate  Numbers:   3564:3   Credit  Line:   Museum  Collection;  ex-collection  Kodak  Ltd,  Harrow   England      2010:0068:0001-0004   Department:   Photography   Descriptive  Title:   Unidentified  man  wearing  derby  hat   Classification:   Photograph   Original  photographer:   Unidentified   Date  Label:   ca.  1895   Medium:   collodion  or  gelatin  printing  out  paper  print   Description:   2nd  series  of  (4)  gem  photos  of  young  man  in  derby  hat,   collodion  POP,  ca.  1895      Photos  are  housed  in  a  decorative  textured  grey  mount   with  a  border  of  scrolls  and  flowers  around  each  photo.   see  also  2010:0061:0001-0004.   Dimensions:   Overall:  24  x  8  cm,  2  x  2.4  (each  image)   Inscription(s):   [no  inscription]   Credit  Line:   Museum  Collection  

  

99  

