Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2012

What Will The Legacy Of The Pan American And Parapan Games 2015 Be For Toronto? Looking At Past Successes And Failures To Inform Toronto's Experience
Natasha P. Jailal
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Urban, Community and Regional Planning Commons Recommended Citation
Jailal, Natasha P., "What Will The Legacy Of The Pan American And Parapan Games 2015 Be For Toronto? Looking At Past Successes And Failures To Inform Toronto's Experience" (2012). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1478.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

WHAT WILL THE LEGACY OF THE PAN AMERICAN AND PARAPAN GAMES 2015 BE FOR TORONTO? LOOKING AT PAST SUCCESSES AND FAILURES TO INFORM TORONTO'S EXPERIENCE

by Natasha Preya Jailal, B.E.S., University of Waterloo, 2006 A major research paper presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Planning In the program of Urban Development

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2012 © Natasha Jailal, 2012

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper. This is a true copy of the Major Research Paper, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this Major Research Paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this Major Research Paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I understand that my Major Research Paper may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

Abstract
WHAT WILL THE LEGACY OF THE PAN AMERICAN AND PARAPAN AMERICAN GAMES 2015 BE FOR TORONTO? LOOKING AT PAST SUCCESSES AND FAILURES TO INFORM TORONTO'S EXPERIENCE

© Natasha Preya Jailal, 2012 Candidate for Master of Planning, Urban Development Program Ryerson University

The 2015 Pan American and Parapan American Games will be hosted in Toronto. The Athletes' Village is being constructed in the West Don Lands and post Games will be transformed into a mixed-use community. Due to the scale of the project and brief duration of the Games, the creation of this new neighbourhood in Toronto is a sizeable undertaking but has the potential to accommodate Toronto's anticipated growth and serve to connect the Waterfront from east to west.

The central issue for this paper is identifying the legacy aspects of the Athletes' Village and how stakeholders can work to mitigate any potential negative impacts identified. The investigation will focus on the social, environmental and economic impacts. Recommendations for stakeholders are presented based on the research approach which included interviews, a review of literature as well as case studies of previous sporting events in Winnipeg, Vancouver, Calgary, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and Guadalajara, Mexico.

iii

Acknowledgements
I would firstly like to acknowledge the support and encouragement of my advisor, David Amborski, and second reader, Carlo Bonanni. The wealth of information and guidance from both of these individuals was much appreciated.

I also want to thank my family and friends for their love and support throughout the Program. It has been a remarkable journey.

iv

Table of Contents
Introduction Pan American Games The Athletes' Village - The Plan Research Question Scope Research Approach and Method Stakeholders Legislation and Policy Overview Implementation An Overview of Athletes' Villages Adaptive Reuse What is the Legacy of Sporting Events? Lessons Learned Winnipeg, Canada Vancouver, Canada Calgary, Canada Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Guadalajara, Mexico Discussion Social Considerations Environmental Considerations Economic Considerations Recommendations Conclusion 1 3 4 7 7 9 11 14 19 21 22 23 25 25 26 28 29 30 32 32 33 34 36 38

List of Figures and Appendices
Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4 Appendix 1 - Draft Plan of Subdivision Appendix 2 - Bibliography 4 5 10 13 38 39

v

NJailal, 2012

Introduction
This paper explores the implications, from a planning perspective, of the Athletes' Village for the 2015 Pan American and Parapan (Pan Am) Games to be constructed in Toronto from a planning perspective. The paper discusses the potential social, economic and environmental impacts that may result from this development and provides a set of recommendations based on primary and secondary research as to how potential impacts can be overcome and opportunities taken advantage of for the benefit of all Torontonians once the Games have concluded.

It was announced in 2009 that the City of Toronto won the bid to host the 2015 Pan Am Games. With less than four years left to plan, design, build and provide financing for the entire project, there is much yet to be accomplished. After the Pan Am Games, the Village will transition to a new community for the City of Toronto called, the Canary District. The Games have instigated the construction and creation of an entirely new community for Toronto on a portion of the West Don Lands, a previously derelict brownfield in the central-eastern waterfront area. It follows that this magnitude of a development and creation of a brand new neighbourhood will have everlasting and significant impacts for its future residents and City as a whole.

Infrastructure Ontario has been tasked with delivering the Athletes' Village on time for the Pan Am Games. In conjunction with other stakeholders such as Waterfront Toronto, Toronto 2015 Pan Am/Parapan Games and City of Toronto, the involvement and contribution from each of these government agencies will be significant. This paper draws from interviews conducted with key professionals representing organizations involved in the Athletes' Village project to inform on what are necessary components of an Athletes' Village, how will the transition take place, what the role of each stakeholder is and where gaps may exist. It also aims to provide insight as to what lessons have been gained from host cities of previous mega-sporting events including Winnipeg, Vancouver, Calgary, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and Guadalajara, Mexico.

1

NJailal, 2012

Pan American Games
The Pan Am Games will have significant consequences on the City of Toronto due to the combination of its scale and brief duration. It is anticipated that 42 countries will participate from North, South, Central America and from the Caribbean countries. The Greater Toronto Area (GTA) is thus expected to accommodate approximately 10,000 participants and officials and 250,000 tourists during this event. 48 sports will occur across 17 different municipalities in the Greater Golden Horseshoe over a span of 3 non-consecutive weeks during the summer of 2015. (Waterfront Toronto, 2011; Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games, 2011)

The Pan American Games first began in 1951 in Buenos Aires. This large-scale sporting event is held every four years for countries in North and South America. Usually held in the summer, although there was one winter event, these games also make use of the national Olympic committees and Olympic values and standards, albeit at a smaller scale. In fact, countries that participate in the Pan Am Games must be recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC). There are 42 countries which have National Olympic Committees that are recognized Pan American Sports Organization (PASO), the regulating body which oversees the Games.

Because the Pan Am Games are held one year prior to the Olympic Summer Games, the event becomes an opportunity to train and prepare for the Olympic Games where athletes are competing at a global level. On its own, the Games can work to strengthen relations between North and South American countries, through PASO financial aid and support can be provided for countries lacking resources for sports programs, provide opportunities to compete for athletes and eventually, create a network of "International High Performance Olympics Centers" across the two continents (PASO, 2012).

In terms of scale, the Pan Am Games can be larger than the Winter Olympics; the 2015 Games will be twice the size of the 2010 Winter Olympics (Alcoba, 2011). It should be noted that while the activities held during the Games will be dispersed throughout the Greater Toronto Area, the 10,000 athletes and officials expected will all be housed at the Athletes' Village in Toronto's West Don Lands. This event obviously has a lasting and significant legacy for host cities from its scale alone. Some of the potential benefits usually associated with the Games include strengthening the local economy, addressing sports and recreational needs in an area, providing opportunities for youth leadership and training, infrastructure improvements, fast 2

NJailal, 2012

tracking development or city building initiatives and community engagement (City of Toronto, 2008). It also follows that the Games have the potential to negatively impact a region through costs (i.e. going over budget), exclusion of certain groups or communities (Bornstein, 2010).

The previous two games held in Guadalajara, Mexico in 2011 and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 2007. The 2015 Games in Toronto will be the third time Canada is hosting these games as Winnipeg hosted in 1999 and 1967.

The Athletes' Village - The Plan
The site is approximately 35 acres in size and situated within the West Don Lands, which is just east of Toronto's downtown core and to the west of the Don River (see Figure 1). It is in close proximity to the Waterfront and existing neighbourhoods such as the Distillery District, Corktown, St. Lawrence and King-Parliament. The land is currently owned by the Province of Ontario; the transfer of ownership to the developers and subsequent condominium owners or non-profit affordable housing providers will take place once the Games are complete.

The development of the Village is expected to cost $514 million, which the Province has committed (Waterfront Toronto, 2011; Infrastructure Ontario, 2012). The project is making use of Alternative Financing and Procurement model, in which the private sector assumes the risks associated with the design, construction and financing of the project.

The Village will provide accommodations, which will include a media centre, recreation centre, transport mall and health clinic during the Games for approximately 10,000 athletes and officials. It will feature a polyclinic (emergency care, outpatient area, rehabilitation area and equipment, pharmacy, medical imaging, laboratory services), sports viewing room, religious centre, a security command centre and multiple laundry facilities, 18 acre park with running and cycling trails, recreation/fitness centre, 400 metre track and a 50 metre pool. Toronto's Organizing Committee is responsible for ensuring the Village is a fully accessible and safe environment, meeting the technical requirements for the Village as specified by the International Olympic Committee. (Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games, 2011)

Post Games, the Village will become a "mixed-use, inclusive and pedestrian-friendly riverside community that will include affordable housing" (Waterfront Toronto, 2011). This plan is in 3

Figure 1: West Don Lands: Context

TCHC Financial District

River City

Underpass Park

Pan Am/Parapan Athletes' Village
Distillery District

West Don Lands

Future Canary District
Future Access to Lower Don Recreation Trail

(NJailal, 2012)

East Bayfront

Construction Underway
500 m Port Lands

Google earth, 2012)

NJailal, 2012

keeping with the City's vision and policy documents like the Central Waterfront Secondary Plan and West Don Lands Precinct Plan, which provide the guiding principles for the area as well as a development framework. The specific components of the Village will include creation and installation of: new infrastructure; new, permanent buildings with Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Gold certification, and; market and affordable housing. The Village is a realization of the West Don Lands Precinct Plan for a vibrant, modern green community, which was estimated at taking 15 years but is ahead of schedule by 5-10 years due to the Games (Waterfront Toronto, 2005; Waterfront Toronto, 2012d).

The Village will offer a range of housing options, 787 residential units in total. As mentioned, all buildings will be constructed with sustainability in mind and will attain LEED Gold standards (Waterfront Toronto, 2012d). Of these units, 5% will be available for affordable home ownership and 24 percent will be available for affordable rental housing, for which affordable housing providers have already been selected through a Request for Proposals process and executed contracts are in place. The focus on mixed use and inclusion of people at various stages of life and income levels is evident in the plans (See Figure 2 for rendering). A YMCA and George Brown residences are also slated for the Village post Games. The village will support 4000-6000 residents within this community post Games (City of Toronto, 2012b). Figure 2: An artists' rendering of the aerial view of the Pan Am Athletes' Village (Waterfront Toronto, 2012a)

The city is working on a comprehensive Sanitary Servicing Master Plan for the waterfront area, ahead of an expected spike in development in the lead up to the 2015 Pan Am Games. The plan will help ensure the sanitary sewer infrastructure that will be installed in the area is sufficient to handle the growth, which includes the Pan Am Games Athletes' Village and a number of other major residential developments surrounding the waterfront including River City (See Figure 1). In addition to the city hosted public meeting on June 21st, 2011 for input from residents, public consultation has been ongoing since the development of the West Don Lands Precinct Plan which was approved by Council in 2005 (City of Toronto, 2012). 5

NJailal, 2012

Research Question
This paper will attempt to answer the following research question:

What will the Legacy of the Pan American and Parapan American Games 2015 Athletes' Village be for Toronto? · What are the social, economic and environmental impacts of the Village development and how can these potential and real impacts be mitigated so Torontonians do not bear the cost? Who should be responsible for this mitigation during and after the transition of the Village to permanent residential community?

The research question will identify social, environmental and economic long-term impacts, to better determine the overall sustainability of the Village and its legacy for the City of Toronto and the local community after the Games are completed. Specifically, the paper will look at the decisions being made during the current planning and construction phase of the development and what impacts may arise post Games for Torontonians. The potential impacts relating to the legacy of the Village will need a response and this paper will identify suggestions on how to move forward as well as which stakeholder should be responsible.

Scope
The Athletes' Village is being constructed on a significant portion of the West Don Lands, a former brownfield site in close proximity to the Don River. The West Don Lands is in a prime location within the City, in walking distance from the Distillery District, St. Lawrence neighbourhood and Financial District to the West of the site and will have access to the Lower Don Recreation Trail along the Don River and Waterfront Trails to the east. With regards to the Pan Am Games and events, the site is centrally located so that the majority of venues are within 45 minutes of the Village (Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games, 2011).

As mentioned previously, approximately 10,000 athletes and officials will be participating in the 2015 Games (Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games, 2011; City of Toronto, 2012b). The Village is the most expensive project being built for this event and although the events will be spread out throughout the Greater Toronto Area, the Village acts as a central feature for the Games. The City's renewed interest in the waterfront also makes this prime waterfront land of 6

NJailal, 2012

further interest. Due to these factors, the paper will focus on identifying the legacy of the Village itself for the City of Toronto as opposed to the entire Games, which will have varying effects throughout the GTA.

Construction of the Village has begun but there are still some uncertainties surrounding use during the Games and especially the transition to the Legacy. For example, the sale of the market housing will be dependent on the state of the market at that time, which cannot be predicted. Infrastructure Ontario, the government agency responsible for delivering the Athletes' Village on time and on budget, as well as the other stakeholders, discussed in a later section, have stated that these uncertainties have been minimized or addressed; this paper will investigate what other host cities have done and what lessons from previous experiences can be incorporated into the planning. Conversion of the development from its temporary use as a residence during the Games to a more long term community space will be a formidable task. Approximately 35 acres are being redeveloped and instead of a gradual and organic creation of a community, this approach will have significant, immediate and long-term impacts post Games for the larger area as a whole and this paper aims to better understand what these effects are and how negative impacts can be mitigated.

Many of the international sporting events have had to resolve similar issues of reusing venues post Games. This paper will look at the lessons learned from these events, specifically with regards to choices made relating to accommodations for the athletes. While there are many examples from all across the world, the cases referred to will include Canadian host cities for previous Olympic Games, international host cities for recent Pan American Games and the one previous Canadian host city for the Pan Am Games, which was Winnipeg. The lessons from these cases will be focused around economical, societal and environmental impacts.

While much literature exists on the impacts of mega sporting events such as the Olympics and Pan American Games, there is less academic research that has been conducted on the particular impacts of the Athletes' Villages on the hosting city.

7

NJailal, 2012

Research Approach and Method
A review was completed on secondary sources such as provincial and municipal legislation and policy documents which guide the development in this area as well as City of Toronto Staff Reports. These documents provide information on the government direction for planning of the West Don Lands and specifically the Athletes' Village.

This project has been directed by primary research in the form of interviews. Ethics approval was attained late January 2012 and five interviews took place over the course of three weeks. Purposive or strategic sampling was employed in order to gain knowledge and experience from key stakeholders. The sample includes staff from organizations involved in the development of the Toronto Athletes' Village including Waterfront Toronto officials, Infrastructure Ontario staff, Toronto Pan American/Parapan Games 2015 staff and City of Toronto planning staff. The primary research informs the paper as to what the current planning details are for the Village, their perspective of the constraints and opportunities as well as further contacts or areas of research. This primary research also provided an understanding as to some of the previous sporting events were considered by responsible bodies for points of comparison during the project planning.

Secondary research consists of reviewing cases from other jurisdictions which have hosted large-scale games such as these. The literature review on journal articles on a variety of topics including reuse and repurposing of Athletes' Villages, legacy of Olympics, community benefits of large-scale sporting events, social, economic and environmental impacts from large-scale sporting events (e.g. Pan American and Olympics).

Due to the similar issues faced with when hosting Olympic Games, secondary research documenting the lessons learned from these Games were also considered. For the purposes of relevancy and comparison, only Canadian cities which have hosted Olympic Games are included for this paper, namely Calgary and Vancouver. As well, the last two Pan American Games, held in Guadalajara, Mexico, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil are reviewed as well as the Games held in Winnipeg in 1999. To choose cases that had academic literature available and were relevant in terms of scale and time, the case studies were chosen based on whether one or more of the following questions could be answered affirmatively: Was academic literature in English available for the case? 8

NJailal, 2012

-

Was the Olympic host city in Canada and recent (Within the last 25 years)? Was it a recent example of an Athletes' Village built for the Pan Am Games (i.e. last two host cities)? Was it a Canadian host city for the Pan Am Games (i.e. irrespective of year)?

Based on the above approaches, the findings were integrated into the sections of this paper to identify issues and opportunities relating to the legacy of the development with a discussion and recommendation section synthesizing this research.

9

NJailal, 2012

Stakeholders
The Pan Am Games spans government jurisdictions; in the case of the Athletes' Village, it is situated in the City of Toronto but on largely provincial lands. As well, the lands are considered part of the waterfront and so Waterfront Toronto plays a role as the master developer of the overall area. As was noted, a hosting city's government is seen as a necessary component to success of mega sporting events in general. There is also an active community group for the area. The major stakeholders involved in the development of Toronto's Athletes' Village are summarized below.

Waterfront Toronto is a government corporation established by the federal, provincial and municipal governments as the master developer of Toronto's waterfront. They have been responsible for the vision of the Port Lands and specifically the Figure 3: Stakeholders involved in the development of the Athletes' Village in the West Don Lands.

West Don Lands and have thus far completed parks and other public realm projects. East Bayfront, like the West Don Lands, is another piece of the waterfront which has received much planning attention and also has a precinct plan established to guide development. With the installation of the Corus building and Sugar Beach, waterfront redevelopment appears to be moving from the west to the east, with the Athletes' Village as the latest and furthest development to the east (west of the Don River). Waterfront Toronto's vision for the West Don Lands acts as the guide for the developer of the Pan Am Athletes' Village. As well, the significant community consultation Waterfront Toronto has engaged in has made them the lead for all public consultation relating to this plan. As noted in interviews, the consultation for the West Don Lands Precinct Plan started before the Games were even a reality for Toronto. Because the Games will be building on this plan for the area, which incorporates the community 10

NJailal, 2012

vision for the area, the public has been generally supportive of the development in the area, based on interviews with various governmental staff who have been involved with engaging the members of this community.

Infrastructure Ontario is the provincial arm responsible for delivering the Village in time for the Pan Am Games. The West Don Lands are primarily provincially owned although the City of Toronto owns the roads within the site. As a public agency, Infrastructure Ontario supports Ontario's goals in modernizing and maximizing value of public infrastructure and real estate; while also managing government facilities and financing renewal infrastructure projects (Infrastructure Ontario, 2011). Ontario Realty Corporation was the former provincial corporation (now amalgamated into Infrastructure Ontario) and was involved with constructing the berm feature as a flood proofing mechanism in the West Don Lands along the Don River. Infrastructure Ontario is the agency entering into the agreement with the development team to Design Build and Finance and thus will be involved post Games to ensure that legacy is successfully transitioned to a vibrant community.

The Province also controls the future development of the West Don Lands blocks of land which are not currently being developed for the Games. The current agreement with the developer addresses some of the remaining blocks of land to be developed to ensure that the longer term development proceeds in an orderly manner and that the area will ultimately be well integrated into the City fabric.

Generally, the City of Toronto provides policy guidelines and approves Waterfront Toronto plans. Based on interviews with staff involved in this project, the City sees its role in the development of the Village as the same as in any development project. For the Pan Am Village, the City's role is as an approval agency for the Draft Plan of Subdivision and Site Plan Approval for each building in accordance with S. 41 of the Planning Act. The City will also issue building permits, undertake inspections and ultimately assume the roads and public components of the community development including the nearby Don River Park which is already nearing completion.

The Dundee Kilmer Developments is the team selected as the preferred group who bid on the request for proposals issued by Infrastructure Ontario to design, build and finance the Athletes' Village. The team includes: Dundee Realty Corporation, Kilmer Van Nostrand Co. Limited, 11

NJailal, 2012

EllisDon Corporation, Ledcor Design Build (Ontario) Inc., Brookfield Financial Corp., architects Alliance, Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg, Daoust LeStage Inc., and TEN Arquitectos (Downes and Stork, 2011).

After signing a fixed price contract with Infrastructure Ontario, this group started construction in January 2012. As discussed in an interview with a member of the development team, Dundee's experience with the ongoing development in The Distillery District, Cityscape Development, as well as other developments in Corktown and at the King Eddy Hotel have prepared it for the Village construction and entering into a public-private partnership (P3) with Infrastructure Ontario.

In addition to the government organizations and corporations, the West Don Lands community is also an important stakeholder as these residents live in the vicinity of the Village development. As well, the community group has been involved with Waterfront Toronto's development of the Precinct Plan for the area and has had an interest in the area before the Games were announced. As the most directly impacted Toronto residents by the Village during construction, the duration of the Games and post-Games, this group will continue to engage through Waterfront Toronto to ensure they are not being negatively impacted.

Pan American/Para Pan Games 2015 is the organizing committee created to orchestrate the 2015 games coming to Toronto and surrounding municipalities. This organization's role in the Village development itself is minimal other than ensuring that the development team meets the International Olympic Committee's (IOC) technical requirements for athletes' villages, as required by the Pan American Sports Organization (PASO).

To summarize, Waterfront Toronto and Infrastructure Ontario are leaders in the preparation of the Pan Am Games Athletes Village in coordination with TO 2015 Organizing Committee and, to a lesser extent, the City of Toronto (Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games, 2011b). Dundee Kilmer Development Limited was selected by the coordinated effort of the above group to design, build and finance the Village (Waterfront Toronto, 2011).

12

NJailal, 2012

Legislation and Policy Overview
The West Don Lands have been an area of study for years. Because of this attention, there are existing plans and policies in place to shape how development occurs in this part of the City. While the Pan Am Village is accelerating the redevelopment of this area, this project is still subject to this policy direction. What is interesting to note is that in the past, a social housing project was considered for these lands but the environmental clean-up costs, estimated at $1 billion and flood protection requirements were too costly to implement and the project did not move forward (Al-Attar, A, 2011; De Sousa, 2000; Fisher, 1995). While environmental clean-up legislation has become more sophisticated over the years and allows for risk management and end-use based clean-up in Ontario, brownfield redevelopment can still be cost prohibitive and the West Don Lands site was no different (De Sousa, 2000).

Currently, the Ontario Environmental Protection Act, 1990 and associated regulations govern the remediation of contaminated sites which has guided the remediation of this brownfield. These standards are instrumental in protecting human and ecological health, but for the purposes of this paper will not be detailed further. Interviews with government staff have Figure 4: Image of berm and construction of Village facing West (Waterfront Toronto, 2012c) acknowledged the dedicated effort from the Ministry of

Environment to prioritize the Pan Am projects, including the Village development.

As a provincially led project, the construction of the Athletes' Village will accomplish several planning legislation and policy goals. Set out in the Places to Grow Act (2005), there is a significant infrastructure deficit which requires all levels of government to make use of "alternative partnership arrangements... and... strategic staging of infrastructure investments". This statement exemplifies the approach being taken for the Village development. As well, the Places to Grow Act (2005) identifies complete communities as the vision for Ontario in which 13

NJailal, 2012

neighbourhoods are well-designed, offer choice in transportation, and integrate a mix of housing, jobs, and access to services and amenities for a diverse population at all stages (Government of Ontario, 2005). This vision speaks to the type of development being installed in the West Don Lands under the direction of the provincial agency, Infrastructure Ontario.

The Province's Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe (2006) sets out population estimates for the City of Toronto. It estimates that Toronto's population will grow by 320,000 (12%) to 3,080,000 between 2011 and 2031. This estimate indicates that Toronto will have to accommodate a significant population increase with limited greenfield land. Opportunities exist and are becoming more apparent for brownfield and infill development as population pressures increase. Based on these projections, it can be said that the creation of the Athletes' Village as a new community within the City will be much needed to accommodate future growth, especially when facing limited greenfield availability amidst an already built-out, urban landscape. The Province sets out legislation and policies guiding revitalization and growth in Ontario, regulates "Decades of neglect and lack of sufficient investment have resulted in the current infrastructure deficit. Tens of billions of dollars beyond current levels of investment will be required before the situation is back in balance. All levels of government are under pressure to meet public infrastructure needs. Alternative partnership arrangements that protect the public interest; and the strategic staging of infrastructure investments are all required to respond to these challenges." - Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe (Government of Ontario, 2006)

environmental remediation and also, through Infrastructure Ontario, has the responsibility of delivering the Athletes' Village on time and on budget.

Alternative financing and procurement is an approach Infrastructure Ontario is using to complete large projects by utilizing the private sector's services and expertise while maintaining public control. Infrastructure Ontario uses this model for a variety of public infrastructure projects and has modified the model slightly for the construction of the Village; instead of a Design Build Finance and Maintain project, the Athletes' Village makes use of a Design Build and Finance model as the buildings or condominium units will be sold post-Games. This approach has been used by Infrastructure Ontario to build hospitals, courthouses and other community facilities and can be a successful tool in realizing the Province's policies and goals.

The City of Toronto is mandated to follow the direction of the Province and thus their plans and policies must comply with the direction of the Province. Toronto's Official Plan (OP) directs 14

NJailal, 2012

growth and also informs how growth can be accommodated. With regards to the Athletes' Village development, several of the OP's policies are being realized through this project and thus it can be argued that this project will be achieving City-building goals and objectives. One important policy that will be realized relates to the investing in areas with development potential for the purposes of city-building; brownfields are one example highlighted as the City recognizes its limited resources, i.e. land (s.5.3.3). Directing growth to a currently underutilized area like the West Don Lands is appropriate according to the OP. As well, the OP encourages high environmental standards including the alternative energy production when redevelopment brownfields (s.3.4.22); the Pan Am Village will be built around a district energy system and all buildings will be built to LEED certifications, achieving fairly high environmental objectives (David, 2009). The Plan also focuses on the importance of Healthy Neighbourhoods (s.2.3.1). The OP defines healthy neighbourhoods as having a mix of "scale, amenities, local culture, retail services and demographic make-up" offering choices for residents at all stages of their lives (s.2.3.1). This is in keeping with the Province's vision for complete communities and is the source for subsequent policies addressing the West Don Lands.

Toronto's Central Waterfront Secondary Plan identifies the area as a Regeneration Area and Parks and Open Space Areas (City of Toronto, 2007). The Plan guides development in this area through four principles which are:    

"Removing Barriers/Making Connections Building a Network of Spectacular Waterfront Parks and Public Spaces Promoting a Clean and Green Environment Creating Dynamic and Diverse New Communities" (City of Toronto, 2007).

These principles help to identify existing obstacles and ways to overcome them. Some of the issues identified relating to the West Don Lands include flooding, renaturalizing the mouth of the Don and the need for remediation. The development of the Athletes' Village has instigated the remediation of the area; as well, the flood protection landform has been constructed in anticipation of the 2015 Games. It is apparent that these overarching principles have helped shape the development by identifying obstacles. (City of Toronto, 2007)

It should also be noted that the King-Parliament Secondary Plan also includes the West Don Lands; it sets out similar objectives as the Central Waterfront Plan of reintegrating the area with 15

NJailal, 2012

the neighbouring communities. It also provides that the Holding Symbol can be removed once there is sufficient detailed planning for the area to allow redevelopment. (City of Toronto, 2010)

It is the Precinct Plan that provides a more detailed framework for development of the West Don Lands; it was created by Waterfront Toronto with collaboration from the public and cooperation with the City. The vision for this area includes making connections with the rest of the city, enhancing and integrating the natural heritage system of the Don River with the built environment and providing better transit access to this area. The cultural heritage of the site is also noted as a significant one with several features to be maintained including the Canary Restaurant and Dominion Foundry. The area is envisioned as a gateway connecting the downtown and port lands area. (Toronto Waterfront Revitalization Corporation, 2005)

The Precinct Plan also discusses the development potential for the neighbourhoods and land use and overall design. The area where the Athletes' Village is being constructed has been envisioned as a vibrant, mixed use community of approximately 6,000 units. The Plan also highlights the need for flexible zoning to allow for a mix of uses in the area and highlights examples where inspiration has come. It also draws from neighbouring communities, such as Corktown, to create a similar feel and link the areas through similar design such as Corktown's intimate streets. ((Toronto Waterfront Revitalization Corporation, 2005)

"Making Waves", a plan for the Central Waterfront, was an earlier City document published in 2001 to provide principles for revitalization (Dill and Bedford, 2001). Waterfront Toronto (then called Toronto Waterfront Revitalization Corporation) was created the same year and the organization built on this document with further planning for the area. Its themes and guiding principles can be seen as a precursor for the Precinct Plan and signifies the length of time this area has been under a process of visioning and planning.

The policies shaping the development in this area are important to consider; not only do they reflect the lengthy planning process that has occurred for this area but it also reflects the views of the public. During a development process with definite time constraints such as the construction of the Village, it is especially important to incorporate previous views and decisions made for this area.

16

NJailal, 2012

Because planning and visioning for the area was completed and the Precinct Plan and Secondary Plan contain guiding principles for development, the advanced timeline for the West Don Lands is feasible; funding and the question of a champion were the main issues in the past. From interviews with various stakeholders, it was clear that the end use of the Village as a new community for Toronto was the overall objective for this development; the temporary use to house athletes and official during the Games is seen as a secondary objective and thus the vision held in the planning policy documents is what will guide the development.

17

NJailal, 2012

Implementation
The significant planning for the West Don Lands has resulted in a site that is being constructed with all the relevant legislation and policy documents as guiding principles. The implementation of these guiding documents will be explained briefly to provide some insight as to how the project was able to move forward. It should be noted that this section highlights major steps in the process and is meant to provide an understanding of an overview of the process.

As the West Don Lands Precinct Plan identifies, the development in this area will require environmental assessments, municipal approvals and development proposal calls (Toronto Waterfront Revitalization Corporation, 2005). Due to the Pan Am Games spurring development on a large portion of the West Don Lands and the unique requirements for the Athletes' Village including the need for a hard deadline for this project, many of these activities were or are happening concurrently and are being fast tracked through a coordinated approach to deliver the Village on time for the 2015 Games.

In conjunction with the environmental work on the site, the holding symbol was the first step to moving forward on this development as well as the approval of a slightly changing vision for the area based on the Pan Am Games and refinement of the block planning. These were accomplished through the pursuit of a Zoning By-Law Amendment. The West Don Lands are subject to a Site Plan Control and this is where the City's involvement as the approval body on the planning process and actual building construction became more apparent. In addition to the previous consultation with the public during preparation of the West Don Lands Precinct Plan, a community meeting occurred on May 11, 2009 to discuss issues with the plans and needs for the area. (City of Toronto, 2010)

A plan of subdivision was prepared for the site in keeping with the Precinct Plan and other policy documents guiding design (See Appendix 2). 16 development blocks are shown on the Plan of Subdivision with the potential for multiple buildings on each Block with multiple owners. The City approved the draft subdivision through an expedited review process. During this process and City review, other requirements may be needed for approval, such as storm water management facilities, tree planting, urban design features, schools, environmental remediation and other aspects to be completed for this development (City of Toronto, 2011; City of Toronto, 2010).

18

NJailal, 2012

Due to the nature of the Village being used first for temporary athletic quarters before becoming available for sale to the public, a Temporary Use By-Law application will also be sought to allow the temporary use.

Once Toronto received the news affirming it would be the host city for the Pan Am Games in 2015, Infrastructure Ontario went out with a Request for Qualifications and then a Request for Proposals for a development team that would be able to design, build and finance the Athletes' Village, selecting the Dundee Kilmer group (Downes and Stork, 2011b).

Based on interviews with key stakeholders, the Village is anticipated to come online early 2015, at which point the TO 2015 Organizing Committee will take charge in installing temporary fitouts to meet the needs of visiting athletes and officials and getting the complex ready for the Games. Once the Games conclude in August 2015, it is expected that by spring 2016, George Brown residences and the affordable housing components will be transferred. It is expected that the condo buildings will take a little longer as the developer will have to finalize the units once the Games are complete. At that point, Infrastructure Ontario will transfer the land to the developer and complete its transaction.

19

NJailal, 2012

An Overview of Athletes' Villages
Athletes' Villages for major sporting events such as the Pan Am Games or the Olympics have to comply with the technical requirements set out by the International Olympics Committee (IOC). As per the Olympic Charter, the fundamental principles which are incorporated in all aspects of the Games, including the development of an Athletes' Village, are: 

Olympism creates a way of life that is "based on the joy of effort, the educational value of good example, social responsibility and respect for universal fundamental ethical principles"

    

The goal is for sport to aid the peaceful progression of humankind Practice of sport considered a human right An autonomous organization is created to oversee and provide good governance for the sporting event. Discrimination is not tolerable The Olympic Charter must be recognized as a document for compliance with regards to the Olympic Movement. (IOC, 2011)

When reviewing the literature on athletes' villages constructed for major sporting events, there are many lessons to be learned. Previous games highlight the importance of these elements: differences in state planning, access to skilled labour and public and private coordination or partnerships (Siegel, 2010; Alberts, 2011). Previous events have had their athletic housing criticized due to poor time and project management, a lack of support from government, and non-existent long term planning (Siegel, 2010). A project of this magnitude can have many issues arise if not well-planned because states may invest in these projects with the objective of showmanship and at the cost of social services & meaningful infrastructural growth; the 1964 Olympics in Tokyo is one example of this and Siegel (2010) explains that many countries have tried to emulate Tokyo's success as a "modernized debutante on the world stage". When Delhi hosted the Commonwealth Games in 2010, Siegel (2010) provides the critique that their development projects' main objectives were to wow spectators and tourists, regardless of the costs Delhi citizens would bear after the fact. These examples demonstrate how development projects of this magnitude require long-term planning, the support of government and collaboration between the public and private sector regardless of the fact that it is being built for a short-term use such as a sporting event spanning several weeks. 20

NJailal, 2012

Adaptive Reuse
When the term "adaptive reuse" (the renovation or rejuvenation of an existing building for a new purpose) is used, most people think of heritage or older buildings. In the case of the Athletes' Village, this is a new construction currently being built with both temporary and longer term uses in mind. The agreement between Infrastructure Ontario and the developer ensures that the developer is responsible for constructing the building and delivering it for the Games. The Pan Am Organizing Committee has its own contracts to install temporary fit outs of rooms for athletes six months before the Games occur. Once the Games are over, the developer is also responsible for converting the Village into its permanent use as condominiums, the George Brown residences, affordable housing and other community spaces. As well, Infrastructure Ontario owns the lands on which the Village sits and they will maintain ownership until after the Games to continue to have some control in the project in the event issues arise. In the case of the Pan Am Athletes' Village, the adaptive reuse of the site as a new community for Toronto is really the main purpose of development and the temporary use as athletic housing is considered a secondary use.

While not a major focus of this paper, it can be noted that existing heritage buildings like the Canary Restaurant, as an example, will also be reintegrated into the new community and the entire district will be named, the Canary District, in acknowledgement of this part of Toronto's history.

21

NJailal, 2012

What is the Legacy of Sporting Events?
Both hard (e.g. physical buildings) and soft (less tangible outcomes) legacies are apparent after large sporting events such as Pan Am or the Olympics (Alberts, 2011). It is understood that games of these magnitudes are considered an opportunity for the hosting municipalities even with all the costs associated. Some of the potential benefits include: · · · · · · construction of new facilities, job creation, tourism revenue (both during and after), improved sporting facilities for the region, rejuvenated sites (i.e. brownfield redevelopment), and, fast tracking large-scale projects (e.g. infrastructure) (Alberts, 2011).

The legacy for these games is dependent upon whether the budget and support exists within the hosting region. As well, if new facilities are built, if they are too large or specialized and do not take into consideration the local needs of the area, they may be more of a negative legacy. These facilities may have more chance of success post-games if they are easily adaptive, multifunctional and realize or align with the larger planning goals of the region. PASO recognizes that support from the relevant levels of government must exist in order for successful hosting of the Games; because of this awareness, host cities must sign agreements indicating this support exists. In the case of the Pan Am Games, and specifically the Village development, that the multiple levels of government involved in the project are overall supportive of the initiative. Through interviews with the stakeholders, including government employees, it is clear the Village development had the support of the municipal and provincial government organizations. Every individual interviewed was supportive of the project and agreed that no gaps existed in levels of government which still require addressing.

As Cashman (2010) highlights, there are many different types of impacts to consider when hosting Olympic type games. These can include: altering the design of the city and built environment, reputation and representation of the city, country and culture, transportation and infrastructure improvements, increase of costs and taxes, legislative and political changes or reforms, increase in tourism and economic development, new sporting venues and their postGames use, involvement of community and potential for greater consultation, engagement or

22

NJailal, 2012

protest (Cashman, 2010). All of these considerations are important in this issue as hosting the Pan Am Games will have significant and long-lasting implications for the GTA as a whole.

Because this is a project currently underway, the potential impacts of the Village are speculated. Some of the legacy aspects that are anticipated include new market and affordable housing for the City, creation of further linkages along the Waterfront, reintegration of a contaminated and underutilized site into the urban fabric and providing the area with new amenities including parks, a YMCA and transit infrastructure. The potential negative impacts include the area does not get successfully integrated with the rest of the City, the site does not work to better connect the Waterfront, financial impacts that were unforeseen, environmental issues resurface and the list could go on. These uncertainties are generally the case with any new development but because of the scale of this project, it is especially important to mitigate any concerns so that the legacy of this project is the mixed-use, vibrant community previously envisioned.

23

NJailal, 2012

Lessons Learned
The following five cases summarize the experiences of various host cities during either Olympic or Pan American/Parapan Games. The summaries briefly explain details of the Games and type of athletic housing used and identifies the mistakes made as well as areas of success surrounding the athletic housing facilities chosen by each City.

Winnipeg is the only Canadian city to have hosted the Pan Am Games in the past and thus will be an important comparison for this paper. While the Olympics are of a different scale than the Pan Am Games, the lessons learned from them and specifically with regard to their athletes villages are comparable. This is especially the case when looking at the previous Canadian host cities for the Olympics such as Vancouver and Calgary. The previous host cities for the Pan Am Games, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and Guadalajara, Mexico will also be considered. A summary of each is provided below.

Winnipeg, Canada

Winnipeg hosted the Pan Am Games of 1999 as well as the 1967 Games. Perhaps because of the City's experience, in 1999, the Games generated a surplus of $8.9 million. The surplus is credited to the sheer number of volunteers and fiscal restraint from organizers. The Village was at the University of Manitoba residences, which were refurbished to accommodate 5,000 participants. (University of Manitoba, 1999)

From this example, the use of existing buildings for the Athletes' Village allowed Winnipeg to host the Games without significant costs but because of this choice, no significant infrastructure investment, relating to the Village, was made. Winnipeg identified its need to reinvest in its aging infrastructure such as the residences but overlooked its need for social housing 24

NJailal, 2012

(University of Manitoba, 1999). Toronto, however, expects significant growth and has identified the provision of housing as a major priority in the City. In Toronto's case, making use of existing residence options for a sporting event of this size could not comfortably house the athletes in one location. While the case of Winnipeg differs from Toronto, the fact that the City hosted the Games twice and was able to create a profit indicates that the planning for Toronto's Games should take into consideration Winnipeg's strategy, especially when making use of existing resources.

Vancouver, Canada

Vancouver's Athletes Village was a brownfield site on prime waterfront land, similar to Toronto's site. The post-Games vision for this new development was to house 16,000 people, including 252 affordable housing units as well as providing community amenities for the area (City of Vancouver, 2009). This is an important case study for the Toronto Games due to the similar characteristics between cities, the sites and the legacy aspects for a mixed-use community.

Planning for a sustainable residential community on this site was discussed since the 1990s. The vision was approved in 1999, coincidentally when the bid for the Olympics became a goal. In fact, during the preparations for the World Expo in 1986, there had been previous discussions for redevelopment of this area but this was not realized then as the land was sold; Toronto's West Don Lands also have a similar history of planned communities, such as Ataratiri, not moving forward. (Scherer, 2011)

Vancouver has been criticized for its Athletes Village development for a number of reasons, including the $1 billion price tag for the Village alone (VANOC, 2010). Scherer (2011) states, "with the benefit of hindsight, it was clear that the developer and local officials... had anticipated 25

NJailal, 2012

a perpetually rising real estate market to justify the [original] price...". However, other unanticipated risks were the peak prices for labour and building materials, which increased costs from previous estimates and by 2008, the developer was $150 million over budget (Scherer, 2011). The interviews identified the lack of contingency steps from the Province as a causal factor. With the cooling real estate market, condo sales were not what was anticipated and the prices originally targeted could not be achieved (Scherer, 2011). This unanticipated failure to come out on budget resulted in the Province being pressured to sell off some of the social housing to get back some of its investment; social housing as an important piece of the Olympic legacy was thus diminished (Scherer, 2011). The lands were sold to the developer prior to the completion of the Village; interviews with government staff highlighted this action was what limited the Province's ability to step in earlier to mitigate the situation. Interviews have also noted that Toronto has already taken this lesson into consideration and implemented more reasonable pricing built into the developer's agreements with the Province. While the Village itself was built to high environmental and urban design standards, it is clear that there are many lessons that can be taken away from this example.

One positive impact of the Games was transit improvement in preparation for the 2010 Olympics; the Canada Line in Vancouver was built using a public-private partnership (Battersby, 2012). In this case, Vancouver made use of this model to create a new transit line. The line was in operation six months before the Olympics, serving a high demand throughout the Games (Craig, 2011). As well, surveys post-Games indicated that ridership was steady and rider experiences were positive during and post-Games, an indication of a successful transition (Craig, 2011). The CEO of the Canada Line, Jane Bird, noted that taking a rigourous approach to structuring the P3 agreement set the stage for a successful project (Battersby, 2012). Bird also acknowledges that while the private sector may not be any better at managing risks than the public sector, it is the collaboration of skills and expertise that make P3s valuable. As well, this line was not connected to existing transit, which made the agreement with and involvement of the private sector less of an issue (Battersby, 2012). This line provided higher-order transit options for the Olympic Village, thus connecting the area to the rest of the City. The intention to provide transit connections to the Olympic Village was seen as a way to spur redevelopment of the area and exemplifies the importance of considering the linkages to and from the Athletes' Village for the duration of and post-Games.

26

NJailal, 2012

Calgary, Canada

Calgary hosted the Olympics in 1988. With 1,423 athletes participating in these Games, it was one of the few Games which turned a profit. Two Athletes' Villages were developed, consisting of newly constructed and existing buildings, which are currently used as student housing and a sports centre (XV Olympic Winter Games Organizing Committee, 1988). Due to the smaller scale in this example than Toronto's case, the lessons here may not be as applicable to Toronto's Village development but successful elements of this event can always be adapted.

While the site is about 106 km outside of Calgary and does not directly serve this population, it has been adapted to continue to serve a tourism function outside the City. In 2004 to 2008, the Government of Alberta invested $25.6 million into refurbishing the Canmore Nordic Centre (CNC), bringing it up to international standards and establishing it once again as an international venue in Canada (Government of Alberta, 2010). Identified within the strategic plan for the park, CNC plans to work with national and provincial sport organizations to continue to host events and maintain the accommodations for athletes (Government of Alberta, 2010).

The Calgary Olympic Development Association first proposed the Olympic Village to be located at the University of Calgary in 1978, allowing for significant time to plan, develop and adapt in preparation of the Games (XV Olympic Winter Games Organizing Committee, 1988). 2,144 athletes and team officials were hosted and the development and improvements made to the University was coordinated through a working group with representatives from the University, Calgary Organizing Committee and Province of Alberta (XV Olympic Winter Games Organizing Committee, 1988). The strategic decision to create two Villages and collaborate with institutions allowed the project to be completed on time and on budget. It also shaped the resulting legacy post Games, which may not be a significant benefit to majority of residents but was also not much of a financial burden. 27

NJailal, 2012

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Rio de Janeiro hosted the Pan Am Games in 2007. The Games itself has been criticized as dividing Rio de Janeiro into a "First World space" or the Games venues and the "Third World city" continuing outside the periphery of the Games (Curi, Knijnik and Mascarenhas, 2011). The Pan Village or `Villa Pan' was built on a greenfield site north of Rio; while far from the population, the Organizing Committee announced a plan to connect the development by subway but this plan were not realized (Gaffney, 2010). In addition to being far from the existing population, the site was poorly chosen as it was built on unstable soils and thus required costly interventions such as foundations lowered to a depth of 50 metres (Curi et al, 2011).

The funding for this project, which went over budget, came from the Federal Workers Fund; the original purpose of this fund was to provide unemployment insurance and loans for workers (Curi et al, 2011). In 2009, the federal government ordered the head of the construction projects to repay $28 million because of inflated wages, undelivered services and contractual malfeasance (Gaffney, 2010). Riding (2010) identifies the ingrained corruption and security issues as two of the biggest issues evident during the 2007 Games. With little thought as to how the Village would be transformed post Games, the hasty construction of the Village resulted in additional costs due to the need to complete renovations to crumbling roads and other infrastructure only a few years after the development was constructed (Downie, 2011). Failure to deliver on promises like the new transit lines was another issue cited by Gaffney (2010), which had the effect of isolating a newly constructed community.

There was also poor time management during the development phase and no plan in place for how to repurpose the facilities post Games (Downie, 2011; Riding, 2010). Because Rio will now host the Olympics in 2016, some of the facilities will be reused although a new Village will be constructed as the Pan Village was transitioned to residential units and is now occupied. 28

NJailal, 2012

Gaffney (2010) discusses the social needs which could have been addressed through the preparation for the Games which included a need for improvements to public infrastructure, massive public debt and degradation of the City centre and port areas. In the case of Rio, the poor planning and lack of a long-term vision limited the City's success in addressing these issues and Toronto may take heed of this example as a warning against poor planning and time management in its own project.

Guadalajara, Mexico

Guadalajara, Mexico hosted the last Pan American and Para Pan Games held in 2011. Being the most recent Pan Am Games, it was important to look at the Village development and current issues and opportunities. Although there are obvious geographical, climatic and cultural differences when comparing the event held in Guadalajara and the one to be hosted in Toronto, there are lessons which can be incorporated into Toronto's planning process.

Managing risks relating to market fluctuations and building contingencies were an issue raised during this event. For example, there was a hurricane which came through during the event; while Toronto may not have a hurricane, a severe storm or other weather event could occur (Canadian Olympic Committee, 2011). This could have a direct impact on the Village and is worth considering when creating contingency plans. The flood protection landform in the West Don Lands is an example of a proactive response to potential flooding, which will protect the Village and approximately 518 acres of land (Waterfront Toronto, 2012d).

Again, as with the case in Rio, Guadalajara faced issues of timing and having the venue ready in time for for athletes' arrivals. Perhaps related, there were also complaints that the facilities were not working and toilets worked only at certain times (Buffery, 2011). Planning and allotting 29

NJailal, 2012

sufficient timing for the completion of the Village development is once again highlighted as a crucial aspect in the success of the Village. Because the Games were held recently in 2011, information on the transition of the community is not available but the issues with the facility during the Games are an indication of future issues to come once the transition takes place.

30

NJailal, 2012

Discussion
Based on the above lessons and literature reviewed, a discussion section is provided which integrates lessons learned with Toronto's current experience and plans for the Athletes' Village development. The Toronto Games can consider several items going forward to build on oversights made during previous events. The overall sustainability of the athletes' village is dependant on the resulting social, environmental and economic impacts. As interelated factors, some components may overlap and will be discussed under all relevant areas.

Social Considerations
The development of the Athletes' Village in the West Don Lands is a major effort in City and community building and achieves many of the City's objectives for Healthy Neighbourhoods.

As mentioned, new market and social housing will be an important legacy from the Games; based on the lessons from Vancouver's experience, Toronto has already required the selected development team to bring a higher amount of equity for this project as well as other contractual details which is a response to limiting the amount of risk the Province faces. As well, Toronto's has already secured contracts with affordable housing providers and two buildings will be turned over for social housing post Games. However, the project is still dependent upon the health of the real estate market and thus not all of the risk can be neutralized. Providing affordable home ownership in downtown Toronto is an important step towards providing reasonable options for Toronto's residents. Improvements to transit and access to existing trails will also work towards connecting neighbourhoods and people as well as improving access.

Amenities for the area have also been secured and once the Games have completed, YMCA and George Brown will take over their buildings. Unlike Rio de Janeiro, Toronto has chosen to build its Athletes' Village on prime Waterfront land in the host City which will create a completely new community with access to amenities. The West Don Lands have been subject to significant visioning and planning, similar to Vancouver's South False Creek. Because the preexisting vision exists for the site and is based on community input, the development team for the site has been given specific expectations and requirements to accomplish which will result in a better quality design and community, unlike the hasty, poorly planned legacy which Rio endures. The

31

NJailal, 2012

plans for new transit infrastructure, in the form of light rail, for this area, will be another benefit for Torontonians, affording better connections across the Waterfront.

While not a primary focus of this paper, the preservation of heritage buildings and incorporation of the Canary restaurant into the Village design will also achieve City objectives of preserving cultural heritage.

Environmental Considerations
The remediation of approximately 35 acres of land will be a significant legacy post-Games; without the need for an Athletes' Village centrally located in the Greater Toronto Area to be ready for Games, remediation would have occurred in a piecemeal fashion on a smaller scale and over a longer period of time, based on the market and interest from the development industry. Taking the lead from Vancouver's clean-up of a waterfront property, the West Don Lands will be revitalized and a brand new community will be created on top of a former industrial site. As with many risk assessed properties, risk management measures will have to be in place to mitigate any air, soil and groundwater issues to protect human and ecological health. While building residential communities on brownfields is not uncommon, ensuring the risk management measures are in place and properly monitored and maintained as per regulatory requirements will be important to ensure there are no negative impacts to human and ecological health.

Another significant legacy aspect will be the completion of the flood protection landform. To date, the environmental assessment and risk management undertaken for this project have already received the 2011 Canadian Urban Institute Brownie Award for Excellence at the neighbourhood scale (Waterfront Toronto, 2012d). The significant park land being developed at this site and in the surrounding areas also becomes a landmark feature. The site will also have a gateway access to the Lower Don Recreation Trail, which run north along the Don River and connects to other cultural heritage sites in the City.

The buildings being constructed are being built to LEED Gold standards to create an environmentally sustainable community. One aspect of the project includes a storm water treatment facility to deal with the unique features of the site, contain runoff and pollutants; this facility has been awarded an Award of Excellence in 2011 by the Canadian Architect magazine (Waterfront Toronto, 2012d). District energy will also be a component of the new community, 32

NJailal, 2012

which provides the opportunity to use a renewable energy source and become less dependent on the already stressed power grid.

Geotechnical issues due to the quality of soil exist for the development in the West Don Lands, similar to Rio de Janeiro's example. Unlike Rio, the land was envisioned as a residential community for decades so although it may be more costly, the development accomplishes City building objectives.

Economic Considerations
Many financial lessons were provided from the 2010 Vancouver Olympics. As a proactive response to issues which arose in Vancouver's experience, the government agencies interviewed who are overseeing the development have already instituted condo pricing stipulations into the agreement with the developer, specified higher equity requirements for the selected developer of the site as well as provided financial compensation during the bidding process to ensure the highest quality of designs were considered for the site. Infrastructure Ontario has backstopped the risk taken on by the private sector by providing a provincial loan concept as a way of addressing future market risk as well as maintaining ownership of the lands until the Games are over; these steps help to address uncertainties regarding future market risk as identified during interviews. As well, a mix of uses also helps to lower market absorption and risk; the George Brown residence, affordable housing buildings and YMCA will all be legacy from the Games but have already been sold to future owners who will take possession post Games.

The Village development may also act as a catalyst for further redevelopment in the area. As mentioned, in addition to the remaining parcels of the West Don Lands, directly to the south are the Port Lands, which are also primarily brownfield sites which require remediation before redevelopment. Once a community is installed in the West Don Lands, the City is able to create precinct plans based on lessons taken from both the current East Bayfront and West Don Lands revitalization; the development industry may be more inclined towards taking on redevelopment of the port.

The necessary improvements to infrastructure, including roads, parks, sewers and transit will have positive impacts on the local communities and also connecting the rest of the City to these 33

NJailal, 2012

improvements. The enhanced connections to new destinations such as the parks and legacy buildings can help to attract people to this area. When looking at Vancouver's success at using public-private partnerships for transit infrastructure, Toronto may be able to benefit from a similar arrangement for its own capital projects.

The legacy of the Village as a new community for Toronto has the potential be a source of many benefits for residents; however, if the City is interested in bidding to host the Olympics or another international event, other arrangements would need to be made to accommodate visitors. While the Village post Games may no longer be able to host visitors, the successful transition from the temporary use during the Games to the permanent use as a new community may be selling features for future bids.

34

NJailal, 2012

Recommendations
Based on the above discussion outlining the specific social, environmental, and economic factors relating to the construction of the 2015 Athletes' Village, the following recommendations have been provided to ensure that the legacy is a positive one for generations. This development will be a major City-building initiative; while it is already on its way to creating a brand new community with amenities for the residents of the area and City as a whole, these suggestions are encouraged to ensure that the overall process and specifically the transition period from athletes' living space to a permanent community is as seamless as possible.

In each recommendation, the appropriate body to undertake each task is suggested. Recommendations are as follows:  Infrastructure Ontario and other government agencies make use of their previous and recent expertise to investigate the feasibility of future mega-sporting events, such as the Olympics. Infrastructure Ontario and other government agencies should consider the impacts of creating an athletes' village to be converted to a permanent community on the chances of future applications to host mega-sporting events. It has been suggested that the bid to host the Pan Am Games was a stepping stone to indicating that Toronto could host the Olympics; if this is case, it will be important to address where athletes will stay and whether Toronto will benefit from another athletes' village development.  City of Toronto is encouraged to facilitate connections between the West Don Lands with the rest of the City through the provision of trails, cycling lanes and public transit options. Connecting an entirely new community to the rest of the City will be a long-term process and will require continued involvement from the City post Games to ensure this occurs. The West Don Lands development will house residents in an area of the City which was primarily vacant or underused. The specific needs of the community will only become apparent several years after the Games, as the earliest occupation is estimated at 2016. Planned initiatives like the gateway connecting the community to the Lower Don Recreational Trail, Waterfront Trail and transit improvements planned for the area to encourage mobility to and from the community will have to be honed to what the 35

NJailal, 2012

community will require. While the development is primarily an Infrastructure Ontario delivery, the City's involvement post Games will be crucial in the Village transitioning into a successful community along the waterfront.  City of Toronto may investigate the potential for expansion of the district energy system to future development sites or to connect existing nearby neighbourhoods or businesses. As one of the emerging district energy systems in the City, it is encouraged that the City work with the developer and owners of the area to determine whether the system can be expanded and additional communities or businesses in the area could come online. There is significant potential for district energy to help reduce reliance on Ontario's grid and expanding this system is an opportunity to consider.  An evaluation of the Athletes' Village project, from planning through to construction and transition phases, should be undertaken to provide lessons for future host cities but also for the City of Toronto and other government agencies for use in future large scale community development exercises, including potential Olympic Village developments. Evaluation at the end of the project and reflection will be an important learning point for the conclusion of the Pan Am Games and is an International Olympic Committee (IOC) requirement. However, it is encouraged that Waterfront Toronto, Infrastructure Ontario and the City of Toronto take on a review of the Athletes' Village as a separate effort. As the largest development project for the Games, this evaluation will provide the transparency encouraged for this type of public-private partnership. As well, a consideration of future improvements on the process as well as locations may be appropriate as a starting point for future bids on other mega-sporting events, which is of course dependant on government and public support.

36

NJailal, 2012

Conclusion
The preparation for the 2015 Pan American/Parapan Games coming to Toronto is spurring much development activity. The Athletes' Village, currently under construction in the West Don Lands has the potential as a large-scale development, to transform this part of the City and provide housing, amenities and improved public realm for the local community and Toronto as a whole. This paper investigated what the legacy surrounding the Athletes' Village development may be for Torontonians, as the great potential for positive change also requires significant investment and planning to be successful.

The approach taken consisted of primary and secondary research. Interviews, academic and policy literature was reviewed as well as case studies of experiences from previous mega sporting events. The case studies included three Canadian cities, Winnipeg, Vancouver and Calgary, as well as the last two cities to host the Pan American/Parapan Games, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and Guadalajara, Mexico.

What resulted from the research amounted to lessons learned during previous events with recommendations for how to enhance the legacy associated with the Athletes' Village for Toronto. While the most recent Canadian example, the 2010 Vancouver Olympics, allows Toronto to benefit from lessons that can be easily applied to the Toronto context, the actual impacts and lasting legacy of the development in the West Don Lands remain to be seen. The completion of the Athletes' Village and transition to a permanent Toronto community, the future Canary District, is a major effort in City building and, with the continued efforts and collaboration from all stakeholders, has the potential to become a thriving Waterfront community linking previously isolated areas of the City and accommodating future growth.

37

Appendix 1: Draft Plan of Subdivision for the Athletes' Village

(City of Toronto, 2011)

38

Appendix 2: Bibliography

Al-Attar, A.A. (2011). Planning for reuse and redevelopment of inner city blighted contaminated industrial sites. University of Waterloo (Thesis). Last Accessed on March 29, 2012 from http://uwspace.uwaterloo.ca/bitstream/10012/6330/1/Al-Attar_Akram.pdf Alcoba, N. (2011). Rob Ford `pumped' about Pan Am Games after Mexico trip. National Post (November 2, 2011). Last Access on April 14, 2012 from http://news.nationalpost.com/2011/11/02/rob-ford-pumped-about-pan-am-games-after-mexicotrip/?__lsa=85071c10. Alcoba, N. (2011, January 19). Pan Am Games cost jump to $96M. National Post. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from: http://www.globaltoronto.com/health/Games+costs+could+jump/4125182/story.html Battersby, Sarah-Joyce. (2012). Public-private partnership: the better way? Torontoist. Last Accessed on April 14, 2012 from http://torontoist.com/2012/03/public-private-partnerships-thebetter-way/. Bornstein, L.(2010). Mega-projects, city-building and community benefits. City, Culture and Society. 1 (2010): 199-206. Brown, A. and Massey, J. (2001). Literature review: the impact of major sporting events. Manchester Institute for Popular Culture: p. 1-41. Buffery, S. (2011). Canadian boxer has a back-up plan. Toronto Sun (October 21, 2011). Last accessed on March 29, 2012 from http://www.torontosun.com/2011/10/21/boxer-has-a-back-upplan.

39

Burton, R and O'Reilly, N. (2009). Weighing Olympic Host City Benefits. Sports Business Journal, September 7, p. 33. XV Olympic Winter Games Organizing Committee. (1988). XV Olympic winter games: official report. Canadian Olympic Association: 366. Canadian Winter Sport Institute. (2009). Calgary Olympic Development Association announces transformation to Canadian Winter Sport Institute. Last Accessed on Mar 28, 2012 from http://www.winsportcanada.ca/files/WinSportCanada_releases/WinSportCanadaNewsReleaseE NGFR.pdf. Canadian Olympic Association 1979. (1979). Calgary '88 logo. International Olympic Committee. Ast accessed on March 29, 2012 from http://www.olympic.org/content/olympicgames/all-past-olympic-games/winter/calgary-1988/calgary-1988-collection/. Cashman, R. (2010). Impact of the games on Olympic host cities. Olympic Studies Centre (CEO-UAB). Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://olympicstudies.uab.es/2010/docs/cashman_eng.pdf City of Toronto. (2007). Central Waterfront Secondary Plan: Land Use Plan Map. Last Accessed on March 24, 2012 from http://www.toronto.ca/waterfront/pdf/waterfront_cwp_revised_nov07.pdf. City of Toronto. (2009). Toronto Official Plan. City Planning Division. Toronto: City of Toronto. City of Toronto. (2010). King-Parliament part II secondary plan. Last Accessed on April 14, 2012 from http://www.toronto.ca/planning/official_plan/pdf_secondary/15_king_parliament_dec2010.pdf.

40

City of Toronto. (2011). 475 Front St E- Part Lot Control Exemption Application ­ Final Report. Staff Report (Toronto and East York Community Council): 6. City of Toronto. (2012). Waterfront Sanitary Servicing Master Plan. Last accessed on March 29, 2012 from http://www.toronto.ca/involved/projects/wfsanplan/index.htm. City of Toronto. (2012b). Athletes' Village: 2015 Pan / Parapan American Games. Last Accessed on March 29, 2012, from http://www.toronto.ca/civic-engagement/councilbriefing/pdf/1-3-12.pdf. Craig, M. (2011). TransLink and the 2010 winter games. Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE Journal 81.1.). January 2011: 56.60. Curi, M., Knijnik, J. and Mascarenhas, G. (2011). The Pan American Games in Rio de Janeiro 2007: consequences of a sport mega-event on a BRIC country. International Review for the Sociology of Sport. 46 (2): 149-156. David, R. (2009). Preliminary Report West Don Lands ­ Phase 2 Zoning By-Law Amendment, Lifting of the "H" Holding Symbol and Draft Plan of Subdivision Applications. City of Toronto. Last accessed on March 24, 2012 from http://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2009/te/bgrd/backgroundfile-19706.pdf. De Sousa, C. (2000). Brownfield redevelopment versus greenfield development: a private sector perspective on the costs and risks associated with brownfield redevelopment. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management (November 2000). 43 (6): 831-854. Dickinson, C. (2009). The Whistler housing authority story: a history of affordable housing in Whistler. Whistler Housing Authority: p. 1- 27.

41

Dill, P.M. and Bedford, P.J. (2001). Making waves: Central Waterfront Part II Plan. City of Toronto: 38. Downes, M. and Stork, T. (2011). Construction underway for new West Don Lands community in time for 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games. News Release for Waterfront Toronto and Infrastructure Ontario. Last Accessed from http://www.waterfrontoronto.ca/explore_projects2/west_don_lands/2015_pan_american_games. Downes, M. and Stork, T. (2011b). Preferred bidder selected for Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games athletes' village project. Waterfront Toronto and Infrastructure Ontario. Last Accessed on April 14, 2012 from http://www.infrastructureontario.ca/What-WeDo/Projects/Project-Profiles/Pan-Am-Athletes--Village/. Downie, A. (2011). Rio 2016: is Brazil going to be ready for the Olympics? Time World. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2093391,00.html#ixzz1Y8XrEcmV Essex, S. and Chalkley, B. (2002). The Olympic Games: Catalyst of Urban Change. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://www.plymouth.ac.uk/files/extranet/docs/SSB/eurolympicgames.pdf Essex, S. and Chalkley, B. (2004). Mega-Sporting Events in Urban and Regional Policy: A History of the Winter Olympics. Planning Perspectives. Vol. 19 (1): p. 201­32. Fisher, J. (1995). Urban intensification and the remediation of contaminated sites: Ataratiri as an example of a conflict of public policies. Queens University (Thesis). Last accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://www.queensu.ca/surp/research/Jeff%20Fischer.pdf. Frey, M., Iraldo, F., & Melis, M. (2008l). The Impact of Wide-Scale Sports Events on Local Development: An Assessment of the XXth Torino Olympics Through the Sustainability Report. 42

Social Sciences Research Network (April 2008). Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://ssrn.com/abstract=1117967 Gaffney, C. (2010). Mega-events and socio-spatial dynamics in Rio de Janeiro, 1919-2016. Journal of Latin American Geography. 9 (1): 7-31. Geltner, D. and Martinson, R.J. (2009). A real options analysis of Olympic Village development: how design flexibility adds value. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/54860. Government of Alberta. (2010). Canmore Nordic Centre Provincial Park Strategic Plan 20102015. Last accessed on March 29, 2012 from http://www.tpr.alberta.ca/parks/kananaskis/pdfs/cncpp-strategic-plan-2010-2015.pdf. Government of Alberta. (2011). Canmore Nordic Centre Provincial Park. Last accessed on March 29, 2012 from http://www.tpr.alberta.ca/parks/kananaskis/parks_canmore.asp. Government of Ontario. (2005). Places to Grow Act: 2005. Toronto: Queen's Printer for Ontario. Government of Ontario. (2005). Provincial Policy Statement, 2005. Toronto: Queen's Printer for Ontario. Government of Ontario. (2012). Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe, 2006. Office Consolidation (January 2012). Toronto: 70. Guadalajara Reporter. (2011). Pan American athlete's village. October 4, 2011. Last Accessed March 28, 2012 from http://guadalajarareporter.com/panamgames/29730-pan-americanathletes-village.html. Infrastructure Ontario. (2011). 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games athletes' village alternative financing and procurement project request for proposals RFP No. OIPC-11-00-I024. 43

Infrastructure Ontario. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from: www.infrastructureontario.ca/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id Infrastructure Ontario. (2012). What we do. Last accessed on March 24, 2012 from http://www.infrastructureontario.ca/What-We-Do/Projects/Project-Profiles/Pan-Am-Athletes-Village/ . International Olympic Committee. (2011). Olympic Charter. International Olympic Committee. Switzerland: 95. International Olympic Committee. (2012). Vancouver 2010. Last accessed on March 29, 2012 from http://www.olympic.org/vancouver-2010-winter-olympics. International Olympic Committee. (2012b). Montreal 1976. Last accessed on March 29, 2012 from http://www.olympic.org/content/olympic-games/all-past-olympic-games/summer/montreal1976/montreal-1976-collection/. Kesik, T., & Miller, A. (2008). Toronto Green Development Standard Cost Benefit Study. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: University of Toronto. Kirkman, R. (2010). The Ethics of Metropolitan Growth: The Future of Our Built Environment. London: Continuum International . Liao, H. and Pitts, A. (2006). A brief historical review of Olympic Urbanization. The International Journal of the History of Sport. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09523360600832502 MacKenzie, J. D. (2006). Moving towards sustainability in the Olympic games planning process. Thesis. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://summit.sfu.ca/item/2342

44

McIntosh, G. (2010). Council Briefing: Athletes' Village: 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://www.toronto.ca/civic-engagement/councilbriefing/pdf/1-3-12.pdf Novogrodsky, T. (n.d.) 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games: key agreements, structure & commitments. City of Toronto. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from: http://www.toronto.ca/civic-engagement/council-briefing/pdf/1-3-11.pdf Osbourne, C. (2010, April 28). A City Plans for the Pan Am Games. Azure. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from: http://www.azuremagazine.com/newsviews/blog_content.php?id=1524 Renzetti, E. (24 Sep 2011). The Lego Olympics. The Globe and Mail. Last Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/893873210?accountid=13631 Riding, A. (2010). Reinventing Rio. Smithsonian. 41(5): 72-81. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/748341171?accounti d=13631 Thomson, A., Leopkey, B., Schlenker, K., Schulenkorf, N. (2010). Sport event legacies: implications for meaningful legacy outcomes. Events and Festivals Research. Last Accessed on April 14, 2012 from http://www.eventsandfestivalsresearch.com/files/proceedings/THOMSON,%20LEOPKEY,%20S MALL%20&%20SCHULENKORF.pdf. Toronto 2015 Bid Book. (2009). Pan American & Parapan American Games, Toronto 2015 Bid Book. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://www.toronto2015.org/assets/files/pdf/Toronto-2015-Bid-Book-EN.pdf 45

Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games. (2011).Athletes' Village. Last Accessed on March 12, 2012 from http://www.toronto2015.org/lang/en/the-games/athletes-village.html. Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games. (2011b). Organizing Committee. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://www.toronto2015.org/lang/en/about-the-games/organizingcommittee1.html Toronto Waterfront Revitalization Corporation. (2005). West Don Lands Precinct Plan. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://www.toronto.ca/progress/pdf/west_don.pdf University of Manitoba. (1999). Athletes' Village (Image). Last accessed on March 12, 2012 from http://www.umanitoba.ca/panam/athletes.shtml. Unknown. (2012). Moving Forward On Development Of Major Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games Venues. America's Intelligence Wire (March 16, 2012). Last Accessed on April 14, 2012 from http://go.galegroup.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CA283259354&v=2.1&u=rp u_main&it=r&p=GRGM&sw=w Waterfront Toronto. (2010). Pan/Parapan American Games Athletes' Village. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from Waterfront Toronto: http://www.waterfrontoronto.ca/explore_projects2/west_don_lands/2015_pan_american_games Waterfront Toronto. (2012a). 013329 - Gallery Image (Community Aerial). Last Accessed on March 24, 2012 from http://www.waterfrontoronto.ca/image_galleries/2015_pan_am_games/?13326#13329. Waterfront Toronto. (2012b). 013329 ­ Gallery Image. Last accessed on March 24, 2012 from http://www.waterfrontoronto.ca/image_galleries/2015_pan_am_games/?13326#13329.

46

Waterfront Toronto. (2012c). Image Stream Time-Lapse Movie: Image of the berm facing West. Last Accessed on April 14, 2012 from http://www.waterfrontoronto.ca/explore_projects2/west_don_lands/flood_protection_landform Waterfront Toronto. (2012d). West Don Lands waterfront project accelerates community's development and provides new infrastructure. George Brown College, YMCA, Waterfront Toronto, Infrastructure Ontario (Fact Sheet). Last Accessed on April 14, 2012 from http://www.waterfrontoronto.ca/uploads/documents/paav___legacy_1.pdf. Waterfront Toronto. (September 9, 2011) Preferred bidder selected for Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American games athletes' village project. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from http://news.waterfrontoronto.ca/2011/09/preferred-bidder-selected-for-toronto-2015panparapan-american-games-athletes-village-project/ Wilson, P. (2011). Infrastructure Ontario Networking Session. Infrastructure Ontario. Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from: www.infrastructureontario.ca/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id Zimbalist, A. (2010). Is It Worth It? Hosting the Olympic Games and other mega sporting events is an honor many countries aspire to - but why? Finance & Development (March 2010). Last Accessed on March 28, 2012 from: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2010/03/pdf/zimbalist.pdf

47

