Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Preparing For Destruction : A Management Plan For The Los Angeles Police Department's 1925-1939 Collection Of Cellulose Nitrate Negatives
Esme T. Perry-Trueheart
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Photography Commons Recommended Citation
Perry-Trueheart, Esme T., "Preparing For Destruction : A Management Plan For The Los Angeles Police Department's 1925-1939 Collection Of Cellulose Nitrate Negatives" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1177.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Preparing for Destruction: A Management Plan for the Los Angeles Police Department's 1925-1939 Collection of Cellulose Nitrate Negatives

by Esme T. Perry-Trueheart, BA, Occidental College, 2004

A thesis presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management .

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008 © Esme T. Perry-Trueheart

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

11

Preparing for Destruction: A Management Plan for the Los Angeles Police Department's 1925-1939 Collection of Cellulose Nitrate Negatives Master of Arts, 2008 Esme T. Perry-Trueheart Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University/George Eastman House

Abstract From 1974 to 1982 a collection of negatives, created between 1925 and 1960 and belonging to the LAPD, were transferred to the city's Records Management Division, a total of 246 boxes. In 2001 researchers drew attention to the presence of deteriorating, highly inflammable cellulose nitrate negatives, and the Los Angeles Fire Department ordered the entire collection be destroyed. To prevent immediate destruction the collection was placed in a cold storage facility until it could be digitally re-photographed, catalogued, and then destroyed. In 2007 I received permission to use the portion of the collection containing the cellulose nitrate negatives, about 55,431 in forty boxes created between 1925 and 1939, as the subject of my thesis. I have organized the thesis into two sections. The first section contextualizes the collection and explains how I developed a plan for re-photographing, cataloguing, and storing a digital database of this negative collection that will eventually be destroyed. The second provides a management plan for the collection. Accompanying the management plan is an inventory documenting the current physical condition and the contents of each box. Completing this thesis is a bibliography which includes all sources used for both sections.

111

Acknowledgements

I want to thank David Harris, professor at Ryerson University and my thesis advisor, for his steadfast supervision and support throughout this thesis project. I also want to thank Abhay Sharma, professor at Ryerson University and my second reader, for his assistance in the completion of this thesis project. Thank you Todd Gaydowski, manager of the Record's Management Division of the City of Los Angeles, and Glynn Martin, executive director of the Los Angeles Police Historical Society, for assisting me with my research. To Raymond Kwan, manager of the photographic division of the CLA Office of the City of Los Angeles, I extend a special and great thank you for allowing me to complete this project and for being a wonderful mentor. I also am grateful to my family for their unfailing support. Thank you Mom, Dad, Hsiao Ling, Deja, James, David, Chloe, Elene, Eisha, and Grandmama.

IV

Table of Contents

Abstract ................................................................. : .................................... iii Acknowledgements ........................................................................................ .iv List of Illustrations .......................................................................................... vi Introduction .................................................................................................. 1 Police Photography and the Creation of the Collection from the Beginning to 1939 .......................................................... .4 History of the Collection, 1939-2007 .................................................................... 11 Development and Implementation of Management Plan, 2007-2008 ............................................................................ 12 Observations and Conclusions ............................................................................ 19 Illustrations ...................................................................................... .... ......... 20 Appendices A. Collection Management Plan for Cellulose Nitrate Negatives Belonging to the Scientific Investigation Division of the Los Angeles Police Department. ........................................................................ 24 B. Initial inventory ofLAPD collection of cellulose nitrate negatives ................................................................ 41 C. Final inventory ofLAPD collection of cellulose nitrate negatives ................................................................ 52 Bibliography .................................................................................................. 98

v

List of Illustrations

Figure 1. Label adhered to box 25242 ......................................................... . ........... 20 Figure 2. Interior of storage room 229 ....................... : ............................................. 2.1 Figure 3. Interior of storage room 230 ..................................................................... 22 Figure 4. Interior of box 05658 ............................................................................. 23 Figure 5. Interior of box 25252 ............................................................................. 23

VI

Introduction

Cellulose nitrate negatives are known for their high flammability and severe health hazards, which intensify and become more dangerous as the negatives deteriorate. Due to this detrimental nature many photographic collections with cellulose nitrate negative holdings have instituted plans to save their valuable images on a more stable material before they fade into brown, indistinguishable dust. This is the current situation facing a collection of forensic and mug shot negatives belonging to the Scientific Investigation Division (SID) of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD); this collection consists of cellulose nitrate and acetate negatives housed in 246 boxes, dating from 1925 to 1960, of which forty-five boxes contain black and white, 4"x5" cellulose nitrate negatives. 1 Many of the cellulose nitrate negatives, approximately 55,431, dating from 1925 to 1939, have already been lost to deterioration, and a plan must be devised and executed in order to save the remaining negatives before they are lost as well. However, the caveat, which makes the circumstances of this collection unusually challenging, is that the negatives will be digitally duplicated and then destroyed; the original, physical collection will no longer exist. At present the collection resides in a cold storage facility in Van Nuys, California, a facility that is paid for by the Chief Legislative Analyst's Office (CLA); although the entire collection belongs to the LAPD, access and use of the storage space is controlled by the CLA Office. 2 This creates a dynamic relationship between these two departments, each with its own

Color photographic processes were not used by LAPD from 1925 to 1939 because the color processes available at the time did not meet the needs for documentary, forensic purposes. 2 United States copyright law, U.S. Code Title 17, states that works made for hire belong to the employer responsible for funding the work, in this case LAPD. Works made for hire are protected from acts of infringement for a duration of 120 years from the date they are created. I was given access, as a

1

responsibilities. TheCLA Office controls the space because it pays the rental fees and eventually the office would like to eliminate this expenditure in order to make the funds available for other needs within its department. In order to free up these funds the CLA Office has made the following proposal: transfer the LAPD' s stable cellulose acetate negatives to the city archives and have the cellulose nitrate negatives digitally reproduced, catalogued, and then destroyed. Recently the LAPD has stated that it would prefer to keep the cellulose nitrate negatives as they are, but move the negatives to another storage facility, and outsource digital re-imaging to a scanning vendor. 3 Both departments share a desire to preserve the documentary and contextual value of the collection while they diverge on how to approach this process. I will not argue for one department's cause over the other. Since I have volunteered and worked with the CLA Office to develop this project, the collection management plan I have created reflects this department's priorities and interests; the management plan, which has been developed in close collaboration with Raymond K wan, manager of photographic services division of the CLA Office, is a structured, step-by-step process outlining how to prepare the negatives for digitization and how to digitally duplicate and catalogue the pertinent information in the images before the cellulose nitrate negatives are destroyed. My thesis is organized into two sections. The first provides contextual and historical information related to the collection, and the second is the collection management plan. The first section outlines the historical background specific to Los Angeles during the 1920s through the 1930s, the arrangement of police records, and police photography techniques. It also explains in detail my process for developing and carrying out the management plan. This section provides the context in which to understand the historical value of this collection. The management plan,
consultant, to review the overall condition of the collection in order to complete a management plan but was not permitted to re-photograph any of the negatives for this project. 3 Raymond Kwan, e-mail with author, July 14, 2008.

2

set out in the second section, is an instruction manual that leads one through the necessary steps to complete the duplication and cataloguing requirements of each negative. In addition to these two sections are two inventories, which were used at different stages of my assessment of the collection: the first is a basic list of the forty-five boxes that contain cellulose nitrate negatives and their current physical conditions, and the second is a more detailed inventory that includes the same information from the initial survey as well as the Division of Report (DR) number4 range, negative count, and additional notes. A bibliography concludes my thesis. The sources used for both the written accompaniment and the management plan are arranged into five sections: collection arrangement and description, handling and identification of cellulose nitrate film, Los Angeles Police Department history, police photography techniques and procedures, and police photography exhibitions and publications.
5

A DR number is an individual report number assigned to each criminal case that connects all associated written and photographic documents together; every negative has a DR number handwritten in black on its surface that indicates to what case it belongs. 5 See Appendices B and C.

4

3

Police Photography and the Creation of the Collection from the Beginning to 1939

The early organization of police photographic records in the United States of America was "not easily subdivided except on the basis of names, which constantly change[ d]" 6 and it was not until the introduction of the Bertillon system in 1883, by Alphonse Bertillon (18531914), a French police records clerk, that a more structured arrangement of police records became achievable. The Bertillon system introduced both a system for taking mug shots and photographing crime scenes. The results were called "metric photograph[ s], [because the system] made it possible to compute all [physical] measurements directly from the photograph."7 Bertillon devised the present day mug shot style of obtaining both an anterior and profile image of the subject with a "relation between the size of the individual in reality and the photograph [being] 1:7"8 allowing for anthropometric measurements of the head and face to be recorded directly from the image. 9 Based on several precise measurements of physical attributes, and broken down into three .sections, "bodily measurements ... measurements of the head ... [and] measurements of the limbs," 10 the identification of a criminal could be significantly narrowed down to an accuracy unmatched until the introduction of fingerprinting in the early twentieth century.

J. Edgar Hoover, "Criminal Identification," The American Journal ofPolice Science Vol. 2, No. 1 (1931), 9. 7 Harry Soderman, "Science and Criminal Investigation," Annals of the American Academy ofPolitical and Social Science, Vol. 146 (1929), 239. 8 Harry Soderman, Modern Crimina/Investigation, (New York: Funk and Wagnalls Company, 1935), 51. 9 To attain this ratio, Soderman states in Modern Crimina/Investigation, some police departments used a camera and chair fixed to a joined platform; a lever on the camera was used to turn the chair from anterior to profile views. Another method used was to place a studio camera seven feet from the subject for the anterior view and move the camera six inches closer to the subject for the profile view. 10 Soderman, Modern Crimina/Investigation, 42.

6

4

Bertillon's metric photography system for crime scene photography was more complicated and was never widely adopted; the type of camera, lenses required, and necessary guidelines were much more complicated than capturing a natural perspective with a more portable camera. 11 Despite this minor drawback, the Bertillon method for recording bodily measurements was quickly adopted and used by police departments as an anthropometric method of physical identification that accompanied photographic documentation of the criminal. The LAPD 's use of photography as a tool to aid crime control began with the introduction of the Bertillon system by Police Chief John M. Glass (acting chief from 1889 to 1900) in 1889. 12
In the 1920s photographic records became part of a new division of the police department

dedicated specifically to scientific investigation, the forerunner of the current Scientific Investigation Division. The division was established by Police Chief August Vollmer (acting chief from 1923 to 1924) in 1923 13 and expanded under the direction of Police Chief R. Lee Heath (acting chief from 1924 to 1926). 14 Vollmer was a leading advocate for implementing the use of scientific criminal investigation in police departments and "assisted personally in the reorganization and modernization of the operating methods of scores of police departments." 15 While working for the LAPD he "inaugurated new methods of organization and systematic operation ... [and the] Records and Identification Bureau was entirely reorganized and equipped to conform with the

Ibid., 98 "Inside the LAPD," The History.Channel, DVD (April 25, 2006). 13 Los Angeles Police Department, "History of the LAPD: 1900-1925," The Los Angeles Police Department, http://www.lapdonline.org/history_of_the_lapd/content_basic_view/1108. 14 Thomas G. Hays and Arthur W. Sjoquist, Images ofAmerica: Los Angeles Police Department, (Chicago: Arcadia Publishing, 2005), 45. 15 O.W. Wilson, "August Vollmer," The Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology, and Police Science, Vol. 44, No. 1 (1953), 100.
II 12

5

system of organization, photographic records lost their efficacy; "large accumulations almost destroyed the usefulness of photographic files, as it is a tiresome and often a confusing task for the victim of thieves to view all of the pictures, even though segregated as outlined above." 20 Vollmer stressed that the top priority of police photography is to provide visual information that will aid in the apprehension of a criminal and solve criminal activity and that this could not be achieved if the record can not be promptly accessed. Vollmer's proposal for a new police record system outlines an arrangement comprised of twenty-one types of files. The ninth file is the Criminal Descriptive File, 21 which contains "photographs and descriptions of criminals, segregated according to the criminal specialty, such as burglars, checkmen, 22 safe blowers, etc., further divided by hair color, eye color, height, weight and age. " 23 Other files such as Special Marks File (descriptions of visible physical demarcations), Geographical File, Handwriting File and Individual Finger Print Impression File are cross referenced with the Criminal Record File; this system of cross referencing facilitates the retrieval of a greater amount of information at a quicker rate.
In addition to Vollmer's efforts to establish an organizational system for arranging

photographic records there was also a need for establishing a system of photographic techniques for crime scenes and mug shots. Vollmer does not address photo graphing techniques himself but refers to criminology books which address photographic procedures in a bibliography he created for a course he taught at the University ofChicago. 24 One of these sources is Alfred Lucas's

Ibid. The file names in Vollmer's article only have the first word capitalized but I have normalized capitalization for this text. 22 Checkmen are individuals that commit check forgery. 23 Ibid., 173-174. 24 August Vollmer, "Bibliography on Police Organization and Administration, Criminal Identification and Investigation," The American Journal ofPolice Science, Vol. 2, No. 1 ( 1931 ), 76.
21

20

7

1921 Forensic Chemistry and Scientific Investigation which includes a chapter on the use of "Microscopy, Photography, X-Rays, Ultra-Violet Rays and Infra-Red Rays."
It is well known that photographs can be easily manipulated through lighting,

composition and varying points of view that will portray the same subject in a number of very different ways. In a 1938 article, "Photography in Criminal Investigations," Charles Calvin Scott, an attorney and contributing author to the Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, describes the nature of the photographic image as being in the hands of the photographer: "[t]he camera always portrays accurately whatever a trained photographer wished it to show. Hence, by the expert manipulation of his equipment a skilled photographer can create a false or misleading photograph, and likewise, the bungling tyro 25 may snap a picture that presents the subject in such a way as to mislead judge and jury. It is important, therefore, that the capacities and limitations of the photographic process should be understood by all who use it in establishing the guilt or innocence of those accused of crime. " 26 Since police photography is used exclusively for documentary and evidentiary purposes, Scott emphasized the importance of minimizing the margins of variability in crime scene and mug shot photographs caused by lighting and composition. Scott provided a detailed account of police photographing techniques in his 1938 article. In addition to Bertillon's anterior and profile mug shot style, which is still practiced today, Scott points out the importance of standardizing lighting effects and how different types of film and filters can alter a mug shot. Ideally lighting should be flat with a white background, which will eliminate any heavy shadows. 27 There are many types of film that can be used but the primary

A tyro 1s . a1 . so kn own as a novice. Charles Calvin Scott, "Photography in Criminal Investigations," Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 29, No.3 (1938), 383. 27 Scott, 409.
25 26

8

objective is to "reproduce the face just as it would appear to the normal eye"28 and so the film chosen must meet this requirement. Crime scene photographs also must have adequate lighting and proper film to attain a realistic perspective and a detailed focus depth in order to convey an accurate portrayal of the distance between objects in a scene.
29

To achieve a reliable perspective of the crime scene

"whenever possible the camera should be so placed that the two objects are the same distance from the camera" and, if this is not possible due to layout of the scene, the type of camera lens used must show the most natural perspective achievable given the circumstances. 30 To ensure sharp detail "the lens should always be used at the smallest practical diaphragm in order to secure the greatest possible depth offocus;" 31 everything in the photograph must be in focus to ensure details of the crime scene investigation are accessible in the future. 32 There is also a ·procedure for the sequence in which crime scene photographs are taken. Harry Soderman, a renowned Swedish forensic scientist/ 3 wrote in his 1935 publication Modern Criminal Investigation that it is the police photographer's responsibility to "reenact the story of the crime from beginning to end." 34 The first photographs should be general views of the layout, from at least two different angles, taken just at the perimeter of the crime scene. Then the photographer moves into the scene, taking, for example, a close-up of the point of entry by a burglar where furniture has been disturbed. Added to this are further detailed photographs that
28

Ibid. No other method for determining distances from a photographic print for police purposes had been introduced at this time except for the previously discussed Bertillon system. However, detailed sketches of crime scenes were recorded that depicted the layout of the crime scene and measurements of pertinent features . 30 Scott, 387. 31 Ibid. 32 s cott, 392. 33 Harry Soderman was the head of the National Forensic Science Institute in Stockholm and was one of the founders of International Criminal Police Organization, also known as Interpol. 34 Soderman, Modern Criminal Investigation, 97.
29

9

would focus, for example, on blood stains found on a piece of an overturned chair or crowbar marks on the doorjamb. The method is to move further into the scene in order to create a sense of how the event may have occurre d.
35

While the LAPD underwent reorganization of its records management system and implemented structured photographic techniques and procedures, the city it served was rapidly growing and the overall municipal environment was changing. Through the 1920s and 1930s there were financial and legal constraints as well as government corruption that stretched the police force's resources and caused tension within the department. The city's square mileage expanded from 260 to 450 and the population increased to nearly one million in a span of seventeen years (1915-1932) without a compensatory increase of law enforcement officers. 36 There were additional criminal complications due to circumstances associated with Prohibition (1920 to 1933) 37 and economic strains related to the Great Depression (beginning in 1929). The LAPD also suffered from corruption within the department and city government during this time. Under the directions of Police Chief James E. Davis (acting chief from 1926 to 1931 and from 1933 to 1939) and Mayor Frank Shaw (acting mayor from 1933 to 1938) the "LAPD became known for [the] brutal, unconstitutional treatment of vagrants, 'radical' labor and political organizers, and critics of the municipal administration. " 38 It is within this social and political context that the LAPD collection of 55,431 cellulose nitrate negatives was created between 1925 and 1939.

Soderman, Modern Crimina/Investigation, 96-97 Los Angeles Police Department, "History of the LAPD: 1900-1925," The Los Angeles Police Department, http://www.lapdonline.org/history_of_the_lapd/content_basic_view/11 08. 37 This is evident by the presence of negatives that depict bootleg raids . . 38 Gerald Woods, The Police in Los Angeles: Reform and Professionalism (New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1993), 103.
36

35

10

History of the Collection, 1939-2007

The collection of negatives physically remained with the Scientific Investigation Division (SID) of the LAPD from their creation until1974. How the negatives were housed and stored from 1939 to 1974 is unknown; it may have been that the negatives were organized similarly to how they are now, by report numbers and subject matter, and were stored in boxes or file cabinets for convenient retrieval. From 1974 to 1982 SID began to transfer the collection to the Records Management Division of the City Clerk's Office. 39 The Records Management Division is where departments of the City of Los Angeles, including those of the LAPD, house records that are no longer current and for which they do not have adequate storage space. It is during this transfer period that the negatives where placed in record storage boxes and given their current five-digit box number and barcode (seen in figure one on page 19). In 2001 the collection was found to contain deteriorating cellulose nitrate negatives and, because this posed severe fire and health hazards, it was ordered to be destroyed by the Los Angeles Fire Department. The Chief Legislative Analyst at the time, Ron Deaton, heard of the imminent destruction and undertook the responsibility of caring for the collection by transferring it to a cold storage facility in Van Nuys, California with the intention of re-photographing, cataloguing, and then destroying the original cellulose nitrate negatives. 40 At present access to the collection is under the direct supervision and control of Raymond Kwan, manager of the photographic services division of the CLA Office.

39 40

Todd Gaydowski, e-mail message to author, March 24, 2008. Raymond Kwan, telephone interview with author, November 2008.

11

Development and Implementation of Management Plan, 2007-2008

My preliminary research began the fall of 2007 at the George Eastman House in Rochester, New York; I began by researching and familiarizing myself with methods of identification, handling, and the health hazards of cellulose nitrate negative sheet film. 41 Identification of cellulose nitrate film can be determined from the manufacturing date, edge notch codes and deteriorative characteristics. The manufacturing of cellulose nitrate film began in 1889 by Eastman Kodak. The production of 35mm roll films was discontinued in 1938 and commercial sheet film in 1939. 42 Cellulose acetate film, which eventually superseded cellulose nitrate film, began to be manufactured in 1925 creating a fourteen-year time span in which both cellulose nitrate and acetate sheet films were used. After researching the handling techniques and potential hazards, I went to Los Angeles for two weeks in December 2007 to carry out an initial survey of the collection. During this time I reorganized the 246 boxes in storage rooms 229 and 230 43 by placing the boxes in numerical order based on each box's five-digit number to facilitate their later physical inspection. Next, I began inspecting every box and labeled each as containing cellulose nitrate, cellulose acetate, both or deteriorated cellulose nitrate films. If I discovered severely deteriorated negatives, I separated these boxes by placing them on their own shelf within storage room 229. In February 2008 I returned to Los Angeles for two weeks and completed indentifying the contents of the

Additional information related to the identification, handling and hazards of cellulose nitrate film can be found in sections II and III of Appendix A. 42 Preservation Leaflets, "Short Guide to Film Base Photographic Materials: Identification, Care, and Duplication," Northeast Document Conservation Center, http://www .nedcc.org/resources/leaflets/5Photographs/O 1ShortGuide. php. 43 See figures two and three, pp. 21-22.

41

12

remaining boxes and took photographic documentation of the interiors of each box containing cellulose nitrate negatives. Of the 246 boxes, forty- five contained cellulose nitrate negatives (comprising approximately 55,431); these boxes are now labeled as "Nitrate," "Nitrate and Acetate" or "Deteriorated Nitrate, Destroy ASAP." All the negatives are 4"x5" cellulose nitrate sheet film; they range in date from 1925 to 1939, and, for the most part, were manufactured by Eastman Kodak. The LAPD used cellulose nitrate sheet film until its discontinuation in 1939. The negatives are also in various states of deterioration, ranging from physically stable to completely irrecoverable (seen in figures four and five on page 23). The negatives are by and large arranged in chronological order and by subject matter, and each negative has its own individual report number known as a DR number; in some cases negatives are associated with the same crime and therefore share the same report number. Most of the negatives are mug shots but there are also images depicting assault victims, automobile collisions, crime scenes and deceased individuals laid out on morgue examination tables (of which both an anterior and profile is taken of the person). Unfortunately, at some point in this collection's life some of the negatives were rearranged and, as a result, there are boxes that contain negatives from dates other than those indicated on their corresponding labels. Also, in 2001 and in 2004 researchers removed a selection of negatives from their original boxes and placed them in two twelve-gallon plastic bins. I assume this was done to separate images that were being considered for use in the exhibition To Protect and Serve: The LAPD Archives -100

Years of Photography (200 1), and in the publication Scene of the Crime: Photographs from the LAPD Archive, (2004). 44

44

Both the exhibition (traveled from 2001 to 2005) and publication (2004) included a selection ofLAPD mug shots and forensic images, dated from 1926 to 1974.

13

After completing a thorough assessment of the collection (with information on its size, organization and physical condition) an inventory of all boxes containing cellulose nitrate negatives was made. The inventory is forty-five pages long and outlines each box's contents: it includes information on its inclusive dates and physical condition, provides a photographic image of the box interior and, in some cases, contains additional explanatory notes. Also included in the inventory is the estimated number of negatives in each box; some of the boxes' negatives were counted by hand to attain an approximate number and this number was used for the remaining boxes. The inventory of the forty-five boxes, Appendix C beginning on page 51, allows for quick and convenient retrieval of information related to any one of the boxes and limits unnecessary physical handling and exposure to possible health hazards. After the inventory was created in February 2008, 45 different methods of photographic duplication were considered. While institutions usually duplicate cellulose nitrate negatives onto acetate or polyester based film, the CLA Office preferred to create digital surrogates. Digital reproduction is normally only used for database access and to alleviate physical handling of an original object but rarely for replacing one entirely. In preservation literature, there are two reasons for doing this. Firstly, digital technology is not permanent; what may be the commonly used storage medium today may, in all likelihood, become obsolete in ten years, 46 and the cost of maintaining digital technology is expensive. The second reason is the original object will no longer be available for reference and research. What once was three-dimensional and could be held in one's hand becomes two-dimensional and viewable only on a computer screen; there is considerable informational loss from the original to the new digital copy.

The inventory was completed in May 2008, after I returned to Los Angeles to finish counting the negatives. 46 For example, floppy discs which were commonly used during the 1990s are now outdated and compact discs only have a shelf life of seven to ten years.

45

14

At present the collection is difficult to access because of its remote geographical location and its present organization. There is no documentation indicating the location of specific events and crimes and negatives cannot be individually viewed unless inspected one-by-one; given the size of this collection attempting to find specific images is an intimidating feat. In a digital format the collection will become far easier to access and research. The CLA Office already maintains its own digital image collection so this organizational system can easily be extended to manage this collection as well. Also, a collection in digital format can reside in two different locations, simultaneously with the LAPD and the CLA Office. A digital existence will also free up money now being used to rent space to house the collection. After deciding to digitally duplicate the negatives I began to develop and formulate a collection management plan with a step-by-step structure; this is appended to this text as a separate document, beginning on page twenty-three. After two introductory sections, the plan is divided into seven major sections: 1) identification of cellulose nitrate and acetate negatives, 2) separation of cellulose nitrate and acetate negatives, 3) digitally duplicating cellulose nitrate negatives, 4) recording information onsite, 5) recording information offsite, 6) storing completed digital files and 7) disposing of original cellulose nitrate negatives. The primary difference between my proposed plan and ones commonly used in archives, besides digital replacement, is that mine encourages item-level cataloguing. Item-level cataloguing is not usually carried out because it is both time consuming and more labor intensive than creating a series or record group description and arrangement. 47 If this collection were not being destroyed one of these two standard forms of arrangement and description would be more realistic. Item-level cataloguing will ensure that every negative is reviewed and that nothing is overlooked before it is destroyed.

David W. Carmichael, Organizing Archival Records: A Practical Method ofArrangement & Description for Small Archives (New York: Altamira Press, 2004), 6.

47

15

It is also recommended that contextual information related to the collection be thoroughly

researched and recorded; a collection's significance and potential uses cannot be determined if its historical and institutional context is unknown or lost. To create a contextual framework in which to place the creation of this collection, I researched the general history of the LAPD and its use and organization of photographic records during the time period of 1925 to 193 9. During my research I discovered that the majority of the police records, including the photographic prints, associated with these negatives have been systematically destroyed because they are only kept for ten years after their creation. Murder investigations are the one exception and their records are kept indefinitely. 48 Although the reports related to the negatives in this collection have been destroyed, the general historical context in which they were created is still recoverable. In fact the lost records only strengthen the need to make this collection more widely accessible as it is the only remaining historical reference. After discussing with Raymond K wan about how to make the collection more accessible and secure its longevity, we decided that the best mode of digital reproduction would be using a low-heat lightbox and copy stand with a digital camera. Due to scanners' tendency to heat up over a period of continual use and cellulose nitrate film's high flammability, the copy stand is the safest choice. Another difficult decision was choosing a safe storage medium on which to keep the digital files; one of the major drawbacks with digital storage media is it is not permanent, quickly degrades, and becomes technologically outdated. I concluded that external hard-drives should be used, with at least two sets kept in two different locations and compact discsrecordable (CD-Rs) used for transferring files. Although a collection database has not yet been decided upon, to prepare for future use within a searchable database I decided that each file will
Todd Gaydowski informed me that reports associated with murder investigations are inaccessible to me as a civilian in an e-mail sent May 28, 2008. As a result, I gained no information on how these existing records of past criminal cases are currently organized, stored and retrieved.
48

16

have a limited set of keywords attached to it, which can be applied through the "File Info" feature of Adobe Photoshop; 49 in this way the new metadata will be inseparable from the file. There will also be an Excel worksheet created for each box's contents, which will be filled out as the negatives are photographed and catalogued. Recording information while the negative is in hand will lessen the probability of losing or overlooking data. A more thorough and detailed, item-level inventory can aid in identifying the potential needs of future government and public researchers. In 2001 the collection was used as the basis of an exhibition, To Protect and Serve: The LAPD Archives - 100 Years ofPhotography, 50 and, in 2004, of a book, Scene of the Crime: Photographs from the LAPD Archive. In addition to providing material for potential future exhibitions and publications,5 1 the collection is also an invaluable resource to those studying the progression of scientific investigation, historical autopsy methods by the county morgue, and documentation of historical events. At the time of writing this thesis, some preliminary protective measures have been implemented but the majority of the work has yet to be done. In addition to boxes containing cellulose nitrate negatives being identified, a portion of the "Nitrate and Acetate" boxes have been sorted through and the cellulose nitrate negatives separated from the cellulose acetate ones with interleaving paper within the box. The five boxes that contain irrecoverable and highly hazardous cellulose nitrate negatives (25252, 26470B, 26474B, 26688, 27090A) have been
This process is outlined in the seventh section the management plan, page 35. A selection of the images used in the exhibition, the exhibition's traveling history, and additional information can be found at the Fototeka website, http://fototeka.com/lapd/index.html. Fototeka is a gallery owned by Merrick Morton one of the exhibition organizers. 51 In fact, police departments' historical photographs have been the subject of a number of exhibitions and publications over the past decade. The San Francisco Museum of Modem Art showed Police Pictures (October 17, 1997- January 20, 1998), an exhibition organized by Sandra S. Phillips, which focused on portraying the different functions of photography police departments implement. Another exhibition, Least Wanted (shown at the Steven Kasher Gallery, in New York City, from September to October 2006), presented the progression of the mug shot over a period of a hundred years. There are also a number of publications which focus on police photography.
50 49

17

physically separated from the rest of the collection, and the necessary personnel have been alerted to the need for their immediate destruction. The collection management plan (Appendix A) outlines the main work that remains to be done.

18

Observations and Conclusions

My biggest concerns throughout this project have been addressing the matter of destroying original documents and relying solely on digital surrogates. These are not easy decisions to make especially when every source advises against it with convincing arguments. However given the historical importance of this collection and the two departments' different areas of control - the CLA Office's control over the space and the LAPD 's control over the use of the collection - it still appears to be the best option; the collection will be far more easily available and accessible in digital form than it currently is in its physical state. The only area with which I differ with the CLA Office is with the decision to destroy all of the cellulose nitrate negatives. I would advise instead consolidating the boxes of cellulose nitrate negatives into one secure storage room, returning the cellulose acetate negatives to the archives, and destroying only the irrecoverable negatives. This would reduce storage costs by at least half. At the conclusion of my involvement with this collection and project I feel comfortable with the current state of affairs, and I am pleased to see my involvement has caught the attention of those who are responsible for the protection and survival of the collection. As of July 2008, there is still discussion between the LAPD Public Information Office and the CLA Office as to what will happen to the collection. While the LAPD wants to move the collection to another facility and hire a scanning vendor to digitize the negatives, 52 the CLA Office maintains the images now belong to its department and wants to pursue its proposal for digitization and disposal, and is currently looking into hiring a scanning vendor to begin this process. 53

52 53

Raymond Kwan, e-mail with author, July 14, 2008. Raymond Kwan, phone interview with author, July 22, 2008.

19

Illustrations

2524
II 1 111111111 11111111
LOS ANGELES POLICE DEPARTMENT/SCIENTIF IC INVESTIGATION 01\J NEGATIVES- CRIMES AND BOOKINGS LA 30169M12 THRU LA 30375M11 FROM : 01/01/1948 TO : 12/31/1948 0015

PDX/71

000000131

DESTROY : 12/31/1968

Figure 1. Label adhered to box 25242 Photographed by author in Van Nuys, California, February 2008

20

Figure 2. Interior of storage room 229 Photographed by author in Van Nuys, California, February 2008

21

Figure 3. Interior of storage room 230 Photographed by author in Van Nuys, California, February 2008

22

Figure 4. Interior of box 05658, in physically stable condition Photographed by author in Van Nuys, California, February 2008

Figure 5. Interior of box 25252, in advanced stages of deterioration Photographed by author in Van Nuys, California, February 2008

23

Appendix A

Esme T. Perry-Trueheart

Collection Management Plan for Cellulose Nitrate Negatives Belonging to the Scientific Investigation Division of Los Angeles Police Department

July 2008

24

Table of Contents:

I. Introduction to Collection ................................................................................ 26 II. Procedures for Handling and Housing ................................................................ 27 III. Identification of Cellulose Nitrate and Acetate Negatives ......................................... 29 IV. Separation of Cellulose Nitrate and Acetate Negatives ............................................ 31 V. Digitally Duplicating Cellulose Nitrate Negatives ................................................... 32 A. Cleaning negatives B. Photographing negatives VI. Recording Information Onsite ........................................................................ 34 VII. Recording Information Offsite ....................................................................... 35 A. Adjusting image files B. Applying file information VIII. Storing Completed Digital Files ..................................................................... 39 IX. Disposing of Original Nitrate Negatives ............................................................ .40

25

I. INTRODUCTION TO COLLECTION

This collection of cellulose acetate and nitrate negatives, created between 1925 and 1960, is housed in 246 boxes. Of these boxes forty 54 have cellulose nitrate negatives and are labeled as containing either cellulose nitrate or cellulose nitrate and cellulose acetate 4"x5" black and white sheet film. These negatives date from 1925 to 1939 and range in subject matter from mug shots through crime scenes, automobile collisions and assault victims to deceased individuals on examination tables. The purpose of this management plan is to identify, digitally duplicate and catalogue all the approximately 55,431 cellulose nitrate negatives in this portion of the collection prior to their destruction. This management plan was completed in conjunction with a written accompaniment. The accompaniment includes historical information related to police photography and social developments in the City of Los Angeles during the 1920s and 1930s. It explains the reasoning for the procedures outlined in this plan. For additional information, please consult this document.

There are five additional boxes that contain cellulose nitrate negatives (25252, 26470B, 26474B, 26688, 27090A) but these have deteriorated beyond recoverability and have been set aside for destruction.

54

26

II. GENERAL PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING AND HOUSING

Order for Processing Boxes:
All boxes containing irrecoverable negatives have been set aside for eventual disposal. At present, the rest of the collection of negatives, housed in the remaining forty boxes, is currently stable. To maintain order and prevent confusion, it is recommended that boxes be handled numerically, as they appear in the inventory. 55
It is best to process an entire box from start to finish. Each box should be taken, one at a

time, to the workspace, in between floors one and two of the storage facility. If the box is heavy use a dolly and the elevator.

How to House Materials:
Keep all materials used for cleaning, re-photographing, and cataloguing onsite in one of the storage rooms. Exceptions are the digital camera and laptop which will travel with the employee(s) between onsite and offsite locations. Leave the copy stand and lightbox in the workspace.

How to Handle Negatives:
Health hazards associated with cellulose nitrate film are due to noxious gasses (nitric oxide, nitrous oxide and nitrous dioxide) and nitric acid, which are emitted during the successive stages of its deterioration, and due to the extreme flammability of cellulose nitrate film. The fumes emitted can cause eye irritation, respiratory complications and headaches. Direct skin

55

See Appendix C

27

contact can cause irritations such as rashes and sores. 56 Due to the unstable and dangerous nature of cellulose nitrate negatives, the best precautions are to wear gloves (disposable latex or nitrile) at all times during handling, a protective smock over clothing, protective goggles if contacts are worn (gasses will dry out contacts), and a filtered mask over your nose and mouth for negatives in an advanced state of deterioration. 57 However, with this collection, a mask is optional but not necessary, since all remaining cellulose nitrate film is in stable condition and has not begun to emit fumes. Also it is best to work in a well ventilated area so that fumes are constantly filtered out of the workspace.

Working Schedule: Work onsite at the cold storage facility for three days of the week. The remaining two days of the week should be spent in the office completing the cataloguing and creating JPEG derivatives. When working onsite, photograph for half of the day and catalogue what has been photographed for the remaining half of the day.

Patricia W. Hollinshead, Mark D. Wan Ert, et al, "Deteriorating Negatives: A Health Hazard in Collection Management," Arizona State Museum, The University of Arizona (1987), 1. 57 National Park Service, "Handling and Shipping Cellulose Nitrate Film," Conserve 0 Gram 2, no. 20 (2003), 3.

56

28

PROPK1*.TY OF RYEaiG~ ~ 'ms'TYIIRtW

III. IDENTIFICATION OF CELLULOSE NITRATE AND ACETATE NEGATIVES

The obvious distinction between the two films is that "NITRATE" appears printed on the edge of cellulose nitrate negatives and "SAFETY" appears on the edge of cellulose acetate negatives. Another method of identification is using the film's notch codes on the edge but, this is only applicable if the film is Kodak and manufactured before 1949; Kodak is the only manufacturer to publish information related to their notch codes. If the first notch from the edge is a "V" shape it is cellulose nitrate, if the first notch from the edge is a "U" shape it is cellulose acetate. 58 When no date, notch codes, or edge printing are available, signs of deterioration may be of help. Cellulose nitrate goes through six identifiable stages as it degrades: first, the film will begin to yellow and silver oxidizing will occur; second, the film will begin to emit noxious gasses (nitric oxide, nitrous oxide and nitrous dioxide) and will become tangibly sticky; third, nitric acid begins to form as the gasses interact with moisture in the air and catalyzes deterioration; fourth, yellowing will become darker and more amber in hue; fifth, the film becomes soft and adheres to adjacent items; and finally, it decomposes into brown ash. 59

See flow chart below for identifying cellulose nitrate negatives from cellulose acetate negatives. This is only needed for the boxes labeled as containing both film types.

National Park Service, "Identification of Film-Base Photographic Materials," Conserve 0 Gram 14, no. 9 (1999), 2. 59 Preservation Leaflets, "Short Guide to Film Base Photographic Materials: Identification, Care, and Duplication," Northeast Document Conservation Center, http://www .nedcc. org/resources/leaflets/5Photo graphs/0 1ShortGuide. php.

58

29

Film Identification Flow Chart for LAPD Negatives

[ Dates pre-1938

~--~----__.,~ Nitrate

[nates post-1939 ~--~------.~ Acetate
1938-1939 or Undated

Manufactured by Kodak AND 1st notch from edge is

1--------. .. Nitrate

"V"
Manufactured by Kodak AND t-------·: Acetate 1st notch frorn edge is "U " Unknown manufacturer or indistinguishable notch code Deteriorative Characteristics: · yellowing and silver oxidationt------. · nitric acid odor (noxious) Nitrate · image fade and brown.hue · adhering to adjacent items Deteriorative Characteristics : · acetic acid odor (vinegar) · warping, bubbling and channeling

..

....

Acetate

30

IV. SEPARATING CELLULOSE NITRATE AND ACETATE NEGATIVES Materials required: disposable latex/nitrile gloves, smock, acid-free printer paper
. p roce dures: 60 SeparatiOn

1) Remove all cellulose nitrate negatives from box 2) Group cellulose acetates together in box 3) Place one sheet of paper labeled "Nitrate Negatives Begin" after the last cellulose acetate negative 4) Return cellulose nitrate negatives to box 5) Place one sheet of paper labeled "Nitrate Negatives End" after the last cellulose nitrate negative

6

°Follow handling procedures outlined in section II (pp. 27-28) of this plan.
31

V. DIGITALLY DUPLICATING CELLULOSE NITRATE NEGATIVES Cleaning and Drying Negatives

When to clean negatives: Some of negatives suffer from silver oxidation and dust on the emulsion. Silver oxidation can make the negative appear fogged in duplication and dust can cause marks on digital surrogates. These negatives must be cleaned.

Materials required: disposable latex/nitrile gloves, protective smock, cotton balls, paper towels, N evr-Dull Wadding Polish Cleaning procedures: 1) Tum the negative emulsion side up on a clean paper towel 2) Hold the negative firmly in place with one hand 3) Rub the emulsion side of the negative with a wad of silver polish in a circular motion, moving from the middle outwardly 4) When all silver appears to be removed place negative aside to dry (this may take 1-2 hours) and continue with the next negatives 5) When negative is dry place the negative emulsion side up on a clean paper towel 6) Hold the negative firmly in place with one hand 7) Rub the emulsion side of the negative with a clean cotton ball in a circular motion, moving from the middle outwardly and continue until all polish residue is removed and the negative is clean, without streaks or oxidized silver

32

.Photographing Negatives

Materials required: disposable latex/nitrile gloves, protective smock, light box with low-heat bulb, copy stand, digital camera, black poster board (cut into two L-shaped pieces), 5"x7" piece of glass with secured tab on one side for easy lifting, glass cleaner, paper towels, air duster Camera set-up: · Digital camera settings: set the camera to macro setting, set for uncompressed TIFF file format, tum flash on · Placing camera in stand: secure the camera in the copy stand and ensure the axis of the lens in relation to the lightbox is perpendicular to prevent distorted angles in duplications Photographing procedures: 1) Dust surface of lightbox with air duster 2) Clean glass - holding glass by the adhered tab, use glass cleaner and paper towel and wipe surface until glass is without smudges or dust 3) Turn on lightbox 4) Turn off all other lights in room 5) Place negative emulsion side down in middle of lightbox and place the clean sheet of glass on top to keep negative flat 6) Frame negative with the two L-shaped black boards to block out surrounding light 7) Make sure negative fills the frame of the camera (do not use camera zoom but rather lower or raise the camera along the copy stand), leave a thin border around the negative to prevent accidental cropping of image area 8) Press the capture button half way down to focus the shot, then press all the way down to capture the image 9) ·Remove photographed negative and place it aside. It is absolutely necessary to keep negatives in the exact order in which they were photographed as this will make cataloguing much easier.

33

VI. RECORDING INFORMATION ONSITE Materials required: disposable latex/nitrile gloves, protective smock, camera memory card, memory card reader, laptop Cataloguing information: 1) Remove memory card from camera and place in card reader attached to laptop 2) Set negatives just photographed within reach of computer 3) Change the file names one-by-one of the new TIFF files to match the DR number of its original negative (if there is more than one negative with the same DR number add ".01," ".02," ".03," etc. at the end of the number (e.g. DR972679.01) 4) Create one Excel worksheet for each box number; this will total forty in the end. 5) In an Excel worksheet record the following information: DR number, date, box number that the negative currently resides, the box number the negative was originally recorded to reside (if the DR number doesn't match the range given on the label), inscriptions on the surface of the negative, and inscriptions on the envelope. Create an entry for each negative and record the information seen in the example below:
A
8

-

c

0

E

F

.l

Inventory of Box# 05638
DR Number Date Currently In Box# Originally Recorded In Box#
0

Addltlonallnsalptlons (Surface of Negative)

Additional Inscriptions (Envelope)

'

...

'

,.

~~-

34

VII. RECORDING INFORMATION OFFSITE Materials required: laptop, desktop computer, 61 external hard drive, 62 Adobe Photoshop Adjusting Image Files Adjusting digital images in Photoshop:
1) Leave uncompressed TIFFs unaltered as master access files, only rotate if not right-sided

2) Create JPEG derivatives of TIFF files 63 3) Apply same file name (DR number) to JPEG derivatives 4) Transfer TIFFS to external hard drive 5) Desaturate JPEGS by changing to 16bit Grayscale 64 6) Invert the JPEG image so it is now a positive 7) Crop out thin border65 8) Do not adjust tonal qualities of JPEGs - when copies are requested the individual files can be copied and adjusted depending on the intended use of the image

Applying File Information To begin applying file information to JPEG images:
1) Open each file in Adobe Photoshop

2) For each file, click on "File" in the main toolbar 3) From the drop-down menu click on "File Info," the fifth option from the bottom (see figure one below for visual of pathway)

Make sure both monitors of the laptop and desktop computer have undergone color calibration. An external hard drive with a USB 2.0 connection port is preferable because it is compatible with most computers. 63 As a short-cut in Photoshop, you can create and record the action of converting a TIFF to a JPEG and then use the "Batch" feature to automate all TIFF file conversions. If unfamiliar with this pfocess, search for "automating tasks" in the "Help" feature ofPhotoshop for assistance. 64 Many of the negatives have begun to discolor due to oxidation and degradation of their nitrate base. Desaturation of the JPEG files will eliminate a potential misreading of the image due to staining. 65 The thin border is the result of step 7 ofPhotographing Procedures in section V of this plan (p. 32).
62

61

35

Figure 1. Screenshot taken of pathway used to find "File Info"

36

Recording metadata for each JPEG (see figure 2 below for a visual example): 1) For "Document Title" input the file name 2) For "Author" input name of photographer as it appears on the negative 3) For "Author Title" input "Photographer" 4) For "Description Writer" input full name of cataloguer 5) Include as keywords: DR number, date/year created, box # the negative was in, photographer's name, type of image (i.e. mug shot, crime scene, automobile collision, etc ... ), 66 cellulose nitrate, negative and Los Angeles Police Department 6) Separate each keyword with a semi-colon 7) Capitalize the first letter of each keyword 8) "Copyright Status" is always "Copyrighted" and the "Copyright Notice" belongs to the City of Los Angeles, Los Angeles Police Department

This is a preliminary application of keywords and will make future cataloguing, when a database is decided upon, easier.

66

37

Figure 2. An example of how "File Info" is to be filled out

38

VIII. STORING AND MAINTAINING COMPLETED DIGITAL FILES
1) Master access files (uncompressed TIFFS) must be stored on an external hard drive that stays in the department's office and is added to at the end of every week. 2) JPEG derivatives of the uncompressed TIFFS are made and kept on the hard drive of the desktop computer in the office and on CD-Rs 67 for easy retrieval and transport, depending on uses.
3)

All image files should be opened and reviewed every two years to ensure they are still fully readable.

Media maintenance is imperative because storage media and file formats evolve; their longevity is relative to the development of technology. 68 At this time, it is recommended that uncompressed TIFFs and JPEG derivatives be the two key file formats for they are the most ubiquitous. However, when a change in file formats occurs there will need to be a re-evaluation of the collection and conversion, if required, to guarantee files will remain readable.

CD-Rs are a temporary storage option and inexpensive, and therefore perfect for transferring files and short-term storage. 68 Grey, Tim, Digital Photographer's Guide to Media Management (New York: Sterling Publishing Co., Inc., 2006), 51.

67

39

IX. DISPOSING OF ORIGINAL NITRATE NEGATIVES
When negatives are ready to be destroyed contact: Raymond Kwan, manager of the photographic services division of the Chief Legislative Analyst's Office Todd Gaydowski, Records Management Officer of the City Clerk's Office

Loss of city files must be recorded by the Records Management Office. The Health Hazardous Materials Division (Haz Mat) of the Los Angeles Fire Department handles proper disposal of cellulose nitrate negatives.

40

Appendix B

Appendix B is a preliminary inventory created by the author in February 2008. In this document is a list of the forty- five boxes that contain cellulose nitrate negatives. Each box has an entry that includes, reading from left to right: a thumbnail digital image of the box's interior, the individual box number, the contents of the box (whether the box contains cellulose nitrate or both cellulose nitrate and acetate film), the dates indicated on the label of the box, additional dates of material found in the box, and the negatives' physical condition. The entries are organized in numerical order from smallest to largest.

41

Appendix B
Label Dates Additional Dates Found

Interior of Box

Box#

Material

Physical Condition

05638

Nitrate

01/01/1925- 12/31/1928

1929-1930

Presently stable

05640

Nitrate

01/01/1929- 12/31/1929

1930-1931

Presently stable

05642

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1930 - 12/31/1930

1931, 1939, 1940s

Presently stable

05646

Nitrate

01/01/1931- 12/31/1931

1932

Presently stable

42

05648

Nitrate

01/01/1933-12/31/1933

1934

Presently stable

05652

Nitrate

01/01/1934- 12/31/1935

Presently stable

05654

Nitrate

01/01/1934- 12/31/1934

Presently stable

05656

Nitrate

01/01/1934- 12/31/1938

Presently stable

05658

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1937- 12/31/1938

Presently stable

43

05662

Nitrate

01/01/1940- 12/31/1940

1936-1938 (no 1940s)

Presently stable

24362

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1935- 12/31/1935

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

24458

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1935 - 12/31/1935

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

24460

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1935- 12/31/1935

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

24462

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1935- 12/31/1935

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

44

25194

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1935- 12/31/1935

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

25232

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1940- 12/31/1940

1930s-1950s

Requires immediate attentionstable and irrecoverable exist

25234

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1948- 12/31/1948

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

25236

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1940- 12/31/1940

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

25238

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1948- 12/31/1948

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

45

25240

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1948- 12/31/1948

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

25242

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1948- 12/31/1948

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

25244

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1948-12/31/1948

1930s-1950s

Requires immediate attentionstable and irrecoverable exist

25246

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1948- 12/31/1948

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

25248

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1948- 12/31/1948

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

46

25250

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1935- 12/31/1935

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

25252

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1940- 12/31/1940

1930s-1950s

Irrecoverable

25564

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1935- 12/31/1935

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

26470(A)

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1949- 12/31/1949

Presently stable

26470(B)

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1949-12/31/1949

Irrecoverable

47

26474(A)

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1949- 12/31/1949

Requires immediate attentionstable and irrecoverable exist

26474(B)

Nitrate

01/01/1949- 12/31/1949

Irrecoverable

26688

Nitrate

01/01/1940- 12/31/1940

Irrecoverable

26738

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1940- 12/31/1940

Requires immediate attention stable and irrecoverable exist

26882

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1940- 12/31/1940

Requires immediate attention stable and irrecoverable exist

48

27090(A)

Nitrate

01/01/1932- 12/31/1932

Irrecove ra b Ie

27090{B)

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1932- 12/31/1932

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

36050

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1932- 12/31/1934

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

36052

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1932- 12/31/1939

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

36054

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1939- 12/31/1939

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

49

36056

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1939- 12/31/1939

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

36058

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1939- 12/31/1939

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

36060

Nitrate and Acetate

01/01/1939- 12/31/1939

1930s-1950s

Presently stable

42112

Nitrate and Acetate

1920s-1950s

Presently stable

12Gallon(A)

Nitrate and Acetate

1920s-1950s

Presently stable

50

Q)

:0
ro .....
(,/')

> ':j:j
c
Q)
(,/')

Q)

a..

L..

(,/')

0
L/1
(J) ...-i
I (,/')

N
(J) ...-i

0

.....
ro ..... Q)
u

Q)

<I:
""'0

ro
Q) .....

c

ro
L..

.~

z

Appendix C

Appendix C is an inventory created by the author in March 2008 and completed in May 2008. This document, like Appendix B, lists the forty-five boxes that contain cellulose nitrate negatives in numerical order. However, this later inventory contains additional information. Each box has an entire page that provides: the individual box number, a brief summary of contents (the DR number range of the negatives in the box), the contents of the box (whether the box contains cellulose nitrate or both cellulose nitrate and acetate films), the inclusive dates indicated on the box label, additional dates found, the approximate number of negatives, the physical condition of the negatives, supplementary notes, actions required if deteriorated negatives are present, and a digital image of the box's interior, taken by the author in February 2008.

52

Appendix C Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05638
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR 202577 through DR 380053 Medium: Nitrate Dates: 01/01/1925-12/31/1928 Additional dates found: 1929, 1930 Approximate# of images: 593 negatives, 1049 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

53

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05640
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR 380738 through DR 569865 Medium: Nitrate Dates: 01/0111929- 12/3111929 Additional dates found: 1930, 1931 Approximate# of images: 1044 negatives, 399 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

54

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05642
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR A522921 through DR A543639 Medium: Nitrate and acetate Dates: 01101/1930- 12/3111930 Additional dates found: 1931, 1939, 1940s Approximate # of images: 19 negatives, 8 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

55

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05646
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR 569868 through DR 764436 Medium: Nitrate Dates: 0110111931- 12/31/1931 Additional dates found: 1932 Approximate# of images: 866 negatives, 554 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

56

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05648
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR 765324 through DR 923446 Medium: Nitrate Dates: 01/0111933- 12/3111933 Additional dates found: 1934 Approximate # of images: Average of- 834 negatives, 667 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

57

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05652
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR A448 through DR A82372 Medium: Nitrate Dates: 0110111934- 12/3111935 Additional dates found: N/A Approximate# of images: Average of- 834 negatives, 667 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

58

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05654
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR 464305 through DR A522643 Medium: Nitrate Dates: 0110111934-12/3111934 Additional dates found: N/A Approximate # of images: Average of-834 negatives, 667 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

59

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05656
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR A82372 through DR Al74550 Medium: Nitrate Dates: 01/0111934-12/3111938 Additional dates found: N/A Approximate # of images: Average of-834 negatives, 667 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

60

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05658
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR A289825 through DR A388872 Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111937- 12/3111938 Additional dates found: N/A Approximate# of images: 357 negatives, 310 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

61

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #05662
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, DR A174725 through DR A281502 Medium: Nitrate Dates: 01/0111940- 12/3111940 Additional dates found: 1936-1938 (no 1940s) Approximate# of images: Average of- 834 negatives, 667 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

62

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #24362
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 32292M2 through 32476M14 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111935- 12/3111935 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: 994 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes: Majority are mug shots from 1937

63

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #24458
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 31800 through LA 31987M3 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111935- 12/3111935 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: 2600 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes: Majority are mug shots from 1936

64

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #24460
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 32083M10 through 32109M14 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111935- 12/3111935 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: 2550 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes: Majority are mug shots from 1936 and 1937

65

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #24462
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 32109M15 through 32279M13 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111935- 12/31/1935 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate# of images: 1350 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes: Majority are mug shots from 1937

66

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25194
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 31385M1 through LA 31592M1 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111935- 12/31/1935 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: 2800 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes: Majority are mug shots from 1935

67

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25232
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 29153Ml through LA 29459M15 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111940- 12/3111940 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: 3400 negatives

Physical Condition: Stable and irrecoverable negatives exist Action required: Immediate attention-irrecoverable negatives need to be removed from the box Notes: Three sections of irrecoverable negatives were removed on May 7, 2008. These negatives became adhered together due to advanced deterioration.

68

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25234
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 29460M1 through LA 29649M25 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111948- 12/3111948 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: Average of- 2282 negatives

I

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

69

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25236
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 29650M1 through LA 29797M24 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111948- 12/3111948 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

70

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25238
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 29798Ml through LA 29969M6 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111948- 12/31/1948 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate# of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

71

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25240
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 29970M1 through LA 30165M16 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01101/1948- 12/3111948 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

72

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25242
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 30169M12 through LA 30375M11 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01101/1948- 12/3111948 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

73

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25244
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 30375M12 through LA 30568M15 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111948- 12/3111948 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate# of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Severely deteriorated cellulose acetate film Action required: Remove deteriorated film Notes:

74

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25246
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 30569M1 through LA 30988M6 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111948- 12/31/1948 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate# of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

75

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25248
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 30988M8 through LA 31186M15 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111948- 12/3111948 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

76

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25250
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 31187M1 through LA 31384M15 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111935- 12/3111935 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate# of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

77

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25252
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 26647M1 through LA 27302M8 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate (perhaps Acetate) Dates: 01/01/1940- 12/3111940 Additional dates found: pre-1939 Approximate# of images: Indiscernible

Physical Condition: Irrecoverable Action required: Dispose immediately Notes:

78

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #25564
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 31592Ml through LA 31799M15 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/01/1935- 12/3111935 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

79

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #26470(A)
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 1884W33 through 3438W50; 21332A through 2234 7A: These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111949- 12/31/1949 Additional dates found: Approximate# of images: 125 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

80

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #26470(B)
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 1884W33 through 3438W50; 21332A through 22347 A: These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate (perhaps Acetate) Dates: 0110111949- 12/31/1949 Additional dates found: Approximate # of images: Indiscernible

Physical Condition: Irrecoverable Action required: Dispose immediately Notes:

81

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #26474(A)
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 14098A through 21331A These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111949-12/3111949 Additional dates found: pre-1939 Approximate# of images: 26 negatives

Physical Condition: Stable and irrecoverable negatives exist Action required: Immediate attention-irrecoverable negatives need to be removed from the box Notes: Irrecoverable negatives were removed on May 7, 2008. These negatives became adhered together due to advanced deterioration.

82

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #26474(B)
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 14098A through 21331A These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate (perhaps Acetate) Dates: 01/0111949- 12/3111949 Additional dates found: pre-1939 Approximate # of images: Indiscernible

Physical Condition: Irrecoverable Action required: Dispose immediately Notes:

83

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #26688
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 25755M1 through LA 26646M5 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate (perhaps Acetate) Dates: 01/0111940- 12/31/1940 Additional dates found: pre-1939 Approximate # of images: Indiscernible

Physical Condition: Irrecoverable Action required: Dispose immediately Notes:

84

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #26738
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 24686M1 through LA 25753M2 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/01/1940- 12/3111940 Additional dates found: pre-1939 Approximate# of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Stable and irrecoverable negatives 'exist Action required: Immediate attention-irrecoverable negatives need to be removed from the box Notes: One section of irrecoverable negatives were removed on May 7, 2008. These negatives became adhered together due to advanced deterioration.

85

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #26882
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 24038Ml through LA 24685M2 These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111940- 12/3111940 Additional dates found: pre-1939 Approximate # of images: Average of-2282 negatives

Physical Condition: Stable and irrecoverable negatives exist Action required: Immediate attention-irrecoverable negatives need to be removed from the box Notes: Three sections of irrecoverable negatives were removed on May 7, 2008. These negatives became adhered together due to advanced deterioration.

86

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #27090(A)
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 100-B through LA 1391-B These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate Dates: 0110111932- 12/3111932 Additional dates found: Approximate # of images: Indiscernible

Physical Condition: Irrecoverable Action required: Dispose immediately Notes:

87

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #27090(B)
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, LA 100-B through LA 1391-B These Boxes Also Include Homicide Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111932- 12/3111932 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: Average of- 834 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

88

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #36050
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, Mugs: LA 30000 through LA 31162 These Boxes Contain LA Mug Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111932- 12/3111934 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate# of images: 776 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes: Majority are mug shots from 1932 to 1934

89

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #36052
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, Mugs: LA 31163 through LA 33352 These Boxes Contain LA Mug Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111932- 12/3111939 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: 554 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes: Majority are mug shots from 1935, 1936 and 1939

90

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #36054
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, Mugs: LA 33353 through LA 34463 These Boxes Contain LA Mug Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 0110111939-12/3111939 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: 689 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes: Majority are mug shots from 1939

91

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #36056
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, Mugs: LA 34464 through LA 35518 These Boxes Contain LA Mug Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111939- 12/3111939 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate# of images: Average of- 673 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

92

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #36058
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, Mugs: LA 35518 through LA 36610 These Boxes Contain LA Mug Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111939-12/31/1939 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate # of images: Average of- 673 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

93

Records of L os Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #36060
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings, Mugs: LA 36611 through LA 37656 These Boxes Contain LA Mug Negatives Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: 01/0111939- 12/3111939 Additional dates found: 1930s-1950s Approximate# of images: Average of- 673 negatives

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

94

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #[42112]
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: N/A Additional dates found: 1920s-1950s Approximate# of images: 202 negatives, 92 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

95

Records of Los Angeles Police Department 1 Scientific Investigation Division

Box #[12Gallon(A)]
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: N/A Additional dates found: 1920s-1950s Approximate# of images: 833 negatives, 85 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

96

Records of Los Angeles Police Department I Scientific Investigation Division

Box #[12Gallon(B)]
Contents: Negatives-Crimes and Bookings Medium: Nitrate and Acetate Dates: N/A Additional dates found: 1920s-1950s Approximate# of images: 1246 negatives, 181 prints

Physical Condition: Presently stable Action required: Notes:

97

Bibliography

Collection Arrangement and Description Carmichael, David W. Organizing Archival Records: A Practical Method ofArrangement & Description for Small Archives. New York: Altamira Press, 2004. Frey, Franziska S. and James M. Reilly. Digitallmagingfor Photographic Collections. Rochester, NY: Image Permanence Institute, 2006 . . Grey, Tim. Digital Photographer's Guide to Media Management. New York: Sterling Publishing Co., Inc., 2006. Johnson, Peggy. Fundamentals of Collection Development and Managemen{ Chicago: American Library Association, 2004. Koelling, Jill Marie. Digital Imaging: A Practical Approach. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers Inc., 2004. Muller, S., J.A. Feith, and R. Fruin. Manual for the Arrangement and Description ofArchives. Translated by Arthur H. Leavitt. Chicago: The Society of American Archivists, 2003. Ritzenthaler, Mary Lynn, Gerald J. Munoff, and Margery S. Long. Archives and Manuscripts: Administration of Photographic Collections. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 1984.

Handling and Identification of Cellulose Nitrate Film Hollinshead, Patricia W., Mark D. Wan Ert, et al. "Deteriorating Negatives: A Health Hazard in Collection Management." Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona, 1987. National Park Service. "Handling and Shipping Cellulose Nitrate Film." Conserve 0 Gram 2, no. 20 (2003): 1-6. - - -."Identification ofFilm-Base Photographic Materials." Conserve 0 Gram 14, no. 9 (1999): 1-4. ---."Caring For Cellulose Nitrate Film." Conserve 0 Gram 14, no. 8 (1998): 1-4. ---."Disposal of Cellulose Nitrate Film." Conserve 0 Gram 2, no. 22 (2004): 1-4. Preservation Leaflets. "Short Guide to Film Base Photographic Materials: Identification, Care, and Duplication." Northeast Document Conservation Center, http://www.nedcc.org/resources/leaflets/5Photographs/01ShortGuide.php.

98

Reilly, Julie A. "Celluloid Objects: Their Chemistry and Preservation." Journal of the American . Institute for Conservation 30, no. 2 (1991): 145-162.

Los Angeles Police Department History Hays, Thomas G. and Arthur W. Sjoquist. Images ofAmerica: Los Angeles Police Department. Chicago: Arcadia Publishing, 2005. Heimann, Jim. Sins of the City: The Real Los Angeles Noir. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1999. The History Channel. Inside the LAPD. DVD. April25, 2006. Leckner, Jerald. "History and Development of the Los Angeles Police Department." Master's thesis, University of California, Los Angeles, 1971. Los Angeles Police Department. "History of the LAPD: 1900-1925." The Los Angeles Police Department, http://www.lapdonline.org/history of the lapd/content basic view/1108. Mayer, Robert, ed. Los Angeles: A Chronological & Documentary History, 1542-1976. Dobbs Ferry, NY: Oceana Publications, Inc., 1978. Sitton, Tom and William Deverell, eds. Metropolis in the Making: Los Angeles in the 1920s. Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2001. Sjoquist, Arthur W. "From Posses to Professionals: A History of the Los Angeles Police Department." M.S. thesis, California State University, 1972. Woods, Gerald. The Police in Los Angeles: Reform and Professionalism. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1993.

Police Photography Techniques and Procedures Hoover, J. Edgar. "Criminal Identification." The American Journal of Police Science Vol. 2, No. 1 (1931): 8-19. Lucas, Alfred. Forensic Chemistry and Scientific Criminal Investigation. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1935. Scott, Charles Calvin. "Photography in Criminal Investigations," Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 29, No.3 (1938): 383-419.

99

Soderman, Harry. "Science and Criminal Investigation." Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 146 (1929): 237-248.
- --. Modern Criminal Investigation. New York: Funk and Wagnalls Company, 1935.

Vollmer, August."The Bureau of Criminal Records." Journal of the American Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology, Vol. 11, No.2 (1920): 171-180. ---."Bibliography on Police Organization and Administration, Criminal Identification and Investigation." The American Journal of Police Science, Vol. 2, No. 1 (1931): 76-79. Wilson, 0. W. "August Vollmer." The Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology, and Police Science, Vol. 44, No. 1 (1953): 99-115.

Police Photography Exhibitions and Publications Blanche, Tony and Brad Schreiber. Death in Paradise: An Illustrated History of the Los Angeles Country Department of Coroner. Los Angeles: General Publishing Group, 1998. Buckland, Gail. Shots in the Dark: True Crime Pictures. Boston: Little Brown and Company, 2001. Ellroy, James and Tim B. Wride. Scene of the Crime: Photographs from the LAPD Archive. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 2004 LAPD Archives. "To Protect and Serve: The LAPD Archives- 100 Years ofPhotography." Fototeka, http://fototeka.com/lapd/index.html. Michaelson, Mark and Steven Kasher, eds. Least Wanted: A Century ofAmerican Mugshots. Gottingen, Germany: Steidl, 2006. Philips, Sandra S., Mark Haworth-Booth and Carol Squiers. Police Pictures: The Photograph as Evidence. San Francisco: San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, 1997.

100


