Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2012

Esson's Ontario A Photographic Exhibition Proposal For The Archives Of Ontario
Ashley Cook
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Photography Commons Recommended Citation
Cook, Ashley, "Esson's Ontario A Photographic Exhibition Proposal For The Archives Of Ontario" (2012). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1303.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

                  ESSON'S  ONTARIO   A  PHOTOGRAPHIC  EXHIBITION  PROPOSAL  FOR  THE  ARCHIVES  OF  ONTARIO         By      Ashley  Cook   BFA  Special  Honours,  York  University,  Toronto,  2009            A  thesis  presented  to  Ryerson  University   In  partial  fulfillment  for  the  degree  of   Master  of  Arts   In  the  program  of     Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management.         Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada  2012   ©Ashley  Cook  2012        

I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis  or  dissertation.  This  is  a  true   copy  of  the  thesis,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my   examiners.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  or  dissertation  to  other   institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  or  dissertation  by   photocopying  or  by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other   institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  understand  that  my  thesis  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.     

  

ii  

ESSON'S  ONTARIO:  A  PHOTOGRAPHIC  EXHIBITION  PROPOSAL  FOR  THE  ARCHIVES   OF  ONTARIO   Master  of  Arts,  2012,  Ashley  Cook,  Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections   Management,  Ryerson  University.         Abstract         This  thesis  constitutes  a  proposal  for  the  exhibition,  Esson's  Ontario:   Celebrating  James  Esson's  Stereographic  Tour  of  Ontario,  which  will  be  mounted  in   2013  at  the  Archives  of  Ontario  in  their  Reading  Room  display  cases.  Using  the   collection  of  40  James  Esson  stereographs  at  the  Archives  of  Ontario,  the  proposed   exhibition  will  re-introduce  Esson  and  his  stereographs  of  the  province  of  Ontario.  A   curatorial  statement  and  a  concept  for  the  design  of  the  exhibition  will  follow  an   introduction  to  James  Esson  and  his  life  and  work  as  a  photographer  and   stereographer,  and  some  of  the  assets  and  difficulties  of  displaying  works  in  the   Reading  Room  display  cases  will  be  addressed.  The  thesis  includes  appendices  that   outline  the  design  of  the  exhibition,  including  the  English  panel  texts,  exhibition   designs  and  checklists.  

  

iii  

Acknowledgements   I  am  forever  in  debt  to  my  family  for  their  ongoing  support  and  love  throughout  this   time.  I  think  this  thesis  has  shortened  my  life  by  a  few  years,  but  their  comfort  and   support  may  have  evened  the  playing  field  a  bit.  Mom,  Dad,  Robyn,  thank  you.      I  cannot  begin  to  thank  my  fellow  classmates  enough  for  their  support  throughout   the  past  months.  I  hope  that  my  attempts  to  be  a  soundboard  and  provide  moral   support  back  to  you  all  were  just  as  helpful.  I  am  also  forever  grateful  to  my   roommate  and  friend,  Crystal  Fraser,  for  her  grip  on  the  English  language  and   editing  prowess.        My  thanks  to  all  of  the  staff  at  the  Archives  of  Ontario,  especially  for  putting  up  with   the  continuous  questions  I  had  for  them  during  my  time  there.  Specifically,  Denise   Psaila,  Shannon  Coles,  Adam  Birrell,  Mark  Epp,  Serge  Paquet,  Stewart  Boden  and   James  Bower  are  to  be  commended  for  enduring  my  ongoing  questions  and   conversations.      The  information  I  gathered  about  James  Esson  throughout  the  months  of  research   for  this  thesis  is  thanks  to  four  individuals;  Markus  R.  Boost  of  Cambridge  Ontario,   Joan  M.  Schwartz  of  Queen's  University,  Lynn  Griggs,  Assistant  Archivist  of  the  City   of  Cambridge  Archives,  and  Neil  Brochu,  Collections  Specialist  at  the  Collections  and   Conservation  Centre,  Museum  and  Heritage  Services,  Culture  Division  for  the  City  of   Toronto  cannot  be  thanked  enough  for  their  knowledge  and  expertise  and  kindness   in  showing  me  their  collections  and  research.     

  

iv  

Dedication            To  Ol'  Jimmy.   I  hope  I  did  you  proud.     

  

v  

Table  of  Contents         Declaration                  Abstract                  Acknowledgements               Dedication                  List  of  Figures               List  of  Illustrations               List  of  Appendices               Introduction                  Survey  of  the  Available  Literature         Curatorial  Statement              Methodology                  Biography  of  James  Esson            Preservation  Concerns            Introduction  to  the  Design  of  the  Exhibition   Appendices                  Bibliography                       

                                               

                                               

                                               

                                               

ii   iii   iv   v   vii   vii   vii   1   9   13   15   17   22   26   28   43  

  

vi  

List  of  Figures      Figure  1:  Archives  of  Ontario  First  Storey  Floor  Plan                     List  of  Illustrations      James  Esson,  ca.  1880,  Glimpses  of  Toronto,  Volunteer's  Monument,   Acc.  3964,  ST  565,  A-431,  Archives  of  Ontario.                  James  Esson,  ca.  1880,  Scenery  of  the  Northern  Lakes  of  Canada,     Building  the  Great  Ship  Canal,  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Acc.  13795,     ST  1394,  A-434,  Archives  of  Ontario.                     James  Esson,  ca.  1880,  Ottawa  Views,  Capital  of  The  Dominion,     View  of  Suspension  Bridge,  Acc  2728,  ST  144,     Archives  of  Ontario.                              Reading  room  Display  Case                                 List  of  Appendices      Appendix  A:  Exhibition  checklist  for  entire  exhibition            Appendix  B:  Exhibition  label  designs                  Appendix  C:  Exhibition  design  for  Case  #  1               Appendix  D:  Exhibition  design  for  Case  #  2               Appendix  E:  Exhibition  checklist  for  publically  available  reproductions      Appendix  F:  Esson's  Ontario  Budget                          

23  

6  

19  

20   24  

28   30   31   35   39   42  

  

vii  

Introduction         In  2009,  the  Archives  of  Ontario  opened  its  new  facility  at  the  Keele  Campus  

of  Toronto's  York  University.  The  new  space  included  something  not  seen  in  the   over  100-year  history  of  the  institution:  onsite  exhibition  space.  As  I  was   researching  the  collection  there,  I  discovered  that  during  this  new,  short  exhibition   history,  the  Archives  had  never  had  an  exhibition  purely  focused  on  photography,  or   on  one  photographer.  As  I  discuss  below,  I  wanted  to  propose  an  exhibition   featuring  an  Ontario  photographer,  James  Esson,  who  was  a  self-advertised     "photographer,  publisher,  portraitist  and  dealer  in  stereoscopic  views."1  Esson  was   photographing  Ontario  at  a  time  when  most  photographers  doing  so  were  not  from   Canada,  and  he  was  also  working  with  stereographs,  a  technology  that  was  reaching   its  height  of  popularity  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  during  his  lifetime.      After  some  research  on  Esson,  I  was  struck  by  the  quantity  of  stereographs   that  he  produced,  and  the  variety  of  locations  he  had  photographed  on  a  tour  of   Ontario  he  took  in  the  late  1870s.  The  tour  produced  roughly  1000  stereographs  of   locations  throughout  the  province  of  Ontario.  Major  cities  like  Toronto,  Ottawa  and   Hamilton  and  what  was  then  the  almost  untouched  lakes  and  landscapes  of  the   Province  were  all  part  of  Esson's  stereographic  focus.  A  cross  section  of  Esson's   stereographic  work  is  represented  in  the  Archives;  the  40  of  his  stereographs  in  the   collection  feature  a  variety  of  cities,  architectural  landmarks,  lakes  and  mountains  in   Ontario.  My  research  also  uncovered  one  exhibition  of  Esson's  work  that  was  held                                                                                                                   
(Mar-Apr  1979):  15.  
1  Joan  M.  Schwartz,  "Double  Vision:  The  Stereo  Views  of  James  Esson,"  Photo  Communiqué  1,  no.  1  

  

1  

thirty  years  ago  at  the  National  Archives  (now  Library  and  Archives  Canada,  also   known  as  LAC).  A  selection  of  Esson's  glass  plate  stereograph  negatives  from  LAC's   collection  was  exhibited  as  an  Aperçu  exhibition.  The  Aperçu  exhibition  series   featured  both  historic  and  contemporary  photographic  works  from  the  LAC   collections,  and  was  designed  to  showcase  new  acquisitions  of  historic  work  and   individual  artists  from  the  collections.  LAC  had  received  a  collection  of  247  glass   plate  negatives  of  Esson's  stereographs,  and  Joan  M.  Schwartz,  an  archivist  in  the   Photography  Acquisition  &  Research  department,  was  assigned  to  catalogue  and   research  this  new  acquisition.  Upon  the  completion  of  that  work,  Schwartz  felt  there   was  enough  information  and  material  to  propose  Esson's  stereographs  as  a  subject   for  an  Aperçu  exhibition,  specifically  to  introduce  the  acquisition  of  new  pieces  to   the  collection.  The  final  selection  of  57  reproduction  stereographs  that  was  made  for   the  exhibition  was  predominantly  influenced  by  the  condition  of  the  negatives   themselves.  Many  negatives  had  cracked  emulsion  that  would  affect  the  image   content  when  reproduced.2    The  LAC  exhibition  also  focused  purely  on  stereographs   that  were  located  in  Ottawa,  the  Muskoka  region,  and  the  Thousand  Islands  in   Canada,  since  these  were  the  locations  available  in  the  entire  collection.  This   selection  of  stereographs  is  noted  as  a  way  of  introducing  "one  facet  of  the  work  of   this  prolific  portrait  and  landscape  artist"  in  the  exhibition's  catalogue.3  The  works   that  I  have  chosen  for  the  Archives  of  Ontario  exhibition  will  feature  more  locations   to  highlight  Esson's  stereographic  work  in  Ontario  including  several  cities  and  lakes                                                                                                                   
Archives  Canada,  1979),  4.  

2  Joan  M.  Schwartz,  in  conversation  with  the  author,  Ottawa,  September  3,  2012.

3  Joan  M.  Schwartz,  Aperçu:  The  Archives  Looks  at  The  Stereo  Views  of  James  Esson,  (Ottawa:  Public  

  

  

2  

throughout  the  province.  They  will  also  show  how  Esson  framed  his  photographs   with  fore,  middle  and  background  to  emphasize  the  depth  that  made  the   stereographic  image  so  desirable.  Finally,  the  Aperçu  exhibition  only  exhibited   Esson's  work;  Esson's  Ontario  will  give  viewers  a  chance  to  view  the  stereographs   that  are  exhibited  in  the  way  they  were  intended,  in  three  dimensions.      In  2009,  the  Archives  of  Ontario  moved  to  a  new,  custom-built  building  that   included  several  venues  for  artifact  exhibition.  One  of  these  areas  was  the  Reading   Room  display  cases.  Prior  to  this  new  building,  the  Archives  of  Ontario  did  not   curate  or  organize  exhibitions,  but  works  in  the  collection  were  occasionally  loaned   out  to  other  institutions  for  their  exhibitions.  In  the  short  exhibition  history  that  the   Archives  now  has,  there  has  never  been  an  exhibition  purely  based  on  an  Ontarian   photographer,  or  photography  in  general.4  Because  the  Archives  of  Ontario  had   never  addressed  this  topic  and  Esson's  work  had  been  exhibited  only  once  before   elsewhere  as  an  acquisition  showcase,  I  believe  that  the  exhibition  at  the  Archives   will  serve  to  re-introduce  this  man  and  his  works  to  the  public,  and  make  him  a   more  prominent  character  within  the  history  of  photography  of  Canada.  This   exhibition  will  be  focusing  on  a  larger  cross  section  of  the  locations  Esson  visited  in   Ontario  and  his  stereographs.  This  idea  will  be  further  demonstrated  by  the  chance   for  viewers  of  the  exhibition  to  actually  view  the  materials  in  three  dimensions.  This                                                                                                                   
4  One  exception  is  Assignment  to  Archives  curated  by  Vid  Ingelevics,  which  focused  on  the  works  of  

several  Government  of  Ontario  photographers  throughout  the  twentieth  century.  The  exhibition   focused  on  how  these  images  no  longer  have  their  metadata,  and  have  in  essence,  been  abandoned  at   the  Archives  by  the  various  ministries  that  originally  commissioned  them.  Because  of  this,  many  of   the  photographers  in  the  exhibition  are  unknown  and  un-credited.    

  

3  

aspect  of  the  exhibition  will  aid  the  educators  of  the  Archives,  since  they  have   requested  more  exhibitions  with  a  hands-on  aspect  to  them.  The  exhibition  can  be   used  for  educational  tours  of  the  Archives  that  focus  on  archival  material  and  how  to   make  things  accessible  to  the  researching  public.5          After  expressing  my  interest  in  mounting  an  exhibition  to  the  staff  at  the   Archives,  I  discovered  that  their  enthusiasm  was  matched  by  their  concerns  over  the   safety  of  the  photographs  that  would  be  exhibited.  As  part  of  my  thesis,  I  address   their  concerns  while  creating  an  exhibition  that  fits  the  mandate  of  the  institution   and  satisfies  the  needs  of  the  educators,  archivists  and  conservators  there.  The   Archives  of  Ontario  is  responsible  for  "promoting  and  preserving  the  documentary   memory  of  Ontario,"  and  providing  public  access  to  archival  information  while   ensuring  these  materials  are  protected  for  future  generations.6  Its  mission  now  also   includes  showcasing  Ontario's  public  and  private  archival  records  as  a  vital  resource   for  study  and  interpretation,  while  encouraging  the  public  to  access  the  collection.7   Esson  was  an  Ontarian,  born  and  raised,  who  was  photographing  Ontario  at  a  time   when  many  of  his  contemporaries  doing  so  were  from  the  United  States  and  Europe.   With  all  of  this  in  mind,  and  the  knowledge  that  Esson's  work  hadn't  been  put  on   display  previously  at  the  Archives  of  Ontario,  I  gravitated  towards  Esson,  his  work   and  intentions  as  an  exhibition  subject.                                                                                                                     
5  Stewart  Boden,  conversation  with  the  author,  Toronto,  May  20,  2012.

6  Archives  of  Ontario,  "Code  of  Practice."  Last  modified  February  22,  2012.  

  

http://www.archives.gov.on.ca/english/about/code-of-practice.aspx.     7  Archives  of  Ontario,  "Archives  and  Recordkeeping  Act,  2006."  Last  modified  February  22,  2012.   http://www.archives.gov.on.ca/english/about/archives-act.aspx.    

  

4  

   In  the  1870s,  when  stereography  was  booming  as  a  form  of  entertainment,   Esson  was  embracing  this  technology,  and  chose  to  work  with  it  extensively  in  his   portrayal  of  Ontario.  Based  on  human  vision,  stereographs  have  two  parallel  images   of  the  same  scene  taken  either  simultaneously  or  consecutively  at  slightly  different   angles.  When  merged  together  in  a  viewer,  the  two  images  create  the  illusion  of   depth,  called  "binocular  vision,"  much  like  how  human  eyes  merge  two  separate   views  of  the  world  into  one  in  the  brain.8  By  photographing  scenes  with  elements  in   the  fore,  middle  and  background  (see  image  1),  Esson's  stereographs  emphasize  the   depth  of  the  real  world,  and  as  Margarett  Loke  suggests,  "they  give  access  to  the   past."9  Painted  and  drawn  stereographs  became  popular  with  the  invention  of  the   stereoscope  by  Sir  Charles  Wheatstone  in  1838.  With  stereo  photographs  first   shown  at  the  Crystal  Palace  Exhibition  of  1851  in  London,  the  stereoscope  became  a   form  of  mass-entertainment.  Queen  Victoria's  fascination  with  the  technology   further  spurred  the  stereograph's  rise  in  popularity  in  Europe  which  then  spread  to   North  America.10  This  was  bolstered  by  the  development  of  the  handheld  viewer  in   1859  by  the  Americans  Oliver  Wendall  Holmes  and  Joseph  L.  Bates,11  which  was  far   cheaper  to  produce  and  acquire  in  comparison  to  Wheatstone's  tabletop  box.    

                                                                                                                
8  Emily  J.  Wagner.  "In  All  Solidarity  and  Reality:  A  Stereoscopic  Exhibition  Proposal"  (master's  thesis,  

Ryerson  University,  2009),  2.   9  Margarett  Loke,  The  World  as  it  was,  1865-1921:  A  Photographic  Portrait  From  The  Keystone-Mast   Collection,  (New  York:  Summit  Books,  1980),  11.   10  Loke,  The  World  as  it  was,  1865-1921,  12.   11  Loke,  The  World  as  it  was,  1865-1921,  12.  

  

5  

Image  1:  Note  how  the  trees  are  the  foreground,  the  group  of  children  creates  a   middle  ground  and  the  Volunteer's  monument  and  surrounding  trees  are  the   background.   James  Esson,  ca.  1880,  Glimpses  of  Toronto,  Volunteer's  Monument,  Acc.  3964,  ST   565,  A-431,  Archives  of  Ontario.         During  this  time,  stereographers  from  the  United  Kingdom  focused  on   panoramic  sceneries,  landscapes,  studio  poses  and  architectural  studies.12   Photographers  were  traveling  throughout  the  United  Kingdom  and  Europe  to   photograph  as  much  scenery  as  possible.13  Esson's  work  focused  on  the  landscapes   and  scenery  of  Ontario,  rather  than  some  of  the  subjects  photographed  by  the  many   American  photographers  who  focused  on  photographing  natural  and  man-made   disasters  and  the  American  Civil  War  to  satisfy  the  curiosity  the  American  public  by   documenting  destruction.14  The  stereographs  he  created  on  his  tour  are  early  views                                                                                                                   
12  Loke,  The  World  as  it  was,  1865-1921,  16.   13  William  Culp  Darrah,  Stereo  Views:  A  History  of  Stereographs  in  America  and  Their  Collection,  

  

(Gettysburg:  Times  and  News  Publishing  Company,  1964),  9.   14  Loke,  The  World  as  it  was,  1865-1921,  16.  

  

6  

of  sites  in  the  province  that  would  become  landmarks,  places  like  the  University  of   Toronto,  Parliament  Hill  and  the  Sault  Ste  Marie  Canal.  Esson's  tour  was  at  a  time   when  the  popularity  of  stereographs  was  high;  they  were  flooding  the  market   through  mass  production  and  distribution.15  Esson  published  his  own  stereographs,   but  it  is  unknown  if  he  was  the  sole  seller  of  them  as  well.  I  plan  to  emphasize  his   choice  of  taking  stereographs  on  the  tour  by  making  a  secondary  set  of  the  exhibited   stereographs  available  for  the  public  to  view  through  a  modern  stereoscope,  as  the   original  audience  would  have  done.  These  stereographs,  and  the  ones  shown  in  the   exhibition  itself,  will  show  Esson's  use  of  foreground,  middle  ground  and   background,  and  how  he  framed  scenes  and  photographed  them  on  an  angle  to   further  emphasize  depth.  Esson's  stereographic  works  are  excellent  examples  of  the   art  of  the  stereographer,  and  create  an  illusion  of  buildings,  lakes  and  people   portrayed  in  three  dimensions  for  the  viewer.  With  this  proposed  exhibition,  I  hope   to  reintroduce  Esson  and  his  work,  and  highlight  his  choice  of  stereography,   providing  visitors  to  the  Archives  with  a  view  of  the  Ontario's  history  through   technology  that  will  be  a  new  perspective  to  the  modern  audience.        This  thesis  is  made  up  of  several  components  that  will  provide  the  context   for  the  exhibition  proposal  for  an  exhibition  called  Esson's  Ontario:  Celebrating   James  Esson's  Stereographic  Tour  of  Ontario,  to  be  mounted  in  the  Reading  Room   display  cases  at  the  Archives  of  Ontario.  The  Archives  has  given  me  a  tentative  date   during  2013  for  the  exhibition  to  be  mounted,  after  the  due  date  of  this  thesis.                                                                                                                   

15Darrah,  Stereo  Views:  A  History  of  Stereographs  in  America  and  Their  Collection,  9.  

  

7  

Because  of  this,  a  description  of  the  physical  mounting  of  the  exhibition  will  not  be   included  in  this  thesis.  The  thesis  begins  with  a  survey  of  the  literature  on  stereo   exhibition  and  on  the  history  of  exhibitions  of  Esson's  stereographic  work.  This  will   be  followed  by  a  short  biography  of  Esson  and  a  description  of  the  stereographic   work  he  created  on  his  tour.  The  research  here  will  help  to  provide  some  of  the   panel  texts  in  the  final  exhibition  design  outlined  in  the  appendices.  I  will  then   describe  the  preservation  concerns  with  exhibiting  artifacts  in  the  Archives'  space,   and  demonstrate  how  they  can  be  addressed  to  ensure  the  artifact's  safety  in   accordance  with  the  regulations  of  the  Archives  of  Ontario.  This  is  because  the   Reading  Room  space  in  which  I  have  chosen  to  exhibit  the  Esson  stereographs  in  is  a   very  specific  space,  with  specific  exhibition  concerns  that  need  to  be  addressed  as   part  of  the  Archives'  mandate  to  "preserve  the  documentary  history  of  Ontario"  in   its  collection.16  Finally,  I  will  introduce  the  concept  and  design  of  my  proposed   exhibition  through  my  curatorial  statement.  Exhibition  checklists,  images  of  the   exhibition  design  and  the  text  panels  will  be  laid  out  in  the  appendices  of  this   thesis.17       

                                                                                                                
16  Archives  of  Ontario,  "Code  of  Practice."  

17  The  Archives  of  Ontario  requires  that  all  exhibition  texts  be  in  both  official  languages,  French  and  

  

English.  I  have  every  intention  of  creating  the  French  text  as  well,  however  for  the  purposes  of  this   thesis,  I  will  be  focusing  on  the  English  texts.  

  

8  

Literature  Survey         My  thesis  contains  two  areas  of  research;  the  first  is  on  James  Esson  and  his   place  in  Canadian  photographic  history  in  order  to  provide  the  information  needed   for  the  text  panels  in  the  exhibition.  The  second,  smaller  area  is  the  exhibition  of   stereographs  and  photographic  objects  in  general.  I  chose  not  to  highlight  the   literature  on  the  history  of  stereographs  in  this  survey,  since  this  topic  has  been  well   documented  by  several  theses  prior  to  mine.18  When  I  began  my  research  for  this   project,  there  were  a  very  small  number  of  available  resources  about  James  Esson   within  Canadian  photographic  history.  In  the  few  resources  I  did  find,  the  research   was  based  primarily  on  two  sources,  Markus  R.  Boost  and  Joan  M.  Schwartz.  Boost,  a   researcher  and  writer  based  in  Cambridge,  Ontario  has  been  looking  into  Esson  for   several  years.  He  has  found  several  original  advertisements  for  Esson,  as  well  as   some  of  the  series  listings  for  the  different  stereograph  series.  Many  authors  credit   Boost  with  compiling  the  known  information  about  Esson's  life.  Schwartz  was  an   archivist  in  Photography  Acquisition  and  Research  at  the  National  Archives  of   Canada  (now  Library  and  Archives  Canada,  also  known  as  LAC),  and  was  the  curator   of  the  1979  exhibition,  The  Stereo  Views  of  James  Esson.  Schwartz  also  wrote  Aperçu:   The  Archives  Looks  at  The  Stereo  Views  of  James  Esson  for  the  exhibition  and  Double   Vision:  The  Stereo  Views  of  James  Esson,  an  article  published  in  Photo  Communiqué   about  Esson's  stereographic  works.  Schwartz's  exhibition  and  accompanying   articles  were  a  way  for  LAC  to  introduce  their  holdings  of  Esson's  work  and                                                                                                                   
18  See,  Emily  J.  Wagner's  thesis,  "In  All  Solidarity  and  Reality:  A  Stereoscopic  Exhibition  Proposal,"  

Elisabeth  Teresa  Jessica  Caron  "William  S.  Sawyer  Exhibition,"  and  Rachel  Goldberg  "One  Man's  West:   Photographs  by  Edwin  Hendrie  Grant.  The  Development  and  Proposal  of  a  Photographic  Exhibition."    

  

9  

demonstrate  what  was  known  about  Esson  at  the  time.  The  information  provided  by   Schwartz's  and  Boost's  research  and  publications  at  the  time  has  since  been  updated   by  further  work  by  Boost.  Despite  this  work,  many  details  of  Esson's  photographic   tour  are  still  unknown.  Primary  resources  about  Esson's  business  have  been  hard  to   find,  and  a  full  archive  of  Esson's  photographic  work  does  not  exist  because  when  he   retired  the  glass  plates  in  his  studio  were  sold  for  refurbishment.19  During  his   research,  Boost  found  that  the  building  that  once  housed  Esson's  studio  still  had   some  photographic  material,  however  the  building's  new  owners  tossed  it  all  out  in   the  1990s.20  What  remains  are  prints  and  stereographs,  like  the  ones  that  can  be   found  at  the  Archives  of  Ontario.         Esson's  life  and  work  are  documented  and  written  about  by  researchers  and  

scholars  like  Boost  and  Schwartz,  but  not  to  the  extent  of  that  given  to  other  historic,   Canadian  photographers,  like  William  Notman  for  example.  When  Canada  is  brought   up  in  the  history  of  photography,  men  like  Notman  are  usually  the  ones  mentioned   and  discussed.  Unlike  researchers  or  scholars  in  Europe  or  the  United  States,  who   can  reference  histories  of  photography,  such  as  Beaumont  Newhall's  The  History  of   Photography  or  works  by  Helmut  and  Alison  Gernsheim,  Canada's  history  of   photography  isn't  well  documented.  Ralph  Greenhill,  a  collector  of  photography,   who  researched  and  wrote  about  Canadian  photographic  history,  is  the  exception.   Well  known  for  his  vast  collection  early  Canadian  photography,  Greenhill  is  the                                                                                                                   

19  Stanley  J.  White  "Old  Jimmy  Esson:  Honoured  by  The  City  of  Cambridge."  Photographic  Canadiana.  

21,  no.  1  (1995):  11.   20  White,  "Old  Jimmy  Esson:  Honoured  by  The  City  of  Cambridge,"  11.  

  

10  

author  of  Early  Photography  in  Canada,  published  in  1965.  He  went  on  to  publish   Canadian  Photography:  1839-1920  with  Andrew  Birrell  in  1979,  as  a  second  edition   of  Early  Photography.  Both  of  these  books  mention  Esson  as  a  portrait  photographer   and  a  stereographer,  and  include  reproductions  of  his  work.  In  both  books,  Esson  is   coupled  in  with  other  Canadian  portrait  photographers  and  stereographers  from   Ontario  and  Québec,  including  Louis  Parent  Vallée,  James  George  Parks  and  William   James  Topley.  Greenhill's  short  entry  on  Esson  concludes  with  Greenhill  referencing   a  resource  that  calls  Esson  the  "Wilson  of  Canada,"  referring  to  the  portrait  artist,   George  Washington  Wilson  of  Aberdeen,  Scotland.21  We  can  assume  that  Greenhill   was  never  entirely  impressed  with  Esson,  as  he  writes  that  he  cannot  measure  up  to   the  excellent  portraiture  work  of  Wilson.22        In  my  research  on  the  history  of,  and  problems  associated  with  the  display  of   stereographs,  I  was  directed  to  begin  with  theses  from  former  students  of  the   Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management  programme,  that  had  dealt   with  such  topics.  Emily  J.  Wagner's  2009  thesis  In  All  Solidarity  and  Reality:  A   Stereoscopic  Exhibition  Proposal  included  a  proposal  to  exhibit  stereographs  in  such   a  way  as  to  preserve  them  from  damage  while  still  allowing  the  viewer  to   experience  them  in  three  dimensions.  Wagner's  thesis  provided  my  starting  point   for  developing  ideas  for  the  display  design  of  a  stereographic  exhibition,  in   particular  her  outline  of  the  efforts  by  museums  and  galleries  to  exhibit                                                                                                                   
21  WM  Cochrane,  The  Canadian  Album,  Men  of  Canada:  or  Success  by  Example,  in  Religion,  Patriotism,  

Business,  Law,  Medicine,  Education  and  Agriculture  (Brantford:  Bradley,  Garretson  &  Co.,  1893),  180.   22  Ralph  Greenhill  and  Andrew  Birrell.  Canadian  Photography:  1839-1920  (Toronto:  Coach  House   Press,  1979),  69.  

  

11  

stereographs.  Another  resource  that  helped  to  shape  my  design  of  the  proposed   exhibition  was  Larry  Klein's  book,  Exhibits:  Planning  and  Design.  He  gives  examples   of  the  importance  of  lighting,  the  placement  of  the  objects  and  the  layout  of  the   labels  to  an  exhibition.  William  Hayett's  Display  &  Exhibit  Handbook  and  the   Canadian  Conservation  Institute's  Mount-Making  for  Museum  Objects  follows  in  this   vein  by  providing  an  overview  of  how  to  design  mounts  for  specific  objects  on   display.  While  Mount-Making  didn't  provide  any  examples  of  photography  display,  it   is  still  a  good  resource  on  how  to  work  through  issues  such  as  supporting  the  curve   in  the  mount  of  several  of  the  Esson  stereographs.  

  

12  

Curatorial  Statement         In  1875,  Canada  was  a  young  country  of  only  eight  years,  and  Ontario  was  

home  to  a  young  photographer,  named  James  Esson.  Over  the  next  seven  years,   Esson  would  travel  throughout  Ontario  on  a  tour  to  photograph  the  newly  formed   province,  specifically  in  a  format  that  produced  a  3D  result:  stereographs.  During   this  boom  in  popularity  in  stereography,  Esson  photographed  more  than  a  thousand   images  all  over  Ontario.  Many  of  these  sites  are  still  standing  today,  like  the  Sault  Ste   Marie  Shipping  Canal  and  Parliament  Hill.  By  framing  the  scenes  with  elements   within  them,  such  as  trees  and  architectural  details,  and  by  having  distinct  fore,   middle  and  backgrounds,  Esson  created  depth  in  his  stereographs.  They  are   excellent  examples  of  the  art  of  the  stereographer,  a  way  of  creating  an  illusion  for   the  viewer.  These  stereographs  are  part  of  the  visual  record  of  one  of  the  oldest   provinces  in  the  country,  and  now  forty  of  them  can  be  found  in  the  Archives  of   Ontario  collection  of  photographic  works.  Margarett  Loke  speaks  to  stereographs   being  fixed  in  time,  and  that  they  can  give  access  to  the  past;23  Esson's  Ontario  will   showcase  Esson's  work  to  the  public  and  give  them  access  to  his  time  and  views  of   the  province.  Esson's  work  has  been  shown  only  once  before  in  a  1979  exhibition   that  showed  examples  of  a  new  acquisition  at  the  National  Archives.  It  is  now  time   to  re-introduce  him  and  his  work  to  the  researchers  and  scholars  who  visit  the   Archives  of  Ontario  through  the  holdings  of  the  Archives'  collection.  This  proposed   exhibition  will  do  three  things;  part  of  the  Archives  of  Ontario's  collections  will  be   highlighted  for  the  public  to  see,  the  chosen  stereographs  in  the  exhibition  will                                                                                                                   
23  Loke,  The  World  as  it  was,  1865-1921,  11.  

     

13  

demonstrate  how  Esson  framed  his  work  and  created  the  illusion  of  three   dimensions,  and  the  viewer  will  get  the  chance  to  see  the  exhibited  stereographs  as   they  were  intended,  as  a  3D  image,  something  that  is  not  done  very  often  with   stereographs.      James  Esson  was  born  in  1853  in  Preston,  Ontario,  now  part  of  Cambridge,   Ontario.  Having  learned  photography  from  his  father  George,  James  Esson  took  over   his  father's  photographic  studio  and  made  a  name  for  himself  as  a  meticulous   photographer  of  local  events.  At  a  time  when  many  of  Esson's  contemporaries  who   photographed  Ontario  were  from  the  United  States,  Esson  did  his  own  tour  of  the   province  and  kept  to  the  more  English  style  of  photographing  panoramic  landscapes   and  architectural  scenes  of  the  day.  While  not  all  photographers  from  the  United   States  were  photographing  disasters  and  the  American  Civil  War  to  please  the   American  public,  several  were  during  this  time,  allowing  Esson  to  further  stand  out   from  his  American  contemporaries.  By  mainly  using  stereographs,  a  technology   known  as  a  product  of  mass  production  and  dissemination,  Esson  was  able  to  share   his  province  with  a  much  wider  audience,  especially  at  a  time  when  stereographers   were  trying  to  explore  and  photograph  more  of  Canada  for  the  viewing  audience  in   and  outside  of  the  country.24  With  the  exhibition  I  propose,  the  researcher  and  the   public  who  come  to  the  Archives  of  Ontario  will  get  to  look  at  the  history  of  the   province  using  the  same  technology.  Esson's  Ontario:  Celebrating  James  Esson's   Stereographic  Tour  of  Ontario,  will  show  examples  of  the  monumental  architecture                                                                                                                   

24  Loke,  The  World  as  it  was,  1865-1921,  11.  

  

14  

and  urbanity  of  the  cities  before  moving  out  towards  the  newly  explored  beauty  of   Ontario's  almost  untouched  lakes  and  landscapes.  The  exhibition  will  be  using  a   collection  of  stereographs  from  one  photographer,  rather  than  a  medley  of  work,  to   show  one  man's  vision  of  the  province.  It  also  gives  the  viewers  of  the  exhibition  the   opportunity  to  use  the  stereograph's  viewer,  as  was  originally  intended.  The  public   can  view  reproductions  of  all  of  the  exhibited  stereographs,  through  the  help  of  the   Archives'  staff.      Methodology      My  main  inspiration  for  the  design  of  Esson's  Ontario  was  the  exhibitions  I   had  seen  at  the  Archives  of  Ontario  during  my  nine  months  there  as  part  of  my   program  research.  Many  of  the  exhibitions  I  viewed  were  similar  in  their  very   simple  layout  and  display.  This  allowed  for  the  focus  to  be  solely  on  the  artifacts  and   the  information  provided  by  the  text  panels.  I  wanted  to  arrange  Esson's  Ontario  the   same  way  so  the  stereographs  and  the  accompanying  text  panels  can  be  clearly  read,   viewed  and  understood.  The  object  labels  for  Esson's  Ontario  also  follow  in  this   tradition,  and  will  follow  the  Archives'  rules  for  object  labels  (See  appendix  B  for   examples).  The  selection  of  stereographs  has  been  influenced  by  the  quality  of  the   available  stereographs  in  the  Archives'  collection.  Since  physical  damage  like   scratches  and  image  fading  can  affect  the  3D  outcome,  I  have  selected  stereographs   that  do  not  have  significant  damage.  The  provenances  of  the  stereographs  that  have   been  chosen  for  the  exhibition  are  from  two  photographic  collectors.  Having  been   acquired  from  flea  markets  and  antique  shows  where  vendors  might  not  have  been  

  

15  

concerned  with  the  safe  keeping  of  photographic  objects;  some  of  the  stereographs   had  been  damaged  prior  to  their  donation  to  the  Archives.  The  decision  to  use   reproductions  of  the  stereographs  for  this  exhibition  has  been  chosen  due  to   conservation  concerns  with  the  original  artifacts,  as  will  be  explained  further  in  the   thesis.     

  

16  

James  Esson,  1853-1933      James  Esson  was  born  in  1853  to  the  Preston  Daguerreotypist,  George  Esson   and  his  wife  Jane.  George  had  opened  his  own  studio  in  the  family  home  just  the   year  before  James  was  born,  and  would  eventually  teach  James  photography  to  have   him  as  an  assistant  to  his  practice.25  James  took  over  the  business  from  his  father  in   the  early  1870s,26  and  he  moved  the  studio  to  113  Queen  Street  in  1875.27  Esson  had   little  trouble  establishing  a  greater  reputation  than  that  of  his  father;  his  meticulous   approach  gained  him  fame  as  a  photographer  of  local  weddings  and  events.  In  1878,   the  County  of  Waterloo  Gazetteer  and  Directory  carried  an  advertisement  for  Esson   that  read  "James  Esson  Photographer,  Publisher  and  dealer  in  Stereoscopic  Views,   C.D.V.  Statuary,  Monumental  and  Headstone  Designs.  Queen  Street  -  Preston  -   Ontario."  Within  three  years  this  advertisement  was  altered  to  include  "portrait   artist"  amongst  his  titles.28           In  1875,  Esson  embarked  on  a  roughly  seven-year  tour  of  Ontario  and  the  

State  of  New  York  to  produce  stereographs.  Researchers  have  almost  no  details   about  the  tour  itself,  there  has  yet  to  be  found  any  evidence  of  how  Esson  traveled,   for  how  long,  or  how  he  even  paid  for  the  tour.  Using  Boost's  research,  my  guess  is   that  Esson  went  alone  since  he  had  no  family  and  would  not  meet  his  first  wife  until  

                                                                                                                
25  Markus  R.  Boost  "If  You  Have  Beauty...."  Photographic  Canadiana.  25,  no.  2  (1999):  pg.  39.     26  City  Archives,  "James  Esson,  Inducted  1995,"  Last  modified  2012,  

http://www.cambridge.ca/cs_pubaccess/hall_of_fame.php?aid=16&cpid=0&scpid=0&did=2&sid=34 &ssid=0&tp=0&grid=0.     27  Boost,  "If  You  Have  Beauty....,"  39.   28Schwartz,  "Double  Vision:  The  Stereo  Views  of  James  Esson,"  15.  

  

17  

visiting  New  York  on  the  tour.29  Boost's  research  has  been  able  to  uncover  most  of   the  information  that  shows  that  the  tour  was  seven  years  in  total  specifically   because  Esson  grouped  together  the  different  cities  and  regions  that  he  visited  by   year.  This  has  become  the  accepted  explanation  of  Esson's  tour  in  regards  to  its   length.  Beyond  Boost's  research,  there  has  never  been  any  evidence  to  show  the   actual  schedule  of  the  tour.  It  is  more  likely  that  Esson  only  toured  during  the   summer  when  the  light  was  best  and  did  so  every  summer  for  seven  years.  Esson   photographed  several  landmarks,  including  Osgoode  Hall  and  Allan  Gardens  in   Toronto,  and  the  Parliament  Buildings  in  Ottawa.30  During  the  tour,  Esson  arranged   the  stereographs  into  series  according  to  their  geographical  location,  larger  cities   centre  like  Toronto  receiving  their  own  dedicated  series.  Esson  crisscrossed  the   province  throughout  the  trip  to  create  The  Scenery  of  The  Northern  Lakes  of  Canada   series,  which  included  a  wide  range  of  natural  scenes,  lakes,  towns  and  the   construction  of  several  landmarks  throughout  the  province.  The  building  of  the   Sault  Ste  Marie  shipping  canal  (See  image  2),  steam  ships  in  the  Owen  Sound   Harbour  and  several  lakes  in  the  Muskoka  region,  like  Comeau  Lake  for  example,  are   included  in  this  series.  Once  the  tour  was  finished,  Esson  created  a  series  of  views   called  Picturesque  Canada,  including  some  of  the  best-known  views  of  the  each  of   the  cities  he  visited,  such  as  Parliament  Hill  in  Ottawa  and  Osgoode  Hall  in  Toronto.   Researchers  estimate  that  the  stereographs  from  this  tour  number  approximately   1000,  however  only  a  fraction  of  the  negatives  still  exist.  The  few  negatives  that  do                                                                                                                   
1994).  

29  Boost,  "If  You  Have  Beauty....,"  40.   30  Markus  R.  Boost,  James  Esson  of  Preston,  Canada:  August  10,  1853  ­  January  29,  1949  (Cambridge,  

  

18  

exist  from  Esson's  archives  are  spread  out  between  private  collections  and  Library   and  Archives  Canada.  Esson's  stereographs  are  part  of  the  work  that  gained  him  a   reputation  as  a  "prolific  landscape  ad  portrait  artist."31  Again,  so  little  is  known   about  Esson's  life  and  work,  that  no  one  is  sure  if  he  alone  sold  his  stereographs   locally  from  the  Atelier,  his  studio,  or  more  widely  throughout  Preston,  the  province   or  the  country.  Like  many  stereo  photographers  from  his  time,  he  likely  had  many  of   his  stereographs  sold  locally  at  a  retail  level.  After  the  tour,  he  returned  to  his  studio   in  Preston  and  portraiture  photography,  continuing  to  solidify  his  distinction  as  one   of  the  foremost  photographers  of  his  day.32        

Image  2:  James  Esson,  ca.  1880,  Scenery  of  the  Northern  Lakes  of  Canada,  Building   the  Great  Ship  Canal,  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Acc.  13795,  ST  1394,  A-434,  Archives  of   Ontario.                                                                                                                         
31  Schwartz,  "Double  Vision:  The  Stereo  Views  of  James  Esson,"  15.  

  

32  G.  Gilson  and  H.  C.  Tugwell,  eds.,  "James  Esson:  An  Enterprising  Photographer  of  Preston,  Ont.,"  The  

Canadian  Photographic  Journal  1,  no.  4  (May  1892):  85.  

  

19  

   In  the1880s,  Preston  was  a  small  township  in  Ontario  with  a  population  of   just  1,400.  This  never  limited  Esson,  whose  clients  came  to  him  from  far  beyond   Preston's  city  limits.  The  Marquis  of  Lorne,  who  was  Canada's  Governor-General   from  1878  to  1883  and  he  wife  Princess  Louise,  Queen  Victoria's  daughter,   politicians,  famous  stage  artists  and  prominent  Canadian  society  figures  were   numbered  among  his  clients,  until  a  fall  in  1916  forced  Esson  into  retirement.  After   failed  attempts  at  having  his  nephew,  Elliot  Law,  photograph  his  clients  while  he   maintained  creative  control,  Esson  sold  the  Atelier  and  moved  to  Toronto  in  1920.33   James  Esson  died  in  Toronto,  at  the  age  of  80  on  12  September  1933.34          

Image  3:  James  Esson,  ca.  1880,  Ottawa  Views,  Capital  of  The  Dominion,  View  of   Suspension  Bridge,  Acc  2728,  ST  144,  Archives  of  Ontario.                                                                                                                         
33  Boost,  "If  You  Have  Beauty....,"  41.   34  Boost,  "If  You  Have  Beauty....,"  43.    

  

  

20  

     

Sadly,  a  full  archive  of  Esson's  work  does  not  exist,  possibly  as  a  result  of  his  

own  doing.  When  Esson  retired  and  his  nephew  refused  to  continue  the  business,   local  advertisements  in  Preston  advertised  the  sale  of  glass  plates  from  Esson's   studio.  Some  have  been  found  in  personal  collections  and  some  larger  collections  of   negatives  and  prints  can  be  found  in  Library  and  Archives  Canada,  the  Archives  of   Ontario  and  the  Cambridge  City  Archives.  A  local  Cambridge  photographer  for   example,  found  several  of  Esson's  8x10  glass  plate  negatives  in  an  attic  of  a  resident   in  Cambridge,  Ontario.  The  photographer  begged  to  print  the  negatives  one  last  time   before  the  resident  planned  on  making  a  lamp  out  of  them.35  Until  recently,  the   building  that  housed  Esson's  Atelier  still  contained  some  photographic   paraphernalia;  however  researchers  could  never  verify  if  the  paraphernalia   belonged  to  Esson  since  the  material  was  "unceremoniously  loaded  onto  a  truck  and   taken  to  a  dump"  in  the  mid  1990s  by  the  new  owners  of  the  building.36     

                                                                                                                
35  John  Mitchell,  "Evidence  That  in  Many  Ways,  in  Over  100  Years  We  Have  Made  Little  Progress."  

John  Mitchell  Photography  (blog),  March  24,  2011.   http://www.johnmitchellphoto.com/blog/?m=201103.   36  White,  Stanley  J.  "Old  Jimmy  Esson:  Honoured  by  The  City  of  Cambridge."  Photographic  Canadiana.   21.  no.  1  (1995):  pg.  11.  

  

21  

Preservation  at  the  Exhibition  Location      The  Archives  of  Ontario  Reading  Room  was  designed  as  a  space  for  

researchers  to  access  the  records  at  the  Archives.  Services  available  in  the  Reading   Room  include  the  assistance  of  reference  archivists  and  access  to  microfilm,   microfiche,  finding  aids  and  reproductions  of  Archival  material.  The  space  is  meant   to  be  a  comfortable  place  to  access  and  study  the  Archives'  records.  However,   human  comfort  does  not  always  translate  well  into  artifact  comfort.  The  Archives  of   Ontario  did  not  collect  works  with  the  intention  to  exhibit  them;  now  that  they  do   intend  to  exhibit  objects  from  the  collections,  as  a  result  of  the  creation  of  a  new   space  in  which  to  do  so,  the  safety  of  those  objects  must  be  considered.  The  Reading   Room  is  a  large  space,  as  shown  by  figure  1,  with  very  large  floor  to  ceiling  windows.   The  full  sunlight  the  windows  let  in  is  not  good  for  photographic  material.  The   Archives  initially  dealt  with  this  problem  by  applying  an  Ultra  Violet  filtering  screen   and  blinds  to  each  of  the  windows.  The  blinds  and  filters  can  allow  some  light  to   enter  the  room,  but  help  to  shelter  artifacts  from  any  negative  effects.  Another   problem  created  by  the  room's  structure  is  the  need  to  control  temperature  and   relative  humidity  in  the  space.  The  room  as  a  whole  is  controlled  to  a  degree,  but   fluctuations  can  occur  since  the  public  and  staff  comes  in  and  out  frequently.  This  is   where  the  display  cases  come  into  play  as  a  way  of  protecting  exhibited  material.          

  

22  

Figure  1:  First  storey  floor  plan  of  the  Archives  of  Ontario.  The  red  frame  outlines   the  main  space  of  the  Reading  Room,  and  the  blue  frame  show  where  the  display   cases  are  located  within  that  space.         Built  by  a  company  called  Zone  Display  Cases,  the  cases  are  designed  with  

  

conservation  in  mind.37  The  cases  have  an  inner  display  area  of  58  ½  inches  by  34  ½   inches,  and  a  height  of  15  inches  on  the  inside.  The  cases  are  airtight  and  can  be   controlled  as  a  microenvironment,  even  providing  a  space  where  monitors  can  be   placed  within  the  case.38  The  microenvironment  created  by  the  sealed  cases  would   help  to  eliminate  a  variety  of  environmental  concerns,  such  as  dust,  humidity   changes  and  public  handling  of  the  artifacts.  This,  coupled  with  the  possibility  of   using  reproductions  in  the  cases  will  help  to  protect  the  artifacts  when  on  display.        

                                                                                                                
37  Zone

Display Cases, "Welcome." Last modified 2012. Accessed May 21, 2012. http://www.zonedisplaycases.com/en/index.php.    38  Zone Display Cases, "Technology." Last modified 2012. Accessed May 12, 2012. http://www.zonedisplaycases.com/en/index.php.   

  

23  

Image  4:  One  of  the  Reading  Room  display  cases,  with  an  exhibition  of   reproductions  of  recent  acquisitions  from  the  Archives  of  Ontario.      There  are  times  when  the  archivists  will  restrict  the  material  allowed  into   the  Reading  Room.  Generally,  this  applies  to  records  and  artifacts  with  known   conservation  concerns.  Objects  shown  in  exhibitions  in  the  display  cases  are  no   exception  to  this  procedure,  since  some  recent  exhibitions  of  acquisitions  and   genealogical  records  only  use  reproductions  of  archival  material  due  to  concerns   over  the  originals.  The  procedure  eliminates  virtually  all  problems  related  to   exhibiting  archive  material.  The  reproduction  can  even  sustain  damage  without  the   concern  of  the  loss  of  an  artifact  or  the  information  it  contains.  There  are  three   disadvantages  to  using  reproductions  for  the  proposed  exhibition.  The  first  is  that   digital  reproductions,  like  the  ones  used  by  the  Archives  of  Ontario,  do  not  share  the   same  visual  texture  or  quality  as  the  original  stereographs,  and  therefore  betray   their  identity  as  a  reproduction.  The  second  is  that  the  physical  shape  of  the   stereographs  in  the  Archives'  collection,  which  are  slightly  curved,  makes  it  difficult      24  

  

to  reproduce  the  stereograph's  image  content  easily,  though  not  impossible.39  The   third  problem  is  one  of  cost.  A  high  quality  reproduction  for  use  in  an  exhibition  at   the  Archives  is  approximately  $25  for  each,40  and  the  total  sum  of  the  reproductions   I  intend  to  show  in  the  proposed  exhibition  can  seem  like  a  lot  on  a  prospective   budget.  However,  when  faced  with  the  possibility  of  damaged  artifacts  as  an   alternative,  there  is  no  choice  to  be  made.  As  a  result,  I  intend  to  use  reproductions   for  the  exhibition  in  the  display  cases,  and  for  the  stereographs  available  to  the   public  to  view.  The  publicly  available  reproductions  will  be  mounted  on  a  thicker   board  so  they  can  be  handled  by  the  public  without  the  worry  of  breaking  or   bending  from  mishandling.  The  exhibition  reproductions  can  be  mounted  on  thinner   board  since  the  image  just  needs  to  be  kept  rigid,  but  does  not  have  to  be  handled.        

                                                                                                                

39  James  Bower,  conversation  with  the  author,  Toronto,  April  11,  2012.   40  Stewart  Boden,  conversation  with  the  author,  Toronto,  May  9,  2012.  

  

25  

Design  of  the  Exhibition      Esson's  Ontario  will  be  mounted  in  two  of  the  five  display  cases  that  are  used  

in  the  Reading  Room,  and  an  interactive  aspect  of  the  exhibition  will  be  available  at   the  Reading  Room  reference  desk  (See  figure  1  for  display  case  location  in  Reading   Room).  Each  case  will  have  text  panels  inside,  placed  above  and  to  the  left  of  the   objects,  in  English  and  French  according  to  the  Archives  of  Ontario  regulations  for   exhibitions.  Each  photograph  will  have  a  personal  object  label  below  it  with  the  full   Archives  descriptive  label  (See  appendix  B  for  examples).  The  first  case  will   introduce  the  exhibition,  James  Esson  and  his  work  (See  appendix  C  for  case  #1  text   panels,  design  and  exhibition  checklist).  This  case  will  have  a  sample  of  three   stereographs  from  the  tour  that  highlight  the  way  Esson  composed  them  to   emphasize  depth.  The  second  case  will  highlight  the  1875  tour  and  show  examples   of  the  cities  and  landmarks  that  Esson  visited  during  that  time  through   reproductions  of  the  original  stereographs  (see  appendix  D  for  case  #2  text  panels,   design  and  exhibition  checklist).  The  stereographs  in  this  case  are  split  into  three   categories;  the  first  will  feature  the  major  cities  and  urban  landmarks,  like  Toronto's   St  Lawrence  Hall  and  Parliament  Hill  in  Ottawa.  The  second  category  shows  sites   like  the  Sault  Ste  Marie  shipping  canal  where  nature  meets  the  engineering  talents   of  man.  The  third  category  will  show  the  scenes  of  nature  where  Esson   photographed  the  lakes  and  mountains  of  Ontario.  Similarities  in  how  Esson   composes  his  stereographic  work  can  be  seen  through  the  samples  shown  in  the   exhibition.  The  text  panels  in  this  case  will  also  introduce  the  interactive  aspect  of   the  proposed  exhibition;  viewers  will  be  prompted  to  go  to  the  Reading  Room  

  

26  

reference  desk  to  pick  up  reproductions  of  the  stereographs  that  have  been   exhibited  and  view  them  with  a  modern  day  stereo  viewer  (see  appendix  E  for   publically  available  sample  stereographs).       

  

27  

Appendix  A:  Complete  Exhibition  Checklist  for  Esson's  Ontario      The  objects  in  the  exhibition  checklists  are  ordered  according  to  the  ST  numbers   that  are  assigned  to  the  object  by  the  Archives.   Cases  and  Samples  Stereographs  

      28  

  

  

  

29  

Appendix  B:  Examples  of  object  labels      Example  #1     

   "Osgoode  Hall"  ca.  1880.   Mounted,  Albumen  Prints.   Acc.  3964,  ST  568,  A-431,  Archives  of  Ontario.  
            Example  #2  

      "Chaudiere  Falls:  Ottawa  Views,  Capital  of  The  Dominion"   Ca.  1880.   Mounted,  Albumen  Prints.   Acc.  13795,  ST  1090,  A-434,  Archives  of  Ontario.  
              

In  previous  exhibitions  at  the  Archives  of  Ontario,  the  style  and  content  of  the  

object  labels  has  varied.  One  constant  in  all  object  labels  in  every  exhibition  has   been  the  inclusion  of  the  object's  reference  code.  The  archivist  or  curator  includes   this  so  that  the  public  can  call  up  the  objects  at  a  later  date  if  they  so  wish.  As  a   result,  both  of  my  label  designs  include  the  object  reference  code,  which  can  be   found  on  the  last  line  of  each  design.       

  

30  

Appendix  C:  Case  #1        

Exhibition  Checklist  for  Esson's  Ontario   Case  #1  

      Introductory  Panel      In  1875,  Ontario  was  not  even  10  years  old  and  the  provincial  borders  were  

  

being  changed  again  and  again.  In  that  same  year,  a  young,  Ontario  photographer   named  James  Esson  began  a  tour  of  the  province  to  take  a  special  kind  of   photograph,  a  stereograph.  A  popular  visual  phenomena  of  the  time,  a  stereograph   allowed  a  viewer  to  see  all  the  landmarks  that  Esson  visited  and  photographed,  but   in  three  dimensions.     

  

31  

In  1875,  Esson  embarked  on  a  seven-year  tour  of  Ontario  and  the  State  of   New  York  to  produce  stereographs.  Beginning  in  the  major  cities  of  the  time  like   Toronto,  Ottawa  and  Hamilton,  and  taking  a  winding  route  through  the  untouched   lakes  and  mountains  of  the  province,  Esson  photographed  several  landmarks  and   natural  scenes  throughout  the  province.  This  tour  and  the  stereographs  produced   from  it  gave  Esson  a  nationwide  reputation  as  a  photographer.  A  portion  of  the   stereographs  that  Esson  made  during  his  tour  of  Ontario  can  be  found  in  the   Archives  of  Ontario's  collection  of  stereographs.         Second  Panel   Who  was  James  Esson?   James  Esson  was  born  in  Preston,  Ontario  in  1853.  His  father,  George,  was  a   photographer  who  specialized  in  Daguerreotypes,  the  earliest  form  of  photography,   and  had  his  own  studio  in  the  family  home.  A  young  James  worked  as  an  assistant   for  his  father's  practice  before  he  took  it  over  in  the  early  1870s.  Esson  had  little   trouble  establishing  his  reputation  separately  from  his  father's,  since  he  had  gained   fame  in  Preston  for  photographing  local  weddings  and  events.  James  Esson  did  a   little  bit  of  everything,  and  made  sure  people  knew  about  it!  He  had  his  own   advertisements  that  listed  everything  he  specialized  in,  including  being  a   Photographer,  Publisher  and  dealer  in  Stereoscopic  Views,  Portrait  Artist,  Statuary,   Monumental  and  Headstone  Designs.     

  

32  

Once  the  trip  was  finished,  Esson  returned  to  his  native  Preston  to  open  a   new  studio,  the  Atelier,  in  1884.  His  self-advertising  on  his  stereograph  trip  resulted   in  high  class  clients  like  the  Marquis  of  Lorne,  Canada's  Governor  General  at  the   time,  and  his  wife  Princess  Louise,  politicians,  famous  stage  artists  and  prominent   society  figures.  In  1916,  Esson  suffered  a  fall  that  forced  him  into  retirement.  Esson   sold  the  Atelier  and  moved  to  Toronto  in  1920,  where  he  would  die  at  the  age  of  80   on  12  September  1933.         Third  Panel   What's  a  Stereograph?   Stereographs  are  two  photographs  or  images  positioned  side  by  side.  When  a   viewer  uses  a  stereoscope,  a  device  for  viewing  stereographs,  the  two  flat  images   combine  to  create  a  single  image  that  gives  the  illusion  of  three  dimensions  and   depth.  A  Stereograph  in  a  Stereoscope  works  much  like  human  vision,  since  our  eyes   are  positioned  a  distance  apart;  we  see  everything  from  two  slightly  different  angles.     Our  brain  then  processes  the  two  images  into  a  single  one  that  has  depth  and   dimension.  Thanks  to  Esson's  use  of  a  foreground,  middle  ground  and  background,   his  stereographs  give  the  illusion  of  depth  and  three  dimensions,  in  a  2D  image.           

  

33  

Layout  of  Case  #1      Inside  display  area  is  34.5  inches  by  58.5  inches.  All  objects  within  the  diagram  have   been  scaled  accordingly.  Each  text  panel  shown  in  the  diagram  has  the  text  in   English  and  French.  

  

34  

Appendix  D:  Case  #2      Exhibition  Checklist  for  Esson's  Ontario   Case  #2  

  

  

  

35  

  

      First  Panel   The  Tour   Esson  photographed  several  landmarks  of  the  day,  like  the  brand  new   Osgoode  Hall  in  Toronto,  and  the  newly  built  Parliament  Buildings  in  Ottawa.  The   stereographs  produced  on  this  trip  were  arranged  by  Esson  into  series  according  to      36  

  

their  geography,  larger  city  centres  like  Toronto  receiving  their  own  dedicated   series.  Esson  left  the  cities  and  crisscrossed  the  province  to  create  The  Scenery  of  the   Northern  Lakes  of  Canada  series,  which  included  a  wide  range  of  natural  scenes,   towns  and  the  construction  of  several  landmarks  throughout  the  province.  The   Steam  ships  in  the  Owen  Sound  Harbour  were  some  of  the  last  signs  of  civilization   before  the  photographer  left  it  behind  to  move  towards  the  lake  and  forests  of   Ontario.  Once  this  tour  was  finished,  Esson  created  a  separate  series  of  views  called   Picturesque  Canada  and  included  highlights  of  each  of  the  locations  in  Ontario  that   he  visited.  It's  estimated  that  the  stereographs  in  the  eleven  Ontario  series  from  this   tour  numbers  in  the  thousands.  Little  is  known  about  the  details  of  the  tour,  but  the   stereographs  are  the  lasting  legacy  of  Esson's  tour.            Second  Panel      Try  a  Stereograph!      Stereographs  are  not  just  two  pictures  side  by  side;  they  are  meant  to  be  

viewed  in  3D.  The  reference  desk  has  reproductions  of  all  the  exhibited   stereographs  that  can  be  viewed  with  a  modern  day  viewer.  While  holding  the   viewer  up  to  your  eyes,  look  directly  at  the  stereograph  so  that  the  line  dividing  the   two  images  lines  up  with  your  nose.  You  can  move  the  stereographs  a  little  closer,  or   further  away  from  the  viewer  to  get  the  right  distance  for  the  picture  to  come  into   focus.    

  

37  

Layout  of  Case  #2      Inside  display  area  is  34.5  inches  by  58.5  inches.  All  objects  within  the  diagram  have   been  scaled  accordingly.  Each  text  panel  shown  in  the  diagram  has  the  text  in   English  and  French.

  

38  

Appendix  E:  Exhibition  Checklist  for  the  Publically  Available  Reproductions      Exhibition  Checklist  for  Esson's  Ontario  Sample  Stereographs  

  

39  

  

40  

  

41  

Appendix  F:  Preliminary  budget      Exhibition  dates:   One  month,  2013      Reproduction  costs      Stereographs              Text  Panels  and  Labels         Title                  Installation  costs      Mounting               Viewers                       

              

              

              

$700   $150   $25   $100   $35  

  

42  

Bibliography      James  Esson      Print  Resources      Boost,  Markus  R.,  "If  You  Have  Beauty...."  Photographic  Canadiana.  25,  no  2  (1999):     38-44.        --,  James  Esson  of  Preston,  Canada:  August  10,  1853  ­  January  29,  1949  (Cambridge:     1994).      Brown-Kubisch,  Linda,  "150  Years  of  Photography  in  Cambridge."  Waterloo     Historical  Society  (1992).      Cochrane,  WM.,  The  Canadian  Album,  Men  of  Canada:  or  Success  by  Example,  in     Religion,  Patriotism,  Business,  Law,  Medicine,  Education  and  Agriculture.  Vol.     2.  Brantford:  Bradley,  Garretson  &  Co.,  1893.        Gilson,  G.,  and  H.  C.  Tugwell,  eds.,  "James  Esson:  An  Enterprising  Photographer  of     Preston,  Ont.."  The  Canadian  Photographic  Journal  1,  no.  4  (May  1892):  85.      Greenhill,  Ralph,  and  Andrew  Birrell,  Canadian  Photography:  1839-1920  (Toronto:     Coach  House  Press,  1979).      Greenhill,  Ralph,  Early  Photography  in  Canada  (Toronto:  Oxford  University  Press,     1965).        Schwartz,  Joan  M.,  Aperçu:  The  Archives  Looks  at  The  Stereo  Views  of  James  Esson        (Ottawa:  Public  Archives  Canada,  1979).        --,  "Double  Vision:  The  stereo  Views  of  James  Esson."  Photo  Communiqué  1,  no  1     (March-April  1979):  14-15.      White,  Stanley  J.,  "Old  Jimmy  Esson:  Honoured  by  The  City  of  Cambridge."     Photographic  Canadiana.  21,  no  1  (1995):  11-12.         Electronic  Resources      Cambridge  City  Archives.  "James  Esson,  Inducted  1995."  Cambridge  City  Archives,     http://www.cambridge.ca/cs_pubaccess/hall_of_fame.php?aid=16&cpid=0&   scpid=0&did=2&sid=34&ssid=0&tp=0&grid=0  (accessed  February  5,  2012).      Toronto  Public  Library.  "James  Esson,  Photographer:  1853-1933."  The  Local  History     and  Genealogy  blog,  entry  posted  October  12,  2011,        43  

http://torontopubliclibrary.typepad.com/local-history-   genealogy/2011/10/james-esson-photographer-1853-1933.html  (accessed     November  10,  2011).      Mitchell,  John.  "Evidence  That  in  Many  Ways,  in  Over  100  Years  We  Have  Made     Little  Progress."  The  John  Mitchell  Photography  blog,  entry  posted  on  March     24,  2011,  http://www.johnmitchellphoto.com/blog/?m=201103  (accessed   March  1,  2012).      Photographers  of  Ontario.  "James  Esson."  Photographers  of  Ontario,     http://photographersofontario.ca/index.php/James_Esson  (accessed     December  10,  2011).      Schwartz,  Joan  M.,  ed.  The  Canadian  Encyclopedia,  s.v.  "James  Esson."     http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/articles/james-esson  (accessed     December  11,  2011).        Waterloo  Region,  "James  Esson."  Waterloo  Region  Generations,     http://generations.regionofwaterloo.ca/getperson.php?personID=I17007&tr   ee=generations  (accessed  December  10,  2011).         Other      All  But  Forgotten:  James  Esson,  Canada's  Foremost  Stereographer,  directed  by  David     Delouchery  and  Darcy  Hoover,  Tundra  Filmworks.  DVD  (In  production,     unreleased  as  of  this  date).            Canadian  Photographic  History      Print  Resources      Blake,  Verschoyle  Benson,  and  Ralph  Greenhill,  Rural  Ontario  (Toronto:  University     of  Toronto  Press,  1969).        Greenhill,  Ralph,  Early  Photography  in  Canada  (Toronto:  Oxford  University  Press,     1965).        Greenhill,  Ralph,  and  Andrew  Birrell,  Canadian  Photography:  1839-1920  (Toronto:     Coach  House  Press,  1979).      Loke,  Margarett,  The  World  as  it  Was,  1865-1921:  A  Photographic  Portrait  From  The     Keystone-Mast  Collection  (New  York:  Summit  Books,  1980).         44  

Phillips,  Glen  Christopher,  The  Ontario  Photographers  List  Volume  1:  1851-1900     (Sarnia:  Iron  Gate  Pub.  Co.,  1990-1997).      --,  The  Ontario  Photographers  List  Volume  2:  1901-1925  (Sarnia:  Iron  Gate  Pub.  Co.,     1990-1997).      Public  Archives  of  Canada,  Private  Realms  of  Light,  Amateur  Photography  in  Canada,     1839-1948  (Markham:  Fitzhenry  &  Whiteside,  1984).              Exhibitions      Print  Resources      Canadian  Museum  of  Contemporary  Photography,  Travelling  Exhibitions  (Ottawa:     National  Museums  of  Canada,  1979).      Caron,  Elisabeth  Teresa  Jessica  "William  S.  Sawyer  Exhibition."  Master's  thesis,     Ryerson  University,  2006.        Goldberg,  Rachel,  "One  Man's  West:  Photographs  by  Edwin  Hendrie  Grant.  The     Development  and  Proposal  of  a  Photographic  Exhibition."  Master's  thesis,     Ryerson  University,  2007.      Hayett,  William,  Display  &  Exhibit  Handbook  (New  York:  Reinhold  Publishing     Corporation,  1967).        Klein,  Larry,  (Exhibits:  Planning  and  Design  (New  York:  Madison  Square  Press,     1986).        Robert,  Barclay,  Andre  Bergeron,  and  Carole  Dignard,  Mount-Making  for  Museum     Objects  (Ottawa:  Canadian  Conservation  Institute,  1998).        Russell,  Robert,  L.,  "Designing  Exhibits  That  Engage  Visitor's:  Bob's  Top  Ten  Points."     The  Informal  Learning  Review,  (Victoria:  British  Columbia  Museums     Association,  2007).        Wagner,  Emily  J.,  "In  All  Solidarity  and  Reality:  A  Stereoscopic  Exhibition  Proposal."     Master's  thesis,  Ryerson  University,  2009.           Electronic  Resources      Archives  of  Ontario,  "Archives  and  Recordkeeping  Act,  2006."  Archives  of  Ontario,     http://www.archives.gov.on.ca/english/about/archives-act.aspx  (accessed        45  

December  14,  2011).        Archives  of  Ontario,  "Code  of  Practice."  Archives  of  Ontario,     http://www.archives.gov.on.ca/english/about/code-of-practice.aspx   (accessed  December  14,  2011).      Zone  Display  Cases,  "Zone  Display  Cases."  Zone  Display  Cases,     http://www.zonedisplaycases.com/en/index.php  (accessed  May  5,  2012)            Stereography      Print  Resources      Brewster,  David,  The  Stereoscope:  Its  History,  Theory,  and  Construction  (New  York:     Morgan  &  Morgan,  Inc.,  Publishers,  1971).      Darrah,  William  C.,  Stereo  Views:  A  History  of  Stereographs  in  America  and  Their     Collection  (Gettysburg:  Times  and  News  Publishing  Company,  1964).      --  ,  The  World  of  Stereographs  (Gettysburg:  Times  and  News  Publishing  Company,     1977).        Eastman  Kodak,  Picture  it  in  Stereo  (Rochester:  Eastman  Kodak  Co.,  1955).      Gilbert,  George,  Collecting  Photographica:  The  Images  and  Equipment  of  the  First     Hundred  Years  of  Photography  (New  York:  Hawthorn  Books,  Inc.,  1976).      Kaiser,  Julius,  Make  Your  Own  Stereo  Pictures  (New  York:  The  Macmillan  Company,     1955).      Jenkins,  Harold,  F.,  Two  Points  of  View:  The  History  of  The  Parlor  Stereoscope     (Uniontown:  E.G.  Warman  Pub.,  1973).      Lartigue,  Jacques-Henri,  Hidden  Depths  (London:  Design  for  Life,  2004).      Loke,  Margarett,  The  World  as  it  Was,  1865-1921:  A  Photographic  Portrait  From  The     Keystone-Mast  Collection  (New  York:  Summit  Books,  1980).      May,  Brian,  A  Village  Lost  and  Found  (London:  Frances  Lincoln,  2009).      Reynaud,  Françoise,  Paris  in  3-D  (London:  Booth-Clibborn  Editions,  2000).      Sasoon,  Joanna,  "Photographic  Materiality  in  the  Age  of  Digital  Reproduction."       Photographs  Objects  Histories  (New  York:  Routledge,  2004).        46  

   Wagner,  Emily  J.,  "In  All  Solidarity  and  Reality:  A  Stereoscopic  Exhibition  Proposal."     Master's  thesis,  Ryerson  University,  2009.        Willumsum,  Glenn,  "Making  Meaning:  Displaced  Materiality  in  the  Library  and  Art     Museum."  Photographs  Objects  Histories  (New  York:  Routledge,  2004).        Wing,  Paul,  Stereoscopes:  The  First  One  Hundred  Years  (Nashua:  Transition     Publishing,  1996).         Electronic  Resources      May,  Brian,  Philip  Murray  and  Elena  Vidal,  "The  London  Stereoscopic  Company  Ltd."     The  London  Stereoscopic  Company  Ltd,  http://www.londonstereo.com/   (accessed  November  4,  2011).        McCord  Museum,  "1  Image  2  Eyes  3D."  McCord  Museum,  http://www.mccord-   museum.qc.ca/expositions/expositionsXSL.php?lang=1&expoId=58&page=in   tro  (accessed  November  5,  2011).      National  Gallery  of  Art,  "Carleton  Watkins:  The  Art  of  Perception."  National  Gallery     of  Art  http://www.nga.gov/exhibitions/watkinsimg.shtm  (accessed     November  5,  2011).        

  

47  


