Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2010

A Subject Index : The Canadian Architect Image Archive At Ryerson University Library's Special Collections
Katherine Shoemaker
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Photography Commons Recommended Citation
Shoemaker, Katherine, "A Subject Index : The Canadian Architect Image Archive At Ryerson University Library's Special Collections" (2010). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1489.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

A SUBJECT INDEX: THE CANADIAN ARCHITECT IMAGE ARCHIVE AT RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY'S SPECIAL COLLECTIONS

by Katherine Shoemaker BA, Art History & Studio Art Majors, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, 2007

A professional practice project presented to Ryerson University, Art Gallery of Ontario & George Eastman House International Museum of Photography and Film

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2010 © Shoemaker 2010

i

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

ii

A Subject Index: The Canadian Architect Image Archive at Ryerson University Library's Special Collections Katherine Shoemaker Master of Arts, 2010 Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University

Abstract

The Canadian Architect Image Archive (1955-1990) was donated to Ryerson University Library's Special Collections in March 2009. Over the course of a year, the archive was catalogued and properly housed. This applied thesis project describes the process of subject indexing a photograph collection in order to provide easy user access and preservation of the archive. The two groups of photographs chosen as case studies are `Toronto' and `Quebec', and are the most commonly requested to use for research. This thesis provides a discussion of the context and methodology of subject indexing a unique photographic archive. This thesis contains an appendix with the two subject indexes, proposed subject index testing questionnaire, and an accompanying CD with the indexes in their full format.

iii

Acknowledgements

Thank you to my thesis advisor Naomi Eichenlaub for her expertise and for always being there to help, I appreciate her support in making this project a reality. I would also like to thank my second reader, Bob Burley. I thank Beth Knazook for introducing me to this collection, and for enticing the idea to create this project. I am indebted for the experience I gained from working within Special Collections during the past year, and my internship. I thank the faculty and staff at Ryerson University and Art Gallery of Ontario, particularly Maia Sutnik and Sophie Hackett, for the learning experience of a lifetime and for reminding me why I want to be here. The learning opportunities I gained were invaluable. A huge thank you to my family and friends for always being supportive in whatever decision I have made, they are the reason I keep going.

iv

Dedication

For Dad, Mom, Kristie, and Nick.

v

List of Appendices
A. Quebec and Toronto Indexes

A.1 `Quebec' Subject Index A.2 `Toronto' Subject Index B. Hypothetical `Subject Indexing Testing' Questionnaire

vi

Table of Contents
Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgments Dedication List of Appendices List of Tables List of Images ii iii iv v vi viii ix

1. Introduction 1.1 Statement & Purpose 1.2 Objectives 1.3 Project Organization and Time Line 2. History and Context 2.1 Description of the Canadian Architect Image Archive, Special Collections, Ryerson University Library 2.2 Organization of the Canadian Architect Image Archive 2.3 Summary of work carried out (January 2010 ­ June 2010) 3. Literature Review 4. Subject Index 4.1 Methodology Subject Lists ­ Access Points Pulling Terms from Catalogue Spreadsheets Subject Lists Subject List Refinement Index Development 4.2 Subject Index Evaluation 4.3 Summary Discussion and Concluding Remarks Bibliography Appendices A. A.1 A.2 B. `Quebec' and `Toronto' Indexes `Quebec' Subject Index `Toronto' Subject Index Hypothetical `Subject Indexing Testing' Questionnaire 35 36 97 187 17 18 21 22 25 27 30 32 5 6 8 12 1 2 3

vii

List of Tables

1. Example of subject terms pulled for a photograph in the `Quebec' catalogue spreadsheet 2. Code letters for `Building Name' field entries 3. Example of a `Building Name' entry

viii

List of Images
1. Canadian Architect material as it arrived at Special Collections, March 2009

2. Canadian Architect material after cataloguing and organization, March 2010 3. Canadian Architect material after cataloguing and organization, March 2010 5. A selection of the controlled vocabulary on FADIS 4. Screenshot of an image entry on the FADIS online database

6. Banque Canadienne Nationale, Montreal; Jacques David, Pierre Boulva; 2009.002.062.001 7. Toronto catalogue spreadsheet from which terms were pulled for the initial creation of subject lists. 8. Screenshot image of the Canadian Architect magazine 1989 index available on the online website.

ix

1 INTRODUCTION
This project entails the research and development of a subject index that will be used as a tool to increase access to photographs in an image archive. The focus for this case study is limited to a group of architectural photographs in the Canadian Architect Image Archive, located in Ryerson University Library's Special Collections. An index can be defined as a systematic guide designed to indicate topics or features of documents in order to facilitate retrieval of documents or parts of documents 1. For the purposes of this project, a subject index will be created to facilitate access to a group of photographs. The development of an index, known as indexing, is the process of assigning preferred terms or headings to describe the concepts and other metadata associated with a content object 2. Indexes enhance `intellectual access', which Hastings (1999) describes as "the image searcher's ability to find and use (retrieve) the image that meets a stated need" 3.

1.1

STATEMENT & PURPOSE

When approaching an archive of photographs researchers may be unclear as to what to search for, or they might have a specific name or keyword in mind that could possibly turn up with no results. As a reference tool, a subject index is a means of vocabulary control to provide access to a collection. Subject indexes should not be confused with other information retrieval methods such as a finding aid and thesauri. A finding aid is a document that describes the acquisition, scope, contents, provenance, inventory, and arrangement of a collection within an archive 4. Researchers use finding aids to determine whether or not information is relevant to their research.
1 2

James D. Anderson, Guidelines for indexes and related information retrieval devices, 8. Guidelines for the Construction, Format, and Management of Monolingual Thesauri: ANSI/NISO Z39.192003, 12. 3 Samantha K. Hastings, Evaluation of image retrieval systems: Role of user feedback, 442. 4 Society of American Archivists, http://www.archivists.org/glossary/term_details.asp?DefinitionKey=66.

1

Thesauri are a type of controlled vocabulary meant for information retrieval and indexing purposes by linking broader and narrower terms 5. Thesauri differ from indexes by describing relationships between broad and narrower terms, whereas indexes are lists of terms. A thesaurus can be used as a basis to select terms for an index and to promote consistency in the indexing of documents 6. The Art and Architecture Thesaurus (AAT), for example, is used as one of the source lists for this project to select subject terms to describe architecture photographs 7. The outcome of this project is a subject index that will serve as a means to easily provide access to a photographic archive for researchers and students, as well as preserve the longevity of the archive. A photographic catalogue provides direct information on an archive, however it can lack in information on outside references. Subject indexes combine preferred headings in a manner to describe a concept and can include references (such as page numbers or in this case box numbers) pointing a user towards the information or item they are seeking. This enables more effective image searches without the need to manually search through the archive itself, which cannot always guarantee results. In the case of the Canadian Architect archive, the user can be directed toward information about specific buildings and references to magazine issues in which the prints and images from the negatives are reproduced. This provides the user with an easier and faster approach for conducting research. Eliminating the need for manual searches, the subject index will preserve the photographic archive by providing controlled access and use that will limit handling of the photographs to a manageable level.

1.2

OBJECTIVES

The Canadian Architect Image Archive is divided into groups of photographs according to geographic location. To limit the scope of this project to a manageable
5 6

Anderson, 43. Ibid. 7 See Section 4.1 for a description of the Art & Architecture Thesaurus (AAT).

2

length, the intention of this project is to develop a subject index list that will focus on two groups of photographs, titled `Toronto' and `Quebec', rather than attempt to create and index for the entire collection. The photographs from these two groups are the most frequently requested by students and researchers. Together the `Toronto' and `Quebec' groups comprise approximately 3,000 photographs. There is no intention of bringing in other photographs that are part of this larger collection, as it is not part of the scope of this project, nor will I attempt to instruct how to index images, as the subject indexing process used in this project is an interpretation based on research and my own decisions. At the start of this project, cataloguing had been completed with the Quebec group, and nearly half of the Toronto group. An important factor in the creation of this index was to have a complete cataloguing record for all images before work could begin on creating a subject index for the Quebec and Toronto groups of photographs. Subject terms from the cataloguing record would be the basis for creating the index, and then terms would be refined and standardized to complete the fields in the index 8.

1.3

PROJECT ORGANIZATION and TIME LINE

This project began with the development of a process to accommodate the multiple steps of creating a subject index. The project needed to be organized in a way that allowed for research, development of the subject index, and finally determining methods to test the index at a future date, in order to analyze its effectiveness and to make adjustments accordingly. The final result will act as a model for archivists, librarians, and curators faced with the task of providing access to similar photographic archives. The next task was to develop a cohesive time line to ensure that the multiple steps of the indexing process were met in a timely and efficient manner. Research on
8

See Section 4.1 for a discussion about the process of constructing the subject index.

3

image indexing was undertaken in the first couple months of the project to gain an understanding of the methodology employed in indexing photographs. As a specific case study it was important to establish a hierarchy of methods that would be appropriate for indexing the Canadian Architect Image Archive. The time line was also important for determining weekly development of the index. The first month was devoted to the creation of the `Quebec' subject index, as it was smaller than the Toronto group and therefore could be completed and refined more quickly. In the first week, building names were pulled from the `Quebec' catalogue and alphabetized which began the creation of a draft index. The next two weeks were divided into pulling names of architects, photographers, and subject headings from the catalogue spreadsheets. It was important to ensure that the correct names of buildings, names, and locations were input into the preliminary list before further work could begin on building the index. By the second month, the `Quebec' index was nearly complete when work began on the draft index of `Toronto', which was built in the same manner as the `Quebec' index. The next two weeks were spent refining the `Toronto' index, which at times involved going through magazine issues and using the Canadian Architect online index to confirm correct dates in which the photographs were reproduced in the magazine. By the end of June, both the Toronto and Quebec indexes had been created. Evaluations and index refinement commenced to assess the usability and accurateness of the subject index. Plans for a future hypothetical index testing process were created, which would ideally commence once the entire Canadian Architect Image Archive has been indexed.

4

2 HISTORY & CONTEXT
2.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE Canadian Architect Image Archive, Special Collections, Ryerson University Library

The case study for this project is based on the Canadian Architect Image Archive that was donated to Special Collections at Ryerson University Library in March 2009, by Ian Chodikoff, editor of Canadian Architect magazine. The mandate of Ryerson's Special Collections is to facilitate the scholarly research and creative activities of the Ryerson community by acquiring and preserving photography, film and cultural history objects 9. Ryerson University has a notable reputation for architecture studies, making Special Collections an appropriate repository for an archive that assists researchers and architecture students in their interpretation and study of the Canadian Architect photographs. The period of time the donated collection covers is the years 1955-1990. The archive contains approximately 6,000 negatives and transparencies, and 7,000 prints, which were taken for publication in the magazine. The subjects recorded in the prints are primarily modern Canadian structures, but images of some international structures and portraits of leading Canadian architects are found in the collection as well. The negatives range in format and were lesser used in the later years of the archive. In the 1980s, film as well as colour and black & white transparencies became the popular photographic methods in which prints were then reproduced in the magazine. The acquired negatives number more than 10,000 and have been housed and catalogued separately from the prints. Indexing of the negatives is outside the scope of this project, and therefore will not be discussed in this paper. The Canadian Architect Image Archive includes several graphic representations, plans and renderings, which have not been catalogued and digitized as the prints have
9

Ryerson University Library & Archives: Special Collections, www.ryerson.ca/library/a_sc.html

5

been done. It was decided to omit the graphic renderings from this index project, and this part of the donation will be dealt with in the future. Similarly, the archive's addition of portraiture has been omitted from this project. The fifth floor periodical section of the Ryerson Library is the location of the complete holdings of Canadian Architect magazine (1955-present). There are certain loose issues from 1967-68 that are held in Special Collections, and are available to view upon request. Over the years incidents of vandalism have been the cause for missing and torn pages in some magazines, in which case efforts have been made to replace the lost pages and ensure that magazine issues are complete.

2.2

ORGANIZATION OF THE Canadian Architect Image Archive

The ways in which an archive is arranged determines the longevity of a collection. The organization of the Canadian Architect image archive remains outside of the scope of this project. This information, however, is provided as a background history in order to provide a further understanding of the purposes of the subject index. The Canadian Architect material underwent a series of organizational arrangements and was completed in advance of this thesis project.

Image 1: Canadian Architect material as it arrived at Special Collections, March 2009

When the prints and negatives arrived at Special Collections from the Canadian Architect magazine, there appeared to be a varied order of organization (Image 1). The

6

donation totaled thirteen boxes, comprising several smaller boxes of negatives, numerous folders of photographs, negatives, transparencies, and renderings, and in some cases boxes photographs were loosely strewn as "Miscellaneous". The first decision was an arrangement order for the photographs. After discussions with Beth Knazook, Photographic Specialist in Special Collections, it was decided that for the purpose of the Canadian Architect archive the photographs would be categorized by geographic location. Photographs were separated into boxes according to province, and sometimes by major city, for example `Toronto'. Some provinces were grouped together as regions to compensate for their lesser amount, for example, `West Coast' and `East Coast'. Finally, international photographs, graphic drawings, and portraits were organized into their own groups.

Images 2, 3: Canadian Architect material after cataloguing and organization, March 2010

After the initial group categorization, photographs were separated by project name, placed into an 8 x 10 Archivalware sleeve, acid-free file folder, and given a unique item level description number (Images 2, 3), for example: Chapel Glen (2009.002.070), Quebec box. Initial cataloguing was input into Excel spreadsheets for every group of photograph files, noting the file name, item and object level description, and box in which it was placed. The first boxes to receive cataloguing treatment were the `Quebec' group, as it was determined that they would be the first to be digitized and housed in

7

the Federated Academic Digital Imaging System (FADIS) 10. `Toronto' and `Quebec' have been catalogued and organized into upright and flat Hollinger boxes, and been given extended file numbers indicating the Hollinger box it belongs to (i.e. CA T3). With the cataloguing mostly complete and the images properly stored, the priority shifted to creating a subject index to enhance access to this collection.

2.3

SUMMARY OF WORK CARRIED OUT January 2010-June 2010

At the time when this project first began in January 2010, the Canadian Architect image archive had been organized and nearly half of the archive had been catalogued. Work was continued on cataloguing by student interns and members of staff, from January to the end of April. Due to a lack of supplies and financial constraints, many files of photographs were not yet archivally stored in plastic sleeves, acid-free file folders, and Hollinger boxes. As it was decided that this project would focus on `Quebec' and `Toronto', care was taken to ensure that both groups of photographs were stored in proper archival condition and completely catalogued by the time the index creation would begin. FADIS is presently the online database where the digitized images are being made available for students (Image 4). FADIS has incorporated a controlled vocabulary, which is fixed and meant for cataloging art history and other visual images (Image 5). It is important to note that FADIS is not being used as a database to index the images, for the reason that the vocabulary is fixed and unchanging. The process of digitizing and inputting the images into FADIS is an on-going project carried out by other members of staff in Special Collections.

10

FADIS is a learning management and courseware system for education and research, developed for image based teaching of art, architecture and visual culture. FADIS website: http://fadis.library.utoronto.ca/ (accessed July 25, 2010)

8

Image 4: Screenshot of an image entry in the FADIS online database

Before the subject index creation could be started, research was carried out on the development and use of image indexing processes beginning with an understanding of the use of image collections. I then researched various modes of collection access, such as manual to online image collections. User research played a vital part in helping to develop an index that would be easy for its users, including staff who will work with the collection. It was also important to research ways of choosing the characteristics of an image to pull as subject terms and the retrieval methods that assist with this process, such as using controlled vocabularies, free-text descriptions, and visual thesauri.

9

Image 5: A selection of the controlled vocabulary on FADIS

When this project began there were many discussions pertaining to ideas of what the index would be, what it would look like, what it would include or not include, and especially ideas of how it would be created. It was suggested by my thesis advisor, Naomi Eichenlaub, Catalogue Librarian in Ryerson University Library, that research should include information on subject indexing from various web resources such as the Canadian Bureau of Archivists and American Society for Indexing. It was also suggested to review and familiarize myself with standards and guidelines published by the National Information Standards Organization (NISO), such as the ANSI/NISO Z39.19 standard, which would give directions for determining an acceptable format for the index. It is important to adhere to established standards, which serve as guidelines for organizational control and proper implementation of information.

10

After discussions with Beth Knazook and Naomi Eichenlaub, it was decided that it was important to begin building subject lists to act as the first wave of indexable terms for describing photographs. These lists would be compiled with names of buildings, geographic locations, architects, photographers, and subjects. Terms would be pulled from the catalogue spreadsheets and from the photographs themselves. After the initial pulling of terms for both the `Quebec' and `Toronto' groups, subject lists would be refined and alphabetized, and then created into an index. Time was spent investigating software for indexing that could potentially be used as a framework for hosting the Canadian Architect index. Finding suitable software for an index can be a challenging task. Issues at the time included finding software that would suit the Canadian Architect index, and was easy for users and staff to use. XML (EXtensible Markup Language) was considered for the index as a transferable mode, which would make it easy to transport the index into a future database. XML is a markup language much like HTML, and was created to structure, store, and transport information to various forms of databases. For this project, subject lists could be turned into XML files as a long-term solution, because of its flexible format. The ultimate decision was to use Excel for the creation and development of the subject index. Excel is easily searchable and manageable for this project, and can be adapted at any time if the need is called for it. If a database is found in the future, Excel files can be easily transferred into XML files and input into the database as a future tool. Once the decision to use Excel for the creation of the index was made, attention was turned to the first steps in the creation of the index 11.

11

See Section 4.1 for a more in-depth discussion on the index development processes used for this project.

11

3

LITERATURE REVIEW
This literature review discusses published research applicable to the

development of an image index. The journal articles and websites used in this review indicate the scope of scholarly writing and how it has grown since the 1980s, when this subject began to be explored. This literature review contributes to the development of many stages of this thesis project, such as identifying classification and indexing practices, user trends, retrieval methods, and standards and guidelines. The review has been divided into three sections: literature that has been the most useful towards development of this project, less useful, and resources that have not been useful but nonetheless contribute toward the discussion of indexing photographs. Identifying and interpreting available research will identify gaps and limitations of indexing photographs and encourage further research. USEFUL SOURCES This section identifies literature on image indexing that has been useful toward the development of this project. The articles have been listed chronologically so one can see how they have built upon one another. The initial step toward developing an indexing model is to identify attributes that can be used to describe an image. In indexing images, attributes are the indexable matter that describes a subject or characteristic of an image 12. SHATFORD LAYNE's "Some Issues in the Indexing of Images" (1994) for Journal of the American Society for Information Science, discusses using categories to identify image information, and questions the nature of grouping images with similar characteristics. Similarly, RASMUSSEN's "Indexing Images" (1997) for Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (ARIST), offers an excellent review on approaches to indexing images with manual and automatic indexing practices that use controlled vocabularies and thesauri. For this project, controlled vocabularies and

12

Rasmussen, Indexing Images, 177.

12

thesauri were used when possible. For example, controlled vocabulary terms from the Library of Congress Subject Headings were used in creating the subject index. Concept-based indexing and content-based indexing both involve manual and automatic applications. Content-based indexing extracts image features such as colour, texture and shape from the image file. Concept-based indexing refers to applications of using controlled vocabularies or other descriptive terms to index an image. CHEN & RASMUSSEN's "Intellectual Access to Images" (1999) for Library Trends, references Shatford Layne's article while discussing concept and content-based indexing, and image attributes that they claim users would find the most useful. JÖRGENSEN extensively analyzes image classification systems in the Annual Review of OCLC Research report, "Image Indexing: An Analysis of Selected Classification Systems in Relation to Image Attributes Named by Naive Users" (1999). The study identifies user specific queries and image indexing practices for general web databases, and suggests problems of then current research on image classification schemes. In the same year, Jörgensen wrote "Access to Pictorial Material: A Review of Current Research and Future Prospects" (1999) for the journal Computers & the Humanities based on research pertaining to image retrieval systems. The discussion on image indexing trends identifies the importance of specific user needs and image attributes. The Canadian Architect project was initiated with the primary goal of increasing access for researchers and students. Jörgensen built upon earlier research and further proposed a case study based on index organizational methods. Jörgensen collaborated with JAIMES, BENITEZ, and CHANG for the case study, "A Conceptual Framework and Empirical Research for Classifying Visual Descriptors" (2001) for the Journal of the American Society for Information Science & Technology. The authors explain their Image Indexing template as a useful method for organizing visual content information. Other similar case studies have been published relating to organization and user access through the development of image indexing templates. CONDUIT & RAFFERTY's "Constructing an Image Indexing
13

Template for The Children's Society: Users' Queries and Archivists' Practice" (2007) for the Journal of Documentation illustrates the development of an indexing template that uses specific keywords. By referring to text-based image retrieval (TBIR) and contentbased image retrieval (CBIR), the authors propose an index template for broad collections of images. BEAUDOIN's "Visual Materials and Online Access: Issues Concerning Content Representation" (2007) for Art Documentation, discusses five major issues relating to user access to visual materials: (1) the lack of information types, (2) the lack of universally applied schemas, (3) use of standard classification systems, (4) lack of subject indexing research, and (5) lack of user studies. The author uses these issues to describe how subject identification can be applied toward successful image indexing. As Beaudoin states, there is a lack of subject indexing and user access research. USEFUL WEBSITES Many websites provide information on techniques for indexing images. The Prints and Photographs Division of the LIBRARY OF CONGRESS published a useful online guideline series for selecting photograph subject terms. ZINKHAM's "Subject Indexing for Pictures: An Overview" (2002) and CHITTENDAM's "Subject Indexing with TGM: A Case Study in Selecting Access Points for Photographs" (2004) each provide tips on patterns and general observations for selecting terms for a photograph. The Thesaurus for Graphic Materials (TGM) is a controlled vocabulary providing broad terms for describing subjects, genre, and physical characteristics. The TGM was not used extensively for the scope of this project, but is important to mention nonetheless. The process of identifying subject terms to create an index involves using controlled vocabularies. The Art & Architecture Thesaurus Online, supported by the J. PAUL GETTY TRUST, is a computerized version of the thesaurus first printed in 1980. The online thesaurus is a useful tool for selecting object names, artistic styles and techniques. Another website by the GETTY TRUST is A Guide to Enhancing Access to Art

14

and Material Culture Information and includes a useful tutorial on how to use controlled vocabularies. In 2007, the LIBRARY OF CONGRESS merged the Thesaurus for Graphic Materials into a single vocabulary, stemming from the previous Thesaurus for Graphic Materials I: Subject Terms (TGM I) and the Thesaurus for Graphic Materials II: Genre and Physical Characteristic Terms (TGM II). The website provides information on features of the TGM, image indexing principles, and information on subject heading subdivisions. LESS USEFUL SOURCES Many research papers address image indexing systems, however, they are less useful as resources on the development of this project. In the early 1980s, researchers began to broadly explore the purpose and structure of image indexing. One of the earliest discussions on retrieval systems is BROOKS' article "System-System Interaction in Computerized Indexing of Visual Materials: A Selection Review" (1988). The outdated information is pertinent toward early methods of indexing computerized images of works of art, not photographic objects. BAXTER & ANDERSON's "Image Indexing and Retrieval: Some Problems and Proposed Solutions" (1996), in Internet Research, explores image processing technology. Indexing and retrieval problems of content-based indexing methods are identified, with approaches that have been made to provide solutions. Although the research pertains to retrieval systems, the information is not as useful toward development of this project. The research paper by KLAVANS, SHEFFIELD, ABELS, LIN, PASSONEAU, SIDHU, and SOERGEL explores the development of CLiMB, a computer system that uses linguistic techniques to extract metadata for image access. "Computational Linguistics for Metadata Building (CLiMB)" (2008) was written for the journal Multimedia Tools and Applications. The goal of the CLiMB project is that it will provide an improvement over simple keyword indexing.
15

SOURCES NOT HELPFUL TOWARD THIS PROJECT Image index literature spans broad topics in many fields of study, though some research may be lacking in terms of being useful for indexing photographs in specific collections. Although these resources were not useful toward the development of this project, it is nonetheless important to recognize their place in the field of image indexing. BORDOGNA, CARRARA, GAGLIARDI, MERELLI, MUSSIO, NALDI, and PADULA proposed collaborative research findings in "Pictorial Indexing for an Integrated Pictorial and Textual IR Environment" (1990), in the Journal of Information Science. The discussion relates to topics in computer science, digital imaging, and automatic pictorial indexing as it pertains to multimedia documents and as such is not relevant to the Canadian Architect project. TIBBO's article "Indexing for the Humanities" (1994) for the Journal of the American Society for Information Science describes the need for new controlled vocabularies and indexing frameworks. Although the information is relevant toward indexing collections in the humanities, the article emphasizes archival and manuscript collections, not photographic collections. ENCINAS, LLORÈNS, and AMESCUA co-wrote "Indexing and Classification of Images in Large Organizations" (1999) for Libri, a journal for the computer science department of Carlos III University in Madrid, Spain. The article discusses index technology and the difficulty in storing and accessing multimedia images using IMDEX, R-trees, M-trees, and similarity search trees (SS-trees). The information is largely oriented toward the field of computer science and offers little relevance toward the development of this thesis project. This literature review identifies relevant examples of what has been written about indexing collections of images. It also exposes gaps in the study and research of user and access systems, specifically for the indexing of photographs and photograph collections.

16

4

SUBJECT INDEX
4.1
METHODOLOGY

The definitive goal of this project is the creation of a subject index for an archive of photographs that will be used at Ryerson University Library's Special Collections. The increased need for access to images has revealed problems inherent in image description, retrieval, and indexing. Extensive research is still needed on image indexing, particularly on user trends and processes of image retrieval. Although there is no general agreement on what attributes of an image should be indexed, it is indicated that it is easier to index a collection with a specific use than one for use by a heterogeneous group 13. In developing an index for a photographic archive, it is important to approach it as a step-by-step process. To achieve the project goal, the methodology process is divided in stages: developing access points, pulling terms from catalogue spreadsheets, creating subject lists, refining the subject list, and developing the final index. For the Canadian Architect index, each stage was approached independently, however, there is the possibility that stages may need to be modified which can include the addition of new information or error correction, if found.

METHODOLOGY: SUBJECT LISTS ­ ACCESS POINTS
When indexing images, it is necessary to determine which indexable attributes to be indexed that will provide useful information once the images have been located 14. It was decided by myself and Beth Knazook to limit the Canadian Architect index to a series of access points which would provide enough information to meet the researchers' needs. An access point is a name, term, etc., by which a descriptive record may be searched and identified 15. They are often the most common types of searches performed in a collection.
13 14

Chen and Rasmussen, Intellectual Access to Images. 295. Shatford Layne, Some issues in the indexing of images, 587. 15 Rules for Archival Description, Appendix D-1.

17

For this archive of architecture photographs, six access points were determined to be most useful: "Building Name", "Geographic Location", "Architect", "Photographer", "Corporate Name", and "Subject Term". The Toronto index does not have the "Corporate Name" access point, as it did not apply toward those photographs. Each index is modified to a certain extent, but adheres to similar indexing methods. The user can refine their search according to which access point they choose. For example, if a user is looking for photographs of a certain architect they would look under the `Architect' access point. Similarly, if the user is looking for performing arts buildings in Toronto, they would search under the `Subject Term' access point. Access points can also include subject notes indicating names of individual buildings in a photograph, or a reference to a finding aid for more detailed subject access to other collections 16. Subject notes are added to the Canadian Architect index to compensate for alternate spellings. In the Quebec index, for example, words with accents can make it difficult to use search functions in Excel (Ctrl + F) that do not automatically recognize words with accents. For that reason alternate spellings of names or places are provided (Montréal  alternate spelling: Montreal).

METHODOLOGY: PULLING TERMS FROM CATALOGUE SPREADSHEETS
Analyzing what image attributes to index in an image involves careful study of the photographs themselves and the accompanying catalogue records. Before I began to pull subject terms for the draft subject list, I analyzed the Quebec and Toronto catalogue spreadsheets to determine what fields I would pull terms from. The catalogue spreadsheets were begun in Summer 2009 after the archive had been organized. By the time this project began the `Quebec' group of photograph files had been catalogued, but the completion of the Toronto catalogue continued until the beginning of July 2010. Catalogue fields in the spreadsheets include photograph file reference numbers, file title, extent, date, file description, inscriptions, notes, provenance/owner, maker, subject from
16

Zinkham, Subject Indexing for Pictures: An Overview, 1.

18

Library of Congress Name Authority File (LCNAF), geographic location, medium, agent, and others (Image 7). Cataloguing was continually worked on throughout the year by members of staff, and continues at this moment for the rest of the Canadian Architect Image Archive. The fields I decided to pull subject terms from were `Title', `Provenance, Maker, Owner', `Subject LCSH', `Geographic Location', and `Agent'. I did not pull terms describing the photographic medium because the index is not about the photograph as an object, but the photograph's aboutness. The catalogue spreadsheets are complete enough to describe the photographs as objects. More specifically, the `Title' field particularly refers to the building name. The `Provenance, Maker, Owner' field is the photo agency or individual photographer. Many catalogue entries often indicate no more than two terms for `Subject Headings', selected from the Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH). `Geographic Location' indicates the city where the building resides, and finally, `Agent' is a term that either can be an architect firm, individual architect, or photographer. The `Agent field does not identify the occupation of the individuals listed in the catalogue, for that reason the Union List of Artist Names (ULAN) by the Getty Institute was helpful in researching the names I did not recognize.

Table 1: Example subject terms pulled for a photograph from the `Quebec' catalogue CATALOGUE FIELD TITLE PROVENANCE, MAKER, OWNER SUBJECT LCSH GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION AGENT SUBJECT TERM Banque Canadienne Nationale, Montreal Jowett, Henry Roger Bank buildings-Canada. Montreal David, Jacques Image 6: Banque Canadienne Nationale, Montreal Jacques David, Pierre Boulva 2009.002.062.001 19

Image 7: Toronto catalogue spreadsheet from which terms were pulled for the initial creation of subject lists. 20

METHODOLOGY: SUBJECT LISTS
With the initial terms from the catalogue spreadsheets pulled, I began compiling Subject Lists into Excel. These lists were meant to be the first step toward developing a succinct index of terms for describing photographs in the archive. The lists continually expanded as terms were pulled, and more appropriate terminology and corrected names for buildings were selected. I compiled an initial list of terms all on one Excel spreadsheet page. Each column was headed with a different access point, where I would input the terms into the appropriate column. I would occasionally re-alphabetize the list to ensure that terms were not duplicated and to spot early discrepancies. An alphabetized list is a format that is immediately recognizable to the user, and thus is easy to locate a desired term in the list. As I continued the list I noticed that some catalogue fields did not always indicate the architect or photographer. For this reason, I went through and double-checked the photograph files to ensure that I had names of buildings, architects, and photographers, if applicable. When this project began the Toronto catalogue still needed the assignment of locators to be input into the spreadsheet. Members of the Special Collections staff, due to time constraints and lack of storage materials, later assigned locators to some files. Along with the subject lists, I began a list of Canadian Architect magazine issues in which the photographs were reproduced, if that at all, and storage box location numbers. When applying subject headings to a photograph, it is recommended to limit subject headings to three or four to focus on the core subject of the photograph 17. The most common method of handling images in a database for retrieval purposes has been to establish fields containing bibliographic data (artist, photographer, title, date, etc.) and a field containing descriptive text 18. The Canadian Architect Image Archive follows a similar retrieval method, being: architect, photographer, title (building name), published date, etc. These fields are searchable by using keyword searches in Excel.
17 18

Zinkham, 18. Baxter and Anderson, Image indexing and retrieval: Some problems and proposed solutions, 67.

21

There is always the possibility of finding discrepancies even after the cataloguing process. Some folders that were found to be in the `Ontario' boxes (Don Mills, Etobicoke, North York, Scarborough) were changed over to the `Toronto' catalogue spreadsheet. This was a common discrepancy; when folders were initially catalogued, geographic neighbourhood boundaries were sometimes uncertain. For example, `Scarborough' files were initially not included in the `Toronto' group, however it was later decided that all cities and major suburbs that were in the downtown Toronto region should be included in the Toronto catalogue and index.

METHODOLOGY: SUBJECT LIST REFINEMENT
The index access points are based on content in the architecture photographs. Certain terminology has been omitted from the index pertaining to architectural details and interiors, as the subject list would then become too narrow. Tools such as the AAT and LCSH may not suit all types of image archives, and some organizations may develop their own in-house thesauri and indexing schemes to suit the specific nature of the archive 19. The `Subject Term' access point, specifically, was refined using multiple vocabularies. Along with terms pulled from the catalogue spreadsheets, it was decided by Beth Knazook and myself to include subject terms in the index that were pulled from online FADIS entries describing the already digitized image files. The FADIS terms were checked using the AAT in the case there were other appropriate descriptive term options. The `Subject Term' list in the indexes are not fixed vocabularies, but developed to suit the purpose of the archive. During the refinement process of the subject term lists I used various standard controlled vocabularies to add subject terms and check spellings, particularly of neighbourhood locations, which were not in the existing catalogue spreadsheets but were new additions to the index. Members of staff confirmed the names of individuals and agencies, geographic locations, and buildings during the earlier cataloguing process.
19

Graham, The Cataloguing and Indexing of Images: Time for a New Paradigm?, 24.

22

The controlled vocabularies I selected to use are meant as established standards that aid in selecting appropriate descriptive terms. The Art and Architecture Thesaurus (AAT) is a controlled vocabulary used for describing materials, objects, and styles of visual art and architecture, to name a few. The AAT has an accompanying text, the Guide to Indexing and Cataloging, which was a helpful tool for understanding how to select the best terms from the hierarchy of the AAT. The Thesaurus for Graphic Materials (TGM) was used, and is described in the section `Literature Review: Useful Sources'. Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) is a controlled vocabulary of descriptive language, however it is not detailed enough to describe the content in architecture photographs, as the TGM and AAT do. The LCSH in particular was useful for selecting terms during cataloguing for the Canadian Architect archive, which were then pulled for the initial subject headings list for the index. The Union List of Artist Names (ULAN) was a valuable tool during the refinement of architect and photographer names. The `Architect' and `Photographer' lists in particular indicated names with an initialed first name followed by the last name (Brown, R.). The ULAN proved to be valuable for identifying the full name of the architect (Brown, Roy) or photographer in the index. Once the subject term draft list was completed for the Toronto and Quebec indexes, the next step was confirming the correct dates of photograph publication in Canadian Architect magazine. This was done by going through magazine issues and using the corresponding online index. The Canadian Architect online index web pages are listed annually. The online indexes are for the magazine issues from the years 1983 to the present 20. The indexes include information from the printed magazine, including architects and designers, buildings and projects, awards, articles and reviews, authors, and building types (Image 8). There is no information about the photographs in the magazine, indicating a gap in which it is hoped that this project will fill. This project will also increase subject access to the image collection since this index covers photographs from the years 1955 to the late 1980s. Certain magazine issues from the mid-1950s to
20

The Canadian Architect Online Index is published on the Canadian Architect magazine website, available here: http://www.canadianarchitect.com/indexes/

23

mid-1960s have accompanying indexes that also include cross-references to other printed material not in the magazine. No other index has been printed in the magazine for the public until the online versions were made available.

Image 8: Screenshot image of the Canadian Architect magazine 1989 index available on the online website.

24

METHODOLOGY: INDEX DEVELOPMENT
The question of what the indexing of images should accomplish is summarized by Shatford Layne: first, the indexing of images should provide access to images based on the attributes of those images; and second, it should provide access to useful groupings of images, not simply access to individual images 21. It is better to index the basic elements of an image than to delve into more complex and narrower terms. For the Canadian Architect Image Archive, for example, indexing the architect and type of building is more important than the information about the photograph's material base (example: silver gelatin photograph). Photographers in the Canadian Architect index were included because individual and corporate photographers are important in any photograph collection, particularly if a request is made to reproduce a photograph, since the photograph agency or photographer can then be contacted for copyright purposes. After developing and refining the subject lists for both the Quebec and Toronto indexes, the next step was to create the index itself. Each access point was given its own tab in the Excel spreadsheet 22. The first Excel tab is `Building Name' and displays all index entries according to the name of the building, alphabetically. Underneath each building name entry, I gave a code in each field to indicate what they were:

C ­ City P - Photographer CA ­ CA Issue Date

N ­ Neighbourhood CN ­ Corporate Name (QC) FB ­ Folder, Box number

A ­ Architect S ­ Subject Term F ­ File number

Table 2: Code letters for `Building Name' field entries

21 22

Shatford Layne, 583. Two Excel spreadsheets were created for this project corresponding with the two groups, `Toronto' and `Quebec'. Both indexes are included in Appendix B and are available in full format on the accompanying CD.

25

The `Building Name' tab is the most comprehensive tab in the index and depending on what the searcher is looking for, it can be the main source for information. Excel makes keyword searching very easy. With Ctrl-F the searcher can type the word they are looking for and instantly be directed to the index entry, or find out that that information is unavailable. This makes it much easier to find information without having to go through the catalogue, which can confuse the user with its dense information.
Table 3: Example of a `Building Name' entry

Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada, La C N A P S CA FB F
Montréal (QC) Downtown Montreal Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects Graetz Inc. Bank buildings July 84 Montreal 20/ CA Q1 2009.002.100

The remaining tabs in the Index are all displayed similarly, and resemble an index one would be familiar with. Index tabs were created in the order based on the way indexes were displayed in the 1950s issues of Canadian Architect magazine, which were displayed as: building name (architect): date; box/folder number I decided to follow this method of index listing, as I believed that it displayed enough information that the user would be looking for in an index. For example: Mayrs house (Padolsky, Barry): Feb 58. Lachute 9; CA Q1

26

For the `Architect' tab, I omitted the bracketed architect's name, as it was irrelevant for that tab. For example: Architect Name Padolsky, Barry Index Entry Mayrs house: Feb 58. Lachute 9; CA Q1

The physical arrangement of the index tabs varies. In the `Geographic Location' tab, Montreal and Toronto were divided according to city and neighbourhood. Refer to the accompanying CD for the complete Toronto and Quebec indexes, as they would appear to the user. For the purposes of this thesis paper I have reformatted both indexes to be included as an Appendix (B). The indexes are not meant to provide extensive information about an architectural site as a whole, or specific details in a photograph, but include enough information to function as an access tool.

4.2.

SUBJECT INDEX EVALUATION

In the previous sections I have outlined the purposes and methodology for creating the Toronto and Quebec indexes. Part of every practical project is to evaluate its effectiveness and to analyze the results. Subject index testing is a way for users to evaluate the effectiveness and usability of an index as a search tool, without being told how the index works or what information it contains. This project is selectively formatted around two groups out of the entire Canadian Architect Image Archive, and therefore it is not possible to test the effectiveness of the subject index as a whole with users until indexing of the entire collection is complete. This section is an evaluation of the index itself, with a proposed method of testing for the future once the indexing is complete for the entire image collection. A limited number of studies address information-seeking behaviour as it relates to image collections in any detail 23. Most often, user studies are directed towards art historical and museum image collections, and rarely towards image collections in universities and colleges. When developing a system to provide access to visual
23

Rasmussen, 173.

27

resources, it is important to have information on the users and potential uses of these resources 24. Since I was familiar with the Canadian Architect Image Archive from working with it during my summer internship, I was also familiar with potential users and uses of the collection. I had to determine what I thought users would be searching for in an index, and how they would go about searching through the index. An important consideration in user research is to understand what is being asked for when users come to collections with image requests relating to specific tasks 25. Knowing what is being requested and how it is being requested can help determine the appropriate methods of index development. The Canadian Architect Image Archive index does not require a cataloguer or researcher's specialized knowledge in architecture to use it; the index was created to be simple to understand and use. Users interested in the Canadian Architect Image Archive generally make an appointment to come in Special Collections to view the photographs, with a particular idea or name in mind of what they are looking for, which I took into consideration in developing an effective index. Three case studies have been created using actual user queries to Special Collections for photographs from the archive. These case studies help understand the variety and types of users who would access the collection and could have made use of the index: 1. Students working on a class project ask for photographs of Yorkville, and photographs of Expo '67 that have been published in the Canadian Architect magazine 26. The student looking for photographs of Yorkville would access the Toronto index, and `Geographic Location' tab, and find the entry for `Yorkville (Toronto, ON)'. The student looking for published photographs of Expo '67 would look in the `Quebec' tab, and `Geographic Location' and `Building Name'

24 25

Rasmussen, 172. Jörgensen, 307. 26 From an email with Beth Knazook about actual Special Collections user queries, July 21, 2010.

28

tabs. They would find the entries for Expo '67 and the corresponding magazine issues, which indicate published photographs: Expo 67, Habitat '67 (Safdie, Moshe): Sept/Oct 67; Mar 68. Montreal 9, CA Q2 2. A staff member asks for photographs of Toronto landmarks 27. The professor would be directed to the Toronto index's `Subject Term' and `Building Name' tabs, where they would build a list of the photograph files to extract for the class to use for the project. The files would be put aside for the students to come in and research. 3. An outside researcher is looking for photographs of nineteenth-century indoor architecture for set design ideas 28. The researcher would be directed to the Quebec and Toronto indexes, and look under the `Subject Term' tab. Entries such as `Theatres', `Auditoriums', `Cultural Property', and `Historic house museums' might be helpful. These case studies wrap up my findings by applying real-life situations to evaluate the index. Based on these case studies, I was successfully able to navigate the index and locate relevant images based on the user requests. Future users should be well-served by this tool which will increase access to this important collection. In order to confirm the usability of the Quebec and Toronto indexes in their current states, I consulted with three colleagues to comment on the format of the Quebec index as I had completed it. I was given a few helpful suggestions for slight modifications to improve the index, such as including "[n/a]" in the entry where there was no specified date of publication, and "(unknown architect)" in the entries where no architect name was specified. The overall comments from my colleagues were that they found the index easy to understand and easy to search terms after browsing. I recommend that subject index testing be conducted in the future when indexing of the

27 28

Ibid. Ibid.

29

entire collection is complete. In a hypothetical testing situation, I would have the user sit down with the indexes and study them for a certain amount of time. I would then have them answer a series of questions and give their own remarks. APPENDIX A is a questionnaire that I would give in a hypothetical testing situation, since extensive testing is outside of the scope of this project and timeframe.

4.3.

SUMMARY DISCUSSION and CONCLUDING REMARKS

This project is summarized as an interpretive system for indexing a collection of photographs. There are five main strategies implemented in this index, all of which are careful stages in the development of an accurate and effective list. Firstly, there is the creation of access points which will act as categories for listing subject headings. Secondly, is the process of pulling subject terms that have already been applied to the photographs from a catalogue. Thirdly, is the compilation of subject lists. The fourth stage is the refinement of the subject lists using thesauri and other vocabulary. And finally, the fifth stage is the index development. A lack in research pertaining to indexing images makes it difficult to develop a standardized method of doing so. Image indexing is a relatively new field of study in library science and archival studies, that has only been touched upon in the past couple decades. If there is no budget or time constraints an archive or museum can develop a succinct method and database for effective indexing of a photograph collection. For a collection in an educational institution, time, budget, and a lack of materials and staff can hinder the indexing process and development. For effective results with image indexing the indexer should know and determine attributes of an images that will make for effective image indexing; recognize the users of collections; understand the tasks and image uses of the users; and cognitive processes involved in searching 29.

29

Jörgensen, 303.

30

This applied project is not meant to be a controlled vocabulary of subject headings. The index is not fixed and un-changing, it has the ability to be modified, added to, and expanded by a staff member if it is necessary. This project focused on two groups of photographs in the Canadian Architect image archive, with the remainder of the archive still in the process of being catalogued and digitized. For the future, indexing this collection should be carried out using the methods I have developed to maintain consistency. I have devised a few recommendations for future work to complete the subject indexing. Firstly, regular maintenance of the index should occur for procedures of adding, modifying, and deleting terms that do not adhere to standardized guidelines. Staff in Special Collections should devise a schedule throughout the year to update the vocabulary in the index, for the review of terms, and to establish and add new terms. The addition of new terms should occur when a term cannot be found, a new one can be added. Modifying existing terms is necessary when an error is found. If terms are deemed as ineffective, then they can be deleted. As indexing is completed with the rest of the archive, the staff member should be aware of duplicate terms. While there is no one prescribed method of creating image indexes and the process can be quite involved, they are nonetheless effective tools that benefit end users in the long run. In conclusion, as previously acknowledged there are many stages of development in creating a subject index. As a research tool, the difficulty lies in modifying the index to the image collection it will correspond to. However the modes of creation differ, the ultimate goal remains the same: to increase access to a collection, in this case, the Canadian Architect Image Archive, which I believe has been successful.

31

BIBLIOGRAPHY
JOURNALS
Baxter, Graeme, and Douglas Anderson. "Image Indexing and Retrieval: Some Problems and Proposed Solutions". Internet Research 6, no. 4 (1996): 67-76. http://journals1.scholarsportal.info.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ (accessed January 22, 2010) Beaudoin, Joan E. "Visual Materials and Online Access: Issues Concerning Content Representation". Art Documentation: Bulletin of the Art Libraries Society of North America 26, no. 2 (Fall 2007): 24-8. http://vnweb.hwwilsonweb.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ (accessed January 22, 2010). Bordogna, G., P. Carrara, I. Gagliardi, D. Merelli, P. Mussio, F. Naldi, and M. Padula. "Pictorial Indexing for an Integrated Pictorial and Textual IR Environment". Journal of Information Science 16 (3) (1990): 165-173. Brooks, Diane. "System-system Interaction in Computerized Indexing of Visual Materials: A Selection Review". Information Technology & Libraries 7, no. 2 (06) (1988): 111-23. Chen, Hsin-Liang, and Edie M. Rasmussen. "Intellectual Access to Images". Library Trends 48, no. 2 (Fall 1999): 291. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed January 22, 2010). Chittenden, Karen. "Subject Indexing with TGM: A Case Study in Selecting Access Points for Photographs" (Prints & Photographs Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC., 2004). http://www.loc.gov/rr/print/tp/SubjectAccessHineCaseStudy.pdf (accessed November 4, 2009) Conduit, Neil, and Pauline Rafferty. "Constructing an Image Indexing Template for the Children's Society: Users' Queries and Archivists' Practice". Journal of Documentation 63, no. 6 (November 1, 2007): 898-919. http://www.proquest.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ (accessed July 20, 2010). Encinas, Julio, Juan Lloréns, and Antonio Amescua. "Indexing and Classification of Images in Large Organisations". Libri 49, no. 1 (March 1999): 16-25. http://www.librijournal.org/pdf/1999-1pp16-25.pdf (accessed January 22, 2010). Graham, Margaret. "The Cataloguing and Indexing of Images: Time for a New Paradigm?". Art Libraries Journal 26, no. 1 (2001): 22-27. Hastings, Samantha K. "Evaluation of Image Retrieval Systems: Role of User Feedback". Library Trends, 48, no. 2 (Fall 1999): 438-452. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed January 22, 2010).

32

Jörgensen, Corinne Lyon. "Access to Pictorial Material: A Review of Current Research and Future Prospects". Computers & the Humanities 33, no. 4/12 (1999): 293-318. Jörgensen, Corinne Lyon. "Attributes of Images in Describing Tasks". Information Processing & Management 34, no. 2-3 (1998): 161-174. http://journals1.scholarsportal.info.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ (accessed January 22, 2010) Jörgensen, Corinne Lyon. "Image Indexing: An Analysis of Selected Classification Systems in Relation to Image Attributes Named by Naive Users". Annual Review of OCLC Research 1999. (1999) http://digitalarchive.oclc.org/da/ViewObject.jsp;jsessionid=93ba40e1f3e3405394e7a2a96 4ef370d?fileid=0000002655:000000059275&reqid=17241 (accessed February 10, 2010) Jörgensen, Corinne Lyon, Alejandro Jaimes, Ana B. Benitez, and Shih-Fu Chang. "A Conceptual Framework and Empirical Research for Classifying Visual Descriptors." Journal of the American Society for Information Science & Technology 52, no. 11 (2001): 938-947. Kennedy, Marie, and Trish Rose. "Fresh Work: New Ideas on the Old Problem of Image Indexing and Retrieval". Visual Resources Association Bulletin 32, no. 2 (Fall 2005): 27-8. Art Full Text, WilsonWeb (accessed January 22, 2010) Klavans, Judith L., and Carolyn Sheffield, Eileen Abels, Jimmy Lin, Rebecca Passonneau, Tandeep Sidhu, Dagobert Soergel. "Computational Linguistics for Metadata Building (CLiMB): Using Text Mining for the Automatic Identification, Categorization, and Disambiguation of Subject Terms for Image Metadata", Multimedia Tools and Applications 42, no. 1 (March 2009): 115-138. http://journals1.scholarsportal.info.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ (accessed January 22, 2010) Rasmussen, Edie M. "Indexing images", Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (ARIST) 32 (1997): 169-196. Shatford Lane, S. "Some Issues in the Indexing of Images." Journal of the American Society for Information Science 45, no. 8 (1994): 583-588. http://journals1.scholarsportal.info.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ (accessed January 22, 2010) Tibbo, Helen R. "Indexing for the Humanities". Journal of the American Society for Information Science 45, no. 8 (September 1994): 607619. http://journals1.scholarsportal.info.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ (accessed January 22, 2010) Zinkham, Helena. "Subject Indexing for Pictures: An Overview". (Prints & Photographs Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. 2002; revised 2004) http://www.loc.gov/rr/print/tp/Subject%20Indexing%20for%20Pictures.pdf (accessed November 4, 2009)

33

CONSULTED GUIDELINES
Anderson, James D. Guidelines for Indexes and Related Information Retrieval Devices: NISO Technical Report 2, NISO-TR02-1997. National Information Standards Organization [NISO]. Bethesda: NISO Press (1997). Guidelines for the Construction, Format, and Management of Monolingual Thesauri: ANSI/NISO Z39.19-2003. Bethseda: NISO Press, 2003. Petersen, Toni, Patricia J. Barnett, eds., and Getty Art History Information Program. Guide to Indexing and Cataloging with the Art & Architecture Thesaurus. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. Rules for Archival Description. Ottawa: Bureau of Canadian Archivists, 2008.

WEBSITES
"A Glossary of Archival and Records Terminology ­ Finding Aid", Society of American Archivists. http://www.archivists.org/glossary/term_details.asp?DefinitionKey=66 (accessed June 16, 2010) "Indexing Images: Some Principles", Thesaurus for Graphic Materials: TGM I: Subject Terms. http://www.loc.gov/rr/print/tgm1/ii.html (accessed January 23, 2010) American Society for Indexing. http://www.asindexing.org/site/index.html (accessed February 10, 2010) Art & Architecture Thesaurus Online. http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/vocabularies/aat/ (accessed February 21, 2010) Canadian Architect Magazine online index. http://www.canadianarchitect.com/indexes/ (accessed May 15, 2010) FADIS. http://fadis.library.utoronto.ca/ (accessed April 24, 2010) Indexing Society of Canada. http://www.indexers.ca/index.htm (accessed February 10, 2010) Library of Congress Subject Headings. http://id.loc.gov/search/ (accessed February 21, 2010) Ryerson University Library & Archives: Special Collections. www.ryerson.ca/library/a_sc.html (accessed June 14, 2010) Union List of Artist Names Online (ULAN). http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/vocabularies/ulan/ (Accessed June 15, 2010)

34

APPENDIX A - Quebec and Toronto Subject Indexes

This appendix is both of the Canadian Architect Image Archive indexes in a printed format. This document has been compiled in a way that is to be read similarly to the electronic version, which is available on the accompanying CD. This index is organized according to the tab arrangement on the Excel files, located on the accompanied CD: `Building Name', `Geographic Location', `Architect', `Photographer', `Corporate Name', and `Subject Name'. Code for `Building Name': C - City N - Neighbourhood A - Architect P - Photographer CN - Corporate Name S - Subject Term CA - CA Issue Date FB - Folder, Box # F - File #

Note: Alternate spellings are in italics.

Organization of `Geographic Location', `Architect', `Photographer', `Corporate Name' (if applicable), `Subject Name' index entries: building name (architect): date of publication. Folder, Box #

* If no architect name is indicated, it will appear as: (unknown architect) ** If no publication date is indicated, it will appear as: [n/a]

35

APPENDIX A.1 Quebec Subject Index QUEBEC: BUILDING NAME
500 Sherbrooke Street West C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Blouin and Associates P Delisle, Gilles S Office buildings CA July 88 FB Montreal 17, CA Q1 F 2009.002.055 826-48 Charon Street C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Pointe-Saint-Charles (Montréal, QC) S Houses FB Montreal 14, CA Q1 F 2009.002.056 2000 Peel, Le C N A CN S CA FB F Montréal (QC) Montreal Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects First Quebec Corporation Canderel Limited Office buildings July 80 Montreal 15, CA Q1 2009.002.057

2514-2542 Rue Saint Charles C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Pointe-Saint-Charles (Montréal, QC) S Houses FB Montreal 18, CA Q1 F 2009.002.057 3137-3141 Chemin Côte St-Antoine Chemin Cote St Antoine C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Westmount (Montréal, QC) S Houses FB Westmount 49, CA Q3 F 2009.002.118

A
Alcan Industrial Complex C Jonquière (QC) Jonquiere A Folch-Ribas, Jacques; Berry, James L. S Industrial buildings

36

CA FB F

July 85 Jonquière 7, CA Q1 2009.002.059

B
Ballantyne Residence C Brome (QC) A Schreiber, John P Fulker, John S Houses CA Sept 71 FB Brome 1, CA Q1 F 2009.002.061 Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada, La C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects P Graetz Inc. S Bank buildings CA July 84 FB Montreal 20, CA Q1 F 2009.002.100 Banque Canadienne Nationale C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre P Jowett, Henry Roger S Bank buildings; Commercial buildings FB Montreal 19, CA Q1 F 2009.002.062 Banque provinciale du Canada C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre S Bank buildings FB Montreal 22, CA Q1 F 2009.002.154 Bell Telephone building C Pointe-aux-Trembles (QC) A Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden S Communications buildings; Commercial buildings; Office buildings CA April 68 Pers. FB Trembles 8, CA Q4 F 2009.002.063 Berlioz Street row housing C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Île des Soeurs (Montréal, QC) Ile des Soeurs (Montreal, QC)

37

A S CA FB F

Hanganu, Dan S. Rowhouses June 82 Île des Soeurs 43/ CA Q3 2009.002.218

Bibliothèque de Mont-Royal (Mount Royal) Bibliotheque de Mont-Royal C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Mont-Royal (Mount Royal) (Montréal, QC) A Donaldson, Drummond, Sankey Architects; Resther et Fils architectes P Drummond, Michael S Libraries CA Feb 68 FB Montreal 28, CA Q3 F 2009.002.135 BNP Paribas Tower C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A WZMH Group Architects P Applied Photography Ltd. S Office buildings CA June 80 FB Montreal 21, CA Q1 F 2009.002.138

C
Canadian Centre for Architecture C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal F 2009.002.066 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, exterior views C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Rose, Peter P Bryant, Richard S Architectural centres CA April 89 FB Montreal 27/ Montreal 28, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1334 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, official CCA photographs (interiors) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Rose, Peter P Bryant, Richard S Architectural centres CA April 89 FB Montreal 26, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1335

38

Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, official CCA photographs (exteriors) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Rose, Peter P Bryant, Richard S Architectural centres CA April 89 FB Montreal 25, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1333 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, plans and construction views C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Rose, Peter P Bryant, Richard S Architectural centres CA April 89 FB Montreal 29, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1337 Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Dickinson, Peter; Duschenes & Barrett P Bermingham, Ed S Bank buildings; Office buildings FB Montreal 30, CA Q1 F 2009.002.065 Canadian Museum of Civilization C Hull (QC) A Cardinal, Douglas Joseph P Blohm, Hans S Museum buildings CA Nov 89 FB Gatineau 4, CA Q4 F 2009.002.201 Cantlie House Hotel C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Martin, Ian P Samulewitz, Hans S Hotels (public accomodations) FB Montreal 32, CA Q1 F 2009.002.067 Catholic Information Centre C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Ussner, Wilfred R. P Warrington, Graham

39

S FB F

Religious buildings Montreal 31, CA Q1 2009.002.068

Centre Commercial Les Floralies C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal S Commercial buildings CA Feb 87 FB Montreal 33, CA Q1 F 2009.002.069 Centre Eaton de Montréal (Montreal Eaton Centre) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Rose, Peter; Fichten, Soiferman, Architects S Shopping malls; Commercial buildings; Drawing CA Jan 89 FB Montreal 34, CA Q1 F 2009.002.131 Centre Hospitalier Anna-Laberge C Châteauguay (QC) Chateauguay A Tetreau Parent Languedoc; Jodoin Lamarre Pratte P Photographex S General hospitals CA Nov 85 FB Châteauguay 2, CA Q1 F 2009.002.071 Centre Rockland C N A S CA FB F

Montréal (QC) Montreal Mont-Royal (Mount Royal) (Montréal, QC) Prus, Victor; Martin, Ian Shopping malls; Commercial buildings. Sept 59 Mont-Royal 29, CA Q3 2009.002.157

Château Champlain - Place du Canada, Le Chateau Champlain C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul P Canadian Pacific Rail S Hotels (public accomodations) CA Sept 67 FB Montreal 35, CA Q1 F 2009.002.102 Christ Church C P

Moulinette (QC) Capital Press Service

40

S CA FB F

Churches; Religious buildings Feb 58 Moulinette 31, CA Q3 2009.002.072

Christ Memorial Lutheran Church C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Le Moyne (Montréal, QC) A D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul P Studio Alain S Churches; Religious buildings CA Feb 67 FB Montreal 36, CA Q1 F 2009.002.121 Church of Notre-Dame-de-la-Salette C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal P Goyer, Paul S Churches; Religious buildings CA March 58 FB Montreal 37, CA Q1 F 2009.002.073 CIL House offices C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Greenspoon, Freidlander and Dunne Architects P Richard Arless Associates S Office buildings CA June 62 FB Montreal 38, CA Q1 F 2009.002.074 Colisée du Québec Colisee du Quebec C Québec City (QC) Quebec City A Bégin et Rodrigue Architectes Begin et Rodrigue Architectes P Huard, Jocelyn S Arenas; Stadiums CA July 82 FB Quebec 33, CA Q3 F 2009.002.099 Collège Jesus-Marie de Sillery College Jesus-Marie de Sillery C Québec City (QC) Quebec City N Sillery (Québec City, QC) S Educational buildings; Universities and colleges CA March 85 FB Sillery 6, CA Q4 F 2009.002.075

41

Comédie-Canadienne Theatre, La Comedie-Canadienne Theatre, La C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Blouin, André Blouin, Andre P Taillefer, Paul S Theaters; Performing arts buildings CA Sept 58 FB Montreal 39, CA Q1 F 2009.002.054 Complexe Chaussegros-de-léry Complexe Chaussegros-de-lery C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Hanganu, Dan S. S Office buildings FB Montreal 40, CA Q1 F 2009.002.076 Complexe Hydro-Quebec C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Hanganu, Dan S. S Industrial buildings FB Montreal 41, CA Q1 F 2009.002.077 Concordia University, Henry F. Hall building C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise P Drummond, Michael S Universities and colleges; Educational buildings FB Montreal 43, CA Q1 F 2009.002.079 Concordia University, Webster Library C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Blouin and Associates; Werleman & Guy Architectes P Scheider, F.R. (drawing) S Universities and colleges; Libraries CA Jan 89 FB Montreal 42, CA Q1 F 2009.002.078 Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company of Canada C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Office buildings; Industrial buildings CA Nov 65 FB Montreal 44, CA Q1 F 2009.002.064

42

Cormier House C N P S CA FB F

Montréal (QC) Montreal Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal Merrett, Brian Houses July 83 Montreal 45, CA Q1 2009.002.080

Cour Notre Dame, La (Notre Dame Court) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Thibodeau Conrath Scheffer Architects P Poissant, R.; Studio K-3; Foncier S Houses CA Aug 86 FB Montreal 46, CA Q2 F 2009.002.104 Cours Mont-Royal (Mount Royal Hotel) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Mont-Royal (Mount Royal) (Montréal, QC) A Arcop Associates (Arcop Group); Ross & Macdonald S Hotels (public accomodations); Office buildings CA July 87 FB Montreal 38, CA Q2 F 2009.002.128 Crystaplex Plastics Limited C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Cité-de-la-mode (Montréal, QC) Cite-de-la-mode A Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita S Office buildings CA March 73 FB Montreal 47, CA Q1 F 2009.002.081

D
Dominion Square C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal S Office buildings FB Montreal 49, CA Q1 F 2009.002.082 Drug (Le), Mountain Street (Rue de la Montagne) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Dallegret, François Dallegret, Francois S Art galleries, Commercial; Stores, Retail; Pharmacy CA July 65 FB Montreal 48, CA Q1

43

F

2009.002.101

E
École Ave Maria C A P S CA FB F Ecole Ave Maria Granby (QC) Trépanier, Paul-Olivier; Gauthier, Maurice Studio Alain Elementary schools Jan 57 Granby 5, CA Q1 2009.002.060

Trepanier, Paul-Oliver

École Polyvalente Ecole Polyvalente C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Pierrefonds (Montréal, QC) A Arcop Associates (Arcop Group) P Factotum S Elementary schools CA Apr 72 FB Pierrefonds 32, CA Q3 F 2009.002.083 École professionelle de Saint-Hyacinthe Ecole professionelle de Saint-Hyacinthe C Saint-Hyacinthe (QC) A Allaire, Bergeron, Courchesne, Henderson P Bastien, François S Universities and colleges FB Saint-Hyacinthe 40, CA Q3 F 2009.002.084 École secondaire Saint-John-Baptiste Ecole secondaire Saint-John-Baptiste C Hull (QC) A Richard, René Richard, Rene S High schools FB Hull 6, CA Q1 F 2009.002.085 Église Notre-Dame-d'Anjou Eglise Notre-Dame-d'Anjou C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Anjou (Montréal, QC) A Blouin, André Blouin, Andre P Atelier Jean Louis Bourret S Churches; Religious buildings CA Jan 62 FB Montreal 9, CA Q4 F 2009.002.1350 Église Saint-Raphaël Eglise Saint-Raphael C Jonquière (QC) Jonquiere A St. Gelais & Tremblay S Churches; Religious buildings CA Nov 61

44

FB F Esso Station C N A P S CA FB F

Jonquière 8, CA Q1 2009.002.087

Montréal (QC) Montreal Île des Soeurs (Montréal, QC) Ile des Soeurs (Montreal, QC) Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig Henrich-Blessing, Chicago Service stations Oct 68 Île des Soeurs 44, CA Q3 2009.002.1331

Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) F 2009.002.1301 Expo 67, Administration and Press Building C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Grossman, Irving S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA 1966 Y.B. FB Montreal 50, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1302 Expo 67, Aerial views C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66; May 67 FB Montreal 7, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1303 Expo 67, Africa Place C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal CN Plywood Manufacturers of B.C. S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67 FB Montreal 8, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1304 Expo 67, Air Canada Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal CN Plywood Manufacturers of B.C. S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 51, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1305

45

Expo 67, Austria Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 52, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1306 Expo 67, Automotive Stadium C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Prus, Victor S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 54, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1307 Expo 67, Britain Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67 FB Montreal 18, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1308 Expo 67, Canada Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Vaughn & Williams, Schoeler & Barkham, Stankiewicz P Karkutt Photography S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67 FB Montreal 56, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1309 Expo 67, Canadian National Railway Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 53, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1310 Expo 67, Canadian Pacific Rail - Cominco Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66; May 67 FB Montreal 55, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1311 Expo 67, Canadian Pulp and Paper Industry Pavilion

46

C N S FB F

Montréal (QC) Montreal Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) Montreal 16, CA Q2 2009.002.1312

Expo 67, Czechoslovakia Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 57, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1313 Expo 67, Expo Théâtre Expo Theatre C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 58, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1314 Expo 67, Federal Republic of Germany Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Otto, Frei S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67 FB Montreal 59, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1315 Expo 67, France Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67 FB Montreal 6, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1316 Expo 67, Habitat '67 C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Safdie, Moshe S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Sept/Oct 67; Mar 68 FB Montreal 9, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1317 Expo 67, International Trade Centre C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67

47

FB F

Montreal 1, CA Q2 2009.002.1318

Expo 67, Israel Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Sharon, Arieh S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67 FB Montreal 2, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1319 Expo 67, Japan Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Sharon, Arieh S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67 FB Montreal 2, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1319 Expo 67, Man Pavilions C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67; Oct 66 FB Montreal 4, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1321 Expo 67, Netherlands Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 17, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1322 Expo 67, Ontario Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66; May 67 FB Montreal 10, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1323 Expo 67, Place d'Accueil C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 11, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1324

48

Expo 67, Québec Pavilion Quebec Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 12, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1325 Expo 67, Scandinavian Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA May 67 FB Montreal 5, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1327 Expo 67, Steel Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 13, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1326 Expo 67, U.S.S.R. Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec) CA Oct 66 FB Montreal 14, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1329 Expo 67, United States of America Pavilion C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Fuller, Buckminster S Convention facilities; Expo 67 (Montréal, Québec); Geodesic domes CA Feb & May 67 FB Montreal 15, CA Q2 F 2009.002.1328

F
Faubourg Ste. Catherine, Le C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Desnoyers Mercure Architects S Commercial buildings; Architecture restoration CA April 85 FB Montreal 19, CA Q2 F 2009.002.105

49

Felberg residence C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Westmount (Montréal, QC) A Baker, Joseph S Houses CA April 68 Pers. FB Westmount 50, CA Q3 F 2009.002.090 Floralies de la Montagne, Les C Montréal (QC) Montreal A Reiner, Thomas Robert S Residential architecture CA April 85 FB Montreal 20, CA Q2 F 2009.002.107 Franki Building C A P S CA FB F

Montréal (QC) Montreal Rother, Bland, Trudeau Architects Wright, Bruce Office buildings; Religious buildings Feb 58 Montreal 21, CA Q2 2009.002.142

G
Greek Orthodox Church C Montréal (QC) Montreal A Dimakopoulos, Dimitri S Orthodox Eastern church buildings; Churches CA Oct 60 FB Montreal 22, CA Q2 F 2009.002.092

H
Haut-Fourneau des Forges du Saint-Maurice C Trois-Rivières (QC) Trois-Rivieres A Gauthier, Guité, Roy Architectes Gauthier, Guite, Roy Architectes S Commercial buildings. CA July 85 FB Trois-Rivières 46, CA Q3 F 2009.002.094 Hotel Arcade C A P S CA FB F

Montréal (QC) Montreal Larose, Petrucci Architects Graetz Inc. Hotels (public accomodations) May 84 Montreal 23, CA Q2 2009.002.096

50

I
Îlots, Les Ilots, Les C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Saint-Martin (Montréal, QC) A Ouellet, Reeves, Alain S Residential architecture CA Aug 71 FB Montreal 24, CA Q2 F 2009.002.097

J
Jardins Merici, Les C Québec City (QC) Quebec City A Gauthier, Guité, Roy Architectes S Residential architecture CA April 75 FB Quebec 34, CA Q3 F 2009.002.114

Gauthier, Guite, Roy Architectes

Johnson & Johnson Head Office C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Mercier­Hochelaga-Maisonneuve (Montréal, QC) A Saia, Mario S Office buildings; Commercial buildings CA Jan 89 FB Montreal 25, CA Q2 F 2009.002.098

L
Laurentien, The (La Laurentienne) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects S Office buildings; Bank buildings CA May 84 FB Montreal 26, CA Q2 F 2009.002.108 Long Sault Woodcraft Co., St. Andrews East C Lachute (QC) A Desbarats, Guy P Wright, Bruce S Office buildings CA Feb 58 FB Lachute 9, CA Q1 F 2009.002.106 Loyola College, Father's residence C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal

51

A P S FB F

Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise Drummond, Michael Dormitories; Universities and colleges Montreal 28, CA Q2 2009.002.119

Lumières de la ville, Les Lumieres de la ville, Les C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Reiner, Thomas Robert S Rowhouses CA March 87 FB Montreal 27, CA Q2 F 2009.002.115 Lussier residence C Saint-Bruno (QC) A D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul S Houses CA Sept 66 FB Saint-Bruno 37, CA Q3 F 2009.002.120

M
Maison Alcan C N A P S CA FB F Maison Bryson C A S CA FB F Montréal (QC) Montreal Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal Arcop Associates (Arcop Group) Spalding-Smith, Fiona Office buildings Apr/Jul 84; Nov 82; May 84; Apr 89; Dec 84 Montreal 30/31/32/33/34, CA Q2 2009.002.123

Mansfield-et-Pontefract (QC) Bryson, George Historic house museums Nov 87 Mansfield-et-Pontefract 11, CA Q1 2009.002.124

Maison Coloniale C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Rousseau, Jacques S Houses CA April 94 FB Montreal 2, CA Q4 F 2009.002.013

52

Maison des Coopérants, La Maison des Cooperants, La C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A WZMH Group Architects P Jack Marlow & Company Limited S Office buildings CA Sept 86 FB Montreal 29, CA Q2 F 2009.002.109 Marché St Leonard Marche St Leonard C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Colombani, Henri S Shopping malls; Commercial buildings CA Aug 85 FB Montreal 35, CA Q2 F 2009.002.125 Martinez house C A S CA FB F

Saint-Bruno (QC) Martinez-Camps, Jorge Houses July 82 Saint-Bruno 38, CA Q3 2009.002.110

Maurice Lamontagne Institute C Mont-Joli (QC) A Gagnon, Guy, Latellier, Ross S Industrial buildings CA Oct 85 Pers. FB Mont-Joli 12, CA Q1 F 2009.002.103 Mayrs house C A P S CA FB F

Lucerne (QC) Padolsky, Barry Webber, Ray Houses Feb 58 Lachute 9, CA Q1 2009.002.106

McGill University, Lab & dorms C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine P Dik Nye Photography S Universities and colleges; Laboratories; Dormitories CA Mar 66 FB Mont-Saint-Hilaire 39, CA Q3 F 2009.002.112

53

McGill University, Stewart Biological Sciences Building C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine; Dobush, Stewart, Bourke P Chris F. Payne Photography S Universities and colleges CA June 66 FB Lachute 9, CA Q1 F 2009.002.126 Monastère du Bon-Pasteur Monastere du Bon-Pasteur C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Bourgeau, Victor S Monasteries; Convents CA Nov 87 FB Montreal 37, CA Q2 F 2009.002.127 Montreal Life building C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Barott, Ernest Isbell P Associated Commercial Photographers Ltd. S Office buildings CA Sept 58 FB Montreal 41, CA Q2 F 2009.002.169 Montreal Metro C A P S CA FB F

Montréal (QC) Montreal Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc; David, Jacques; Barott, Ernest Isbell Jowett, Henry Roger; Samulewitz, Hans; Dik Nye Photography Subway stations Feb 67 Montreal 4, CA Q4 2009.002.134

Montreal, Aerial views C Montréal (QC) Montreal CN Province of Québec Film Bureau (Office du Film du Québec) S Commercial buildings; Office buildings; Aerial views CA Nov 88 FB Montreal 13, CA Q1 F 2009.002.058 Montreal-Dorval International Airport C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Dorval (Montréal, QC) A Illsley, Templeton, Archibald; Larose and Larose P National Film Board of Canada; Bermingham, Ed; Department of Transport S Airports; Transportation structures

54

FB F

Montreal 39, CA Q2 2009.002.132

Mont-Royal (Mount Royal) Park C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Mont-Royal (Mount Royal) (Montréal, QC) S Urban parks FB Montreal 40, CA Q2 F 2009.002.136 Mont-Tremblant village C Parc Provincial du Mont-Tremblant (QC) A Hanganu, Dan S. S Ski resorts FB Mont-Tremblant 30, CA Q3 F 2009.002.129 Musée d'archeologie et d'histoire de Montréal Musee d'archeologie et d'histoire de Montreal C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Hanganu, Dan S. P Chen, Roderick S Museum buildings CA October 1992 cover FB Montreal 3, CA Q4 F 2009.002.004 Musée de la Civilisation Musee de la Civilisation C Québec City (QC) Quebec City A Moshe Safdie & Associates S Museum buildings CA Nov 88 FB Quebec 35/36, CA Q3 F 2009.002.137

N
Nelson Monument C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal S Historic monuments CA Aug 70 FB Montreal 42, CA Q2 F 2009.002.139

O
Ordre des Architectes du Quebec (OAQ) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal S Office buildings; Architectural centres CA Aug 86 FB Montreal 43, CA Q2 F 2009.002.141

55

P
Palais des congrès de Montreal Palais des congres de Montreal C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Prus, Victor P Drummond, Michael S Convention facilities CA Jul 84; Nov 84 FB Montreal 44/45/46, CA Q2 F 2009.002.086 Papineau house C A P S CA FB F Parc Olympique C N A CN S CA FB F Peel Centre C N A P S CA FB F

Laval (QC) Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc Samulewitz, Hans Houses Apr 66 Laval 10, CA Q1 2009.002.143

Montréal (QC) Montreal Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal Moshe Safdie & Associates Relations Publiques (Public Relations), City of Montreal Recreation buildings; Sports complexes Jan 88 Montreal 47/48/49, CA Q2 2009.002.144

Montréal (QC) Montreal Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal Greenspoon, Freedlander and Dunne Architects Century Photo Arts Reg'd Commercial buildings; Office buildings Sept 58 Montreal 1, CA Q3 2009.002.146

Pitney-Bowes building C Saint-Laurent (QC) A Baker, Joseph P Chris F. Payne Photography S Commercial buildings; Office buildings CA Jan 67 FB Montreal 9, CA Q3 F 2009.002.147 Place Alexis Nihon (Alexis Nihon Plaza) C Montréal (QC) Montreal

56

N A S CA FB F

Westmount (Montréal, QC) Ship, Harold Office buildings July 84 Montreal 10, CA Q4 2009.002.840

Place Bonaventure C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise P Jowett, Henry Roger S Commercial buildings; Office buildings CA Sept 67; May 68 FB Montreal 3/4, CA Q3 F 2009.002.148 Place des Arts C N A P S CA FB F

Montréal (QC) Montreal Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise Panda Associates Photography Theaters; Performing arts buildings Nov 63 Montreal 2, CA Q3 2009.002.149

Place Montreal Trust C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal S Commercial buildings FB Montreal 5, CA Q3 F 2009.002.150 Place Victoria, Stock exchange tower (Tour de la Bourse) C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Moretti, Luigi P Arnott Rogers Batten Ltd. S Stock exchanges; Commercial buildings. CA July 65 FB Montreal 18, CA Q3 F 2009.002.152 Place Ville Marie C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise P Panda Associates Photography; Dik Nye Photography S Shopping malls; Commercial buildings CA June 62; Feb 63 FB Montreal 6/7/8, CA Q3 F 2009.002.151

57

Pointe-Saint-Charles neighbourhood C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Pointe-Saint-Charles (Montréal, QC) S Residential architecture FB Montreal 10, CA Q3 F 2009.002.216 Port Royal apartments C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Martin, Ian P Federal Photos S Apartment buildings FB Montreal 11, CA Q3 F 2009.002.156

Q
Queen's Hotel development C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects P Roper, Peter (drawing) S Hotels (public accomodations); Commercial buildings CA Feb 87 FB Montreal 12, CA Q3 F 2009.002.155

R
Residential complex C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Île des Soeurs (Montréal, QC) Ile des Soeurs A Tornay, Edgar; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig P Henrich-Blessing, Chicago S Row houses; Residential architecture CA June 70 FB Île des Soeurs 45, CA Q3 F 2009.002.140 Rockhill apartments C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Côte-des-Neiges (Montréal, QC) A Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden S Apartment buildings FB Montreal 14, CA Q3 F 2009.002.158

Cote-des-Neiges

Ruby Foo's Motor Hotel C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Côte-des-Neiges­Notre-Dame-de-Grâce (Montréal, QC) Cote-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grace A Roth and Ronar P Hollenzer and Company Limited

58

S CA FB F

Hotels (public accomodations) Oct 62 Montreal 13, CA Q3 2009.002.159

Rue Sherbrooke Ouest at McGill College Avenue C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Vecsei & Panzini Architects P Roper, Peter (drawing) S Hotels (public accomodations); Commercial buildings CA Dec 83 FB Montreal 16, CA Q1 F 2009.002.1330

S
Sacred Heart Chapel of the Church of Notre Dame C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Old Montreal A Jodoin Lamarre Pratte P Photographex S Churches; Religious buildings CA Mar 86 FB Montreal 15, CA Q3 F 2009.002.160 Saidye Bronfman Centre C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Côte-des-Neiges­Notre-Dame-de-Grâce (Montréal, QC) Cote-des-Neiges-Notre-Dame-de-Grace A Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden P Nickel, R. S Commercial buildings. CA July 70 FB Montreal 16, CA Q3 F 2009.002.161 Saint-Georges School C Delson (QC) A Gauthier, Maurice; Trépanier, Paul-Olivier S Elementary schools CA May 58 FB Delson 3, CA Q1 F 2009.002.165 Saint-Gérrard-Majella Church Saint-Gerrard-Majella Church C Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu (QC) A Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise P Chris F. Payne Photography S Churches; Religious buildings FB Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu 41, CA Q3 F 2009.002.166

59

Saint-Thomas-d'Aquin Church C Saint-Lambert (QC) A Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise P Samulewitz, Hans; Proulx, Michel S Churches; Religious buildings CA Mar 68 FB Saint-Lambert 42, CA Q3 F 2009.002.167 St. Gabriel's Church C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Pointe-Saint-Charles (Montréal, QC) A Bird, John P Studio Alain S Churches; Religious buildings CA Apr 66 FB Montreal 17, CA Q3 F 2009.002.164 Summerlea Golf and Country Club C Vaudreuil-Dorion (QC) A Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise S Recreation buildings; Golf courses CA Sept 63 FB Vaudreuil-Dorion 48, CA Q3 F 2009.002.168 Sun Life building C N A P S CA FB F

Montréal (QC) Montreal Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal John B. and John C. Parkin Architects Graetz Inc. Office buildings July 61 Montreal 19, CA Q3 2009.002.133

T
Temple Emanu-El-Beth Sholom C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Westmount (Montréal, QC) A Roth, Max W. P Wright, Bruce S Religious buildings; Synagogues CA Mar 58 FB Westmount 5, CA Q4 F 2009.002.171 Terrasses, Les C A S

Montréal (QC) Montreal Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden Shopping malls; Commercial buildings.

60

CA FB F

June 75 Montreal 20, CA Q3 2009.002.116

Tour l'Industrielle Vie, La C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Trépanier, Paul-Olivier; Gauthier, Maurice S Educational buildings CA Mar 85 FB Montreal 21, CA Q3 F 2009.002.111

U
Université de Montréal Universite de Montreal C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Outremont (Montréal, QC) A Cormier, Ernest P Armour Landry S Universities and colleges FB Montreal 22, CA Q3 F 2009.002.130 Université de Montréal, Garage Louis-Colin Universite de Montreal, Garage Louis-Colin C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Outremont (Montréal, QC) A Ouellet, Reeves, Alain S Universities and colleges; Educational buildings CA 1970 Y.B. FB Montreal 23, CA Q3 F 2009.002.091 Université de Montréal, School of Architecture Universite de Montreal, School of Architecture C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Outremont (Montréal, QC) S Universities and colleges; Educational buildings CA July 80 FB Montreal 24, CA Q3 F 2009.002.172 Université du Québec à Montréal Universite du Quebec a Montreal C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal A Saia & Barbarese, Architectes P Brunelle, Michel S Universities and colleges FB Montreal 25, CA Q3 F 2009.002.174 Urgel Bourgle Ltee. Salon Funeraire C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal

61

A S CA FB F

Julien, Marc Commercial buildings Aug 86 Montreal 26, CA Q3 2009.002.175

V
Village des sports, Le C St-Gabriel-de-Valcartier (QC) A Bouchard, Denis; Chabot, Denis S Recreation buildings. CA Mar 85 FB Valcartier 47, CA Q3 F 2009.002.117

W
Westmount Square C Montréal (QC) Montreal N Westmount (Montréal, QC) A Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise P Jowett, Henry Roger S Squares (open spaces) FB Westmount 7, CA Q4 F 2009.002.009 Windsor station C N A CN S CA FB F

Montréal (QC) Montreal Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) Downtown Montreal Price, Bruce Canadian Pacific Rail Railroad stations; Commercial buildings. Feb 71 Montreal 27, CA Q3 2009.002. 176

62

QUEBEC: GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION
Brome (QC) Ballantyne Residence (Schreiber, John): Sept 71. Brome 1, CA Q1 Châteauguay (QC) Centre Hospitalier Anna-Laberge (Tetreau Parent Languedoc; Jodoin Lamarre Pratte): Nov 85. Châteauguay 2, CA Q1 Delson (QC) Saint-Georges School (Gauthier, Maurice; Trépanier, Paul-Olivier): May 58. Delson 3, CA Q1 Granby (QC) École Ave Maria (Trépanier, Paul-Olivier; Gauthier, Maurice): Jan 57. Granby 5, CA Q1 Hull (QC) Canadian Museum of Civilization (Cardinal, Douglas Joseph): Nov 89. Gatineau 4, CA Q4 École secondaire Saint-John-Baptiste (Richard, René): [n/a]. Hull 6, CA Q1 Jonquière (QC) Alcan Industrial Complex (Folch-Ribas, Jacques; Berry, James L.): July 85. Jonquière 7, CA Q1 Eglise Saint-Raphaël (St. Gelais & Tremblay): Nov 61. Jonquière 8, CA Q1 Lachute (QC) Long Sault Woodcraft Co., St. Andrews East (Desbarats, Guy): Feb 58. Lachute 9, CA Q1 Laval (QC) Papineau house (Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc): Apr 66. Laval 10, CA Q1 Lucerne (QC) Mayrs house (Padolsky, Barry): Feb 58. Lachute 9, CA Q1 Mansfield-et-Pontefract (QC) Maison Bryson (Bryson, George): Nov 87. Mansfield-et-Pontefract 11, CA Q1 Mont-Joli (QC) Maurice Lamontagne Institute (Gagnon, Guy, Latellier, Ross): Oct 85 Pers. Mont-Joli 12, CA Q1 Montréal (QC) Aerial views: Nov 88. Montreal 13, CA Q1 Franki Building (Rother, Bland, Trudeau Architects): Feb 58. Montreal 21, CA Q2 Greek Othodox Church (Dimakopoulos, Dimitri): Oct 60. Montreal 22, CA Q2 Hotel Arcade (Larose, Petrucci Architects): May 84. Montreal 23, CA Q2 Lumières de la ville, Les (Reiner, Thomas Robert): March 87. Montreal 27, CA Q2 Montreal Metro (Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc; David, Jacques; Barott, Ernest Isbell; Boulva, Pierre; Prus, Victor): Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4 Terrasses, Les (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): June 75. Montreal 20, CA Q3 Anjou (Montréal, QC) Église Notre-Dame-d'Anjou (Blouin, André): Jan 1962. Montreal 9, CA Q4 Cité-de-la-mode (Montréal, QC) Crystaplex Plastics Limited (Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita): March 73. Montreal 47, CA Q1

74

Côte-des-Neiges (Montréal, QC) Rockhill apartments (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): [n/a]. Montreal 14, CA Q3 Côte-des-Neiges­Notre-Dame-de-Grâce (Montréal, QC) Ruby Foo's Motor Hotel (Roth and Ronar): Oct 62. Montreal 13, CA Q3 Saidye Bronfman Centre (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): July 70. Montreal 16, CA Q3 Dorval (Montréal, QC) Montreal-Dorval International Airport (Illsley, Templeton, Archibald; Larose and Larose): [n/a]. Montreal 39, CA Q2 Downtown Montréal (Montréal, QC) 2000 Peel, Le (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): July 80. Montreal 15, CA Q1 500 Sherbrooke Street West (Blouin and Associates): July 88. Montreal 17, CA Q1 Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada, La (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): July 84. Montreal 20, CA Q1 BNP Paribas Tower (WZMH Group Architects): June 80. Montreal 21, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, exterior views (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 23-24, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, interior views (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 27-28, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, offical Centre photographs (interiors) (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 26, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, official Centre photographs (exteriors) (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 25, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, plans and construction views (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 29, CA Q1 Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (Dickinson, Peter; Duschenes & Barrett): [n/a]. Montreal 30, CA Q1 Cantlie House Hotel (Martin, Ian): [n/a]. Montreal 32, CA Q1 Catholic Information Centre (Ussner, Wilfred R.): [n/a]. Montreal 31, CA Q1 Centre commercial Les Floralies (unknown architect): Feb 87. Montreal 33, CA Q1 Centre Eaton de Montréal (Montréal Eaton Centre) (Rose, Peter; Fichten, Soiferman, Architects): Jan 89. Montreal 34, CA Q1 Château Champlain - Place du Canada, Le (D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul): Sept 67. Montreal 35, CA Q1 Church of Notre-Dame-de-la-Salette (Goyer, Paul): March 58. Montreal 37, CA Q1 CIL House offices (Greenspoon, Freidlander and Dunne Architects): June 62. Montreal 38, CA Q1 Comédie-Canadienne Theatre, La (Blouin, André): Sept 58. Montreal 39, CA Q1 Complexe Chaussegros-de-léry (Hanganu, Dan S.): [n/a]. Montreal 40, CA Q1 Complexe Hydro-Quebec (Hanganu, Dan S. ): 1986. Montreal 41, CA Q1 Concordia University Henry F. Hall building (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a]. Montreal 43, CA Q1 Webster Library (Blouin and Associates; Werleman & Guy Architectes): Jan 89. Montreal 42, CA Q1 Cormier House (unknown architect): July 83. Montreal 45, CA Q1 Cour Notre Dame, La (Notre Dame Court) (Thibodeau Conrath Scheffer Architects): Aug 86. Montreal 46, CA Q1 Dominion Square (unknown architect): [n/a]. Montreal 49, CA Q1 Drug, Le, Mountain Street (Rue de la Montagne) (Dallegret, François): July 65. Montreal 48, CA Q1 Faubourg Ste. Catherine, Le (Desnoyers Mercure Architects): April 85. Montreal 19, CA Q2 Laurentien, The (La Laurentienne) (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): May 84. Montreal 26, CA Q2 Lumières de la ville, Les (Reiner, Thomas Robert): March 87. Montreal 27, CA Q2 Maison Alcan (Arcop Associates (Arcop Group)): Apr/Jul 84; Nov 82; May 84; Apr 89; Dec 84. Montreal 30-34, CA Q2

75

Maison Coloniale (Rousseau, Jacques): April 94. Montreal 2, CA Q4 Maison des Coopérants, La (WZMH Group Architects): Sept 86. Montreal 29, CA Q2 Marché St Leonard (Colombani, Henri): Aug 85. Montreal 35, CA Q2 McGill University Lab & dorms (Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine): Mar 66. Mont-Saint-Hilaire 39, CA Q3 Loyola College, Father's residence (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a]. Montreal 28, CA Q2 Stewart Biological Sciences Building (Dobush, Stewart, Bourke; Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine): June 66. Montreal 36, CA Q2 Monastère du Bon-Pasteur (Bourgeau, Victor): Nov 87. Montreal 37, CA Q2 Montreal Life building (Barott, Ernest Isbell): Sept 58. Montreal 41, CA Q2 Ordre des Architectes du Quebec (OAQ) (unknown architect): Aug 86. Montreal 43, CA Q2 Parc Olympique (Moshe Safdie & Associates): Jan 88. Montreal 47-49, CA Q2 Peel Centre (Greenspoon, Freedlander and Dunne Architects): Sept 58. Montreal 1, CA Q3 Place Bonaventure (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Sept 67; May 68. Montreal 3-4, CA Q3 Place des Arts (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Nov 63. Montreal 2, CA Q3 Place Montreal Trust (unknown architect): [n/a]. Montreal 5, CA Q3 Place Victoria, Stock exchange tower (Tour de la Bourse) (Moretti, Luigi): July 1965. Montreal 18, CA Q3 Place Ville Marie (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): June 62; Feb 63. Montreal 6-8, CA Q3 Port Royal apartments (Martin, Ian): [n/a]. Montreal 11, CA Q3 Queen's Hotel development (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): Feb 87. Montreal 12, CA Q3 Rue Sherbrooke Ouest at McGill College Avenue (Vecsei & Panzini Architects): Dec 83. Montreal 16, CA Q1 Sun Life building (John B. and John C. Parkin Architects): July 61. Montreal 19, CA Q3 Tour l'Industrielle Vie, La (Trépanier, Paul-Olivier; Gauthier, Maurice): Mar 85. Montreal 21, CA Q3 Université du Québec a Montréal (Saia & Barbarese, Architectes): [n/a]. Montreal 25, CA Q3 Urgel Bourgle Ltee. Salon Funeraire (Julien, Marc): Aug 86. Montreal 26, CA Q3 Windsor station (Price, Bruce): Feb 71. Montreal 27, CA Q3 Île des Soeurs (Montréal, QC) Berlioz Street Row Housing (Hanganu, Dan S.): June 82. Île des Soeurs 43/ CA Q3 Esso Station (Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig ): Oct 68. Île des Soeurs 44, CA Q3 Residential complex (Tornay, Edgar; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig): June 70. Île des Soeurs 45, CA Q3 Le Moyne (Montréal, QC) Christ Memorial Lutheran Church (D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul): Feb 67. Montreal 36, CA Q1 Mercier­Hochelaga-Maisonneuve (Montréal, QC) Johnson & Johnson Head Office (Saia, Mario): Jan 89. Montreal 25, CA Q2 Mont-Royal (Mount Royal) (Montréal, QC) Bibliothèque de Mont-Royal (Donaldson, Drummond, Sankey Architects; Resther et Fils architectes): Feb 68. Montreal 28, CA Q3 Centre Rockland (Martin, Ian; Prus, Victor): Sept 59. Mont-Royal 29, CA Q3 Cours Mont-Royal (Mont-Royal Hotel) (Arcop Associates (Arcop Group); Ross & Macdonald): July 87. Montreal 38, CA Q2 Mont-Royal Park: [n/a]. Montreal 40, CA Q2 Old Montréal (Montréal, QC) Banque Canadienne Nationale (David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre): [n/a]. Montreal 19, CA Q1

76

Banque provinciale du Canada (David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre): [n/a]. Montreal 22, CA Q1 Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company of Canada (unknown architect): Nov 65. Montreal 44, CA Q1 Expo 67 Expo 67, Administration and Press Building (Grossman, Irving): 1966 Y.B. Montreal 50, CA Q1 Expo 67, Aerial views: Oct 66; May 67. Montreal 7, CA Q2 Expo 67, Africa Place (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 8, CA Q2 Expo 67, Air Canada Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 51, CA Q1 Expo 67, Austria Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 52, CA Q1 Expo 67, Automotive Stadium (Prus, Victor): Oct 66. Montreal 54, CA Q1 Expo 67, Britain Pavilion (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 18, CA Q2 Expo 67, Canada Pavilion (Vaughn & Williams, Schoeler & Barkham, Stankiewicz): May 67. Montreal 56, CA Q1 Expo 67, Canadian National Railway Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 53, CA Q1 Expo 67, Canadian Pacific Rail - Cominco Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66; May 67. Montreal 55, CA Q1 Expo 67, Canadian Pulp and Paper Industry Pavilion (unknown architect): Montreal 16, CA Q2 Expo 67, Czechoslovakia Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 57, CA Q1 Expo 67, Expo Théâtre (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 58, CA Q1 Expo 67, Federal Republic of Germany Pavilion (Otto, Frei): May 67. Montreal 59, CA Q1 Expo 67, France Pavilion (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 6, CA Q2 Expo 67, Habitat '67 (Safdie, Moshe): Sept/Oct 67; Mar 68. Montreal 9, CA Q2 Expo 67, International Trade Centre (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 1, CA Q2 Expo 67, Israel Pavilion (Sharon, Arieh): May 67. Montreal 2, CA Q2 Expo 67, Japan Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 3, CA Q2 Expo 67, Man Pavilions (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): May 67; Oct 66. Montreal 4, CA Q2 Expo 67, Netherlands Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 17, CA Q2 Expo 67, Ontario Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66; May 67. Montreal 10, CA Q2 Expo 67, Place d'Accueil (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 11, CA Q2 Expo 67, Québec Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 12, CA Q2 Expo 67, Scandinavian Pavilion (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 5, CA Q2 Expo 67, Steel Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 13, CA Q2 Expo 67, U.S.S.R. Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 14, CA Q2 Expo 67, United States of America Pavilion (Fuller, Buckminster): Feb & May 67. Montreal 15, CA Q2 Musée d'archeologie et d'histoire de Montréal (Montreal Museum of Archeology and History) (Hanganu, Dan S.): October 1992 cover. Montreal 3, CA Q4 Nelson Monument (unknown architect): Aug 70. Montreal 42, CA Q2 Palais des congrès de Montreal (Prus, Victor): Jul 84/Nov 84. Montreal 44-46, CA Q2 Sacred Heart Chapel of the Church of Notre Dame (Jodoin Lamarre Pratte): Mar 86. Montreal 15, CA Q3 Outremont (Montréal, QC) Université de Montréal (Cormier, Ernest): [n/a]. Montreal 22, CA Q3 Garage Louis-Colin (Ouellet, Reeves, Alain): 1970 Y.B. Montreal 23, CA Q3 School of Architecture (unknown architect): July 80. Montreal 24, CA Q3

77

Pierrefonds (Montréal, QC) École Polyvalente (Arcop Associates (Arcop Group)): Apr 72. Pierrefonds 32, CA Q3 Pointe-Saint-Charles (Montréal, QC) 2514-2542 Rue Saint Charles (unknown architect): [n/a]. Montreal 18, CA Q1 826-48 Charon street (unknown architect): [n/a]. Montreal 14, CA Q1 Pointe-Saint-Charles neighbourhood (unknown architect): [n/a]. Montreal 10, CA Q3 St. Gabriel's Church (Bird, John): Apr 66. Montreal 17, CA Q3 Saint-Martin (Montréal, QC) Îlots, Les (Ouellet, Reeves, Alain): Aug 71. Montreal 24, CA Q2 Westmount (Montréal, QC) 3137-3141 Chemin Côte St-Antoine (unknown architect): [n/a]. Westmount 49, CA Q3 Felberg residence (Baker, Joseph): April 68 Pers. Westmount 50, CA Q3 Place Alexis Nihon (Alexis Nihon Plaza) (Ship, Harold): Apr 85. Montreal 20, CA Q2 Temple Emanu-El-Beth Sholom (Roth, Max W.): March 58. Westmount 5, CA Q4 Westmount Square (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a]. Westmount 7, CA Q4 Moulinette (QC) Christ Church (unknown architect): Feb 58. Moulinette 31, CA Q3 Parc Provincial du Mont-Tremblant (QC) Mont-Tremblant village (Hanganu, Dan S.): 1984. Mont-Tremblant 30, CA Q3 Pointe-aux-Trembles (QC) Bell Telephone building (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): April 68 Pers. Trembles 8, CA Q4 Québec City (QC) Colisée du Québec (Bégin et Rodrigue Architectes): July 82. Quebec 33, CA Q3 Jardins Merici, Les (Gauthier, Guité, Roy Architectes): Apr 75. Quebec 34, CA Q3 Musée de la Civilisation (Moshe Safdie & Associates): Nov 88. Quebec 35-36, CA Q3 Sillery (Québec City, QC) Collège Jesus-Marie de Sillery (unknown architect): March 85. Sillery 6, CA Q4 Saint Jean-sur-Richelieu (QC) Saint-Gérrard-Majella Church (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a]. Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu 41, CA Q3 Saint Lambert (QC) Saint-Thomas-d'Aquin Church (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Mar 68. Saint-Lambert 42, CA Q3 Saint-Bruno (QC) Lussier residence (D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul): Sept 66. Saint-Bruno 37, CA Q3 Martinez house (Martinez-Camps, Jorge): July 82. Saint-Bruno 38, CA Q3 Saint-Hyacinthe (QC) École professionelle de Saint-Hyacinthe (Allaire, Bergeron, Courchesne, Henderson): [n/a] Saint-Hyacinthe 40, CA Q3 Saint-Laurent (QC) Pitney-Bowes building (Baker, Joseph): Jan 67. Montreal 9, CA Q3

78

St-Gabriel-de-Valcartier (QC) Village des sports, Le (Bouchard, Denis; Chabot, Denis): Mar 85. Valcartier 47, CA Q3 Trois-Rivières (QC) Haut-Fourneau des Forges du Saint-Maurice (Gauthier, Guité, Roy Architectes): July 85. Trois-Rivières 46, CA Q3 Vaudreuil-Dorion (QC) Summerlea Golf and Country Club (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Sept 63. Vaudreuil-Dorion 48, CA Q3

79

QUEBEC: ARCHITECT
Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise Concordia University, Henry F. Hall building: [n/a] Montreal 43, CA Q1 Expo 67, Man Pavilions: May 67; Oct 66. Montreal 4, CA Q2 McGill University, Loyola College, Father's residence: [n/a] Montreal 28, CA Q2 Place Bonaventure: Sept 67; May 68. Montreal 3-4, CA Q3 Place des Arts: Nov 63. Montreal 2, CA Q3 Place Ville Marie: June 62; Feb 63. Montreal 6-8, CA Q3 Saint-Gérrard-Majella Church: [n/a] Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu 41, CA Q3 Saint-Thomas-d'Aquin Church: Mar 68. Saint-Lambert 42, CA Q3 Summerlea Golf and Country Club: Sept 63. Vaudreuil-Dorion 48, CA Q3 Westmount Square: [n/a] Westmount 7, CA Q4 Allaire, Bergeron, Courchesne, Henderson École professionelle de Saint-Hyacinthe: [n/a] Saint-Hyacinthe 40, CA Q3 Arcop Associates (Arcop Group) Cours Mont-Royal (Mont-Royal Hotel): July 87. Montreal 38, CA Q2 École Polyvalente: Apr 72. Pierrefonds 32, CA Q3 Maison Alcan: Apr/Jul 84; Nov 82; May 84; Apr 89; Dec 84. Montreal 30-34, CA Q2 Baker, Joseph Felberg residence: April 68 Pers. Westmount 50, CA Q3 Pitney-Bowes building: Jan 67. Montreal 9, CA Q3 Barott, Ernest Isbell Montreal Life building: Sept 58. Montreal 41, CA Q2 Montreal Metro: Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4 Bégin et Rodrigue Architectes Colisée du Québec: July 82. Quebec 33, CA Q3 Berry, James L. Alcan Industrial Complex: July 85. Jonquière 7, CA Q1 Bird, John St. Gabriel's Church: Apr 66. Montreal 17, CA Q3 Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine McGill University, Lab & dorms: Mar 66. Mont-Saint-Hilaire 39, CA Q3 McGill University, Stewart Biological Sciences Building: June 66. Montreal 36, CA Q2 Blouin and Associates 500 Sherbrooke Street West: July 88. Montreal 17, CA Q1 Concordia University, Webster Library: Jan 89. Montreal 42, CA Q1 Blouin, André Église Notre-Dame-d'Anjou: Jan 1962. Montreal 9, CA Q4

80

Comédie-Canadienne Theatre, La: Sept 58. Montreal 39, CA Q1 Bouchard, Denis Village des sports, Le: Mar 85. Valcartier 47, CA Q3 Boulva, Pierre Banque Canadienne Nationale (David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre): [n/a] Montreal 19, CA Q1 Banque provinciale du Canada (David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre): [n/a] Montreal 22, CA Q1 Montreal Metro: Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4 Bourgeau, Victor Monastère du Bon-Pasteur: Nov 87. Montreal 37, CA Q2 Bryson, George Maison Bryson: Nov 87. Mansfield-et-Pontefract 11, CA Q1 Cardinal, Douglas Joseph Canadian Museum of Civilization: Nov 89. Gatineau 4, CA Q4 Chabot, Denis Village des sports, Le: Mar 85. Valcartier 47, CA Q3 Colombani, Henri Marché St Leonard: Aug 85. Montreal 35, CA Q2 Cormier, Ernest Université de Montréal: [n/a] Montreal 22, CA Q3 Dallegret, François Drug, Le, Mountain Street (Rue de la Montagne): July 65. Montreal 48, CA Q1 D'Astous, Roger Château Champlain - Place du Canada, Le: Sept 67. Montreal 35, CA Q1 Christ Memorial Lutheran Church: Feb 67. Montreal 36, CA Q1 Lussier residence: Sept 66. Saint-Bruno 37, CA Q3 David, Jacques Banque Canadienne Nationale: [n/a]. Montreal 19, CA Q1 Banque provinciale du Canada: [n/a]. Montreal 22, CA Q1 Montreal Metro: Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4 Desbarats, Guy Long Sault Woodcraft Co., St. Andrews East: Feb 58. Lachute 9, CA Q1 Desnoyers Mercure Architects Faubourg Ste. Catherine, Le: April 85. Montreal 19, CA Q2 Dickinson, Peter Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce: [n/a]. Montreal 30, CA Q1 Dimakopoulos, Dimitri Greek Othodox Church: Oct 60. Montreal 22, CA Q2 Dobush, Stewart, Bourke McGill University, Stewart Biological Sciences Building: June 66. Montreal 36, CA Q2

81

Donaldson, Drummond, Sankey Architects Bibliothèque de Mont-Royal: Feb 68. Montreal 28, CA Q3 Duschenes & Barrett Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce: [n/a]. Montreal 30, CA Q1 Fichten, Soiferman, Architects Centre Eaton de Montréal (Montréal Eaton Centre): Jan 89. Montreal 34, CA Q1 Folch-Ribas, Jacques Alcan Industrial Complex: July 85. Jonquière 7, CA Q1 Fuller, Buckminster Expo 67, United States of America Pavilion: Feb & May 67. Montreal 15, CA Q2 Gagnon, Guy, Latellier, Ross Maurice Lamontagne Institute: Oct 85 Pers. Mont-Joli 12, CA Q1 Gauthier, Guité, Roy Architectes Haut-Fourneau des Forges du Saint-Maurice: July 85. Trois-Rivières 46, CA Q3 Jardins Merici, Les: Apr 75. Quebec 34, CA Q3 Gauthier, Maurice École Ave Maria: Jan 57. Granby 5, CA Q1 Saint-Georges School: May 58. Delson 3, CA Q1 Tour l'Industrielle Vie, La: Mar 85. Montreal 21, CA Q3 Goyer, Paul Church of Notre-Dame-de-la-Salette: March 58. Montreal 37, CA Q1 Greenspoon, Freidlander and Dunne Architects CIL House offices: June 62. Montreal 38, CA Q1 Grossman, Irving Expo 67, Administration and Press Building: 1966 Y.B. Montreal 50, CA Q1 Hanganu, Dan S. Complexe Chaussegros-de-léry: [n/a] Montreal 40, CA Q1 Complexe Hydro-Quebec: 1986. Montreal 41, CA Q1 Illsley, Templeton, Archibald Montreal-Dorval International Airport: [n/a]Montreal 39, CA Q2 Jodoin Lamarre Pratte Sacred Heart Chapel of the Church of Notre Dame: Mar 86. Montreal 15, CA Q3 Centre Hospitalier Anna-Laberge: Nov 85. Châteauguay 2, CA Q1 John B. and John C. Parkin Architects Sun Life building: July 61. Montreal 19, CA Q3 Julien, Marc Urgel Bourgle Ltee. Salon Funeraire: Aug 86. Montreal 26, CA Q3 Larose and Larose Montreal-Dorval International Airport: [n/a]Montreal 39, CA Q2

82

Larose, Petrucci Architects Hotel Arcade: May 84. Montreal 23, CA Q2 Martin, Ian Centre Rockland: Sept 59. Mont-Royal 29, CA Q3 Cantlie House Hotel: [N/A]. Montreal 32, CA Q1 Port Royal apartments: [N/A]. Montreal 11, CA Q3 Martinez-Camps, Jorge Martinez house: July 82. Saint-Bruno 38, CA Q3 Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig Esso Station: Oct 68. Île des Soeurs 44, CA Q3 Residential complex: June 70. Île des Soeurs 45, CA Q3 Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita Crystaplex Plastics Limited: March 73. Montreal 47, CA Q1 Moretti, Luigi Place Victoria, Stock exchange tower (Tour de la Bourse): July 1965. Montreal 18, CA Q3 Moshe Safdie & Associates Musée de la Civilisation: Nov 88. Quebec 35-36, CA Q3 Parc Olympique: Jan 88. Montreal 47-49, CA Q2 Otto, Frei Expo 67, Federal Republic of Germany Pavilion: May 67. Montreal 59, CA Q1 Ouellet, Reeves, Alain Îlots, Les: Aug 71. Montreal 24, CA Q2 Université de Montréal, Garage Louis-Colin: 1970 Y.B. Montreal 23, CA Q3 Padolsky, Barry Mayrs house: Feb 58. Lachute 9, CA Q1 Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc Montreal Metro: Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4 Papineau house: Apr 66. Laval 10, CA Q1 Pothier, Jean-Paul Château Champlain - Place du Canada, Le: Sept 67. Montreal 35, CA Q1 Christ Memorial Lutheran Church: Feb 67. Montreal 36, CA Q1 Lussier residence: Sept 66. Saint-Bruno 37, CA Q3 Price, Bruce Windsor station: Feb 71. Montreal 27, CA Q3 Prus, Victor Centre Rockland: Sept 59. Mont-Royal 29, CA Q3 Expo 67, Automotive Stadium: Oct 66. Montreal 54, CA Q1 Montreal Metro: Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4 Palais des congrès de Montreal: Jul 84/Nov 84. Montreal 44-46, CA Q2

83

Reiner, Thomas Robert Lumières de la ville, Les: March 87. Montreal 27, CA Q2 Resther et Fils architectes Bibliothèque de Mont-Royal: Feb 68. Montreal 28, CA Q3 Richard, René École secondaire Saint-John-Baptiste: [n/a] Hull 6, CA Q1 Rose, Peter Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, exterior views: Apr 89. Montreal 23-24, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, interior views: Apr 89. Montreal 27-28, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, offical Centre photographs (interiors): Apr 89. Montreal 26, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, official Centre photographs (exteriors): Apr 89. Montreal 25, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, plans and construction views: Apr 89. Montreal 29, CA Q1 Centre Eaton de Montréal (Montréal Eaton Centre): Jan 89. Montreal 34, CA Q1 Ross & Macdonald Cours Mont-Royal (Mont-Royal Hotel): July 87. Montreal 38, CA Q2 Roth and Ronar Ruby Foo's Motor Hotel: Oct 62. Montreal 13, CA Q3 Roth, Max W. Temple Emanu-El-Beth Sholom: March 58. Westmount 5, CA Q4 Rother, Bland, Trudeau Architects Franki Building: Feb 58. Montreal 21, CA Q2 Rousseau, Jacques Maison Coloniale: April 94. Montreal 2, CA Q4 Safdie, Moshe Expo 67, Habitat '67: Sept/Oct 67; Mar 68. Montreal 9, CA Q2 Saia, Mario Johnson & Johnson Head Office: Jan 89. Montreal 25, CA Q2 Saia & Barbarese, Architectes Université du Québec a Montréal: [n/a] Montreal 25, CA Q3 Schreiber, John Ballantyne Residence: Sept 71. Brome 1, CA Q1 Sharon, Arieh Expo 67, Israel Pavilion: May 67. Montreal 2, CA Q2 Ship, Harold Place Alexis Nihon (Alexis Nihon Plaza): Apr 85. Montreal 20, CA Q2 St. Gelais & Tremblay Eglise Saint-Raphaël: Nov 61. Jonquière 8, CA Q1 Tetreau Parent Languedoc Centre Hospitalier Anna-Laberge: Nov 85. Châteauguay 2, CA Q1

84

Thibodeau Conrath Scheffer Architects Cour Notre Dame, La (Notre Dame Court): Aug 86. Montreal 46, CA Q1 Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects 2000 Peel, Le: July 80. Montreal 15, CA Q1 Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada, La: July 84. Montreal 20, CA Q1 Queen's Hotel development: Feb 87. Montreal 12, CA Q3 The Laurentien (La Laurentienne): May 84. Montreal 26, CA Q2 Tornay, Edgar Residential complex: June 70. Île des Soeurs 45, CA Q3 Trépanier, Paul-Olivier École Ave Maria: Jan 57. Granby 5, CA Q1 Saint-Georges School: May 58. Delson 3, CA Q1 Tour l'Industrielle Vie, La: Mar 85. Montreal 21, CA Q3 Ussner, Wilfred R. Catholic Information Centre: [n/a] Montreal 31, CA Q1 Vaughn & Williams, Schoeler & Barkham, Stankiewicz Expo 67, Canada Pavilion: May 67. Montreal 56, CA Q1 Vecsei & Panzini Architects Rue Sherbrooke Ouest at McGill College Avenue: Dec 83. Montreal 16, CA Q1 Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden Bell Telephone building: April 68 Pers. Trembles 8, CA Q4 Rockhill apartments: [n/a] Montreal 14, CA Q3 Saidye Bronfman Centre: July 70. Montreal 16, CA Q3 Terrasses, Les: June 75. Montreal 20, CA Q3 Werleman & Guy Architectes Concordia University, Webster Library: Jan 89. Montreal 42, CA Q1 WZMH Group Architects Maison des Coopérants, La: Sept 86. Montreal 29, CA Q2 BNP Paribas Tower: June 80. Montreal 21, CA Q1

85

QUEBEC: PHOTOGRAPHER
Applied Photography Ltd. BNP Paribas Tower (WZMH Group Architects): June 80. Montreal 21, CA Q1 Armour Landry Université de Montréal (Cormier, Ernest): [n/a] Montreal 22, CA Q3 Arnott Rogers Batten Ltd. Place Victoria, Stock exchange tower (Tour de la Bourse) (Moretti, Luigi): July 1965. Montreal 18, CA Q3 Associated Commercial Photographers Ltd. Montreal Life building (Barott, Ernest Isbell): Sept 58. Montreal 41, CA Q2 Atelier Jean Louis Bourret Église Notre-Dame-d'Anjou (Blouin, André): Jan 1962. Montreal 9, CA Q4 Bastien, François École professionelle de Saint-Hyacinthe (Allaire, Bergeron, Courchesne, Henderson): [n/a] Saint-Hyacinthe 40, CA Q3 Bermingham, Ed Montreal-Dorval International Airport (Illsley, Templeton, Archibald; Larose and Larose): [n/a] Montreal 39, CA Q2 Blohm, Hans Canadian Museum of Civilization (Cardinal, Douglas Joseph): Nov 89. Gatineau 4/ CA Q4 Brunelle, Michel Université du Québec a Montréal (Saia & Barbarese, Architectes): [n/a] Montreal 25, CA Q3 Bryant, Richard Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, exterior views (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 23-24, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, interior views (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 27-28, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, offical Centre photographs (interiors) (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 26, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, official Centre photographs (exteriors) (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 25, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, plans and construction views (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 29, CA Q1 Capital Press Service Christ Church (unknown architect): Feb 58. Moulinette 31, CA Q3 Century Photo Arts Reg'd Peel Centre (Greenspoon, Freedlander and Dunne Architects): Sept 58. Montreal 1, CA Q3 Chen, Roderick Musée d'archeologie et d'histoire de Montréal (Hanganu, Dan S.): October 1992 cover. Montreal 3, CA Q4 Chris F. Payne Photography McGill University, Stewart Biological Sciences Building (Dobush, Stewart, Bourke; Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine): June 66. Montreal 36, CA Q2 Pitney-Bowes building (Baker, Joseph): Jan 67. Montreal 9, CA Q3 Saint-Gérrard-Majella Church (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu 41, CA Q3 Delisle, Gilles 500 Sherbrooke Street West (Blouin and Associates): July 88. Montreal 17, CA Q1 Dik Nye Photography

86

McGill University, Lab & dorms (Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine): Mar 66. Mont-Saint-Hilaire 39, CA Q3 Montreal Metro (Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc; David, Jacques; Barott, Ernest Isbell; Boulva, Pierre; Prus, Victor): Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4 Place Ville Marie (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): June 62; Feb 63. Montreal 6-8, CA Q3 Drummond, Michael Bibliothèque de Mont-Royal (Donaldson, Drummond, Sankey Architects; Resther et Fils architectes): Feb 68. Montreal 28, CA Q3 Concordia University, Henry F. Hall building (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Montreal 43, CA Q1 McGill University, Loyola College, Father's residence (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Montreal 28, CA Q2 Factotum École Polyvalente (Arcop Associates (Arcop Group)): Apr 72. Pierrefonds 32, CA Q3 Federal Photos Port Royal apartments (Martin, Ian): [n/a] Montreal 11, CA Q3 Foncier Cour Notre Dame, La (Notre Dame Court) (Thibodeau Conrath Scheffer Architects): Aug 86. Montreal 46, CA Q1 Fulker, John Ballantyne Residence (Schreiber, John): Sept 71. Brome 1, CA Q1 Goyer, Paul Church of Notre-Dame-de-la-Salette (Goyer, Paul): March 58. Montreal 37, CA Q1 Graetz Inc. Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada, La (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): July 84. Montreal 20, CA Q1 Hotel Arcade (Larose, Petrucci Architects): May 84. Montreal 23, CA Q2 Sun Life building (John B. and John C. Parkin Architects): July 61. Montreal 19, CA Q3 Henrich-Blessing, Chicago Esso Station (Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig ): Oct 68. Île des Soeurs 44, CA Q3 Residential complex (Tornay, Edgar; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig): June 70. Île des Soeurs 45, CA Q3 Hollenzer and Company Limited Ruby Foo's Motor Hotel (Roth and Ronar): Oct 62. Montreal 13, CA Q3 Huard, Jocelyn Colisée du Québec (Bégin et Rodrigue Architectes): July 82. Quebec 33, CA Q3 Jack Marlow & Company Limited Maison des Coopérants, La (WZMH Group Architects): Sept 86. Montreal 29, CA Q2 Jowett, Henry Roger Banque Canadienne Nationale (David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre): [n/a] Montreal 19, CA Q1 Montreal Metro (Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc; David, Jacques; Barott, Ernest Isbell; Boulva, Pierre; Prus, Victor): Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4 Place Bonaventure (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Sept 67; May 68. Montreal 3-4, CA Q3 Westmount Square (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Westmount 7, CA Q4 Karkutt Photography Expo 67, Canada Pavilion (Vaughn & Williams, Schoeler & Barkham, Stankiewicz): May 67. Montreal 56, CA Q1 Merrett, Brian Cormier House (unknown architect): July 83. Montreal 45, CA Q1 Nickel, R.

87

Saidye Bronfman Centre (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): July 70. Montreal 16, CA Q3 Panda Associates Photography Place des Arts (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Nov 63. Montreal 2, CA Q3 Place Ville Marie (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): June 62; Feb 63. Montreal 6-8, CA Q3 Photographex Centre Hospitalier Anna-Laberge (Tetreau Parent Languedoc; Jodoin Lamarre Pratte): Nov 85. Châteauguay 2, CA Q1 Sacred Heart Chapel of the Church of Notre Dame (Jodoin Lamarre Pratte): Mar 86. Montreal 15, CA Q3 Plywood Manufacturers of B.C. Expo 67, Africa Place (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 8, CA Q2 Expo 67, Air Canada Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 51, CA Q1 Poissant, R. Cour Notre Dame, La (Notre Dame Court) (Thibodeau Conrath Scheffer Architects): Aug 86. Montreal 46, CA Q1 Proulx, Michel Saint-Thomas-d'Aquin Church (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Mar 68. Saint-Lambert 42, CA Q3 Relations Publiques, City of Montreal Parc Olympique (Moshe Safdie & Associates): Jan 88. Montreal 47-49, CA Q2 Richard Arless Associates CIL House offices (Greenspoon, Freidlander and Dunne Architects): June 62. Montreal 38, CA Q1 Samulewitz, Hans Cantlie House Hotel (Martin, Ian): [n/a] Montreal 32, CA Q1 Montreal Metro (Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc; David, Jacques; Barott, Ernest Isbell; Boulva, Pierre; Prus, Victor): Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4 Papineau house (Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc): Apr 66. Laval 10, CA Q1 Spalding-Smith, Fiona Maison Alcan (Arcop Associates (Arcop Group)): Apr/Jul 84; Nov 82; May 84; Apr 89; Dec 84. Montreal 30-34, CA Q2 Studio Alain Christ Memorial Lutheran Church (D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul): Feb 67. Montreal 3, CA Q1 École Ave Maria (Trépanier, Paul-Olivier; Gauthier, Maurice): Jan 57. Granby 5, CA Q1 St. Gabriel's Church (Bird, John): Apr 66. Montreal 17, CA Q3 Studio K-3 Cour Notre Dame, La (Notre Dame Court) (Thibodeau Conrath Scheffer Architects): Aug 86. Montreal 46, CA Q1 Taillefer, Paul Comédie-Canadienne Theatre, La (Blouin, André): Sept 58. Montreal 39, CA Q1 Warrington, Graham Catholic Information Centre (Ussner, Wilfred R.): [n/a] Montreal 31, CA Q1 Webber, Ray Mayrs house (Padolsky, Barry): Feb 58. Lachute 9, CA Q1 Franki Building (Rother, Bland, Trudeau Architects): Feb 58. Montreal 21, CA Q2 Wright, Bruce Long Sault Woodcraft Co., St. Andrews East (Desbarats, Guy): Feb 58. Lachute 9, CA Q1 Temple Emanu-El-Beth Sholom (Roth, Max W.): March 58. Westmount 5, CA Q4

88

QUEBEC: CORPORATE NAME
Canadian Pacific Rail Château Champlain - Place du Canada, Le (D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul): Sept 67. Montreal 35, CA Q1 Windsor station (Price, Bruce): Feb 71. Montreal 27, CA Q3 Department of Transport Montreal-Dorval International Airport (Illsley, Templeton, Archibald; Larose and Larose): [n/a] Montreal 39, CA Q2 First Quebec Corporation Canderel Limited 2000 Peel, Le (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): July 80. Montreal 15/ CA Q1 National Film Board of Canada Montreal-Dorval International Airport (Illsley, Templeton, Archibald; Larose and Larose): [n/a] Montreal 39, CA Q2 Plywood Manufacturers of B.C. Expo 67, Africa Place (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 8, CA Q2 Expo 67, Air Canada Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 51, CA Q1 Province of Québec Film Bureau (Office du Film du Québec) Aerial views: Nov 88. Montreal 13, CA Q1 Relations Publiques (Public Relations), City of Montreal Parc Olympique (Moshe Safdie & Associates): Jan 88. Montreal 47-49, CA Q2

89

QUEBEC: SUBJECT TERM
Aerial views Expo 67, Aerial views: Oct 66; May 67. Montreal 7, CA Q2 Montreal, Aerial views: Nov 88. Montreal 13, CA Q1 Airports Montreal-Dorval International Airport (Illsley, Templeton, Archibald; Larose and Larose): [n/a] Montreal 39, CA Q2 Apartment buildings Port Royal apartments (Martin, Ian): [n/a] Montreal 11, CA Q3 Rockhill apartments (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): [n/a] Montreal 14, CA Q3 Arenas Colisée du Québec (Bégin et Rodrigue Architectes): July 82. Quebec 33/ CA Q3 Architecture restoration Faubourg Ste. Catherine (Le) (Desnoyers Mercure Architects): April 85. Montreal 19, CA Q2 Architectural centres Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, exterior views (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 23-24, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, interior views (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 27-28, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, offical Centre photographs (interiors) (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 26, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, official Centre photographs (exteriors) (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 25, CA Q1 Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal, plans and construction views (Rose, Peter): Apr 89. Montreal 29, CA Q1 Ordre des Architectes du Quebec (OAQ) (unknown architect): Aug 86. Montreal 43, CA Q2 Art galleries, Commercial Drug, Le, Mountain Street (Rue de la Montagne) (Dallegret, François): July 65. Montreal 48, CA Q1 Bank buildings Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada, La (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): July 84. Montreal 20, CA Q1 Banque Canadienne Nationale (David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre): Montreal 19, CA Q1 Banque provinciale du Canada (David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre): Montreal 22, CA Q1 Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (Dickinson, Peter; Duschenes & Barrett): Montreal 30, CA Q1 Churches Christ Church (unknown architect): Feb 58. Moulinette 31, CA Q3 Christ Memorial Lutheran Church (D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul): Feb 67. Montreal 36, CA Q1 Church of Notre-Dame-de-la-Salette (Goyer, Paul): March 58. Montreal 37, CA Q1 Église Notre-Dame-d'Anjou (Blouin, André): Jan 1962. Montreal 9, CA Q4 Eglise Saint-Raphaël (St. Gelais & Tremblay): Nov 61. Jonquière 8, CA Q1 Greek Othodox Church (Dimakopoulos, Dimitri): Oct 60. Montreal 22, CA Q2 Sacred Heart Chapel of the Church of Notre Dame (Jodoin Lamarre Pratte): Mar 86. Montreal 15, CA Q3 Saint-Gérrard-Majella Church (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu 41, CA Q3 Saint-Thomas-d'Aquin Church (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Mar 68. Saint-Lambert 42, CA Q3 St. Gabriel's Church (Bird, John): Apr 66. Montreal 17, CA Q3

90

Commercial buildings Aerial views: Nov 88. Montreal 13, CA Q1 Banque Canadienne Nationale (David, Jacques; Boulva, Pierre): [n/a] Montreal 19, CA Q1 Bell Telephone building (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): April 68 Pers. Trembles 8, CA Q4 Centre commercial Les Floralies (unknown architect): Feb 87. Montreal 33, CA Q1 Centre Rockland (Martin, Ian; Prus, Victor): Sept 59. Mont-Royal 29, CA Q3 Faubourg Ste. Catherine, Le (Desnoyers Mercure Architects): April 85. Montreal 19, CA Q2 Haut-Fourneau des Forges du Saint-Maurice (Gauthier, Guité, Roy Architectes): July 85. Trois-Rivières 46, CA Q3 Johnson & Johnson Head Office (Saia, Mario): Jan 89. Montreal 25, CA Q2 Marché St Leonard (Colombani, Henri): Aug 85. Montreal 35, CA Q2 Peel Centre (Greenspoon, Freedlander and Dunne Architects): Sept 58. Montreal 1, CA Q3 Pitney-Bowes building (Baker, Joseph): Jan 67. Montreal 9, CA Q3 Place Bonaventure (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Sept 67; May 68. Montreal 3-4, CA Q3 Place Montreal Trust (unknown architect): [n/a] Montreal 5, CA Q3 Place Victoria, Stock exchange tower (Tour de la Bourse) (Moretti, Luigi): July 1965. Montreal 18, CA Q3 Place Ville Marie (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): June 62; Feb 63. Montreal 6-8, CA Q3 Queen's Hotel development (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): Feb 87. Montreal 12, CA Q3 Rue Sherbrooke Ouest at McGill College Avenue (Vecsei & Panzini Architects): Dec 83. Montreal 16, CA Q1 Saidye Bronfman Centre (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): July 70. Montreal 16, CA Q3 Terrasses, Les (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): June 75. Montreal 20, CA Q3 Urgel Bourgle Ltee. Salon Funeraire (Julien, Marc): Aug 86. Montreal 26, CA Q3 Windsor station (Price, Bruce): Feb 71. Montreal 27, CA Q3 Communications buildings Bell Telephone building (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): April 68 Pers. Trembles 8, CA Q4 Convention facilities Expo 67, Administration and Press Building (Grossman, Irving): 1966 Y.B. Montreal 50, CA Q1 Expo 67, Aerial views: Oct 66; May 67. Montreal 7, CA Q2 Expo 67, Africa Place (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 8, CA Q2 Expo 67, Air Canada Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 51, CA Q1 Expo 67, Austria Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 52, CA Q1 Expo 67, Automotive Stadium (Prus, Victor): Oct 66. Montreal 54, CA Q1 Expo 67, Britain Pavilion (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 18, CA Q2 Expo 67, Canada Pavilion (Vaughn & Williams, Schoeler & Barkham, Stankiewicz): May 67. Montreal 56, CA Q1 Expo 67, Canadian National Railway Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 53, CA Q1 Expo 67, Canadian Pacific Rail - Cominco Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66; May 67. Montreal 55, CA Q1 Expo 67, Canadian Pulp and Paper Industry Pavilion (unknown architect): Montreal 16, CA Q2 Expo 67, Czechoslovakia Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 57, CA Q1 Expo 67, Expo Théâtre (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 58, CA Q1 Expo 67, Federal Republic of Germany Pavilion (Otto, Frei): May 67. Montreal 59, CA Q1 Expo 67, France Pavilion (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 6, CA Q2

91

Expo 67, Habitat '67 (Safdie, Moshe): Sept/Oct 67; Mar 68. Montreal 9, CA Q2 Expo 67, International Trade Centre (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 1, CA Q2 Expo 67, Israel Pavilion (Sharon, Arieh): May 67. Montreal 2, CA Q2 Expo 67, Man Pavilions (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): May 67; Oct 66. Montreal 4, CA Q2 Expo 67, Netherlands Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 17, CA Q2 Expo 67, Ontario Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66; May 67. Montreal 10, CA Q2 Expo 67, Place d'Accueil (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 11, CA Q2 Expo 67, Québec Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 12, CA Q2 Expo 67, Scandinavian Pavilion (unknown architect): May 67. Montreal 5, CA Q2 Expo 67, Steel Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 13, CA Q2 Expo 67, U.S.S.R. Pavilion (unknown architect): Oct 66. Montreal 14, CA Q2 Expo 67, United States of America Pavilion (Fuller, Buckminster): Feb & May 67. Montreal 15, CA Q2 Palais des congrès de Montreal (Prus, Victor): Jul 84/Nov 84. Montreal 44-46, CA Q2 Convents Monastère du Bon-Pasteur (Bourgeau, Victor): Nov 87. Montreal 37, CA Q2 Dormitories McGill University, Lab & dorms (Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine): Mar 66. Mont-Saint-Hilaire 39, CA Q3 McGill University, Loyola College, Father's residence (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Montreal 28, CA Q2 Educational buildings Collège Jesus-Marie de Sillery (unknown architect): March 85. Sillery 6, CA Q4 Concordia Univerisity, Henry F. Hall building (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Montreal 43, CA Q1 Tour l'Industrielle Vie, La (Trépanier, Paul-Olivier; Gauthier, Maurice): Mar 85. Montreal 21, CA Q3 Université de Montréal, Garage Louis-Colin (Ouellet, Reeves, Alain): 1970 Y.B. Montreal 23, CA Q3 Université de Montréal, School of Architecture (unknown architect): July 80. Montreal 24, CA Q3 Elementary schools École Ave Maria (Trépanier, Paul-Olivier; Gauthier, Maurice): Jan 57. Granby 5, CA Q1 École Polyvalente (Arcop Associates (Arcop Group)): Apr 72. Pierrefonds 32, CA Q3 Saint-Georges School (Gauthier, Maurice; Trépanier, Paul-Olivier): May 58. Delson 3, CA Q1 General hospitals Centre Hospitalier Anna-Laberge (Tetreau Parent Languedoc; Jodoin Lamarre Pratte): Nov 85. Châteauguay 2, CA Q1 Geodesic domes Expo 67, United States of America Pavilion (Fuller, Buckminster): Feb & May 67. Montreal 15, CA Q2 Golf courses Summerlea Golf and Country Club (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Sept 63. Vaudreuil-Dorion 48, CA Q3 High schools École secondaire Saint-John-Baptiste (Richard, René): [n/a] Hull 6, CA Q1 Historic house museums Maison Bryson (Bryson, George): Nov 87. Mansfield-et-Pontefract 11, CA Q1 Historic monuments Nelson Monument (unknown architect): Aug 70. Montreal 42, CA Q2

92

Hotels (public accomodations) Cantlie House Hotel (Martin, Ian): [n/a] Montreal 32/ CA Q1 Château Champlain - Place du Canada, Le (D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul): Sept 67. Montreal 35, CA Q1 Cours Mont-Royal (Mont-Royal Hotel) ((Arcop Associates (Arcop Group); Ross & Macdonald): July 87. Montreal 38, CA Q2 Hotel Arcade (Larose, Petrucci Architects): May 84. Montreal 23, CA Q2 Queen's Hotel development (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): Feb 87. Montreal 12, CA Q3 Ruby Foo's Motor Hotel (Roth and Ronar): Oct 62. Montreal 13, CA Q3 Rue Sherbrooke Ouest at McGill College Avenue (Vecsei & Panzini Architects): Dec 83. Montreal 16, CA Q1 Houses 2514-2542 Rue Saint Charles (unknown architect): [n/a] Montreal 18, CA Q1 826-48 Charon street (unknown architect): [n/a] Montreal 14, CA Q1 3137-3141 Chemin Côte St-Antoine (unknown architect): [n/a] Westmount 49, CA Q3 Ballantyne Residence (Schreiber, John): Sept 71. Brome 1, CA Q1 Cormier House [unknown architect): July 83. Montreal 45, CA Q1 Cour Notre Dame, La (Notre Dame Court) (Thibodeau Conrath Scheffer Architects): Aug 86. Montreal 46, CA Q1 Felberg residence (Baker, Joseph): April 68 Pers. Westmount 50, CA Q3 Lussier residence (D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul): Sept 66. Saint-Bruno 37, CA Q3 Maison Coloniale (Rousseau, Jacques): April 94. Montreal 2, CA Q4 Martinez house (Martinez-Camps, Jorge): July 82. Saint-Bruno 38, CA Q3 Mayrs house (Padolsky, Barry): Feb 58. Lachute 9; CA Q1 Papineau house (Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc): Apr 66. Laval 10, CA Q1 Industrial buildings Alcan Industrial Complex (Folch-Ribas, Jacques; Berry, James L.): July 85. Jonquière 7, CA Q1 Complexe Hydro-Quebec (Hanganu, Dan S. ): 1986. Montreal 41/ CA Q1 Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company of Canada (unknown architect): Nov 65. Montreal 44, CA Q1 Maurice Lamontagne Institute (Gagnon, Guy, Latellier, Ross): Oct 85 Pers. Mont-Joli 12, CA Q1 Laboratories McGill University, Lab & dorms (Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine): Mar 66. Mont-Saint-Hilaire 39, CA Q3 Libraries Bibliothèque de Mont-Royal (Donaldson, Drummond, Sankey Architects; Resther et Fils architectes): Feb 68. Montreal 28, CA Q3 Concordia University, Webster Library (Blouin and Associates; Werleman & Guy Architectes): Jan 89. Montreal 42, CA Q1 Monasteries Monastère du Bon-Pasteur (Bourgeau, Victor): Nov 87. Montreal 37, CA Q2 Museum buildings Canadian Museum of Civilization (Cardinal, Douglas Joseph): Nov 89. Gatineau 4, CA Q4 Musée d'archeologie et d'histoire de Montréal (Hanganu, Dan S):October 1992 cover. Montreal 3,CA Q4 Musée de la Civilisation (Moshe Safdie & Associates): Nov 88. Quebec 35-36, CA Q3 Office buildings 500 Sherbrooke Street West (Blouin and Associates): July 88. Montreal 17, CA Q1 2000 Peel, Le (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): July 80. Montreal 15, CA Q1

93

Aerial views: Nov 88. Montreal 13, CA Q1 Bell Telephone building (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): April 68 Pers. Trembles 8, CA Q4 BNP Paribas Tower (WZMH Group Architects): June 80. Montreal 21, CA Q1 Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (Dickinson, Peter; Duschenes & Barrett): Montreal 30, CA Q1 CIL House offices (Greenspoon, Freidlander and Dunne Architects): June 62. Montreal 38, CA Q1 Complexe Chaussegros-de-léry (Hanganu, Dan S. ): [n/a] Montreal 40, CA Q1 Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company of Canada (unknown architect): Nov 65. Montreal 44, CA Q1 Cours Mont-Royal (Mont-Royal Hotel) ((Arcop Associates (Arcop Group); Ross & Macdonald): July 87. Montreal 38, CA Q2 Crystaplex Plastics Limited (Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita): March 73. Montreal 47, CA Q1 Dominion Square (unknown architect): [n/a] Montreal 49, CA Q1 Franki Building (Rother, Bland, Trudeau Architects): Feb 58. Montreal 21, CA Q2 Johnson & Johnson Head Office (Saia, Mario): Jan 89. Montreal 25, CA Q2 Laurentien, The (La Laurentienne) (Tolchinsky & Goodz Architects): May 84. Montreal 26, CA Q2 Long Sault Woodcraft Co., St. Andrews East (Desbarats, Guy): Feb 58. Lachute 9, CA Q1 Maison Alcan (Arcop Associates (Arcop Group)): Apr/Jul 84; Nov 82; May 84; Apr 89; Dec 84. Montreal 30-34, CA Q2 Maison des Coopérants, La (WZMH Group Architects): Sept 86. Montreal 29, CA Q2 Montreal Life building (Barott, Ernest Isbell): Sept 58. Montreal 41, CA Q2 Montreal, Aerial views: Nov 88. Montreal 13, CA Q1 Ordre des Architectes du Quebec (OAQ) (unknown architect): Aug 86. Montreal 43, CA Q2 Peel Centre (Greenspoon, Freedlander and Dunne Architects): Sept 58. Montreal 1, CA Q3 Pitney-Bowes building (Baker, Joseph): Jan 67. Montreal 9, CA Q3 Place Alexis Nihon (Alexis Nihon Plaza) (Ship, Harold): Apr 85. Montreal 20, CA Q2 Place Bonaventure (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Sept 67; May 68. Montreal 3-4, CA Q3 Sun Life building (John B. and John C. Parkin Architects): July 61. Montreal 19, CA Q3 Orthodox Eastern church buildings Greek Othodox Church (Dimakopoulos, Dimitri): Oct 60. Montreal 22, CA Q2 Performing arts buildings Comédie-Canadienne Theatre (La) (Blouin, André): Sept 58. Montreal 39, CA Q1 Place des Arts (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Nov 63. Montreal 2, CA Q3 Pharmacy Drug, Le, Mountain Street (Rue de la Montagne) (Dallegret, François): July 65. Montreal 48, CA Q1 Railroad stations Windsor station (Price, Bruce): Feb 71. Montreal 27, CA Q3 Recreation buildings. Parc Olympique (Moshe Safdie & Associates): Jan 88. Montreal 47-49, CA Q2 Summerlea Golf and Country Club (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Sept 63. Vaudreuil-Dorion 48, CA Q3 Village des sports, Le (Bouchard, Denis; Chabot, Denis): Mar 85. Valcartier 47, CA Q3 Religious buildings Catholic Information Centre (Ussner, Wilfred R.): [n/a] Montreal 31, CA Q1 Christ Memorial Lutheran Church (D'Astous, Roger; Pothier, Jean-Paul): Feb 67. Montreal 36, CA Q1

94

Church of Notre-Dame-de-la-Salette (Goyer, Paul): March 58. Montreal 37, CA Q1 Église Notre-Dame-d'Anjou (Blouin, André): Jan 1962. Montreal 9, CA Q4 Eglise Saint-Raphaël (St. Gelais & Tremblay): Nov 61. Jonquière 8, CA Q1 Sacred Heart Chapel of the Church of Notre Dame (Jodoin Lamarre Pratte): Mar 86. Montreal 15, CA Q3 Saint-Gérrard-Majella Church (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu 41, CA Q3 Saint-Thomas-d'Aquin Church (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Mar 68. Saint-Lambert 42, CA Q3 St. Gabriel's Church (Bird, John): Apr 66. Montreal 17, CA Q3 Residential architecture Lumières de la ville, Les (Reiner, Thomas Robert): March 87. Montreal 27, CA Q2 Îlots, Les (Ouellet, Reeves, Alain): Aug 71. Montreal 24, CA Q2 Jardins Merici, Les (Gauthier, Guité, Roy Architectes): Apr 75. Quebec 34, CA Q3 Pointe-Saint-Charles neighbourhood (unknown architect): [n/a] Montreal 10, CA Q3 Residential complex (Tornay, Edgar; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig): June 70. Île des Soeurs 45, CA Q3 Rowhouses Berlioz Street Row Housing (Hanganu, Dan S.): June 82. Île des Soeurs 43, CA Q3 Lumières de la ville, Les (Reiner, Thomas Robert): March 87. Montreal 27, CA Q2 Residential complex (Tornay, Edgar; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig): June 70. Île des Soeurs 45, CA Q3 Service stations Esso Station (Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig ): Oct 68. Île des Soeurs 44, CA Q3 Shopping malls Centre Eaton de Montréal (Montréal Eaton Centre) (Rose, Peter; Fichten, Soiferman, Architects): Jan 89. Montreal 34, CA Q1 Centre Rockland (Martin, Ian; Prus, Victor): Sept 59. Mont-Royal 29, CA Q3 Marché St Leonard (Colombani, Henri): Aug 85. Montreal 35, CA Q2 Place Ville Marie (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): June 62; Feb 63. Montreal 6-8, CA Q3 Terrasses, Les (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes, Housden): June 75. Montreal 20, CA Q3 Ski resorts Mont-Tremblant village (Hanganu, Dan S.): 1984. Mont-Tremblant 30, CA Q3 Sports complexes Parc Olympique (Moshe Safdie & Associates): Jan 88. Montreal 47-49, CA Q2 Squares (open spaces) Westmount Square (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Westmount 7, CA Q4 Stadiums Colisée du Québec (Bégin et Rodrigue Architectes): July 82. Quebec 33, CA Q3 Stock exchanges Place Victoria, Stock exchange tower (Tour de la Bourse) (Moretti, Luigi): July 1965. Montreal 18, CA Q3 Stores, Retail Drug, Le, Mountain Street (Rue de la Montagne) (Dallegret, François): July 65. Montreal 48, CA Q1 Subway stations Montreal Metro (Papineau Gerin-Lajoie LeBlanc; David, Jacques; Barott, Ernest Isbell; Boulva, Pierre; Prus, Victor): Feb 67. Montreal 4, CA Q4

95

Synagogues Temple Emanu-El-Beth Sholom (Roth, Max W.): March 58. Westmount 5, CA Q4 Theatres Comédie-Canadienne Theatre, La (Blouin, André): Sept 58. Montreal 39, CA Q1 Place des Arts (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): Nov 63. Montreal 2, CA Q3 Transportation structures Montreal-Dorval International Airport (Illsley, Templeton, Archibald; Larose and Larose): [n/a] Montreal 39, CA Q2 Universities and colleges Collège Jesus-Marie de Sillery (unknown architect): March 85. Sillery 6, CA Q4 Concordia University, Henry F. Hall building (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Montreal 43, CA Q1 Concordia University, Webster Library (Blouin and Associates; Werleman & Guy Architectes): Jan 89. Montreal 42, CA Q1 École professionelle de Saint-Hyacinthe (Allaire, Bergeron, Courchesne, Henderson): [n/a] Saint-Hyacinthe 40, CA Q3 McGill University, Lab & dorms (Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine): Mar 66. Mont-Saint-Hilaire 39, CA Q3 McGill University, Loyola College, Father's residence (Affleck, Desbarats, Dimakopoulos, Lebensold and Sise): [n/a] Montreal 28, CA Q2 McGill University, Stewart Biological Sciences Building (Dobush, Stewart, Bourke; Bland, Lemoyne, Edwards, Shine): June 66. Montreal 36, CA Q2 Université de Montréal (Cormier, Ernest): [n/a] Montreal 22, CA Q3 Université de Montréal, Garage Louis-Colin (Ouellet, Reeves, Alain): 1970 Y.B. Montreal 23, CA Q3 Université de Montréal, School of Architecture (unknown architect): July 80. Montreal 24, CA Q3 Université du Québec a Montréal (Saia & Barbarese, Architectes): [n/a] Montreal 25, CA Q3 Urban parks Mont-Royal Park: [n/a] Montreal 40, CA Q2

96

APPENDIX A.2 Toronto Subject Index TORONTO: BUILDING NAME
1 Richmond Street West C Toronto (ON) N Bay Street Corridor, Toronto A Page & Steele Architects P Lenscape Incorporated S Office buildings CA May 84; Nov 87 FB Toronto 24, CA T8 F 2009.002.868

14 Thorncrest Road
C N A S FB F Toronto (ON) Etobicoke-Lakeshore (Toronto, ON) Millar, Charles Blakeway Residential houses Toronto 22, CA T8 2009.002.866

20 Adelaide Street East C Toronto (ON) N Bay Street Corridor, Toronto A Page & Steele Architects S Office buildings; Commercial buildings CA May 87 FB Toronto 20, CA T8 F 2009.002.864 21 Avenue Rd C N A P S FB F

Toronto (ON) Yorkville (Toronto, ON) Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden N & H Studio Commercial buildings Toronto 1, CA T1 2009.002.1061

30 St. Clair Avenue West
C N A P S CA FB F Toronto (ON) Yonge-St Clair (Toronto, ON) Page & Steele Architects Spalding-Smith, Fiona Office buildings; Commercial buildings Nov 87 Toronto 19, CA T8 2009.002.863

97

44-46 Castle Frank Road
C

N
A P S FB F

Toronto (ON) Rosedale (Toronto, ON) Satok & Poizner N & H Studio Residential houses Toronto 18, CA T8 2009.002.862

45 Charles Street East
C

N
A P S FB F

Toronto (ON) Church and Wellesley (Toronto, ON) Fairfield and Dubois Panda Photography Office buildings Toronto 17, CA T8 2009.002.861

45, 47 and 49 Front Street East
C N A S CA FB F 59 Dunloe Road C N A S CA FB F Toronto (ON) St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) Stone & Kohn Architects Cultural property; Office buiding May 84 Toronto 16, CA T8 2009.002.860

Toronto (ON) Forest Hill (Toronto, ON) Montgomery and Sisam Residential houses Nov 87 Toronto 7, CA T9 2009.002.859

70 University Avenue
C N A P S CA FB F Toronto (ON) Financial District (Toronto, ON) Strong & Associates Applied Photography Ltd. Office buiding; Skyscrapers Jul 86; Nov 84 Toronto 15, CA T8 2009.002.858

70 York Street
C N A S Toronto (ON) Financial District (Toronto, ON) Page & Steele Architects Office buiding; Skyscrapers

98

CA FB F

May 88 (Persp) Toronto 14, CA T8 2009.002.857

90 Adelaide Street West
C N

A
S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) Financial District (Toronto, ON) Adamson Associates Office building Aug 85 Toronto 2, CA T12 2009.002.737

95 Wellington Street West
C N A S CA FB F Toronto (ON) Financial District (Toronto, ON) Pellow + Associates Architects Office buiding; Skyscrapers Nov 86 Toronto 15, CA T4 2009.002.855

163 Queen Street East C Toronto (ON) N Moss Park (Toronto, ON) A Jones and Kirkland S Office buiding CA June 89 FB Toronto 10, CA T8 F 2009.002.852

184 Roxborough Drive
C

N
A S FB F

Toronto (ON) Summerhill (Toronto, ON) Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita Architects, Engineers and Planners Residential houses Toronto 9, CA T8 2009.002.850

484 Avenue Road apartments
C N

A
S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) Yonge-St Clair (Toronto, ON) Bregman and Hamann Apartment buildings July 1958 Toronto 6, CA T8 2009.002.846

505 Broadview Avenue
C

N

Toronto (ON) Riverdale (Toronto, ON)

99

P S FB F

Burrow, Gordon Pavements, Concrete; Residential houses Toronto 5, CA T8 2009.002.845

1166 Bay Street
C N S CA FB F Toronto (ON) Yorkville (Toronto, ON) Condominiums (Housing) Dec 80 Toronto 4, CA T8 2009.002.844

A
Aerial views, Toronto C Toronto (ON) S Aerial photographs FB CA O2, Oversize Administration Park C Scarborough (ON) A Medwecki, Joseph P Panda Photography S Commercial buildings FB Toronto 27, CA T6 F 2009.002.518 Albert Campbell Library C Scarborough (ON) A Fairfield and Dubois P Perron, Robert S Libraries CA Jan 72 FB Toronto 26, CA T6 F 2009.002.519 Alexandra Park housing cooperative C Toronto (ON) N Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) A Ontario Housing Corporation P Jowett, Henry Roger S Apartment houses; Residential houses FB Toronto 1, CA T8 F 2009.002.841 Amherst Veterinary Hospital C Scarborough (ON) A Elken & Bechstead P Panda Photography S Animal hospitals CA Nov 58

100

FB F

Toronto 25, CA T6 2009.002.520

Amsterdam Café, York Quay Centre C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) A Clarke, Andrew; Jones, Jedd P Applied Photography Ltd. S Cafes CA Sept 88 FB Toronto 18, CA T7 F 2009.002.838 Art Gallery of Ontario, exhibitions, "Contemporary Furnishings" C Toronto (ON) N Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) A Parkin Partnership Architects S Art galleries; Museum architecture CA Aug 58 FB Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 F 2009.002.012 Art Gallery of Ontario, exhibitions, "The Bauhaus: 50 Years" C Toronto (ON) N Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) A Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Gropius, Walter S Art galleries; Museum architecture; Exhibition buildings FB Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 F 2009.002.012 Art Gallery of Ontario, exterior & plans C Toronto (ON) N Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) A Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects; Zeidler Roberts Partnership; Moriyama & Teshima Architects; A.J Diamond & Partners; Parkin Partnership Architects P Applied Photography Ltd. S Art galleries; Museum architecture CA April 87; Feb 75 FB Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 F 2009.002.012 Art Gallery of Ontario, Henry Moore Gallery C Toronto (ON) N Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) A Parkin Partnership Architects P Applied Photography Ltd. S Art galleries; Museum architecture FB Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 F 2009.002.012 Art Gallery of Ontario, interiors C Toronto (ON)

101

N A P S FB F Atria North C N A P S CA FB F Atrium on Bay C N A S CA FB F

Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) Parkin Partnership Architects Applied Photography Ltd. Art galleries; Museum architecture Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 2009.002.012

Toronto (ON) Church-Yonge Corridor (Toronto, ON) The Thom Partnership Spalding-Smith, Fiona Office buiding; Atriums April 1972; July 1984; April 1980; Feb 1980; Sept 1980 Toronto 17, CA T7 2009.002.836 Toronto (ON) Bay Street Corridor (Toronto, ON) Page & Steele Architects Office buiding; Atriums June/July 83 Toronto 5, CA T7 2009.002.715

Avoca Apartments Ltd. C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-St Clair (Toronto, ON) A Seligman & Dick Architects P Panda Photography S Apartment buildings CA Mar 71; Jan 69 FB Toronto 23, CA T8 F 2009.002.867

B
Baas Studio Gallery (322 King Street West) C Toronto (ON) N Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) S Office building CA June 81 FB Toronto 4, CA T9 F 2009.002.833 Baldwin & Franklin Architects office (167 Richmond Street West) C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Baldwin & Franklin Architects Inc. P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Office building CA Apr 81 FB Toronto 25, CA T4

102

F

2009.002.851

Balmoral Estates C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-St Clair (Toronto, ON) A Lipson and Dashkin Architects P Jones, Edward S Residential houses; Apartment houses FB Toronto 3, CA T9 F 2009.002.832 Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Scolozzi, Francesco S Bank buildings CA Jan 85 FB Toronto 9, CA T9 F 2009.002.831 Bank of Nova Scotia, branch bank C Toronto (ON) N Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) A Eadie, Arthur H. S Bank buildings CA Jan 58; July 79 FB Toronto 11, CA T9; Toronto 8, CA T13 F 2009.002.822; 2009.002.035 Bank of Nova Scotia, branch bank (Bloor St & Spadina Rd) C Toronto (ON) N Annex (Toronto, ON) A Eadie, Arthur H. S Bank buildings CA Jan 58 FB Toronto 14, CA T2 F 2009.002.1107 Bathurst Quay, Harbourfront revitalization project C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) S Renovation (Architecture) CA Sept 86 FB Toronto 8, CA T9 F 2009.002.830 Bay Charles Towers (55 Charles Street West) C Toronto (ON) N Bay Street Corridor (Toronto, ON) A Klein and Sears P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Apartment houses CA Oct 81

103

FB F

Toronto 25, CA T8 2009.002.829

Bedford Glen (1555 Avenue Road) C North York (ON) A Annau Associates Architects P Panda Photography S Condominiums (Housing) CA Dec 80 FB Toronto 3 + 1 oversize, CA T8 F 2009.002.843 Bell Canada Administration Centre C Scarborough (ON) A Shore, Tilbe, Henschel, Irwin, Peters S Administration buildings FB Toronto 24, CA T6 F 2009.002.522 Bell Trinity Square C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-Dundas (Toronto, ON) A Parkin Partnership Architects P James, Art S Office buildings CA Jan 85 FB Toronto 6, CA T9 F 2009.002.827 Bellmere Public School C Scarborough (ON) A Andrews, John S Elementary school buildings CA Aug 66 FB Toronto 23, CA T6 F 2009.002.523 Belmont House Home for the Aged (55 Belmont Street) C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-St Clair (Toronto, ON) A Montgomery and Sisam S Housing for the elderly FB Toronto 15, CA T10 F 2009.002.826 Beth David Synagogue (7 Sultan Street) C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A Grossman, Irving S Synagogue architecture FB Toronto 10, CA T9 F 2009.002.825

104

Beth Tzedec Synagogue C Toronto (ON) N Forest Hill (Toronto, ON) A Page & Steele Architects; Markus, Isadore; Kohl, Harry B. S Synagogue architecture CA March 58 FB Toronto 13, CA T9 F 2009.002.824 Black Creek Pioneer Village Visitor's Centre C North York (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates S Museum architecture CA Dec 68 FB Toronto 12, CA T9 F 2009.002.823 Black Residence C A S CA FB F Bridlewood C P S FB F Brimley Acres C A P S FB F

Don Mills (ON) Hix, John Residential houses Jul-85 Toronto 1, CA T10 2009.002.247

Scarborough (ON) McLeod, Ron Apartment houses Toronto 22, CA T6 2009.002.532

Scarborough (ON) Jackson Ypes & Associates Tomiczek, Leonard Apartment houses; Residential houses Toronto 16, CA T9 2009.002.821

British American Oil Company Ltd., Ontario Division C Toronto (ON) A Crang & Boake Inc. P B-A Oil Photo S Office building CA Jan 61; Aug 66 FB Toronto 13, CA T4 F 2009.002.834 Brookbanks Community Library C Don Mills (ON) A Banz, Brook, Carruthers, Grierson, Shaw S Libraries

105

CA FB F Burns Hall C A P S CA FB F

Jan 70 Toronto 15, CA T9 2009.002.819

North York (ON) A.J Diamond & Partners Evans, Steven; Poirier, Mario Military education; College buildings June 89 Toronto 11, CA T1; CA O2, oversize 2009.002.420

C
Canada Malting Company Silos C Toronto (ON) A Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects S Grain elevators FB Toronto 14, CA T9 F 2009.002.817 Canada Place C A S CA FB F Canada Trust C N A P S CA FB F

Scarborough (ON) Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden Government buildings Dec-84 Toronto 20, CA T6 2009.002.525

Toronto (ON) Financial District (Toronto, ON) Crang & Boake Inc.; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Parkin, John Burnett; Bregman and Hamann Panda Photography Office building; Skyscrapers June 68 Toronto 16, CA T4 2009.002.017

Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Markson, Jerome S Bank buildings CA Nov 81 FB Toronto 19, CA T9 F 2009.002.806 Canadian Magazine (200 Adelaide Street West) C Toronto (ON) N Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) S Office buiding

106

CA FB F

Dec 83; Dec 80 Toronto 8, CA T8 2009.002.849

Canadian National Exhibition (CNE) grounds C Toronto (ON) N Niagara neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A Page & Steele Architects P Warner Photographic Ltd. S Exhibition buildings CA April 58 FB Toronto 22, CA T9 F 2009.002.803 Carling building C S CA FB F Casa Loma C N S FB F

Toronto (ON) Office building Jan 59 Toronto 13, CA T10 2009.002.816

Toronto (ON) Annex (Toronto, ON) Museum architecture; Cultural property Toronto 18, CA T9 2009.002.815

Cathedral Church of St. James C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) S Church buildings FB Toronto 21, CA T3 F 2009.002.1120 Centenary Hospital C Scarborough (ON) P Panda Photography S Hospitals FB Toronto 19, CA T6 F 2009.002.526 Central Technical School C Toronto (ON) N Little Italy (Toronto, ON) A Fairfield (Robert) Associates P Panda Photography S High school buildings CA July 63 and 64 FB Toronto 25, CA T9 F 2009.002.812

107

Chapel Glen C A P S CA FB F

Don Mills (ON) Boigon and Heinonen Proulx, Michel Office building; Skyscrapers June 72 Toronto 24, CA T9 2009.002.811

Charles O. Bick Police College C Scarborough (ON) A Wilson, Newton, Roberts, Duncan Architects S College buildings CA Feb 80 FB Toronto 23, CA T9 F 2009.002.810 CHDC residences C Etobicoke (ON) A Fleiss, Henry P Panda Photography S Residential houses FB Toronto 15, CA T5 F 2009.002.257 Chiat/Day office C N A S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) Frank O. Gehry and Associates, Inc.; Fujiwara, David Office building May & June 89 CA O2, oversize 2009.002.808

CIL House offices C Toronto (ON) N Yorkville (Toronto, ON) A Shore, Tilbe, Henschel, Irwin, Peters; Kwok, Stanley P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Corporate headquarters buildings; Office building CA Jun/Jul 82 FB Toronto 30-31, CA T9 F 2009.002.016 City TV and Much Music C Toronto (ON) N Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) A Quadrangle Architects Limited S Television stations CA Sept 87 FB Toronto 29 + 1 oversize, CA T9 F 2009.002.804

108

Civic Garden Centre C Don Mills (ON) A Markson, Jerome; Moriyama, Raymond P N & H Studio S Horticultural buildings CA Apr 66 FB Toronto 11, CA T14 F 2009.002.032 CN Tower C N A P S CA FB F Coakwell Close C A S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) WZMH Architects; Andrews, John Panda Photography Skyscrapers May 87; Feb 86; Jan 75; May 71; Nov 84; Sept 86 Toronto 2 + 1 oversize, CA T13 2009.002.031

Toronto (ON) Cowle, John Renovation (Architecture); Row houses Oct 89 Toronto 27, CA T9 2009.002.801

College of Nurses of Ontario C Toronto (ON) N Yorkville (Toronto, ON) A Parkin Partnership Architects S College buildings CA Feb 86; Feb 85 FB CA O2, oversize F 2009.002.800 Colonnade (131 Bloor Street West) C Toronto (ON) N Yorkville (Toronto, ON) A Tampold & Wells S Condominium office buildings CA May 71 FB Toronto 12, CA T8 F 2009.002.854 Commerce Court C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Page & Steele Architects; Pei, Ieoh Ming S Office building CA Mar 73 FB Toronto 5, CA T10 F 2009.002.799

109

Confederation Life C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A The Thom Partnership S Office building CA Aug 70; June 84 FB Toronto 28, CA T9 F 2009.002.022 Courtesy Chevrolet Oldsmobile C Etobicoke (ON) A Strong & Associates S Office building CA Jan 82 FB Toronto 11, CA T10 F 2009.002.809 Crang & Boake Architects office C Toronto (ON) A Crang & Boake Inc. P Panda Photography S Office building CA Aug 65 FB Toronto 10, CA T10 F 2009.002.797 Crombie Park apartments C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) A Grossman, Irving S Apartment buildings CA June 81 FB Toronto 7, CA T10 F 2009.002.795 Cumberland Court C Toronto (ON) N Yorkville (Toronto, ON) P N & H Studio S Commercial buildings CA Mar 74 FB Toronto 4, CA T7 F 2009.002.793

D
Devonsleigh Place C Scarborough (ON) A Stecura, Ihor S Residential houses CA Feb 84 FB Toronto 17, CA T10 F 2009.002.791

110

Don Corning building C Toronto (ON) A Fairfield and Dubois P Jowett, Henry Roger S Office building CA June 66 FB Toronto 18, CA T10 F 2009.002.790 Don Mills Centre C Don Mills (ON) A John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers P Shawcroft, Brian S Shopping centers CA Sept 57 FB Toronto 2, CA T10 F 2009.002.249 Don Valley Woods C Toronto (ON) N Thorncliffe (Toronto, ON) A Murray, James D.; Klein and Sears P Newton, Neil S Apartment houses CA Feb 57; Aug 66 FB Toronto 4, CA T10 F 2009.002.789 Dorothy Cameron Gallery Ltd. C Toronto (ON) P Reeves, John S Art galleries CA July 64 FB Toronto 19, CA T10 F 2009.002.788 Dunlop Architects office C Toronto (ON) A Dunlop-Farrow Architects Inc. S Office building FB Toronto 20, CA T10 F 2009.002.785 Dynamic Funds of Canada C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Shuster, Matthew S Office building CA Nov 85 FB Toronto 21, CA T10 F 2009.002.784

111

E
Eatonville Branch Library C Etobicoke (ON) P Newton, Neil S Libraries FB Toronto 14, CA T5 F 2009.002.258 Edgeley in the Village C North York (ON) A Grossman, Irving P Clark, Clive S Apartment houses CA Aug 71 FB Toronto 23, CA T10 F 2009.002.782 Ed's Warehouse C N S FB F

Toronto (ON) Annex (Toronto, ON) Commercial buildings Toronto 22, CA T10 2009.002.783

Educational buildings, Toronto C Toronto (ON) A Robbie, Roderick George S Schools; Education buildings CA March 71; Feb 72 FB Toronto 15, CA T3 F 2009.002.1110 Electrical Reduction Plant C Toronto (ON) A Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden P Jowett, Henry Roger S Office building CA Nov 66 FB Toronto 24, CA T10 F 2009.002.781 Etobicoke Education Centre C Etobicoke (ON) A Shore and Moffat S Education buildings CA Jun-70 FB Toronto 11, CA T5 F 2009.002.259

112

F
Facelle Corporation C Toronto (ON) A Montgomery and Sisam S Office building CA Nov-82 FB Toronto 25, CA T10 F 2009.002.779 Fairview Mall C A P S CA FB F

Don Mills (ON) Bregman and Hamann Panda Photography Shopping centers Nov 85; May 71, Oct 70 Toronto 26, CA T10 2009.002.036

FCI Canada Inc. (Burndy) (1530 Birchmount Road) C Scarborough (ON) A Crang & Boake Inc. P Legg Brothers Limited S Office building CA Oct 57 FB Toronto 21, CA T6 F 2009.002.524 Fifth Church of Christ Scientist C Toronto (ON) P Lawrence Park (Toronto, ON) S Church buildings CA March 58 FB Toronto 27, CA T10 F 2009.002.778 Firehall Number Eight C Toronto (ON) P Webber, Ray S Firehalls FB Toronto 28, CA T10 F 2009.002.777 Fischbach & Moore offices C Etobicoke (ON) A Fairfield and Dubois S Office building CA Jan-70 FB Toronto 12, CA T5 F 2009.002.260

113

Flemingdon Park C Toronto (ON) N Flemingdon Park (Toronto, ON) A Grossman, Irving P Green, Seymour S Apartment houses CA Apr 67; May 61 FB Toronto 30, CA T10 F 2009.002.775 Forest Valley Day Camp C Toronto (ON) N Bathurst Manor (Toronto, ON) A Sprachman, Mandel P Jowett, Henry Roger S Recreation buildings CA Mar 65 FB Toronto 31, CA T10 F 2009.002.774 Four Seasons Sheraton Hotel C Toronto (ON) N Niagara neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A Searle, Wilbee, Rowland P Clark, Clive S Hotels (public accomodations) FB Toronto 26, CA T8 F 2009.002.773 Fraser residence C A P S FB F

Toronto (ON) Thom, Ron J. Jowett, Henry Roger Residential houses Toronto 1, CA T11 2009.002.772

G
Garden Court apartments C Toronto (ON) N Mount Pleasant (Toronto, ON) A Page & Steele Architects S Apartment houses CA July 58 FB Toronto 10, CA T4 F 2009.002.1132 Gasworks C A S CA

Toronto (ON) Brown, Roy Renovation (Architecture); Urban renewal May 71

114

FB F

Toronto 2, CA T11 2009.002.770

George Brown College, St James Campus C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) A Day, Fraser; Perron, Robert S College buildings FB Toronto 3, CA T11 F 2009.002.769 Gloucester Mansion C Toronto (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates P Clark, Clive S Commercial buildings; Residential houses CA Y.B '67 FB Toronto 5, CA T11 F 2009.002.768 Gooderham building C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) S Office building; Cultural property CA May 85 FB Toronto 29, CA T10 F 2009.002.776 Green residence C A S CA FB F

North York (ON) Klein and Sears Residential houses Dec 61 Toronto 15, CA T1 2009.002.423

Guaranty Trust Computer Centre C Toronto (ON) A Dunlop-Farrow Architects Inc.; Zeidler Roberts Partnership P Lenscape Incorporated S Office building CA Oct 87 FB Toronto 29, CA T11 F 2009.002.744

H
Harbour Castle Hilton C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) S Hotels (public accomodations) CA Apr 86 FB Toronto 7, CA T11

115

F

2009.002.764

Harbour Terrace, Queen's Quay C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) A Li Architects Inc. P Applied Photography Ltd. S Condominiums (Housing) CA Sept 86 FB Toronto 11, CA T2 F 2009.002.546 Harbourfront Centre C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) S Exhibition buildings; Commercial buildings CA Jan & Sept 86 FB Toronto 10, CA T11 F 2009.002.762 Harold & Grace Baker Centre C Toronto (ON) N Beechborough-Greenbrook (Toronto, ON) A Sievenpiper, Ted S Housing for the elderly CA Aug 85 FB Toronto 8, CA T11 F 2009.002.763 Hazelton residence (33 Hazelton Avenue) C Toronto (ON) N Yorkville (Toronto, ON) S Residential houses FB Toronto 20, CA T9 F 2009.002.807 Hockey Hall of Fame C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) A Darling & Curry P Mickler, Denis S Museum architecture CA May 71 FB Toronto 2, CA T14 F 2009.002.018 Hoskin residence C Toronto (ON) S Residential houses CA Oct 85 FB Toronto 17, CA T11 F 2009.002.760

116

Hospital for Sick Children (drawing) C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A Zeidler Roberts Partnership S Hospitals CA Dec 86 FB Toronto 16, CA T11 F 2009.002.761 Hotel Admiral (249 Queen's Quay West) C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) S Hotels (public accomodations) CA Sept 86 FB Toronto 2, CA T8 F 2009.002.842 House design model C Toronto (ON) A Brock & Ritz S Residential houses CA Jan 86 FB Toronto 9, CA T10 F 2009.002.847 Howard residence C Toronto (ON) A Young & Wright Architects P Samson, Ian S Residential houses FB Toronto 19, CA T11 F 2009.002.758 Humbermede Junior High School C North York (ON) A Adamson, Gordon S. P Jowett, Henry Roger S High school buildings FB Toronto 12, CA T1 F 2009.002.424 Hyatt Regency Hotel C Toronto (ON) N Moss Park (Toronto, ON) A Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden P N & H Studio S Hotels (public accomodations) CA Feb 73 FB Toronto 4, CA T14 F 2009.002.020 Hylands residence C Toronto (ON)

117

A S CA FB F

Natale Scott Browne Residential houses Oct 87 Toronto 20 + 1 oversize, CA T11 2009.002.756

I
IBM Distribution Centre C Don Mills (ON) A Neish Owen Rowland & Roy Architects, Engineers, and Planners; Crang & Boake Inc. P Panda Photography S Office building CA Oct 70; Jun/Jul 83 FB Toronto 21, CA T11 F 2009.002.754 Italian Trade Commission office C Toronto (ON) N Bay Street Corridor (Toronto, ON) A Scolozzi, Francesco P Applied Photography Ltd. S Office building CA Apr 85 FB Toronto 23, CA T11 F 2009.002.750

J
Jane Junior High School C North York (ON) A Boigon and Heinonen P Jowett, Henry Roger S High school buildings CA May 69 FB Toronto 13, CA T1 F 2009.002.426 Jerome Markson townhouse C Toronto (ON) A Markson, Jerome S Residential houses CA May 63 FB Toronto 25, CA T11 F 2009.002.747 Joseph Brant Public School C Scarborough (ON) A Craig Zeidler Strong S Elementary school buildings CA Aug-72 FB Toronto 16, CA T6 F 2009.002.529

118

Joseph Shepard Federal office building C Toronto (ON) N Bloor & Yonge (Toronto, ON) A DuBois Associates, Architects, Planners P Applied Photography Ltd. S Office building FB CA T11, folder 26 F 2009.002.049

K
Kenton Drive Public School C North York (ON) A Pentland & Baker P Panda Photography S Elementary school buildings CA Jan 57 FB Toronto 14, CA T1 F 2009.002.427 King's Landing complex, Building B C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) P Lenscape Incorporated S Apartment buildings CA Sept 85; Sept 86 FB Toronto 28, CA T11 F 2009.002.745 Kingsmill Vocational School C Etobicoke (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates P Jowett, Henry Roger S Elementary school buildings CA March 67 FB Toronto 13, CA T5 F 2009.002.261

L
La Cantinetta restaurant (322 King Street West) C Toronto (ON) N Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) A Barton Myers Associates, Architects and Planners P Samson, Ian S Restaurants. FB Toronto 7, CA T8 F 2009.002.848 Lawrence Avenue office C Scarborough (ON) A Ferdinand Wagner Architect

119

S CA FB F

Office building Feb-80 Toronto 12, CA T6 2009.002.530

Lord Simcoe Hotel C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Langston, Henry T. S Hotels (public accomodations) CA Nov 79 FB Toronto 6, CA T3 F 2009.002.1099 Lothian Mews C N A P S FB F

Toronto (ON) Yorkville (Toronto, ON) Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden Jowett, Henry Roger Shopping centers Toronto 30, CA T11 2009.002.039

Lyndhurst Hospital C Toronto (ON) N Mount Pleasant (Toronto, ON) S Hospitals FB Toronto 31, CA T11 F 2009.002.741

M
Manors of Brandywine C Scarborough (ON) A Fleiss, Henry S Residential houses CA Feb 80 FB Toronto 32, CA T11 F 2009.002.740 Manulife Centre C N A S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) Bloor & Yonge (Toronto, ON) Marani, Rounthwaite & Dick, Architects Office building Aug 68; July 67 Toronto 33, CA T11 2009.002.739

Manulife North Tower C Toronto (ON) N Church and Wellesley (Toronto, ON) A Clifford Lawrie Bolton Ritchie Architects

120

P S CA FB F

Spalding-Smith, Fiona Office building; Corporate headquarters buildings March 81 Toronto 34, CA T11 2009.002.738

Maple Leaf Gardens C Toronto (ON) N Church and Wellesley (Toronto, ON) S Hockey arenas; Cultural property CA Nov 70 FB Toronto 1, CA T12 F 2009.002.037 Market Galleria Lofts (71 Front Street East) C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) A Moriyama & Teshima Architects S Condominiums (Housing) CA Apr 81 FB Toronto 13, CA T8 F 2009.002.856 Market Square Condominiums C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) A Markson, Jerome P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Condominiums (Housing) CA May 85 FB Toronto 3, CA T12 F 2009.002.736 Markleargelo's Restaurant C Toronto (ON) N Bloor & Yonge (Toronto, ON) A Ridgely, Gordon P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Restaurants CA Nov 81 FB Toronto 4, CA T12 F 2009.002.735 Martin Grove Estates C Etobicoke (ON) A Markson, Jerome S Residential houses CA May-72 FB Toronto 10, CA T5 F 2009.002.262 Mauran residence, 95 Ardwold Gate C Toronto (ON)

121

A S CA FB F

Kapsi, Taivo Residential houses Apr 68 Toronto 5, CA T12 2009.002.733

McCleary Towers C Toronto (ON) N Riverdale (Toronto, ON) S Apartment buildings CA July 85 FB Toronto 6, CA T12 F 2009.002.731 McDonald's restaurant C Toronto (ON) A Markson, Jerome P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Restaurants CA Nov 85 FB Toronto 7, CA T12 F 2009.002.730 Menkes Corporate Plaza C North York (ON) A Adamson Associates P Applied Photography Ltd. S Office building CA Aug 85 FB Toronto 8, CA T12 F 2009.002.729 Meteorological Headquarters building C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) A Boigon and Heinonen P Realisation S Corporate headquarters buildings CA June 72 FB Toronto 9, CA T12 F 2009.002.019 Metro Toronto Reference Library C Toronto (ON) N Yorkville (Toronto, ON) A Moriyama, Raymond S Libraries CA July 84; July 82 FB Toronto 10, CA T12 F 2009.002.047 Metro Toronto Police Marine Unit Building C Toronto (ON)

122

A S CA FB F

Crang & Boake Inc. Police buildings; Marinas Sept 85 Toronto 11, CA T12 2009.002.048

Metropolitan Toronto West Regional Detention Centre C Etobicoke (ON) A Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita Architects, Engineers and Planners S Police buildings CA May 84 FB Toronto 12, CA T12 F 2009.002.504 Metropolitan Toronto School Board offices C Toronto (ON) N Lawrence Park (Toronto, ON) S Education buildings CA Feb 85 FB Toronto 13-14, CA T12 F 2009.002.503 Metropolitan Toronto Convention Centre C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Crang & Boake Inc. S Exhibition buildings CA Nov 84; Nov 83 FB Toronto 27-29 + 2 oversize, CA T8 F 2009.002.505 Milliken Public School C Scarborough (ON) A Ingleson, A.M. S Elementary school buildings CA Feb 84 FB Toronto 15, CA T6 F 2009.002.531 Monarch Park Collegiate C Toronto (ON) N Greenwood-Coxwell (Toronto, ON) S High school buildings; Auditoriums CA Jan 65 FB Toronto 15, CA T12 F 2009.002.502 Munk residence C A S FB F

Toronto (ON) Markson, Jerome Residential houses; Landscape design Toronto 16, CA T12 2009.002.499

123

Myers residence (19 Berryman Street) C Toronto (ON) N Yorkville (Toronto, ON) A Diamond and Myers; Myers, Barton S Residential houses CA April 73 FB Toronto 5, CA T9 F 2009.002.835

N
Nash residence C A P S CA FB F Neilson building C A P S CA FB F Toronto (ON) Markson, Jerome Jones, Edward Residential houses; Row houses Feb 71 Toronto 2, CA T1 2009.002.1062

Toronto (ON) Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden Jowett, Henry Roger Office building Mar 63 Toronto 4, CA T1 2009.002.1064

New York Life building C Toronto (ON) A Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden P Jowett, Henry Roger S Office building CA Nov 87 FB Toronto 5, CA T1 F 2009.002.1065 Norman Bethune-Tim Buck Education Centre C Toronto (ON) N Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) A Turner, Peter S Education buildings FB Toronto 21, CA T1 F 2009.002.1072 North American Life Centre (Xerox Tower) C North York (ON) A Adamson Associates P Lenscape Incorporated S Office building; Skyscrapers CA Apr 85

124

FB F

Toronto 6, CA T1 2009.002.1066

North Bathurst Talmud Torah School C North York (ON) A Weir, Cripps & Associates S High school buildings CA May 58 FB Toronto 7, CA T1 F 2009.002.1067 North Bridlewood Junior Public School C Scarborough (ON) A Walker, Howard V. P Jowett, Henry Roger S Elementary school buildings CA Feb 68 FB Toronto 8, CA T1 F 2009.002.1068 North York City Hall C North York (ON) P Applied Photography Ltd. S Government buildings FB Toronto 9, CA T1 F 2009.002.038 North York Medical Arts building C North York (ON) A Markson, Jerome P Jowett, Henry Roger S Health and welfare centres CA Sept 71 FB Toronto 10, CA T1 F 2009.002.1069 Northeast Court restaurant development C Toronto (ON) N L'Amoreaux (Toronto, ON) A Szeto, Alfred S Restaurants CA Feb 84 FB Toronto 22, CA T1 F 2009.002.1071 Northview Heights Collegiate C North York (ON) A Pentland & Baker P Panda Photography S High school buildings CA May 58 FB Toronto 16, CA T1 F 2009.002.428

125

Now Magazine C N A S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) Church-Yonge Corridor (Toronto, ON) Ferguson Ferguson Architects Office building Feb 85 Toronto 24, CA T1 2009.002.1074

O
The Oaklands Condominium and Housing Project C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-St Clair (Toronto, ON) A DuBois Plumb & Associates P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Condominium office buildings; Apartment houses CA Jan 82 FB Toronto 23, CA T1; CA O2, oversize F 2009.002.1073 O'Keefe Centre C N A P S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) Page & Steele Architects; Morgan, Earle C. Panda Photography Music-halls; Theaters Mar 61; May 71 Toronto 3, CA T14 2009.002.033

Olivetti Canada Headquarters C Toronto (ON) A Scolozzi, Francesco P Applied Photography Ltd. S Office building CA Nov 85 FB Toronto 25, CA T1 F 2009.002.1075 One West Mall C A S CA FB F

Etobicoke (ON) Chapman, Howard P. Apartment houses May-63 Toronto 9, CA T5 2009.002.263

Ontario Association of Architects Headquarters C Don Mills (ON) S Corporate headquarters buildings; Office buiding CA Nov-92

126

FB F

Toronto 10, CA T7 2009.002.429

Ontario Museum Association building C Toronto (ON) N Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) A Diamond and Myers P Silva, Karl S Office buildings CA June 71 FB Toronto 26, CA T1 F 2009.002.1076 Ontario Nursing Association building C Toronto (ON) S Office buildings CA Feb 86 FB Toronto 25, CA T3 F 2009.002.1078 Ontario Place C N A P S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) Niagara neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) Craig Zeidler Strong Sliva, Karl; Nakashima, Hiro Exhibition buildings Apr 71; Jun 71 Toronto 1, CA T14 2009.002.043

Ontario Power building C Toronto (ON) N Bay Street Corridor (Toronto, ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates S Office building; Skyscrapers CA Feb 76 FB Toronto 1, CA T2 F 2009.002.1077 Our Lady Queen of Croatia Church C Toronto (ON) N Dufferin Grove (Toronto, ON) A Fisher, Tedman, Glaister S Church buildings CA Mar 68 FB Toronto 2, CA T2 F 2009.002.1080

P
Pantages Theatre C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-Dundas (Toronto, ON)

127

A P S CA FB F

David K. Mesbur Architect Ltd. Spalding-Smith, Fiona Theaters Oct 89 Toronto 3, CA T2 2009.002.1081

Pascal's Warehouse & Showroom C Scarborough (ON) A Nightingale and Quigley Architects S Office building CA Feb-80 FB Toronto 14, CA T6 F 2009.002.533 Pearson International Airport, Old Terminal 1 C Toronto (ON) A John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers P Jowett, Henry Roger S Airport buildings; Airport concourses; Airport parking lots CA May 58; Jan 65; Feb 64; Apr 72 FB Toronto 9-10, CA T13 F 2009.002.003 Phantom Industries C North York (ON) A The Thom Partnership S Office buildings CA Apr/Jul 84 FB Toronto 5, CA T2 F 2009.002.1084 Photoengravers & Electrotypers Plant C Etobicoke (ON) A Mathers & Haldenby S Office buildings CA Nov-72 FB Toronto 8, CA T5 F 2009.002.264 Police Marine Depots C Scarborough (ON) S Police buildings CA May-88 FB Toronto 13, CA T6 F 2009.002.534 Port Union Recreation Centre & Public Library C Scarborough (ON) A Annau Associates Architects S Libraries; Recreation buildings CA Jan-85 FB Toronto 11, CA T6

128

F Posluns house C A P S CA FB F

2009.002.535

Toronto (ON) Markson, Jerome Jowett, Henry Roger Residential houses July 64 Toronto 6, CA T2 2009.002.1085

Q
Queen's Quay boardwalk C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) A Li, Daniel S Urban renewal; Waterfronts CA Sept 86 FB Toronto 12, CA T2; CA O2, oversize F 2009.002.1087 Queen's Quay Terminal building C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) A Zeidler Roberts Partnership P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Condominiums (Housing); Office building CA Oct 85; Sept 86 FB Toronto 10, CA T2; CA O2, oversize F 2009.002.386

R
R.S. Kane Funeral Home C North York (ON) A Adamson Associates P Liana, P. S Funeral homes CA Nov 85 FB Toronto 15, CA T2 F 2009.002.1088 Ramada Renaissance Hotel C Toronto (ON) A Moffat & Duncan S Hotels (public accomodations) CA Feb-85 FB Toronto 16, CA T2 F 2009.002.1089

129

Refalmeen residence C Toronto (ON) P Evans, Steven S Residential houses FB Toronto 17, CA T2 F 2009.002.1091 Regent Park apartments C Toronto (ON) N Regent Park (Toronto, ON) A Page & Steele Architects S Apartment houses CA Sept 59 FB Toronto 7, CA T13 F 2009.002.007 Rhapsody Café & Bistro C Toronto (ON) A Pragnell, Peter S Restaurants CA March 87 FB Toronto 12, CA T3 F 2009.002.1092 Richview Public Library C Etobicoke (ON) A Dunlop, Wardell, Matsui, Aitken P Jowett, Henry Roger S Libraries CA Feb-67 FB Toronto 7, CA T5 F 2009.002.265 Rogers Center (Skydome) C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) A Crang & Boake Inc. S Stadiums CA May 86; May 87 FB Toronto 18, CA T2; CA O2, oversize F 2009.002.042 Rosegarden Mews C Toronto (ON) N Summerhill (Toronto, ON) A Annau Associates Architects P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Residential houses; Row houses CA March 83 FB Toronto 2, CA T3 F 2009.002.1094

130

Rothmans of Pall Mall Canada Ltd. C Don Mills (ON) P Newton, Neil S Office building FB Toronto 3, CA T3 F 2009.002.1095 Roy Thomson Hall C Toronto (ON) N Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) A Erickson, Arthur P Spalding-Smith, Fiona; Grant, Frank S Music-halls; Concert halls CA Sept & Oct 82 FB Toronto 17-18, CA T12 F 2009.002.001 Royal Bank Data Centre C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) A Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden S Office building; Bank buildings CA Sept 72 FB Toronto 4, CA T3 F 2009.002.1096 Royal Bank Plaza C Toronto (ON) N Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) A Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden S Office building; Bank buildings; Skyscrapers FB Toronto 5, CA T3 F 2009.002.1097 Ryerson Athletic Centre C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-Dundas (Toronto, ON) A Lett Smith Architects S Sports facilities FB CA O2, oversize F 2009.002.1101

S
S.A. Armstrong Ltd. C Scarborough (ON) S Office building CA Jul-89 FB Toronto 9, CA T6 F 2009.002.536 Saffer Cravit & Freedom Advirtising offices C Toronto (ON)

131

A P S CA FB F

Cravit Ortved Architects Burley, Robert Office building April 85 Toronto 7, CA T3 2009.002.1102

Saintfield Avenue house C Toronto (ON) N Mount Pleasant (Toronto, ON) A Markson, Jerome P Jowett, Henry Roger S Residential houses CA July 64 FB Toronto 8, CA T3 F 2009.002.1103 Sales centre for 132 Front Street East C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) S Condominium office buildings CA June 81 FB Toronto 11, CA T8 F 2009.002.853 Scaramouche Restaurant C Toronto (ON) S Restaurants CA Nov 81 FB Toronto 9, CA T3 F 2009.002.1104 Scarborough Civic Centre C Scarborough (ON) A Moriyama, Raymond P Applied Photography Ltd.; Panda Photography S Government buildings CA July 84; Jan 72 FB Toronto 18, CA T6 F 2009.002.527 Scarborough College C Scarborough (ON) A Andrews, John S College buildings CA May-66 FB Toronto 8, CA T6 F 2009.002.538 Sceptor Headquarters C Don Mills (ON) P Panda Photography S Office building

132

CA FB F

Jan 88 Toronto 2, CA T9 2009.002.431

Scotia Plaza (44 King Street West) C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden; Mathers & Haldenby S Office building; Bank buildings; Skyscrapers CA March 85 FB Toronto 11, CA T3 F 2009.002.1106 Sears house C A S CA FB F Seaview Hotel C P S FB F Shaarei Tefillah C A S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) DuBois, Mary; Klein, Jack; Sears, Henry Residential houses May 63 Toronto 13, CA T3 2009.002.1108

Toronto (ON) Clark, Clive Hotels (public accomodations) Toronto 14, CA T3 2009.002.1109

North York (ON) Grossman, Irving Synagogue architecture June 63 Toronto 16, CA T3 2009.002.1112

Sheppard Centre C North York (ON) S Shopping centers; Office building CA May 80 FB Toronto 17, CA T3 F 2009.002.1113 Sheraton Centre Hotel C Toronto (ON) N Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) A Parkin Partnership Architects P Panda Photography S Hotels (public accomodations) CA May 68 FB Toronto 9, CA T2 F 2009.002.1086

133

Simpson's Tower C Toronto (ON) N Bay Street Corridor (Toronto, ON) A John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Bregman and Hamann P Panda Photography S Office building CA May 69 FB Toronto 24, CA T3 F 2009.002.1115 Single family home renovation C Toronto (ON) A Ensslen, Harrald B. P Burley, Robert; Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Residential houses CA July 81; Aug 87 FB Toronto 18, CA T3 F 2009.002.1116 Sir William Osler Vocational School C Toronto (ON) A Ingleson, A.M. S High school buildings FB Toronto 19, CA T3 F 2009.002.1117 Southill Village C A P S CA FB F

Don Mills (ON) Murray, James D.; Fleiss, Henry Fleet, Max Residential houses Feb & Sept 57; July 58 Toronto 6, CA T7 2009.002.1098

Southern Pacific Hotels Services offices C Toronto (ON) A Markson, Jerome P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Office building CA Feb 81 FB Toronto 8, CA T2; CA O2, oversize F 2009.002.1118 St. Fidelius Parish C North York (ON) P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Church buildings CA Aug 81 FB Toronto 20, CA T3 F 2009.002.1119

134

St. James Anglican Church C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) A Taylor, Ron S Church buildings FB Toronto 21, CA T3 F 2009.002.1120 St. Joan of Arc Roman Catholic Church C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-St Clair (Toronto, ON) A Saccoccio, William S Church buildings CA Oct 67 FB Toronto 1, CA T4 F 2009.002.1123 St. Lawrence apartments C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) S Apartment houses CA Apr, May, June 81 FB Toronto 23, CA T3 F 2009.002.1122 St. Lawrence Market Hall C Toronto (ON) N St Lawrence (Toronto, ON) A Walker, Howard V. S Renovation (Architecture); Commercial buildings CA Apr 67; July 85; June 81 FB Toronto 1, CA T13 F 2009.002.045 St. Marks Presbyterian Church C Don Mills (ON) A John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers P Harris, David S Church buildings CA Y.B. '65 FB Toronto 1, CA T9 F 2009.002.250 Stephen Leacock Collegiate Institute C Scarborough (ON) A Ingleson, A.M. S Schools CA Oct 70; Mar 71 FB Toronto 3, CA T4 F 2009.002.1125 Suburban development C Etobicoke (ON)

135

S CA FB F

Residential houses May-63 Toronto 6, CA T5 2009.002.267

Summerhill Canadian Pacific Railway Station C Toronto (ON) N Bloor & Yonge (Toronto, ON) A Pearson and Darling S Railroad stations CA Aug 68 FB Toronto 3, CA T1 F 2009.002.1063 Sunlife Tower C N A S FB F

Toronto (ON) Financial District (Toronto, ON) Parkin Partnership Architects Corporate headquarters buildings; Office building Toronto 10, CA T14 2009.002.010

Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre C Toronto (ON) N Mount Pleasant (Toronto, ON) A Bregman + Hamann S Health and welfare centres CA April 73 FB Toronto 4, CA T4 F 2009.002.1126 Sunnylea Elementary School C Etobicoke (ON) A Parkin, John Burnett S Elementary school buildings CA May 58 FB Toronto 5, CA T4 F 2009.002.1127 Sutton Place Hotel C Toronto (ON) N Bay Street Corridor (Toronto, ON) P Jowett, Henry Roger S Hotels (public accomodations) CA Sept 67 FB Toronto 6, CA T4 F 2009.002.1128

T
Tabor Park Vocational School C Scarborough (ON) A Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden

136

P S CA FB F

Jowett, Henry Roger High school buildings Jul-66 Toronto 6, CA T6 2009.002.540

Tartu College student residence C Toronto (ON) N Annex (Toronto, ON) A Tampold & Wells P Panda Photography S College buildings; Dormitories FB Toronto 8, CA T4 F 2009.002.1130 Tecumseh Senior Public School C Scarborough (ON) A Fairfield and Dubois S High school buildings CA Aug 69 FB Toronto 7, CA T4 F 2009.002.1129 Teleglobe Canada International Centre C Scarborough (ON) A Day, Fraser P Mykusz, Peter S Commercial buildings CA Mar-87 FB Toronto 5, CA T6 F 2009.002.541 Temple building C A S CA FB F The Towne C N A P S FB F

Toronto (ON) Gouinlock, George W. Office building July 68 Toronto 9, CA T4 2009.002.1131

Toronto (ON) Summerhill (Toronto, ON) Murray, James D.; Fleiss, Henry Panda Photography Apartment houses Toronto 24, CA T4 2009.002.1145

Timberbank Junior Public School C Scarborough (ON) A Sullivan & Pacek S Elementary school buildings

137

FB F

Toronto 4, CA T6 2009.002.542

Tom Longboat Junior Public School C Scarborough (ON) A DuBois Associates, Architects, Planners P Applied Photography Ltd. S Elementary school buildings CA May-82 FB Toronto 3, CA T6 F 2009.002.543 Topcliff Avenue Public School C North York (ON) A Craig Zeidler Strong P Jowett, Henry Roger S Elementary school buildings CA Nov 65 FB Toronto 17, CA T1 F 2009.002.432 Toronto Ballet Opera House C Toronto (ON) N Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) A Safdie, Moshe P Rosenthal, Steve S Theaters CA Aug 88 FB Toronto 11, CA T4 F 2009.002.1133 Toronto City Hall C Toronto (ON) N Bay Street Corridor (Toronto, ON) A Parkin Partnership Architects S Government buildings CA Nov 79; May 89; Jul 85; Jun 87; 1965 Y.B; Dec 59; Aug 68 FB Toronto 6, CA T14 F 2009.002.041 Toronto Dominion Bank, branch location C Toronto (ON) S Bank buildings CA Jan-58 FB Toronto 9, CA T7 F 2009.002.1136 Toronto Dominion Bank Tower C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Parkin, John Burnett; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Bregman and Hamann P Jowett, Henry Roger; Mitchell, Jack; Vickers, Ron S Condominium office buildings

138

CA FB F

Nov 65; Nov 67; Aug 76; Jan 58; Jun 80 Toronto 8-9 + 1 oversize, CA T14 2009.002.011

Toronto Eaton Shopping Centre C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-Dundas (Toronto, ON) A Crang & Boake Inc.; Zeidler Roberts Partnership S Shopping centers CA Dec 80; July 82; Nov 79; May 77; Oct 79 FB Toronto 11-14, CA T13 F 2009.002.021 Toronto French School C Don Mills (ON) A Brook, Carruthers, Grierson, Shaw P Panda Photography S Elementary school buildings CA April 72 FB Toronto 17, CA T4 F 2009.002.1137 Toronto Hilton Hotel C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden P Jowett, Henry Roger S Hotels (public accomodations) CA May 68 FB Toronto 8, CA T7 F 2009.002.1135 Toronto Humane Society C Toronto (ON) N Cabbagetown (Toronto, ON) S Animal shelters CA March 81 FB Toronto 5, CA T13 F 2009.002.050 Toronto Islands cityscape C Toronto (ON) N Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) P Legg Brothers Limited S Waterfronts CA Sept 57 FB Toronto 18, CA T4 F 2009.002.1138 Toronto Real Estate Board head office C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-St Clair (Toronto, ON) A Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden

139

P S CA FB F

Jowett, Henry Roger Corporate headquarters buildings; Office building May 71 Toronto 21, CA T4 2009.002.1142

Toronto Stock Exchange C Toronto (ON) N Financial District (Toronto, ON) A Strong & Associates S Office building; Skyscrapers CA Nov 84 FB Toronto 19, CA T4 F 2009.002.1140 Toronto Transit Commission - subway stations and streetcars C Toronto (ON) N Bloor & Yonge (Toronto, ON) S Local transit; Subways FB Toronto 7, CA T2 F 2009.002.044 Toronto Zoo C N A P S CA FB F Travel office C A S CA FB F

Toronto (ON) Morningside (Toronto, ON) WZMH Architects Applied Photography Ltd.; Lenscape Incorporated Zoos (built complexes) Mar 87 Toronto 7, CA T14 2009.002.046

Toronto (ON) Baldwin, Edward R. Office building Nov-81 Toronto 7 + 1 oversize, CA T7 2009.002.1146

Trinity Square Park C Toronto (ON) N Yonge-Dundas (Toronto, ON) A The Thom Partnership S Urban parks CA Dec 84 FB Toronto 26, CA T4 F 2009.002.1147 Trolley Café C A P

Toronto (ON) Millar, Charles Blakeway Applied Photography Ltd.

140

S CA FB F

Restaurants April, May, Sept 80 Toronto 27, CA T4 2009.002.1148

U
Union Station C N S FB F Toronto (ON) Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) Railroad stations Toronto 5, CA T14 2009.002.040

United Rubber Workers of America building C Toronto (ON) A Burston & Wells P Panda Photography S Corporate headquarters buildings; Office building CA April 58 FB Toronto 28, CA T4 F 2009.002.1149 University of Toronto, Architecture, Landscape and Design Library C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A Shore and Moffat S University buildings CA Sept 86 FB Toronto 17, CA T9 F 2009.002.813 University of Toronto, Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and Design C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) S University buildings CA Sept 86 FB Toronto 5, CA T5 F N/A University of Toronto, Faculty of Music, Edward Johnson building C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates P Jowett, Henry Roger S University buildings CA Jan 63 FB Toronto 2, CA T5 F 2009.002.034 University of Toronto, John P. Robarts Research Library C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON)

141

A S CA FB F

Mathers & Haldenby; Warner Burns Toan & Lunde University buildings; Libraries Aug-74 Toronto 1, CA T5 2009.002.052

University of Toronto, Koffler Student Services Centre C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A Chapman, Howard P. P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S University buildings CA Mar-86 FB Toronto 30, CA T4 F 2009.002.1139 University of Toronto, Massey College C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A Thompson, Berwick, Pratt P Jowett, Henry Roger S University buildings CA Oct 63 FB Toronto 29, CA T4 F 2009.002.1152 University of Toronto, New College, Wetmore Hall C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A Fairfield & DuBois P Jowett, Henry Roger S University buildings CA Oct 63 FB Toronto 29, CA T4 F 2009.002.1153 University of Toronto, Scarborough Campus C Scarborough (ON) A John Andrews Architects; Page & Steele Architects P Panda Photography S University buildings FB Toronto 31, CA T4 F 2009.002.1154 University of Toronto, Sidney Smith Hall C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers S University buildings CA Jan-62 FB Toronto 4, CA T5 F 2009.002.743

142

University of Toronto, St. Joseph's College C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) S University buildings CA Mar 58 FB Toronto 22, CA T3 F 2009.002.1121 University of Toronto, Trinity College C Toronto (ON) N University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) A George and Moorehouse; Darling & Pearson S University buildings CA April 80 FB Toronto 32, CA T4 F 2009.002.1151

V
Victoria Park Avenue (Clintwood Court) C North York (ON) A Fleiss, Henry P Newton, Neil S Residential houses CA Dec-62 FB Toronto 16, CA T5 F 2009.002.1155 Victoria Park Place C North York (ON) A Matsui Baer Vanstone Freeman P Panda Associates S Office building CA July 85 FB Toronto 18, CA T1 F 2009.002.433 Visiting Homemakers Association C Toronto (ON) N Mount Pleasant (Toronto, ON) A Rebanks, Leslie P Jowett, Henry Roger S Office building CA Apr-70 FB Toronto 18, CA T5 F 2009.002.1157 Volkswagon Head office C Toronto (ON) A Gustavs, Erland P Spalding-Smith, Fiona S Corporate headquarters buildings

143

CA FB F

Sep-80 Toronto 20, CA T5 2009.002.1159

W
Wellington Square C Toronto (ON) N Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) S Urban renewal; Office building CA May-85 FB Toronto 21, CA T5 F 2009.002.1161 West Park Vocational School C Toronto (ON) A Ingleson, A.M. S High school buildings CA Mar-70 FB Toronto 22, CA T5 F 2009.002.1162 Willow Park Public School C Scarborough (ON) A Craig Zeidler Strong P Panda Photography S Elementary school buildings CA Y.B. 1965 FB Toronto 2, CA T6 F 2009.002.545 Wrigley building C N A P S FB F

Toronto (ON) Leslieville (Toronto, ON) Adamson, Gordon S. Jowett, Henry Roger Office building Toronto 24, CA T5 2009.002.1164

Wychwood Library C Toronto (ON) N Bracondale Hill (Toronto, ON) S Libraries CA Dec 80; Oct 79 FB Toronto 3-4, CA T13 F 2009.002.053

Y
YMCA, Metropolitan Central C Toronto (ON)

144

N A P S CA FB F

Bay Street Corridor (Toronto, ON) A.J Diamond & Partners Spalding-Smith, Fiona Recreation buildings Apr-85 Toronto 36, CA T5 2009.002.1168

Yonge Street elevation (100 Yonge Street) C Toronto (ON) N Church-Yonge Corridor (Toronto, ON) A Quadrangle Architects Limited S Office building CA Feb 87 Pers. FB Toronto 25, CA T5 F 2009.002.1165 York Regional School of Nursing C North York (ON) S College buildings FB Toronto 19, CA T1 F 2009.002.593 York University, Central Square C North York (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat S University buildings CA Aug-68 FB Toronto 30, CA T5 F N/A York University, Founders College C North York (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Shore and Moffat S University buildings CA Aug-68 FB Toronto 31, CA T5 F N/A York University, McLaughlin College C North York (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Shore and Moffat P Jowett, Henry Roger S University buildings FB Toronto 29, CA T5 F N/A York University, Osgoode Hall Law School C North York (ON) A Marani, Rounthwaite & Dick, Architects S University buildings

145

CA FB F

Dec-80 Toronto 26, CA T5 2009.002.1166

York University, Petrie Science and Engineering Building C North York (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Shore and Moffat S University buildings CA Nov-72 FB Toronto 28, CA T5 F N/A York University, Ross Humanities and Social Sciences building C North York (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat S University buildings CA Aug-68 FB Toronto 34, CA T5 F N/A York University, Scott Library C North York (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat S University buildings; Libraries FB Toronto 33, CA T5 F N/A York University, Tait MacKenzie Centre C North York (ON) A Adamson Associates P Panda Photography; N & H Studio S University buildings CA Aug 68; Nov 72 FB Toronto 27, CA T5 F 2009.002.1167 York University, Winters College Residence C North York (ON) A Gordon S. Adamson & Associates S University buildings; Dormitories CA Aug-68 FB Toronto 32, CA T5 F N/A Yorkdale Shopping Centre C Toronto (ON) N Lawrence Park (Toronto, ON) A Thom, Ron J. P Harris, David S Shopping centers CA March 84 FB Toronto 6, CA T13

146

F Yorkville Square C N A S CA FB F

2009.002.051

Toronto (ON) Yorkville (Toronto, ON) Diamond and Myers Shopping centers June 69 Toronto 3, CA T7 2009.002.1172

Yorkwoods Village C North York (ON) A Klein and Sears S Residential houses CA Aug-64 FB Toronto 1, CA T7 F 2009.002.1170 Yorkwoods Gate Public School C North York (ON) A Walker, Howard V. S Elementary school buildings FB Toronto 20, CA T1 F 2009.002.434 YYZ Artists Outlet C Toronto (ON) N Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) S Office building CA Aug-88 FB Toronto 2, CA T7 F 2009.002.1171

147

TORONTO: GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION
Don Mills (ON) Black Residence (Hix, John): Jul 85. Toronto 1, CA T10 Brookbanks Community Library (Banz, Brook, Carruthers, Grierson, Shaw ): Jan 70. Toronto 15, CA T9 Chapel Glen (Boigon and Heinonen): June 72. Toronto 24, CA T9 Civic Garden Centre (Markson, Jerome; Moriyama, Raymond): Apr 66. Toronto 11, CA T14 Don Mills Centre (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): Sept 57. Toronto 2, CA T10 Fairview Mall (Bregman and Hamann): Nov 85; May 71; Oct 70. Toronto 26, CA T10 IBM Distribution Centre (Neish Owen Rowland &Roy Architects, Engineers, & Planners; Crang & Boake Inc.): Oct 1970; Jun/Jul 83. Toronto 21, CA T11 Ontario Association of Architects Headquarters (unknown architect): Nov 92. Toronto 10, CA T7 Rothmans of Pall Mall Canada Ltd. (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T3 Sceptor Headquarters (unknown architect): Jan 88. Toronto 2, CA T9 Southill Village (Murray, James D.; Fleiss, Henry): Feb & Sept 1957; July 58. Toronto 6, CA T7 St. Marks Presbyterian Church (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): Y.B. '65. Toronto 1, CA T9 Toronto French School (Brook, Carruthers, Grierson, Shaw): April 72. Toronto 17, CA T4 Etobicoke (ON) CHDC residences (Fleiss, Henry): [n/a]. Toronto 15, CA T5 Courtesy Chevrolet Oldsmobile (Strong & Associates): Jan 1982. Toronto 11, CA T10 Eatonville Branch Library (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 14, CA T5 Etobicoke Education Centre (Shore and Moffat): Jun 70. Toronto 11, CA T5 Fischbach & Moore offices (Fairfield and Dubois): Jan 70. Toronto 12, CA T5 Kingsmill Vocational School (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): March 67. Toronto 13, CA T5 Martin Grove Estates (Markson, Jerome): May 72. Toronto 10, CA T5 Metropolitan Toronto West Regional Detention Centre (Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita Architects, Engineers and Planners): May 84. Toronto 12, CA T12 One West Mall (Chapman, Howard P.): May 63. Toronto 9, CA T5 Photoengravers & Electrotypers Plant (Mathers & Haldenby): Nov 72. Toronto 8, CA T5 Richview Public Library (Dunlop, Wardell, Matsui, Aitken): Feb 67. Toronto 7, CA T5 Suburban development (unknown architect): May 63. Toronto 6, CA T5 Sunnylea Elementary School (Parkin, John Burnett): May 58. Toronto 5, CA T4 North York (ON) Bedford Glen, 1555 Avenue Road (Annau Associates Architects): Dec 80. Toronto 3 + 1 oversize, CA T8 Black Creek Pioneer Village Visitor's Centre (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Dec 68. Toronto 12, CA T9 Burns Hall (A.J Diamond & Partners): June 89. Toronto 11, CA T1; CA O2, oversize Edgeley in the Village (Grossman, Irving): Aug 71. Toronto 23, CA T10 Green residence (Klein and Sears): Dec 61. Toronto 15, CA T1 Humbermede Junior High School (Adamson, Gordon S.): [n/a]. Toronto 12, CA T1

148

Jane Junior High School (Boigon and Heinonen ): May 69. Toronto 13, CA T1 Kenton Drive Public School (Pentland & Baker): Jan 57. Toronto 14, CA T1 Menkes Corporate Plaza (Adamson Associates): Aug 85. Toronto 8, CA T12 North American Life Centre, Xerox Tower (Adamson Associates): Apr 85. Toronto 6, CA T1 North Bathurst Talmud Torah School (Weir, Cripps & Associates): May 58. Toronto 7, CA T1 North York City Hall (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 9, CA T1 North York Medical Arts building (Markson, Jerome): Sept 71. Toronto 10, CA T1 Northview Heights Collegiate (Pentland & Baker; Boigon, Irving D.): May 58. Toronto 16, CA T1 Phantom Industries (The Thom Partnership): Apr/Jul 84. Toronto 5, CA T2 R.S. Kane Funeral Home (Adamson Associates): Nov 85. Toronto 15, CA T2 Shaarei Tefillah (Grossman, Irving): June 63. Toronto 16, CA T3 Sheppard Centre (unknown architect): May 80. Toronto 17, CA T3 St. Fidelius Parish (unknown architect): Aug 81. Toronto 20, CA T3 Topcliff Avenue Public School (Craig Zeidler Strong): Nov 65. Toronto 17, CA T1 Victoria Park Avenue, Clintwood Court (Fleiss, Henry): Dec 62. Toronto 16, CA T5 Victoria Park Place (Matsui Baer Vanstone Freeman): July 85. Toronto 18, CA T1 York Regional School of Nursing (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T1 York University Central Square (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat): Aug 68. Toronto 30, CA T5 Founders College (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Shore and Moffat): Aug 68. Toronto 31, CA T5 McLaughlin College (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Shore and Moffat): [n/a]. Toronto 29, CA T5 Osgoode Hall Law School (Marani, Rounthwaite & Dick, Architects): Dec 80. Toronto 26, CA T5 Petrie Science and Engineering building (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Shore and Moffat): Nov 72. Toronto 28, CA T5 Ross Humanities and Social Sciences building (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat): Aug-68. Toronto 34, CA T5 Scott Library (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat): [n/a]. Toronto 33, CA T5 Tait MacKenzie Centre (Adamson Associates): Aug 68; Nov 72. Toronto 27, CA T5 Winters College Residence (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Aug-68. Toronto 32, CA T5 Yorkwoods Village (Klein and Sears): Aug-64. Toronto 1, CA T7 Yorkwoods Gate Public School (Walker, Howard V.): [n/a]. Toronto 20, CA T1 Scarborough (ON) Administration Park (Medwecki, Joseph): [n/a]. Toronto 27, CA T6 Albert Campbell Library (Fairfield and Dubois): Jan-72. Toronto 26, CA T6 Amherst Veterinary Hospital (Elken & Bechstead): Nov-58. Toronto 25, CA T6 Bell Canada Administration Centre (Shore, Tilbe, Henschel, Irwin, Peters): [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T6

149

Bellmere Public School (Andrews, John): Aug-66. Toronto 23, CA T6 Bridlewood (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 22, CA T6 Brimley Acres (Jackson Ypes & Associates): [n/a]. Toronto 16, CA T9 Canada Place (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Dec-84. Toronto 20, CA T6 Centenary Hospital (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T6 Charles O. Bick Police College (Wilson, Newton, Roberts, Duncan Architects): Feb 80. Toronto 23, CA T9 Devonsleigh Place (Stecura, Ihor): Feb 84. Toronto 17, CA T10 FCI Canada Inc. (Burndy), 1530 Birchmount Road (Crang & Boake Inc.): Oct 57. Toronto 21, CA T6 Joseph Brant Public School (Craig Zeidler Strong): Aug-72. Toronto 16, CA T6 Lawrence Avenue office (Ferdinand Wagner Architect): Feb-80. Toronto 12, CA T6 Manors of Brandywine (Fleiss, Henry): Feb 80. Toronto 32, CA T11 Milliken Public School (Ingleson, A.M.): Feb 84. Toronto 15, CA T6 North Bridlewood Junior Public School (Walker, Howard V.): Feb 68. Toronto 8, CA T1 Pascal's Warehouse & Showroom (Nightingale and Quigley Architects): Feb-80. Toronto 14, CA T6 Police Marine Depots (unknown architect): May-88. Toronto 13, CA T6 Port Union Recreation Centre & Public Library (Annau Associates Architects): Jan-85. Toronto 11, CA T6 S.A. Armstrong Ltd. (unknown architect): Jul-89. Toronto 9, CA T6 Scarborough Civic Centre (Moriyama, Raymond): July 84; Jan 72. Toronto 18, CA T6 Scarborough College (Andrews, John): May-66. Toronto 8, CA T6 Stephen Leacock Collegiate Institute (Ingleson, A.M.): Oct 70; Mar 71. Toronto 3, CA T4 Tabor Park Vocational School (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Jul-66. Toronto 6, CA T6 Tecumseh Senior Public School (Fairfield and Dubois): Aug 69. Toronto 7, CA T4 Teleglobe Canada International Centre (Day, Fraser): Mar-87. Toronto 5, CA T6 Timberbank Junior Public School (Sullivan & Pacek): [n/a]. Toronto 4, CA T6 Tom Longboat Junior Public School (DuBois Associates, Architects, Planners): May-82. Toronto 3, CA T6 University of Toronto, Scarborough Campus (John Andrews Architects; Page & Steele Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T5 Willow Park Public School (Craig Zeidler Strong): Y.B. 1965. Toronto 2, CA T6 Toronto (ON) Aerial views, Toronto (unknown architect): [n/a]. CA O2, Oversize British American Oil Company Ltd., Ontario Division (Crang & Boake Inc.): Jan 61; Aug 66. Toronto 13, CA T4 Canada Malting Company Silos (Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 14, CA T9 Carling building (unknown architect): Jan 59. Toronto 13, CA T10 Coakwell Close (Cowle, John): Oct 89. Toronto 27, CA T9 Crang & Boake Architects office (Crang & Boake Inc.): Aug 65. Toronto 10, CA T10 Don Corning building (Fairfield and Dubois): June 66. Toronto 18, CA T10 Dorothy Cameron Gallery Ltd. (unknown architect): July 64. Toronto 19, CA T10 Dunlop Architects office (Dunlop-Farrow Architects Inc.): [n/a]. Toronto 20, CA T10 Educational buildings, Toronto (Robbie, Roderick George; various): March 1971, Feb 1972. Toronto 15, CA T3

150

Electrical Reduction Plant (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Nov 66. Toronto 24, CA T10 Facelle Corporation (Montgomery and Sisam): Nov-82. Toronto 25, CA T10 Firehall Number Eight (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 28, CA T10 Fraser residence (Thom, Ron J.): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T11 Gasworks (Brown, Roy): May 71. Toronto 2, CA T11 Gloucester Mansion (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Y.B '67. Toronto 5, CA T11 Guaranty Trust Computer Centre (Dunlop-Farrow Architects Inc.; Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Oct 87. Toronto 29, CA T11 Hoskin residence (unknown architect): Oct 85. Toronto 17, CA T11 House design model (Brock & Ritz): Jan 86. Toronto 9, CA T10 Howard residence (Young & Wright Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T11 Hylands residence (Natale Scott Browne): Oct 87. Toronto 20 + 1 oversize, CA T11 Jerome Markson townhouse (Markson, Jerome): May 63. Toronto 25, CA T11 Mauran residence, 95 Ardwold Gate (Kapsi, Taivo): Apr 68. Toronto 5, CA T12 McDonald's restaurant (Markson, Jerome): Nov 85. Toronto 7, CA T12 Metro Toronto Police Marine Unit Building (Crang & Boake Inc.): Sept 85. Toronto 11, CA T12 Munk residence (Markson, Jerome): [n/a]. Toronto 16, CA T12 Nash residence (Markson, Jerome): Feb 71. Toronto 2, CA T1 Neilson building (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Mar 63. Toronto 4, CA T1 New York Life building (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Nov 87. Toronto 5, CA T1 Olivetti Canada Headquarters (Scolozzi, Francesco): Nov 85. Toronto 25, CA T1 Ontario Nursing Association building (unknown architect): Feb 86. Toronto 25, CA T3 Pearson International Airport, Old Terminal 1 (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): May 58; Jan 65; Feb 64; Apr 72. Toronto 9-10, CA T13 Posluns house (Markson, Jerome): July 64. Toronto 6, CA T2 Ramada Renaissance Hotel (Moffat & Duncan): Feb-85. Toronto 16, CA T2 Refalmeen residence (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 17, CA T2 Rhapsody Café & Bistro (Pragnell, Peter): March 87. Toronto 12, CA T3 Saffer Cravit & Freedom Advirtising offices (Cravit Ortved Architects): April 85. Toronto 7, CA T3 Scaramouche Restaurant (unknown architect): Nov 81, Toronto 9, CA T3 Sears house (DuBois, Mary; Klein, Jack; Sears, Henry): May 63. Toronto 13, CA T3 Seaview Hotel (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 14, CA T3 Single family home renovation (Ensslen, Harrald B.): July 81; Aug 87. Toronto 18, CA T3 Sir William Osler Vocational School (Ingleson, A.M.): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T3 Southern Pacific Hotels Services offices (Markson, Jerome): Feb 81. Toronto 8, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Temple building (Gouinlock, George W.): July 68. Toronto 9, CA T4 Toronto Dominion Bank, branch location (unknown architect): Jan 58. Toronto 9, CA T7 Travel office (Baldwin, Edward R.): Nov-81. Toronto 7 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Trolley Café (Millar, Charles Blakeway): April, May, Sept 1980. Toronto 27, CA T4 United Rubber Workers of America building (Burston & Wells): April 58. Toronto 28, CA T4

151

Volkswagon Head office (Gustavs, Erland): Sept 80. Toronto 20, CA T5 West Park Vocational School (Ingleson, A.M.): Mar-70. Toronto 22, CA T5 Annex (Toronto, ON) Bank of Nova Scotia, Bloor St & Spadina Rd (Eadie, Arthur H.): Jan 58. Toronto 14, CA T2 Casa Loma (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 18, CA T9 Ed's Warehouse (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 22, CA T10 Tartu College student residence (Tampold & Wells): [n/a]. Toronto 8, CA T4 Bathurst Manor (Toronto, ON) Forest Valley Day Camp (Sprachman, Mandel): Mar 65. Toronto 31, CA T10 Bay Street Corridor (Toronto, ON) 1 Richmond Street West (Page & Steele Architects): May 84; Nov 87. Toronto 24, CA T8 20 Adelaide Street East (Page & Steele Architects): May 87. Toronto 20, CA T8 Atrium on Bay (Page & Steele Architects): June/July 83. Toronto 5, CA T7 Bay Charles Towers, 55 Charles Street West (Klein and Sears): Oct 81. Toronto 25, CA T8 Italian Trade Commission office (Scolozzi, Francesco): Apr 85. Toronto 23, CA T11 Ontario Power building (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Feb 76. Toronto 1, CA T2 Simpson's Tower (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Bregman and Hamann): May 69. Toronto 24, CA T3 Sutton Place Hotel (unknown architect): Sept 67. Toronto 6, CA T4 Toronto City Hall (Parkin Partnership Architects): Nov 79; May 89; Jul 85; Jun 87; 1965 Y.B; Dec 59; Aug 68. Toronto 6, CA T14 YMCA, Metropolitan Central (A.J Diamond & Partners): Apr-85. Toronto 36, CA T5 Beechborough-Greenbrook (Toronto, ON) Harold & Grace Baker Centre (Sievenpiper, Ted): Aug 85. Toronto 8, CA T11 Bloor & Yonge (Toronto, ON) Joseph Shepard Federal office building (DuBois Associates, Architects, Planners): [n/a]. CA T11, folder 26 Manulife Centre (Marani, Rounthwaite & Dick, Architects): Aug 68; July 67. Toronto 33, CA T11 Markleargelo's Restaurant (Ridgely, Gordon): Nov 81. Toronto 4, CA T12 Summerhill Canadian Pacific Railway Station (Pearson and Darling): Aug 68. Toronto 3, CA T1 Toronto Transit Commission - subway stations and streetcars (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 7, CA T2 Bracondale Hill (Toronto, ON) Wychwood Library (unknown architect): Dec 1980; Oct 79. Toronto 3-4, CA T13 Cabbagetown (Toronto, ON) Toronto Humane Society (unknown architect): March 81. Toronto 5, CA T13 Church and Wellesley (Toronto, ON) 45 Charles Street East (Fairfield and Dubois): [n/a]. Toronto 17, CA T8 Manulife North Tower (Clifford Lawrie Bolton Ritchie Architects): March 81. Toronto 34, CA T11 Maple Leaf Gardens (unknown architect): Nov 70. Toronto 1, CA T12

152

Church-Yonge Corridor (Toronto, ON) Atria North (The Thom Partnership): April 1972; July 1984; April 1980; Feb 1980; Sept 1980. Toronto 17, CA T7 Now Magazine (Ferguson Ferguson Architects): Feb 85. Toronto 24, CA T1 Yonge Street elevation, 100 Yonge Street (Quadrangle Architects Limited): Feb 87 Pers. Toronto 25, CA T5 Dufferin Grove (Toronto, ON) Our Lady Queen of Croatia Church (Fisher, Tedman, Glaister): Mar 68. Toronto 2, CA T2 Entertainment District (Toronto, ON) Baas Studio Gallery, 322 King Street West (unknown architect): June 81. Toronto 4, CA T9 Canadian Magazine, 200 Adelaide Street West (unknown architect): Dec 1983; Dec 1980. Toronto 8, CA T8 City TV and Much Music (Quadrangle Architects Limited): Sept 87. Toronto 29 + 1 oversize, CA T9 La Cantinetta restaurant, 322 King Street West (Barton Myers Associates, Architects and Planners): [n/a]. Toronto 7, CA T8 Roy Thomson Hall (Erickson, Arthur): Sept & Oct 82. Toronto 17-18, CA T12 Royal Bank Plaza (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T3 Sheraton Centre Hotel (Parkin Partnership Architects): May 68. Toronto 9, CA T2 Wellington Square (unknown architect): May-85. Toronto 21, CA T5 YYZ Artists Outlet (unknown architect): Aug-88. Toronto 2, CA T7 Etobicoke-Lakeshore (Toronto, ON) 14 Thorncrest Road (Millar, Charles Blakeway): [n/a]. Toronto 22, CA T8 Financial District (Toronto, ON) 70 University Avenue (Strong & Associates): Jul 86; Nov 84. Toronto 15, CA T8 70 York Street (Page & Steele Architects): May 88 Persp. Toronto 14, CA T8 90 Adelaide Street West (Adamson Associates): Nov 86. Toronto 15, CA T4 95 Wellington Street West (Pellow + Associates Architects): Nov 86. Toronto 15, CA T4 Baldwin & Franklin Architects office, 167 Richmond Street West (Baldwin & Franklin Architects Inc.): Apr 81. Toronto 25, CA T4 Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada (Scolozzi, Francesco): Jan 85. Toronto 9, CA T9 Canada Trust (Crang & Boake Inc.; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Parkin, John Burnett; Bregman and Hamann): June 68. Toronto 16, CA T4 Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (Markson, Jerome): Nov 81. Toronto 19, CA T9 Commerce Court (Page & Steele Architects; Pei, Ieoh Ming): Mar 73. Toronto 5, CA T10 Confederation Life (The Thom Partnership): Aug 70; June 84. Toronto 28, CA T9 Dynamic Funds of Canada (Shuster, Matthew): Nov 85. Toronto 21, CA T10 Lord Simcoe Hotel (Langston, Henry T.): Nov 79. Toronto 6, CA T3 Metropolitan Toronto Convention Centre (Crang & Boake Inc.): Nov 84; Nov 83. Toronto 27-29 + 2 oversize, CA T8 Scotia Plaza, 44 King Street West (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden; Mathers & Haldenby): March 85. Toronto 11, CA T3 Sunlife Tower (Parkin Partnership Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 10, CA T14 Toronto Dominion Bank Tower (Parkin, John Burnett; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Bregman and Hamann): Nov 65; Nov 67; Aug 76; Jan 58; Jun 80. Toronto 8-9 + 1 oversize, CA T14 Toronto Hilton Hotel (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): May 68. Toronto 8, CA T7 Toronto Stock Exchange (Strong & Associates): Nov 84. Toronto 19, CA T4

153

Flemingdon Park (Toronto, ON) Flemingdon Park (Grossman, Irving): Apr 67; May 61. Toronto 30, CA T10 Forest Hill (Toronto, ON) 59 Dunloe Road (Montgomery and Sisam): Nov 87. Toronto 7, CA T9 Beth Tzedec Synagogue (Page & Steele Architects; Markus, Isadore; Kohl, Harry B.): March 58. Toronto 13, CA T9 Greenwood-Coxwell (Toronto, ON) Monarch Park Collegiate (unknown architect): Jan 65. Toronto 15, CA T12 Kensington-Chinatown (Toronto, ON) Alexandra Park housing cooperative (Ontario Housing Corporation): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T8 Art Gallery of Ontario Exhibitions, "Contemporary Furnishings" (Parkin Partnership Architects): Aug 58. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Exhibitions, "The Bauhaus: 50 Years" (Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Gropius, Walter): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Exterior & plans (Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects; Zeidler Roberts Partnership; Moriyama & Teshima Architects; A.J Diamond & Partners; Parkin Partnership Architects) April 87; Feb 75. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Henry Moore Gallery (Parkin Partnership Architects ): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Interiors (Parkin Partnership Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Bank of Nova Scotia, branch bank (Eadie, Arthur H.): Jan 1958; July 79. Toronto 11, CA T9; Toronto 8, CA T13 Chiat/Day office (Frank O. Gehry and Associates, Inc.; Fujiwara, David): May & June 89. CA O2, oversize Norman Bethune-Tim Buck Education Centre (Turner, Peter): [n/a]. Toronto 21, CA T1 Ontario Museum Association building (Diamond and Myers): June 71. Toronto 26, CA T1 Toronto Ballet Opera House (Safdie, Moshe): Aug 88. Toronto 11, CA T4 L'Amoreaux (Toronto, ON) Northeast Court restaurant development (Szeto, Alfred): Feb 84. Toronto 22, CA T1 Lawrence Park (Toronto, ON) Fifth Church of Christ Scientist (unknown architect): March 58. Toronto 27, CA T10 Metropolitan Toronto School Board offices (unknown architect): Feb 85. Toronto 13-14, CA T12 Yorkdale Shopping Centre (Thom, Ron J.): March 84. Toronto 6, CA T13 Leslieville (Toronto, ON) Wrigley building (Adamson, Gordon S.): [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T5 Little Italy (Toronto, ON) Central Technical School (Fairfield (Robert) Associates): July 63. Toronto 25, CA T9 Morningside (Toronto, ON) Toronto Zoo (WZMH Architects): Mar 87. Toronto 7, CA T14 Moss Park (Toronto, ON) 163 Queen Street East (Jones and Kirkland): June 89. Toronto 10, CA T8 Hyatt Regency Hotel (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Feb 73. Toronto 4, CA T14

154

Mount Pleasant (Toronto, ON) Garden Court apartments (Page & Steele Architects): July 58. Toronto 10, CA T4 Lyndhurst Hospital (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 31, CA T11 Saintfield Avenue house (Markson, Jerome): July 64. Toronto 8, CA T3 Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre (Bregman + Hamann): April 73. Toronto 4, CA T4 Visiting Homemakers Association (Rebanks, Leslie): Apr 70. Toronto 18, CA T5 Niagara neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) Canadian National Exhibition (CNE) grounds (Page & Steele Architects): April 58. Toronto 22, CA T9 Four Seasons Sheraton Hotel (Searle, Wilbee, Rowland): [n/a]. Toronto 26, CA T8 Ontario Place (Craig Zeidler Strong): Apr 71; Jun 71. Toronto 1, CA T14 Queen's Quay-Waterfront (Toronto, ON) Amsterdam Café, York Quay Centre (Clarke, Andrew; Jones, Jedd): Sept 88. Toronto 18, CA T7 Bathurst Quay, Harbourfront revitalization project (unknown architect): Sept 86. Toronto 8, CA T9 CN Tower (WZMH Architects; Andrews, John): May 87; Feb 86; Jan 75; May 71; Nov 84; Sept 86. Toronto 2 + 1 oversize, CA T13 Harbour Castle Hilton (unknown architect): Apr 86. Toronto 7, CA T11 Harbour Terrace, Queen's Quay (Li Architects Inc.): Sept 86. Toronto 11, CA T2 Hotel Admiral, 249 Queen's Quay West (unknown architect): Sept 86. Toronto 2, CA T8 King's Landing complex, Building B (unknown architect): Sept 85; Sept 86. Toronto 28, CA T11 Meteorological Headquarters building (Boigon and Heinonen): June 72. Toronto 9, CA T12 O'Keefe Centre (Page & Steele Architects; Morgan, Earle C.): Mar 61; May 71. Toronto 3, CA T14 Queen's Quay boardwalk (Li, Daniel): Sept 86. Toronto 12, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Queen's Quay Terminal building (Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Oct 85; Sept 86. Toronto 10, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Rogers Center, Skydome (Crang & Boake Inc.): May 86; May 87. Toronto 18, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Royal Bank Data Centre (Webb, Zerafa, Menkes  , Housden): Sept 72. Toronto 4, CA T3 Sales centre for 132 Front Street East (unknown architect): June 81. Toronto 11, CA T8 Toronto Islands cityscape (unknown architect): Sept 57. Toronto 18, CA T4 Union Station (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T14 Regent Park (Toronto, ON) Regent Park apartments (Page & Steele Architects): Sept 59. Toronto 7, CA T13 Riverdale (Toronto, ON) 505 Broadview Avenue (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T8 McCleary Towers (unknown architect): July 85. Toronto 6, CA T12 Rosedale (Toronto, ON) 44-46 Castle Frank Road (Satok & Poizner): [n/a]. Toronto 18, CA T8 St. Lawrence (Toronto, ON) 45, 47 and 49 Front Street East (Stone & Kohn Architects): May 84. Toronto 16, CA T8 Cathedral Church of St. James (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 21, CA T3 Crombie Park apartments (Grossman, Irving): June 81. Toronto 7, CA T10

155

George Brown College, St James Campus (Day, Fraser): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T11 Gooderham building (unknown architect): May 85. Toronto 29, CA T10 Harbourfront Centre (unknown architect): Jan & Sept 86. Toronto 10, CA T11 Hockey Hall of Fame (Darling & Curry): May 71. Toronto 2, CA T14 Market Galleria Lofts, 71 Front Street East (Moriyama & Teshima Architects): Apr 81. Toronto 13, CA T8 Market Square Condominiums (Markson, Jerome): May 85. Toronto 3, CA T12 St. James Anglican church (Taylor, Ron): [n/a]. Toronto 21, CA T3 St. Lawrence apartments (unknown architect): Apr, May, June 81. Toronto 23, CA T3 St. Lawrence Market Hall (Walker, Howard V.): Apr 67; July 85; June 81. Toronto 1, CA T13 Summerhill (Toronto, ON) 184 Roxborough Drive (Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita Architects, Engineers and Planners): [n/a]. Toronto 9, CA T8 Rosegarden Mews (Annau Associates Architects): March 83. Toronto 2, CA T3 The Towne (Murray, James D.; Fleiss, Henry): [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T4 Thorncliffe (Toronto, ON) Don Valley Woods (Murray, James D.; Klein and Sears): Feb 57; Aug 66. Toronto 4, CA T10 University neighbourhood (Toronto, ON) Beth David Synagogue, 7 Sultan Street (Grossman, Irving): [n/a]. Toronto 10, CA T9 Hospital for Sick Children (drawing) (Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Dec 86. Toronto 16, CA T11 University of Toronto Architecture, Landscape and Design Library (Shore and Moffat): Sept 86. Toronto 17, CA T9 Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and Design (unknown architect): Sept 86. Toronto 5, CA T5 Faculty of Music, Edward Johnson building (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Jan 63. Toronto 2, CA T5 John P. Robarts Research Library (Mathers & Haldenby; Warner Burns Toan & Lunde): Aug-74. Toronto 1, CA T5 Koffler Student Services Centre (Chapman, Howard P.; Walker, Howard V.): Mar-86. Toronto 30, CA T4 Massey College (Thompson, Berwick, Pratt): Oct 63. Toronto 29, CA T4 New College, Wetmore Hall (Fairfield & DuBois): May 70. Toronto 31, CA T4 Sidney Smith Hall (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): Jan-62. Toronto 4, CA T5 St. Joseph's College (unknown architect): Mar 58. Toronto 22, CA T3 Trinity College (George and Moorehouse; Darling & Pearson): April 80. Toronto 32, CA T4 Yonge-Dundas (Toronto, ON) Bell Trinity Square (Parkin Partnership Architects): Jan-85. Toronto 6, CA T9 Pantages Theatre (David K. Mesbur Architect Ltd.): Oct 89. Toronto 3, CA T2 Ryerson Athletic Centre (Lett Smith Architects): [n/a]. CA O2, oversize Toronto Eaton Shopping Centre (Crang & Boake Inc.;Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Dec 80; July 82; Nov 79; May 77; Oct 79. Toronto 11-14, CA T13 Trinity Square Park (The Thom Partnership): Dec 84. Toronto 26, CA T4

156

Yonge-St Clair (Toronto, ON) 30 St. Clair Avenue West (Page & Steele Architects): Nov 87. Toronto 19, CA T8 484 Avenue Road apartments (Bregman and Hamann): July 58. Toronto 6, CA T8 Avoca Apartments Ltd. (Seligman & Dick Architects): Mar 71; Jan 69. Toronto 23, CA T8 Balmoral Estates (Lipson and Dashkin Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T9 Belmont House Home for the Aged, 55 Belmont Street (Montgomery and Sisam): [n/a]. Toronto 15, CA T10 The Oaklands Condominium and Housing Project (DuBois Plumb & Associates): Jan 82. Toronto 23, CA T1; CA O2, oversize St. Joan of Arc Roman Catholic Church (Saccoccio, William): Oct 67. Toronto 1, CA T4 Toronto Real Estate Board head office(Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): May 71. Toronto 21, CA T4 Yorkville (Toronto, ON) 21 Avenue Rd (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T1 1166 Bay Street (unknown architect): Dec 80. Toronto 4, CA T8 CIL House offices (Shore, Tilbe, Henschel, Irwin, Peters; Kwok, Stanley): Jun/Jul 82. Toronto 30-31, CA T9 College of Nurses of Ontario (Parkin Partnership Architects): Feb 86; Feb 85. CA O2, oversize Colonnade, 131 Bloor Street West (Tampold & Wells): May 71. Toronto 12, CA T8 Cumberland Court (unknown architect): Mar 74. Toronto 4, CA T7 Hazelton residence, 33 Hazelton Avenue (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 20, CA T9 Lothian Mews (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 30, CA T11 Metro Toronto Reference Library (Moriyama, Raymond): July 84; July 82. Toronto 10, CA T12 Myers residence, 19 Berryman Street (Diamond and Myers; Myers, Barton): April 73. Toronto 5, CA T9 Yorkville Square (Diamond and Myers): Jun-69. Toronto 3, CA T7

157

TORONTO: ARCHITECT
A.J Diamond & Partners Art Gallery of Ontario, Exterior & plans: April 87; Feb 75. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Burns Hall: June 89. Toronto 11, CA T1; CA O2, oversize YMCA, Metropolitan Central: Apr-85. Toronto 36, CA T5 Adamson Associates (see also Gordon S. Adamson & Associates) 90 Adelaide Street West: Nov 86. Toronto 15, CA T4 Menkes Corporate Plaza: Aug 85. Toronto 8, CA T12 North American Life Centre, Xerox Tower: Apr 85. Toronto 6, CA T1 R.S. Kane Funeral Home: Nov 85. Toronto 15, CA T2 York University, Tait MacKenzie Centre: Aug 68; Nov 72. Toronto 27, CA T5 Adamson, Gordon S. Humbermede Junior High School: [n/a]. Toronto 12, CA T1 Wrigley building: [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T5 Andrews, John Bellmere Public School: Aug-66. Toronto 23, CA T6 CN Tower: May 87; Feb 86; Jan 75; May 71; Nov 84; Sept 86. Toronto 2 + 1 oversize, CA T13 Scarborough College: May-66. Toronto 8, CA T6 Annau Associates Architects Bedford Glen, 1555 Avenue Road: Dec 80. Toronto 3 + 1 oversize, CA T8 Port Union Recreation Centre & Public Library: Jan-85. Toronto 11, CA T6 Rosegarden Mews: March 83. Toronto 2, CA T3 Baldwin & Franklin Architects Inc. Baldwin & Franklin Architects office, 167 Richmond Street West: Apr 81. Toronto 25, CA T4 Baldwin, Edward R. Travel office: Nov-81. Toronto 7 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Banz, Brook, Carruthers, Grierson, Shaw Brookbanks Community Library: Jan 70. Toronto 15, CA T9 Barton Myers Associates, Architects and Planners La Cantinetta restaurant, 322 King Street West: [n/a]. Toronto 7, CA T8 Boigon and Heinonen Chapel Glen: June 72. Toronto 24, CA T9 Jane Junior High School: May 69. Toronto 13, CA T1 Meteorological Headquarters building: June 72. Toronto 9, CA T12

158

Boigon, Irving D. Northview Heights Collegiate: May 58. Toronto 16, CA T1 Bregman and Hamann Canada Trust: June 68. Toronto 16, CA T4 Simpson's Tower: May 69. Toronto 24, CA T3 Toronto Dominion Bank Tower: Nov 65; Nov 67; Aug 76; Jan 58; Jun 80. Toronto 8-9 + 1 oversize, CA T14 Brock & Ritz House design model: Jan 86. Toronto 9, CA T10 Brook, Carruthers, Grierson, Shaw Brookbanks Community Library: Jan 70. Toronto 15, CA T9 Toronto French School: April 72. Toronto 17, CA T4 Brown, Roy Gasworks: May 71. Toronto 2, CA T11 Burston & Wells United Rubber Workers of America building: April 58. Toronto 28, CA T4 Chapman, Howard P. One West Mall: May 63. Toronto 9, CA T5 University of Toronto, Koffler Student Services Centre: Mar-86. Toronto 30, CA T4 Clarke, Andrew Amsterdam Café, York Quay Centre: Sept 88. Toronto 18, CA T7 Clifford Lawrie Bolton Ritchie Architects Manulife North Tower: March 81. Toronto 34, CA T11 Cowle, John Coakwell Close: Oct 89. Toronto 27, CA T9 Craig Zeidler Strong Joseph Brant Public School: Aug-72. Toronto 16, CA T6 Ontario Place: Apr 71; Jun 71. Toronto 1, CA T14 Topcliff Avenue Public School: Nov 65. Toronto 17, CA T1 Willow Park Public School: Y.B. 1965. Toronto 2, CA T6 Crang & Boake Inc. British American Oil Company Ltd., Ontario Division: Jan 61; Aug 66. Toronto 13, CA T4 Canada Trust: June 68. Toronto 16, CA T4 Crang & Boake Architects office: Aug 65. Toronto 10, CA T10 FCI Canada Inc. (Burndy), 1530 Birchmount Road: Oct 57. Toronto 21, CA T6 IBM Distribution Centre: Oct 1970; Jun/Jul 83. Toronto 21, CA T11 Metro Toronto Police Marine Unit Building: Sept 85. Toronto 11, CA T12 Metropolitan Toronto Convention Centre: Nov 84; Nov 83. Toronto 27-29 + 2 oversize, CA T8 Rogers Center, Skydome: May 86; May 87. Toronto 18, CA T2; CA O2, oversize

159

Toronto Eaton Shopping Centre: Dec 80; July 82; Nov 79; May 77; Oct 79. Toronto 11-14, CA T13 Cravit Ortved Architects Saffer Cravit & Freedom Advirtising offices: April 85. Toronto 7, CA T3 Darling & Curry Hockey Hall of Fame: May 71. Toronto 2, CA T14 Darling & Pearson University of Toronto, Trinity College: April 80. Toronto 32, CA T4 David K. Mesbur Architect Ltd. Pantages Theatre: Oct 89. Toronto 3, CA T2 Day, Fraser George Brown College, St James Campus: [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T11 Teleglobe Canada International Centre: Mar-87. Toronto 5, CA T6 Diamond and Myers Myers residence, 19 Berryman Street: April 73. Toronto 5, CA T9 Ontario Museum Association building: June 71. Toronto 26, CA T1 Yorkville Square: Jun-69. Toronto 3, CA T7 DuBois Associates, Architects, Planners Joseph Shepard Federal office building: [n/a]. CA T11, folder 26 Tom Longboat Junior Public School: May-82. Toronto 3, CA T6 DuBois Plumb & Associates The Oaklands Condominium and Housing Project: Jan 82. Toronto 23, CA T1; CA O2, oversize DuBois, Mary Sears house: May 63. Toronto 13, CA T3 Dunlop-Farrow Architects Inc. Dunlop Architects office: [n/a]. Toronto 20, CA T10 Guaranty Trust Computer Centre: Oct 87. Toronto 29, CA T11 Dunlop, Wardell, Matsui, Aitken Richview Public Library: Feb 67. Toronto 7, CA T5 Eadie, Arthur H. Bank of Nova Scotia, Bloor St & Spadina Rd: Jan 58. Toronto 14, CA T2 Bank of Nova Scotia, branch bank: Jan 1958; July 79. Toronto 11, CA T9; Toronto 8, CA T13 Elken & Bechstead Amherst Veterinary Hospital: Nov-58. Toronto 25, CA T6 Ensslen, Harrald B. Single family home renovation: July 81; Aug 87. Toronto 18, CA T3 Erickson, Arthur Roy Thomson Hall: Sept & Oct 82. Toronto 17-18, CA T12

160

Fairfield (Robert) Associates Central Technical School: July 63. Toronto 25, CA T9 Fairfield and Dubois 45 Charles Street East: [n/a]. Toronto 17, CA T8 Albert Campbell Library: Jan-72. Toronto 26, CA T6 Don Corning building: June 66. Toronto 18, CA T10 Fischbach & Moore offices: Jan 70. Toronto 12, CA T5 Tecumseh Senior Public School: Aug 69. Toronto 7, CA T4 Ferdinand Wagner Architect Lawrence Avenue office: Feb-80. Toronto 12, CA T6 Ferguson Ferguson Architects Now Magazine: Feb 85. Toronto 24, CA T1 Fisher, Tedman, Glaister Our Lady Queen of Croatia Church: Mar 68. Toronto 2, CA T2 Fleiss, Henry CHDC residences: [n/a]. Toronto 15, CA T5 Manors of Brandywine: Feb 80. Toronto 32, CA T11 Southill Village: Feb & Sept 1957; July 58. Toronto 6, CA T7 The Towne: [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T4 Victoria Park Avenue, Clintwood Court: Dec 62. Toronto 16, CA T5 Frank O. Gehry and Associates, Inc. Chiat/Day office: May & June 89. CA O2, oversize Fujiwara, David Chiat/Day office: May & June 89. CA O2, oversize George and Moorehouse University of Toronto, Trinity College: April 80. Toronto 32, CA T4 Gordon S. Adamson & Associates Black Creek Pioneer Village Visitor's Centre: Dec 68. Toronto 12, CA T9 Gloucester Mansion: Y.B '67. Toronto 5, CA T11 Kingsmill Vocational School: March 67. Toronto 13, CA T5 Ontario Power building: Feb 76. Toronto 1, CA T2 University of Toronto, Faculty of Music, Edward Johnson building: Jan 63. Toronto 2, CA T5 York University, Central Square: Aug 68. Toronto 30, CA T5 York University, Founders College: Aug 68. Toronto 31, CA T5 York University, McLaughlin College: [n/a]. Toronto 29, CA T5 York University, Petrie Science and Engineering building: Nov 72. Toronto 28, CA T5 York University, Ross Humanities and Social Sciences building: Aug-68. Toronto 34, CA T5 York University, Scott Library: [n/a]. Toronto 33, CA T5

161

York University, Winters College Residence: Aug-68. Toronto 32, CA T5 Gouinlock, George W. Temple building: July 68. Toronto 9, CA T4 Gropius, Walter Art Gallery of Ontario, Exhibitions, "The Bauhaus: 50 Years": [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Grossman, Irving Beth David Synagogue, 7 Sultan Street: [n/a]. Toronto 10, CA T9 Crombie Park apartments: June 81. Toronto 7, CA T10 Edgeley in the Village: Aug 71. Toronto 23, CA T10 Flemingdon Park: Apr 67; May 61. Toronto 30, CA T10 Shaarei Tefillah: June 63. Toronto 16, CA T3 Gustavs, Erland Volkswagon Head office: Sept 80. Toronto 20, CA T5 Hix, John Black Residence: Jul 85. Toronto 1, CA T10 Ingleson, A.M. Milliken Public School: Feb 84. Toronto 15, CA T6 Sir William Osler Vocational School: [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T3 Stephen Leacock Collegiate Institute: Oct 70; Mar 71. Toronto 3, CA T4 West Park Vocational School: Mar-70. Toronto 22, CA T5 Jackson Ypes & Associates Brimley Acres: [n/a]. Toronto 16, CA T9 John Andrews Architects University of Toronto, Scarborough Campus: [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T5 John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers Don Mills Centre: Sept 57. Toronto 2, CA T10 Pearson International Airport, Old Terminal 1: May 58; Jan 65; Feb 64; Apr 72. Toronto 9-10, CA T13 Simpson's Tower: May 69. Toronto 24, CA T3 St. Marks Presbyterian Church: Y.B. '65. Toronto 1, CA T9 University of Toronto, Sidney Smith Hall: Jan-62. Toronto 4, CA T5 York University, Founders College: Aug 68. Toronto 31, CA T5 York University, McLaughlin College: [n/a]. Toronto 29, CA T5 York University, Petrie Science and Engineering building: Nov 72. Toronto 28, CA T5 Jones and Kirkland 163 Queen Street East: June 89. Toronto 10, CA T8 Jones, Jedd Amsterdam Café, York Quay Centre: Sept 88. Toronto 18, CA T7

162

Kapsi, Taivo Mauran residence, 95 Ardwold Gate: Apr 68. Toronto 5, CA T12 Klein and Sears Bay Charles Towers, 55 Charles Street West: Oct 81. Toronto 25, CA T8 Don Valley Woods: Feb 57; Aug 66. Toronto 4, CA T10 Green residence: Dec 61. Toronto 15, CA T1 Yorkwoods Village: Aug-64. Toronto 1, CA T7 Klein, Jack Sears house: May 63. Toronto 13, CA T3 Kohl, Harry B. Beth Tzedec Synagogue: March 58. Toronto 13, CA T9 Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects Art Gallery of Ontario, Exterior & plans: April 87; Feb 75. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Canada Malting Company Silos: [n/a]. Toronto 14, CA T9 Kwok, Stanley CIL House offices: Jun/Jul 82. Toronto 30-31, CA T9 Langston, Henry T. Lord Simcoe Hotel: Nov 79. Toronto 6, CA T3 Lett Smith Architects Ryerson Athletic Centre: [n/a]. CA O2, oversize Li, Daniel Queen's Quay boardwalk: Sept 86. Toronto 12, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Li Architects Inc. Harbour Terrace, Queen's Quay: Sept 86. Toronto 11, CA T2 Lipson and Dashkin Architects Balmoral Estates: [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T9 Marani, Rounthwaite & Dick, Architects Manulife Centre: Aug 68; July 67. Toronto 33, CA T11 York University, Osgoode Hall Law School: Dec 80. Toronto 26, CA T5 Markson, Jerome Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce: Nov 81. Toronto 19, CA T9 Civic Garden Centre: Apr 66. Toronto 11, CA T14 Jerome Markson townhouse: May 63. Toronto 25, CA T11 Market Square Condominiums: May 85. Toronto 3, CA T12 Martin Grove Estates: May 72. Toronto 10, CA T5 McDonald's restaurant: Nov 85. Toronto 7, CA T12 Nash residence: Feb 71. Toronto 2, CA T1 North York Medical Arts building: Sept 71. Toronto 10, CA T1

163

Posluns house: July 64. Toronto 6, CA T2 Saintfield Avenue house: July 64. Toronto 8, CA T3 Southern Pacific Hotels Services offices: Feb 81. Toronto 8, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Markus, Isadore Beth Tzedec Synagogue: March 58. Toronto 13, CA T9 Mathers & Haldenby Photoengravers & Electrotypers Plant: Nov 72. Toronto 8, CA T5 Scotia Plaza, 44 King Street West: March 85. Toronto 11, CA T3 University of Toronto, John P. Robarts Research Library: Aug-74. Toronto 1, CA T5 Matsui Baer Vanstone Freeman Victoria Park Place: July 85. Toronto 18, CA T1 Medwecki, Joseph Administration Park: [n/a]. Toronto 27, CA T6 Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig Art Gallery of Ontario, Exhibitions, "The Bauhaus: 50 Years": [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Canada Trust: June 68. Toronto 16, CA T4 Toronto Dominion Bank Tower: Nov 65; Nov 67; Aug 76; Jan 58; Jun 80. Toronto 8-9 + 1 oversize, CA T14 Millar, Charles Blakeway 14 Thorncrest Road: [n/a]. Toronto 22, CA T8 Trolley Café: April, May, Sept 1980. Toronto 27, CA T4 Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita Architects, Engineers and Planners 184 Roxborough Drive: [n/a]. Toronto 9, CA T8 Metropolitan Toronto West Regional Detention Centre: May 84. Toronto 12, CA T12 Moffat & Duncan Ramada Renaissance Hotel: Feb-85. Toronto 16, CA T2 Montgomery and Sisam 59 Dunloe Road: Nov 87. Toronto 7, CA T9 Belmont House Home for the Aged, 55 Belmont Street: [n/a]. Toronto 15, CA T10 Facelle Corporation: Nov-82. Toronto 25, CA T10 Morgan, Earle C. O'Keefe Centre: Mar 61; May 71. Toronto 3, CA T14 Moriyama & Teshima Architects Art Gallery of Ontario, Exterior & plans: April 87; Feb 75. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Market Galleria Lofts, 71 Front Street East: Apr 81. Toronto 13, CA T8 Moriyama, Raymond Civic Garden Centre: Apr 66. Toronto 11, CA T14 Metro Toronto Reference Library: July 84; July 82. Toronto 10, CA T12 Scarborough Civic Centre: July 84; Jan 72. Toronto 18, CA T6

164

Murray, James D. Don Valley Woods: Feb 57; Aug 66. Toronto 4, CA T10 Southill Village: Feb & Sept 1957; July 58. Toronto 6, CA T7 The Towne: [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T4 Myers, Barton Myers residence, 19 Berryman Street: April 73. Toronto 5, CA T9 Natale Scott Browne Hylands residence: Oct 87. Toronto 20 + 1 oversize, CA T11 Neish Owen Rowland & Roy Architects, Engineers, and Planners IBM Distribution Centre: Oct 1970; Jun/Jul 83. Toronto 21, CA T11 Nightingale and Quigley Architects Pascal's Warehouse & Showroom: Feb-80. Toronto 14, CA T6 Ontario Housing Corporation Alexandra Park housing cooperative: [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T8 Page & Steele Architects 1 Richmond Street West: May 84; Nov 87. Toronto 24, CA T8 20 Adelaide Street East: May 87. Toronto 20, CA T8 30 St. Clair Avenue West: Nov 87. Toronto 19, CA T8 70 York Street: May 88 Persp. Toronto 14, CA T8 Atrium on Bay: June/July 83. Toronto 5, CA T7 Beth Tzedec Synagogue: March 58. Toronto 13, CA T9 Canadian National Exhibition (CNE) grounds: April 58. Toronto 22, CA T9 Commerce Court: Mar 73. Toronto 5, CA T10 Garden Court apartments: July 58. Toronto 10, CA T4 O'Keefe Centre: Mar 61; May 71. Toronto 3, CA T14 Regent Park apartments: Sept 59. Toronto 7, CA T13 University of Toronto, Scarborough Campus: [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T5 Parkin Partnership Architects Art Gallery of Ontario, exhibitions, "Contemporary Furnishings": Aug 58. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Henry Moore Gallery: [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Bell Trinity Square (Parkin Partnership Architects): Jan-85. Toronto 6, CA T9 College of Nurses of Ontario (Parkin Partnership Architects): Feb 86; Feb 85. CA O2, oversize Toronto City Hall: Nov 79; May 89; Jul 85; Jun 87; 1965 Y.B; Dec 59; Aug 68. Toronto 6, CA T14 Parkin, John Burnett Canada Trust: June 68. Toronto 16, CA T4 Sunnylea Elementary School: May 58. Toronto 5, CA T4 Toronto Dominion Bank Tower: Nov 65; Nov 67; Aug 76; Jan 58; Jun 80. Toronto 8-9 + 1 oversize, CA T14

165

Pearson and Darling Summerhill Canadian Pacific Railway Station: Aug 68. Toronto 3, CA T1 Pei, Ieoh Ming Commerce Court: Mar 73. Toronto 5, CA T10 Pellow + Associates Architects 95 Wellington Street West: Nov 86. Toronto 15, CA T4 Pentland & Baker Kenton Drive Public School: Jan 57. Toronto 14, CA T1 Northview Heights Collegiate: May 58. Toronto 16, CA T1 Pragnell, Peter Rhapsody Café & Bistro: March 87. Toronto 12, CA T3 Quadrangle Architects Limited City TV and Much Music: Sept 87. Toronto 29 + 1 oversize, CA T9 Yonge Street elevation, 100 Yonge Street: Feb 87 Pers. Toronto 25, CA T5 Rebanks, Leslie Visiting Homemakers Association: Apr 70. Toronto 18, CA T5 Ridgely, Gordon Markleargelo's Restaurant: Nov 81. Toronto 4, CA T12 Robbie, Roderick George Educational buildings, Toronto: March 1971, Feb 1972. Toronto 15, CA T3 Saccoccio, William St. Joan of Arc Roman Catholic Church: Oct 67. Toronto 1, CA T4 Safdie, Moshe Toronto Ballet Opera House: Aug 88. Toronto 11, CA T4 Satok & Poizner 44-46 Castle Frank Road: [n/a]. Toronto 18, CA T8 Scolozzi, Francesco Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada: Jan 85. Toronto 9, CA T9 Italian Trade Commission office: Apr 85. Toronto 23, CA T11 Olivetti Canada Headquarters: Nov 85. Toronto 25, CA T1 Searle, Wilbee, Rowland Four Seasons Sheraton Hotel: [n/a]. Toronto 26, CA T8 York University, Central Square: Aug 68. Toronto 30, CA T5 York University, Ross Humanities and Social Sciences building: Aug-68. Toronto 34, CA T5 York University, Scott Library: [n/a]. Toronto 33, CA T5 Sears, Henry Sears house: May 63. Toronto 13, CA T3

166

Seligman & Dick Architects Avoca Apartments Ltd.: Mar 71; Jan 69. Toronto 23, CA T8 Shore and Moffat Etobicoke Education Centre: Jun 70. Toronto 11, CA T5 University of Toronto, Architecture, Landscape and Design Library: Sept 86. Toronto 17, CA T9 York University, Central Square: Aug 68. Toronto 30, CA T5 York University, Founders College: Aug 68. Toronto 31, CA T5 York University, McLaughlin College: [n/a]. Toronto 29, CA T5 York University, Petrie Science and Engineering building: Nov 72. Toronto 28, CA T5 York University, Ross Humanities and Social Sciences building: Aug-68. Toronto 34, CA T5 York University, Scott Library: [n/a]. Toronto 33, CA T5 Shore, Tilbe, Henschel, Irwin, Peters Bell Canada Administration Centre: [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T6 CIL House offices: Jun/Jul 82. Toronto 30-31, CA T9 Shuster, Matthew Dynamic Funds of Canada: Nov 85. Toronto 21, CA T10 Sievenpiper, Ted Harold & Grace Baker Centre: Aug 85. Toronto 8, CA T11 Sprachman, Mandel Forest Valley Day Camp: Mar 65. Toronto 31, CA T10 Stecura, Ihor Devonsleigh Place: Feb 84. Toronto 17, CA T10 Stone & Kohn Architects 45, 47 and 49 Front Street East: May 84. Toronto 16, CA T8 Strong & Associates 70 University Avenue: Jul 86; Nov 84. Toronto 15, CA T8 Courtesy Chevrolet Oldsmobile: Jan 1982. Toronto 11, CA T10 Toronto Stock Exchange: Nov 84. Toronto 19, CA T4 Sullivan & Pacek Timberbank Junior Public School: [n/a]. Toronto 4, CA T6 Szeto, Alfred Northeast Court restaurant development: Feb 84. Toronto 22, CA T1 Tampold & Wells Colonnade, 131 Bloor Street West: May 71. Toronto 12, CA T8 Tartu College student residence: [n/a]. Toronto 8, CA T4 Taylor, Ron St. James Anglican church: [n/a]. Toronto 21, CA T3

167

The Thom Partnership Atria North: April 1972; July 1984; April 1980; Feb 1980; Sept 1980. Toronto 17, CA T7 Confederation Life: Aug 70; June 84. Toronto 28, CA T9 Phantom Industries: Apr/Jul 84. Toronto 5, CA T2 Trinity Square Park: Dec 84. Toronto 26, CA T4 Thom, Ron J. Fraser residence: [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T11 Yorkdale Shopping Centre: March 84. Toronto 6, CA T13 Thompson, Berwick, Pratt University of Toronto, Massey College: Oct 63. Toronto 29, CA T4 Turner, Peter Norman Bethune-Tim Buck Education Centre: [n/a]. Toronto 21, CA T1 Walker, Howard V. North Bridlewood Junior Public School: Feb 68. Toronto 8, CA T1 St. Lawrence Market Hall: Apr 67; July 85; June 81. Toronto 1, CA T13 University of Toronto, Koffler Student Services Centre: Mar-86. Toronto 30, CA T4 Yorkwoods Gate Public School: [n/a]. Toronto 20, CA T1 Warner Burns Toan & Lunde University of Toronto, John P. Robarts Research Library: Aug-74. Toronto 1, CA T5 Webb, Zerafa, Menke  s , Housden 21 Avenue Rd: [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T1 Canada Place: Dec-84. Toronto 20, CA T6 Electrical Reduction Plant: Nov 66. Toronto 24, CA T10 Hyatt Regency Hotel: Feb 73. Toronto 4, CA T14 Lothian Mews: [n/a]. Toronto 30, CA T11 Neilson building: Mar 63. Toronto 4, CA T1 New York Life building: Nov 87. Toronto 5, CA T1 Royal Bank Data Centre: Sept 72. Toronto 4, CA T3 Royal Bank Plaza: [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T3 Scotia Plaza, 44 King Street West: March 85. Toronto 11, CA T3 Tabor Park Vocational School: Jul-66. Toronto 6, CA T6 Toronto Hilton Hotel: May 68. Toronto 8, CA T7 Toronto Real Estate Board head office: May 71. Toronto 21, CA T4 Weir, Cripps & Associates North Bathurst Talmud Torah School: May 58. Toronto 7, CA T1 Wilson, Newton, Roberts, Duncan Architects Charles O. Bick Police College: Feb 80. Toronto 23, CA T9

168

WZMH Architects CN Tower: May 87; Feb 86; Jan 75; May 71; Nov 84; Sept 86. Toronto 2 + 1 oversize, CA T13 Toronto Zoo: Mar 87. Toronto 7, CA T14 Young & Wright Architects Howard residence: [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T11 Zeidler Roberts Partnership Art Gallery of Ontario, Exterior & plans: April 87; Feb 75. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Guaranty Trust Computer Centre: Oct 87. Toronto 29, CA T11 Hospital for Sick Children (drawing): Dec 86. Toronto 16, CA T11 Queen's Quay Terminal building: Oct 85; Sept 86. Toronto 10, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Toronto Eaton Shopping Centre: Dec 80; July 82; Nov 79; May 77; Oct 79. Toronto 11-14, CA T13

169

TORONTO: PHOTOGRAPHER
Applied Photography Ltd. 70 University Avenue (Strong & Associates): Jul 86; Nov 84. Toronto 15, CA T8 Amsterdam Café, York Quay Centre (Clarke, Andrew; Jones, Jedd): Sept 88. Toronto 18, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Exterior & plans (Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects; Zeidler Roberts Partnership; Moriyama & Teshima Architects; A.J Diamond & Partners; Parkin Partnership Architects) April 87; Feb 75. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Henry Moore Gallery (Parkin Partnership Architects ): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Interiors (Parkin Partnership Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Harbour Terrace, Queen's Quay (Li Architects Inc.): Sept 86. Toronto 11, CA T2 Italian Trade Commission office (Scolozzi, Francesco): Apr 85. Toronto 23, CA T11 Menkes Corporate Plaza (Adamson Associates): Aug 85. Toronto 8, CA T12 North York City Hall (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 9, CA T1 Olivetti Canada Headquarters (Scolozzi, Francesco): Nov 85. Toronto 25, CA T1 Scarborough Civic Centre (Moriyama, Raymond): July 84; Jan 72. Toronto 18, CA T6 Tom Longboat Junior Public School (DuBois Associates, Architects, Planners): May-82. Toronto 3, CA T6 Toronto Zoo (WZMH Architects): Mar 87. Toronto 7, CA T14 Trolley Café (Millar, Charles Blakeway): April, May, Sept 1980. Toronto 27, CA T4 B-A Oil Photo British American Oil Company Ltd., Ontario Division (Crang & Boake Inc.): Jan 61; Aug 66. Toronto 13, CA T4 Burley, Robert Saffer Cravit & Freedom Advirtising offices (Cravit Ortved Architects): April 85. Toronto 7, CA T3 Single family home renovation (Ensslen, Harrald B.): July 81; Aug 87. Toronto 18, CA T3 Burrow, Gordon 505 Broadview Avenue (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T8 Clark, Clive Edgeley in the Village (Grossman, Irving): Aug 71. Toronto 23, CA T10 Four Seasons Sheraton Hotel (Searle, Wilbee, Rowland): [n/a]. Toronto 26, CA T8 Gloucester Mansion (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Y.B '67. Toronto 5, CA T11 Seaview Hotel (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 14, CA T3 Evans, Steven Burns Hall (A.J Diamond & Partners): June 89. Toronto 11, CA T1; CA O2, oversize Refalmeen residence (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 17, CA T2 Fleet, Max Southill Village (Murray, James D.; Fleiss, Henry): Feb & Sept 1957; July 58. Toronto 6, CA T7 Grant, Frank Roy Thomson Hall (Erickson, Arthur): Sept & Oct 82. Toronto 17-18, CA T12

170

Green, Seymour Flemingdon Park (Grossman, Irving): Apr 67; May 61. Toronto 30, CA T10 Harris, David St. Marks Presbyterian Church (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): Y.B. '65. Toronto 1, CA T9 Yorkdale Shopping Centre (Thom, Ron J.): March 84. Toronto 6, CA T13 James, Art Bell Trinity Square (Parkin Partnership Architects): Jan-85. Toronto 6, CA T9 Jones, Edward Balmoral Estates (Lipson and Dashkin Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T9 Nash residence (Markson, Jerome): Feb 71. Toronto 2, CA T1 Jowett, Henry Roger Alexandra Park housing cooperative (Ontario Housing Corporation): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T8 Don Corning building (Fairfield and Dubois): June 66. Toronto 18, CA T10 Electrical Reduction Plant (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Nov 66. Toronto 24, CA T10 Forest Valley Day Camp (Sprachman, Mandel): Mar 65. Toronto 31, CA T10 Fraser residence (Thom, Ron J.): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T11 Humbermede Junior High School (Adamson, Gordon S.): [n/a]. Toronto 12, CA T1 Jane Junior High School (Boigon and Heinonen ): May 69. Toronto 13, CA T1 Kingsmill Vocational School (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): March 67. Toronto 13, CA T5 Lothian Mews (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 30, CA T11 Neilson building (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Mar 63. Toronto 4, CA T1 New York Life building (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Nov 87. Toronto 5, CA T1 North Bridlewood Junior Public School (Walker, Howard V.): Feb 68. Toronto 8, CA T1 North York Medical Arts building (Markson, Jerome): Sept 71. Toronto 10, CA T1 Pearson International Airport, Old Terminal 1 (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): May 58; Jan 65; Feb 64; Apr 72. Toronto 9-10, CA T13 Posluns house (Markson, Jerome): July 64. Toronto 6, CA T2 Legg Brothers Limited FCI Canada Inc. (Burndy), 1530 Birchmount Road (Crang & Boake Inc.): Oct 57. Toronto 21, CA T6 Toronto Islands cityscape (unknown architect): Sept 57. Toronto 18, CA T4 Lenscape Incorporated Guaranty Trust Computer Centre (Dunlop-Farrow Architects Inc.; Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Oct 87. Toronto 29, CA T11 King's Landing complex, Building B (unknown architect): Sept 85; Sept 86. Toronto 28, CA T11 North American Life Centre, Xerox Tower (Adamson Associates): Apr 85. Toronto 6, CA T1 Toronto Zoo (WZMH Architects): Mar 87. Toronto 7, CA T14 Liana, P. R.S. Kane Funeral Home (Adamson Associates): Nov 85. Toronto 15, CA T2 McLeod, Ron Bridlewood (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 22, CA T6

171

Mickler, Denis Hockey Hall of Fame (Darling & Curry): May 71. Toronto 2, CA T14 Mitchell, Jack Toronto Dominion Bank Tower (Parkin, John Burnett; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Bregman and Hamann): Nov 65; Nov 67; Aug 76; Jan 58; Jun 80. Toronto 8-9 + 1 oversize, CA T14 Mykusz, Peter Teleglobe Canada International Centre (Day, Fraser): Mar-87. Toronto 5, CA T6 N & H Studio 21 Avenue Rd (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T1 44-46 Castle Frank Road (Satok & Poizner): [n/a]. Toronto 18, CA T8 Civic Garden Centre (Markson, Jerome; Moriyama, Raymond): Apr 66. Toronto 11, CA T14 Cumberland Court (unknown architect): Mar 74. Toronto 4, CA T7 Hyatt Regency Hotel (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Feb 73. Toronto 4, CA T14 York University, Tait MacKenzie Centre (Adamson Associates): Aug 68; Nov 72. Toronto 27, CA T5 Nakashima, Hiro Ontario Place (Craig Zeidler Strong): Apr 71; Jun 71. Toronto 1, CA T14 Newton, Neil Don Valley Woods (Murray, James D.; Klein and Sears): Feb 57; Aug 66. Toronto 4, CA T10 Eatonville Branch Library (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 14, CA T5 Rothmans of Pall Mall Canada Ltd. (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T3 Victoria Park Avenue, Clintwood Court (Fleiss, Henry): Dec 62. Toronto 16, CA T5 Panda Photography 45 Charles Street East (Fairfield and Dubois): [n/a]. Toronto 17, CA T8 Administration Park (Medwecki, Joseph): [n/a]. Toronto 27, CA T6 Amherst Veterinary Hospital (Elken & Bechstead): Nov-58. Toronto 25, CA T6 Avoca Apartments Ltd. (Seligman & Dick Architects): Mar 71; Jan 69. Toronto 23, CA T8 Bedford Glen, 1555 Avenue Road (Annau Associates Architects): Dec 80. Toronto 3 + 1 oversize, CA T8 Canada Trust (Crang & Boake Inc.; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Parkin, John Burnett; Bregman and Hamann): June 68. Toronto 16, CA T4 Centenary Hospital (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T6 Central Technical School (Fairfield (Robert) Associates): July 63. Toronto 25, CA T9 CHDC residences (Fleiss, Henry): [n/a]. Toronto 15, CA T5 CN Tower (WZMH Architects; Andrews, John): May 87; Feb 86; Jan 75; May 71; Nov 84; Sept 86. Toronto 2 + 1 oversize, CA T13 Crang & Boake Architects office (Crang & Boake Inc.): Aug 65. Toronto 10, CA T10 Fairview Mall (Bregman and Hamann): Nov 85; May 71; Oct 70. Toronto 26, CA T10 IBM Distribution Centre (Neish Owen Rowland & Roy Architects, Engineers, and Planners; Crang & Boake Inc.): Oct 1970; Jun/Jul 83. Toronto 21, CA T11 Kenton Drive Public School (Pentland & Baker): Jan 57. Toronto 14, CA T1 Northview Heights Collegiate (Pentland & Baker; Boigon, Irving D.): May 58. Toronto 16, CA T1

172

O'Keefe Centre (Page & Steele Architects; Morgan, Earle C.): Mar 61; May 71. Toronto 3, CA T14 Scarborough Civic Centre (Moriyama, Raymond): July 84; Jan 72. Toronto 18, CA T6 Sceptor Headquarters (unknown architect): Jan 88. Toronto 2, CA T9 Sheraton Centre Hotel (Parkin Partnership Architects): May 68. Toronto 9, CA T2 Simpson's Tower (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Bregman and Hamann): May 69. Toronto 24, CA T3 Tartu College student residence (Tampold & Wells): [n/a]. Toronto 8, CA T4 The Towne (Murray, James D.; Fleiss, Henry): [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T4 Toronto French School (Brook, Carruthers, Grierson, Shaw): April 72. Toronto 17, CA T4 United Rubber Workers of America building (Burston & Wells): April 58. Toronto 28, CA T4 University of Toronto, Scarborough Campus (John Andrews Architects; Page & Steele Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T5 Willow Park Public School (Craig Zeidler Strong): Y.B. 1965. Toronto 2, CA T6 York University, Tait MacKenzie Centre (Adamson Associates): Aug 68; Nov 72. Toronto 27, CA T5 Perron, Robert Albert Campbell Library (Fairfield and Dubois): Jan-72. Toronto 26, CA T6 George Brown College, St James Campus (Day, Fraser): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T11 Poirier, Mario Burns Hall (A.J Diamond & Partners): June 89. Toronto 11, CA T1; CA O2, oversize Proulx, Michel Chapel Glen (Boigon and Heinonen): June 72. Toronto 24, CA T9 Realisation Meteorological Headquarters building (Boigon and Heinonen): June 72. Toronto 9, CA T12 Reeves, John Dorothy Cameron Gallery Ltd. (unknown architect): July 64. Toronto 19, CA T10 Rosenthal, Steve Toronto Ballet Opera House (Safdie, Moshe): Aug 88. Toronto 11, CA T4 Samson, Ian Howard residence (Young & Wright Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T11 La Cantinetta restaurant, 322 King Street West (Barton Myers Associates, Architects and Planners): [n/a]. Toronto 7, CA T8 Shawcroft, Brian Don Mills Centre (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): Sept 57. Toronto 2, CA T10 Sliva, Karl Ontario Place (Craig Zeidler Strong): Apr 71; Jun 71. Toronto 1, CA T14 Spalding-Smith, Fiona 30 St. Clair Avenue West (Page & Steele Architects): Nov 87. Toronto 19, CA T8 Atria North (The Thom Partnership): April 1972; July 1984; April 1980; Feb 1980; Sept 1980. Toronto 17, CA T7 Baldwin & Franklin Architects office, 167 Richmond Street West (Baldwin & Franklin Architects Inc.): Apr 81. Toronto 25, CA T4 Bay Charles Towers, 55 Charles Street West (Klein and Sears): Oct 81. Toronto 25, CA T8 CIL House offices (Shore, Tilbe, Henschel, Irwin, Peters; Kwok, Stanley): Jun/Jul 82. Toronto 30-31, CA T9

173

Manulife North Tower (Clifford Lawrie Bolton Ritchie Architects): March 81. Toronto 34, CA T11 Market Square Condominiums (Markson, Jerome): May 85. Toronto 3, CA T12 Markleargelo's Restaurant (Ridgely, Gordon): Nov 81. Toronto 4, CA T12 McDonald's restaurant (Markson, Jerome): Nov 85. Toronto 7, CA T12 Pantages Theatre (David K. Mesbur Architect Ltd.): Oct 89. Toronto 3, CA T2 Queen's Quay Terminal building (Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Oct 85; Sept 86. Toronto 10, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Rosegarden Mews (Annau Associates Architects): March 83. Toronto 2, CA T3 Roy Thomson Hall (Erickson, Arthur): Sept & Oct 82. Toronto 17-18, CA T12 Single family home renovation (Ensslen, Harrald B.): July 81; Aug 87. Toronto 18, CA T3 Southern Pacific Hotels Services offices (Markson, Jerome): Feb 81. Toronto 8, CA T2; CA O2, oversize St. Fidelius Parish (unknown architect): Aug 81. Toronto 20, CA T3 The Oaklands Condominium and Housing Project (DuBois Plumb & Associates): Jan 82. Toronto 23, CA T1; CA O2, oversize University of Toronto, Koffler Student Services Centre (Chapman, Howard P.; Walker, Howard V.): Mar-86. Toronto 30, CA T4 Volkswagon Head office (Gustavs, Erland): Sept 80. Toronto 20, CA T5 YMCA, Metropolitan Central (A.J Diamond & Partners): Apr-85. Toronto 36, CA T5 Tomiczek, Leonard Brimley Acres (Jackson Ypes & Associates): [n/a]. Toronto 16, CA T9 Vickers, Ron Toronto Dominion Bank Tower (Parkin, John Burnett; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Bregman and Hamann): Nov 65; Nov 67; Aug 76; Jan 58; Jun 80. Toronto 8-9 + 1 oversize, CA T14 Warner Photographic Ltd. Canadian National Exhibition (CNE) grounds (Page & Steele Architects): April 58. Toronto 22, CA T9 Webber, Ray Firehall Number Eight (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 28, CA T10

174

TORONTO: SUBJECT TERM
Administration buildings Bell Canada Administration Centre (Shore, Tilbe, Henschel, Irwin, Peters): [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T6 Aerial photographs Aerial views, Toronto (unknown architect): [n/a]. CA O2, Oversize Airport buildings Pearson International Airport, Old Terminal 1 (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): May 58; Jan 65; Feb 64; Apr 72. Toronto 9-10, CA T13 Airport concourses Pearson International Airport, Old Terminal 1 (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): May 58; Jan 65; Feb 64; Apr 72. Toronto 9-10, CA T13 Airport parking lots Pearson International Airport, Old Terminal 1 (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): May 58; Jan 65; Feb 64; Apr 72. Toronto 9-10, CA T13 Animal hospitals Amherst Veterinary Hospital (Elken & Bechstead): Nov-58. Toronto 25, CA T6 Animal shelters Toronto Humane Society (unknown architect): March 81. Toronto 5, CA T13 Apartment buildings 484 Avenue Road apartments (Bregman and Hamann): July 58. Toronto 6, CA T8 Avoca Apartments Ltd. (Seligman & Dick Architects): Mar 71; Jan 69. Toronto 23, CA T8 Crombie Park apartments (Grossman, Irving): June 81. Toronto 7, CA T10 King's Landing complex, Building B (unknown architect): Sept 85; Sept 86. Toronto 28, CA T11 McCleary Towers (unknown architect): July 85. Toronto 6, CA T12 Apartment houses Alexandra Park housing cooperative (Ontario Housing Corporation): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T8 Balmoral Estates (Lipson and Dashkin Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T9 Bay Charles Towers, 55 Charles Street West (Klein and Sears): Oct 81. Toronto 25, CA T8 Bridlewood (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 22, CA T6 Brimley Acres (Jackson Ypes & Associates): [n/a]. Toronto 16, CA T9 Don Valley Woods (Murray, James D.; Klein and Sears): Feb 57; Aug 66. Toronto 4, CA T10 Edgeley in the Village (Grossman, Irving): Aug 71. Toronto 23, CA T10 Flemingdon Park (Grossman, Irving): Apr 67; May 61. Toronto 30, CA T10 Garden Court apartments (Page & Steele Architects): July 58. Toronto 10, CA T4 The Oaklands Condominium and Housing Project (DuBois Plumb & Associates): Jan 82. Toronto 23, CA T1; CA O2, oversize One West Mall (Chapman, Howard P.): May 63. Toronto 9, CA T5 Regent Park apartments (Page & Steele Architects): Sept 59. Toronto 7, CA T13 St. Lawrence apartments (unknown architect): Apr, May, June 81. Toronto 23, CA T3 The Towne (Murray, James D.; Fleiss, Henry): [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T4

175

Art galleries Art Gallery of Ontario, Exhibitions, "Contemporary Furnishings" (Parkin Partnership Architects): Aug 58. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Exhibitions, "The Bauhaus: 50 Years" (Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Gropius, Walter): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Exterior & plans (Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects; Zeidler Roberts Partnership; Moriyama & Teshima Architects; A.J Diamond & Partners; Parkin Partnership Architects) April 87; Feb 75. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Henry Moore Gallery (Parkin Partnership Architects ): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Interiors (Parkin Partnership Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Dorothy Cameron Gallery Ltd. (unknown architect): July 64. Toronto 19, CA T10 Atriums Atria North (The Thom Partnership): April 1972; July 1984; April 1980; Feb 1980; Sept 1980. Toronto 17, CA T7 Atrium on Bay (Page & Steele Architects): June/July 83. Toronto 5, CA T7 Auditoriums Monarch Park Collegiate (unknown architect): Jan 65. Toronto 15, CA T12 Bank buildings Banca Commerciale Italiana of Canada (Scolozzi, Francesco): Jan 85. Toronto 9, CA T9 Bank of Nova Scotia, Bloor St & Spadina Rd (Eadie, Arthur H.): Jan 58. Toronto 14, CA T2 Bank of Nova Scotia, branch bank (Eadie, Arthur H.): Jan 1958; July 79. Toronto 11, CA T9; Toronto 8, CA T13 Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (Markson, Jerome): Nov 81. Toronto 19, CA T9 Royal Bank Data Centre (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Sept 72. Toronto 4, CA T3 Royal Bank Plaza (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T3 Scotia Plaza, 44 King Street West (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden; Mathers & Haldenby): March 85. Toronto 11, CA T3 Toronto Dominion Bank, branch location (unknown architect): Jan-58. Toronto 9, CA T7 Cafes Amsterdam Café, York Quay Centre (Clarke, Andrew; Jones, Jedd): Sept 88. Toronto 18, CA T7 Church buildings Cathedral Church of St. James (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 21, CA T3 Fifth Church of Christ Scientist (unknown architect): March 58. Toronto 27, CA T10 Our Lady Queen of Croatia Church (Fisher, Tedman, Glaister): Mar 68. Toronto 2, CA T2 St. Fidelius Parish (unknown architect): Aug 81. Toronto 20, CA T3 St. James Anglican church (Taylor, Ron): [n/a]. Toronto 21, CA T3 St. Joan of Arc Roman Catholic Church (Saccoccio, William): Oct 67. Toronto 1, CA T4 St. Marks Presbyterian Church (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): Y.B. '65. Toronto 1, CA T9 College buildings Burns Hall (A.J Diamond & Partners): June 89. Toronto 11, CA T1; CA O2, oversize Charles O. Bick Police College (Wilson, Newton, Roberts, Duncan Architects): Feb 80. Toronto 23, CA T9 College of Nurses of Ontario (Parkin Partnership Architects): Feb 86; Feb 85. CA O2, oversize George Brown College, St James Campus (Day, Fraser): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T11 Scarborough College (Andrews, John): May-66. Toronto 8, CA T6

176

Tartu College student residence (Tampold & Wells): [n/a]. Toronto 8, CA T4 York Regional School of Nursing (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T1 Commercial buildings 20 Adelaide Street East (Page & Steele Architects): May 87. Toronto 20, CA T8 21 Avenue Rd (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T1 30 St. Clair Avenue West (Page & Steele Architects): Nov 87. Toronto 19, CA T8 Administration Park (Medwecki, Joseph): [n/a]. Toronto 27, CA T6 Cumberland Court (unknown architect): Mar 74. Toronto 4, CA T7 Ed's Warehouse (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 22, CA T10 Gloucester Mansion (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Y.B '67. Toronto 5, CA T11 Harbourfront Centre (unknown architect): Jan & Sept 86. Toronto 10, CA T11 St. Lawrence Market Hall (Walker, Howard V.): Apr 67; July 85; June 81. Toronto 1, CA T13 Teleglobe Canada International Centre (Day, Fraser): Mar-87. Toronto 5, CA T6 Concert halls Roy Thomson Hall (Erickson, Arthur): Sept & Oct 82. Toronto 17-18, CA T12 Condominium office buildings Colonnade, 131 Bloor Street West (Tampold & Wells): May 71. Toronto 12, CA T8 Sales centre for 132 Front Street East (unknown architect): June 81. Toronto 11, CA T8 The Oaklands Condominium and Housing Project (DuBois Plumb & Associates): Jan 82. Toronto 23, CA T1; CA O2, oversize Toronto Dominion Bank Tower (Parkin, John Burnett; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Bregman and Hamann): Nov 65; Nov 67; Aug 76; Jan 58; Jun 80. Toronto 8-9 + 1 oversize, CA T14 Condominiums (Housing) 1166 Bay Street (unknown architect): Dec 80. Toronto 4, CA T8 Bedford Glen, 1555 Avenue Road (Annau Associates Architects): Dec 80. Toronto 3 + 1 oversize, CA T8 Harbour Terrace, Queen's Quay (Li Architects Inc.): Sept 86. Toronto 11, CA T2 Market Galleria Lofts, 71 Front Street East (Moriyama & Teshima Architects): Apr 81. Toronto 13, CA T8 Market Square Condominiums (Markson, Jerome): May 85. Toronto 3, CA T12 Queen's Quay Terminal building (Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Oct 85; Sept 86. Toronto 10, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Corporate headquarters buildings CIL House offices (Shore, Tilbe, Henschel, Irwin, Peters; Kwok, Stanley): Jun/Jul 82. Toronto 30-31, CA T9 Manulife North Tower (Clifford Lawrie Bolton Ritchie Architects): March 81. Toronto 34, CA T11 Meteorological Headquarters building (Boigon and Heinonen): June 72. Toronto 9, CA T12 Ontario Association of Architects Headquarters (unknown architect): Nov 92. Toronto 10, CA T7 Sunlife Tower (Parkin Partnership Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 10, CA T14 Toronto Real Estate Board head office(Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): May 71. Toronto 21, CA T4 United Rubber Workers of America building (Burston & Wells): April 58. Toronto 28, CA T4 Volkswagon Head office (Gustavs, Erland): Sept 80. Toronto 20, CA T5

177

Cultural property 45, 47 and 49 Front Street East (Stone & Kohn Architects): May 84. Toronto 16, CA T8 Casa Loma (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 18, CA T9 Gooderham building (unknown architect): May 85. Toronto 29, CA T10 Maple Leaf Gardens (unknown architect): Nov 70. Toronto 1, CA T12 Dormitories Tartu College student residence (Tampold & Wells): [n/a]. Toronto 8, CA T4 York University, Winters College Residence (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Aug-68. Toronto 32, CA T5 Education buildings Educational buildings, Toronto (Robbie, Roderick George; various): March 1971, Feb 1972. Toronto 15, CA T3 Etobicoke Education Centre (Shore and Moffat): Jun 70. Toronto 11, CA T5 Metropolitan Toronto School Board offices (unknown architect): Feb 85. Toronto 13-14, CA T12 Norman Bethune-Tim Buck Education Centre (Turner, Peter): [n/a]. Toronto 21, CA T1 Elementary school buildings Bellmere Public School (Andrews, John): Aug-66. Toronto 23, CA T6 Joseph Brant Public School (Craig Zeidler Strong): Aug-72. Toronto 16, CA T6 Kenton Drive Public School (Pentland & Baker): Jan 57. Toronto 14, CA T1 Kingsmill Vocational School (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): March 67. Toronto 13, CA T5 Milliken Public School (Ingleson, A.M.): Feb 84. Toronto 15, CA T6 North Bridlewood Junior Public School (Walker, Howard V.): Feb 68. Toronto 8, CA T1 Sunnylea Elementary School (Parkin, John Burnett): May 58. Toronto 5, CA T4 Timberbank Junior Public School (Sullivan & Pacek): [n/a]. Toronto 4, CA T6 Tom Longboat Junior Public School (DuBois Associates, Architects, Planners): May-82. Toronto 3, CA T6 Topcliff Avenue Public School (Craig Zeidler Strong): Nov 65. Toronto 17, CA T1 Toronto French School (Brook, Carruthers, Grierson, Shaw): April 72. Toronto 17, CA T4 Willow Park Public School (Craig Zeidler Strong): Y.B. 1965. Toronto 2, CA T6 Yorkwoods Gate Public School (Walker, Howard V.): [n/a]. Toronto 20, CA T1 Exhibition buildings Art Gallery of Ontario, Exhibitions, "The Bauhaus: 50 Years" (Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Gropius, Walter): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Canadian National Exhibition (CNE) grounds (Page & Steele Architects): April 58. Toronto 22, CA T9 Harbourfront Centre (unknown architect): Jan & Sept 86. Toronto 10, CA T11 Metropolitan Toronto Convention Centre (Crang & Boake Inc.): Nov 84; Nov 83. Toronto 27-29 + 2 oversize, CA T8 Ontario Place (Craig Zeidler Strong): Apr 71; Jun 71. Toronto 1, CA T14 Firehalls Firehall Number Eight (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 28, CA T10 Funeral homes R.S. Kane Funeral Home (Adamson Associates): Nov 85. Toronto 15, CA T2

178

Government buildings Canada Place (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Dec-84. Toronto 20, CA T6 North York City Hall (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 9, CA T1 Scarborough Civic Centre (Moriyama, Raymond): July 84; Jan 72. Toronto 18, CA T6 Toronto City Hall (Parkin Partnership Architects): Nov 79; May 89; Jul 85; Jun 87; 1965 Y.B; Dec 59; Aug 68. Toronto 6, CA T14 Grain elevators Canada Malting Company Silos (Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 14, CA T9 High school buildings Central Technical School (Fairfield (Robert) Associates): July 63. Toronto 25, CA T9 Humbermede Junior High School (Adamson, Gordon S.): [n/a]. Toronto 12, CA T1 Jane Junior High School (Boigon and Heinonen): May 69. Toronto 13, CA T1 Monarch Park Collegiate (unknown architect): Jan 65. Toronto 15, CA T12 North Bathurst Talmud Torah School (Weir, Cripps & Associates): May 58. Toronto 7, CA T1 Northview Heights Collegiate (Pentland & Baker; Boigon, Irving D.): May 58. Toronto 16, CA T1 Sir William Osler Vocational School (Ingleson, A.M.): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T3 Tabor Park Vocational School (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Jul-66. Toronto 6, CA T6 Tecumseh Senior Public School (Fairfield and Dubois): Aug 69. Toronto 7, CA T4 West Park Vocational School (Ingleson, A.M.): Mar-70. Toronto 22, CA T5 Health and welfare centres North York Medical Arts building (Markson, Jerome): Sept 71. Toronto 10, CA T1 Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre (Bregman + Hamann): April 73. Toronto 4, CA T4 Hockey arenas Maple Leaf Gardens (unknown architect): Nov 70. Toronto 1, CA T12 Horticultural buildings Civic Garden Centre (Markson, Jerome; Moriyama, Raymond): Apr 66. Toronto 11, CA T14 Hospitals Amherst Veterinary Hospital (Elken & Bechstead): Nov-58. Toronto 25, CA T6 Centenary Hospital (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T6 Hospital for Sick Children (drawing) (Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Dec 86. Toronto 16, CA T11 Lyndhurst Hospital (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 31, CA T11 Hotels (public accomodations) Four Seasons Sheraton Hotel (Searle, Wilbee, Rowland): [n/a]. Toronto 26, CA T8 Harbour Castle Hilton (unknown architect): Apr 86. Toronto 7, CA T11 Hotel Admiral, 249 Queen's Quay West (unknown architect): Sept 86. Toronto 2, CA T8 Hyatt Regency Hotel (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Feb 73. Toronto 4, CA T14 Lord Simcoe Hotel (Langston, Henry T.): Nov 79. Toronto 6, CA T3 Ramada Renaissance Hotel (Moffat & Duncan): Feb-85. Toronto 16, CA T2 Seaview Hotel (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 14, CA T3

179

Sheraton Centre Hotel (Parkin Partnership Architects): May 68. Toronto 9, CA T2 Sutton Place Hotel (unknown architect): Sept 67. Toronto 6, CA T4 Toronto Hilton Hotel (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): May 68. Toronto 8, CA T7 Housing for the elderly Belmont House Home for the Aged, 55 Belmont Street (Montgomery and Sisam): [n/a]. Toronto 15, CA T10 Harold & Grace Baker Centre (Sievenpiper, Ted): Aug 85. Toronto 8, CA T11 Landscape design Munk residence (Markson, Jerome): [n/a]. Toronto 16, CA T12 Libraries Albert Campbell Library (Fairfield and Dubois): Jan-72. Toronto 26, CA T6 Brookbanks Community Library (Banz, Brook, Carruthers, Grierson, Shaw ): Jan 70. Toronto 15, CA T9 Eatonville Branch Library (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 14, CA T5 Metro Toronto Reference Library (Moriyama, Raymond): July 84; July 82. Toronto 10, CA T12 Port Union Recreation Centre & Public Library (Annau Associates Architects): Jan-85. Toronto 11, CA T6 Richview Public Library (Dunlop, Wardell, Matsui, Aitken): Feb 67. Toronto 7, CA T5 University of Toronto, John P. Robarts Research Library (Mathers & Haldenby; Warner Burns Toan & Lunde): Aug-74. Toronto 1, CA T5 Wychwood Library (unknown architect): Dec 1980; Oct 79. Toronto 3-4, CA T13 York University, Scott Library (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat): [n/a]. Toronto 33, CA T5 Local transit Toronto Transit Commission - subway stations and streetcars (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 7, CA T2 Marinas Metro Toronto Police Marine Unit Building (Crang & Boake Inc.): Sept 85. Toronto 11, CA T12 Military education Burns Hall (A.J Diamond & Partners): June 89. Toronto 11, CA T1; CA O2, oversize Museum architecture Art Gallery of Ontario, Exhibitions, "Contemporary Furnishings" (Parkin Partnership Architects): Aug 58. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Exhibitions, "The Bauhaus: 50 Years" (Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Gropius, Walter): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Exterior & plans (Kuwabara Payne McKenna Blumberg Architects; Zeidler Roberts Partnership; Moriyama & Teshima Architects; A.J Diamond & Partners; Parkin Partnership Architects) April 87; Feb 75. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Henry Moore Gallery (Parkin Partnership Architects ): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Art Gallery of Ontario, Interiors (Parkin Partnership Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 11-16 + 1 oversize, CA T7 Casa Loma (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 18, CA T9 Hockey Hall of Fame (Darling & Curry): May 71. Toronto 2, CA T14 Music-halls O'Keefe Centre (Page & Steele Architects; Morgan, Earle C.): Mar 61; May 71. Toronto 3, CA T14 Roy Thomson Hall (Erickson, Arthur): Sept & Oct 82. Toronto 17-18, CA T12 Office building 1 Richmond Street West (Page & Steele Architects): May 84; Nov 87. Toronto 24, CA T8

180

30 St. Clair Avenue West (Page & Steele Architects): Nov 87. Toronto 19, CA T8 45 Charles Street East (Fairfield and Dubois): [n/a]. Toronto 17, CA T8 90 Adelaide Street West (Adamson Associates): Nov 86. Toronto 15, CA T4 95 Wellington Street West (Pellow + Associates Architects): Nov 86. Toronto 15, CA T4 Administration Park (Medwecki, Joseph): [n/a]. Toronto 27, CA T6 Atria North (The Thom Partnership): April 1972; July 1984; April 1980; Feb 1980; Sept 1980. Toronto 17, CA T7 Atrium on Bay (Page & Steele Architects): June/July 83. Toronto 5, CA T7 Baas Studio Gallery, 322 King Street West (unknown architect): June 81. Toronto 4, CA T9 Baldwin & Franklin Architects office, 167 Richmond Street West (Baldwin & Franklin Architects Inc.): Apr 81. Toronto 25, CA T4 Bell Trinity Square (Parkin Partnership Architects): Jan-85. Toronto 6, CA T9 British American Oil Company Ltd., Ontario Division (Crang & Boake Inc.): Jan 61; Aug 66. Toronto 13, CA T4 Canada Trust (Crang & Boake Inc.; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Parkin, John Burnett; Bregman and Hamann): June 68. Toronto 16, CA T4 Carling building (unknown architect): Jan 59. Toronto 13, CA T10 Chapel Glen (Boigon and Heinonen): June 72. Toronto 24, CA T9 Chiat/Day office (Frank O. Gehry and Associates, Inc.; Fujiwara, David): May & June 89. CA O2, oversize CIL House offices (Shore, Tilbe, Henschel, Irwin, Peters; Kwok, Stanley): Jun/Jul 82. Toronto 30-31, CA T9 Colonnade, 131 Bloor Street West (Tampold & Wells): May 71. Toronto 12, CA T8 Commerce Court (Page & Steele Architects; Pei, Ieoh Ming): Mar 73. Toronto 5, CA T10 Confederation Life (The Thom Partnership): Aug 70; June 84. Toronto 28, CA T9 Courtesy Chevrolet Oldsmobile (Strong & Associates): Jan 1982. Toronto 11, CA T10 Crang & Boake Architects office (Crang & Boake Inc.): Aug 65. Toronto 10, CA T10 Don Corning building (Fairfield and Dubois): June 66. Toronto 18, CA T10 Dunlop Architects office (Dunlop-Farrow Architects Inc.): [n/a]. Toronto 20, CA T10 Dynamic Funds of Canada (Shuster, Matthew): Nov 85. Toronto 21, CA T10 Electrical Reduction Plant (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Nov 66. Toronto 24, CA T10 Facelle Corporation (Montgomery and Sisam): Nov-82. Toronto 25, CA T10 FCI Canada Inc. (Burndy), 1530 Birchmount Road (Crang & Boake Inc.): Oct 57. Toronto 21, CA T6 Fischbach & Moore offices (Fairfield and Dubois): Jan 70. Toronto 12, CA T5 Gooderham building (unknown architect): May 85. Toronto 29, CA T10 Guaranty Trust Computer Centre (Dunlop-Farrow Architects Inc.; Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Oct 87. Toronto 29, CA T11 IBM Distribution Centre (Neish Owen Rowland & Roy Architects, Engineers, and Planners; Crang & Boake Inc.): Oct 1970; Jun/Jul 83. Toronto 21, CA T11 Italian Trade Commission office (Scolozzi, Francesco): Apr 85. Toronto 23, CA T11 Joseph Shepard Federal office building (DuBois Associates, Architects, Planners): [n/a]. CA T11, folder 26 Lawrence Avenue office (Ferdinand Wagner Architect): Feb-80. Toronto 12, CA T6 Manulife Centre (Marani, Rounthwaite & Dick, Architects): Aug 68; July 67. Toronto 33, CA T11 Manulife North Tower (Clifford Lawrie Bolton Ritchie Architects): March 81. Toronto 34, CA T11 Menkes Corporate Plaza (Adamson Associates): Aug 85. Toronto 8, CA T12

181

Neilson building (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Mar 63. Toronto 4, CA T1 New York Life building (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Nov 87. Toronto 5, CA T1 North American Life Centre, Xerox Tower (Adamson Associates): Apr 85. Toronto 6, CA T1 Now Magazine (Ferguson Ferguson Architects): Feb 85. Toronto 24, CA T1 Olivetti Canada Headquarters (Scolozzi, Francesco): Nov 85. Toronto 25, CA T1 Ontario Museum Association building (Diamond and Myers): June 71. Toronto 26, CA T1 Ontario Nursing Association building (unknown architect): Feb 86. Toronto 25, CA T3 Ontario Power building (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Feb 76. Toronto 1, CA T2 Pascal's Warehouse & Showroom (Nightingale and Quigley Architects): Feb-80. Toronto 14, CA T6 Phantom Industries (The Thom Partnership): Apr/Jul 84. Toronto 5, CA T2 Photoengravers & Electrotypers Plant (Mathers & Haldenby): Nov 72. Toronto 8, CA T5 Queen's Quay Terminal building (Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Oct 85; Sept 86. Toronto 10, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Rothmans of Pall Mall Canada Ltd. (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T3 Royal Bank Data Centre (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): Sept 72. Toronto 4, CA T3 Royal Bank Plaza (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T3 S.A. Armstrong Ltd. (unknown architect): Jul-89. Toronto 9, CA T6 Saffer Cravit & Freedom Advirtising offices (Cravit Ortved Architects): April 85. Toronto 7, CA T3 Sales centre for 132 Front Street East (unknown architect): June 81. Toronto 11, CA T8 Scotia Plaza, 44 King Street West (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden; Mathers & Haldenby): March 85. Toronto 11, CA T3 Sheppard Centre (unknown architect): May 80. Toronto 17, CA T3 Simpson's Tower (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Bregman and Hamann): May 69. Toronto 24, CA T3 Southern Pacific Hotels Services offices (Markson, Jerome): Feb 81. Toronto 8, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Sunlife Tower (Parkin Partnership Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 10, CA T14 Temple building (Gouinlock, George W.): July 68. Toronto 9, CA T4 Toronto Real Estate Board head office(Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): May 71. Toronto 21, CA T4 Toronto Stock Exchange (Strong & Associates): Nov 84. Toronto 19, CA T4 Travel office (Baldwin, Edward R.): Nov-81. Toronto 7 + 1 oversize, CA T7 United Rubber Workers of America building (Burston & Wells): April 58. Toronto 28, CA T4 Victoria Park Place (Matsui Baer Vanstone Freeman): July 85. Toronto 18, CA T1 Visiting Homemakers Association (Rebanks, Leslie): Apr 70. Toronto 18, CA T5 Wellington Square (unknown architect): May-85. Toronto 21, CA T5 Wrigley building (Adamson, Gordon S.): [n/a]. Toronto 24, CA T5 Yonge Street elevation, 100 Yonge Street (Quadrangle Architects Limited): Feb 87 Pers. Toronto 25, CA T5 YYZ Artists Outlet (unknown architect): Aug-88. Toronto 2, CA T7 Pavements, Concrete 505 Broadview Avenue (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T8 Police buildings Metro Toronto Police Marine Unit Building (Crang & Boake Inc.): Sept 85. Toronto 11, CA T12

182

Railroad stations Summerhill Canadian Pacific Railway Station (Pearson and Darling): Aug 68. Toronto 3, CA T1 Union Station (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T14 Recreation buildings Forest Valley Day Camp (Sprachman, Mandel): Mar 65. Toronto 31, CA T10 Port Union Recreation Centre & Public Library (Annau Associates Architects): Jan-85. Toronto 11, CA T6 YMCA, Metropolitan Central (A.J Diamond & Partners): Apr-85. Toronto 36, CA T5 Renovation (Architecture) Bathurst Quay, Harbourfront revitalization project (unknown architect): Sept 86. Toronto 8, CA T9 Coakwell Close (Cowle, John): Oct 89. Toronto 27, CA T9 Gasworks (Brown, Roy): May 71. Toronto 2, CA T11 St. Lawrence Market Hall (Walker, Howard V.): Apr 67; July 85; June 81. Toronto 1, CA T13 Residential houses 14 Thorncrest Road (Millar, Charles Blakeway): [n/a]. Toronto 22, CA T8 184 Roxborough Drive (Moffat, Moffat & Kinoshita Architects, Engineers and Planners): [n/a]. Toronto 9, CA T8 44-46 Castle Frank Road (Satok & Poizner): [n/a]. Toronto 18, CA T8 505 Broadview Avenue (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T8 59 Dunloe Road (Montgomery and Sisam): Nov 87. Toronto 7, CA T9 Alexandra Park housing cooperative (Ontario Housing Corporation): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T8 Balmoral Estates (Lipson and Dashkin Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T9 Black Residence (Hix, John): Jul 85. Toronto 1, CA T10 Brimley Acres (Jackson Ypes & Associates): [n/a]. Toronto 16, CA T9 CHDC residences (Fleiss, Henry): [n/a]. Toronto 15, CA T5 Devonsleigh Place (Stecura, Ihor): Feb 84. Toronto 17, CA T10 Fraser residence (Thom, Ron J.): [n/a]. Toronto 1, CA T11 Gloucester Mansion (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Y.B '67. Toronto 5, CA T11 Green residence (Klein and Sears): Dec 61. Toronto 15, CA T1 Hazelton residence, 33 Hazelton Avenue (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 20, CA T9 Hoskin residence (unknown architect): Oct 85. Toronto 17, CA T11 House design model (Brock & Ritz): Jan 86. Toronto 9, CA T10 Howard residence (Young & Wright Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 19, CA T11 Hylands residence (Natale Scott Browne): Oct 87. Toronto 20 + 1 oversize, CA T11 Jerome Markson townhouse (Markson, Jerome): May 63. Toronto 25, CA T11 Manors of Brandywine (Fleiss, Henry): Feb 80. Toronto 32, CA T11 Martin Grove Estates (Markson, Jerome): May 72. Toronto 10, CA T5 Mauran residence, 95 Ardwold Gate (Kapsi, Taivo): Apr 68. Toronto 5, CA T12 Munk residence (Markson, Jerome): [n/a]. Toronto 16, CA T12 Myers residence, 19 Berryman Street (Diamond and Myers; Myers, Barton): April 73. Toronto 5, CA T9

183

Nash residence (Markson, Jerome): Feb 71. Toronto 2, CA T1 Posluns house (Markson, Jerome): July 64. Toronto 6, CA T2 Refalmeen residence (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 17, CA T2 Restaurants La Cantinetta restaurant, 322 King Street West (Barton Myers Associates, Architects and Planners): [n/a]. Toronto 7, CA T8 Markleargelo's Restaurant (Ridgely, Gordon): Nov 81. Toronto 4, CA T12 McDonald's restaurant (Markson, Jerome): Nov 85. Toronto 7, CA T12 Northeast Court restaurant development (Szeto, Alfred): Feb 84. Toronto 22, CA T1 Rhapsody Café & Bistro (Pragnell, Peter): March 87. Toronto 12, CA T3 Scaramouche Restaurant (unknown architect): Nov 81, Toronto 9, CA T3 Trolley Café (Millar, Charles Blakeway): April, May, Sept 1980. Toronto 27, CA T4 Row houses Coakwell Close (Cowle, John): Oct 89. Toronto 27, CA T9 Nash residence (Markson, Jerome): Feb 71. Toronto 2, CA T1 Rosegarden Mews (Annau Associates Architects): March 83. Toronto 2, CA T3 School buildings (various) Educational buildings, Toronto (Robbie, Roderick George; various): March 1971, Feb 1972. Toronto 15, CA T3 Stephen Leacock Collegiate Institute (Ingleson, A.M.): Oct 70; Mar 71. Toronto 3, CA T4 School boards Metropolitan Toronto School Board offices (unknown architect): Feb 85. Toronto 13-14, CA T12 Shopping centers Don Mills Centre (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): Sept 57. Toronto 2, CA T10 Fairview Mall (Bregman and Hamann): Nov 85; May 71; Oct 70. Toronto 26, CA T10 Lothian Mews (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 30, CA T11 Sheppard Centre (unknown architect): May 80. Toronto 17, CA T3 Toronto Eaton Shopping Centre (Crang & Boake Inc.; Zeidler Roberts Partnership): Dec 80; July 82; Nov 79; May 77; Oct 79. Toronto 11-14, CA T13 Yorkdale Shopping Centre (Thom, Ron J.): March 84. Toronto 6, CA T13 Yorkville Square (Diamond and Myers): Jun-69. Toronto 3, CA T7 Skyscrapers 70 University Avenue (Strong & Associates): Jul 86; Nov 84. Toronto 15, CA T8 70 York Street (Page & Steele Architects): May 88 Persp. Toronto 14, CA T8 95 Wellington Street West (Pellow + Associates Architects): Nov 86. Toronto 15, CA T4 Canada Trust (Crang & Boake Inc.; Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig; Parkin, John Burnett; Bregman and Hamann): June 68. Toronto 16, CA T4 Chapel Glen (Boigon and Heinonen): June 72. Toronto 24, CA T9 CN Tower (WZMH Architects; Andrews, John): May 87; Feb 86; Jan 75; May 71; Nov 84; Sept 86. Toronto 2 + 1 oversize, CA T13 North American Life Centre, Xerox Tower (Adamson Associates): Apr 85. Toronto 6, CA T1 Ontario Power building (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Feb 76. Toronto 1, CA T2 Royal Bank Plaza (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden): [n/a]. Toronto 5, CA T3

184

Scotia Plaza, 44 King Street West (Webb, Zerafa, Menke s , Housden; Mathers & Haldenby): March 85. Toronto 11, CA T3 Simpson's Tower (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Bregman and Hamann): May 69. Toronto 24, CA T3 Toronto Stock Exchange (Strong & Associates): Nov 84. Toronto 19, CA T4 Sports facilities Ryerson Athletic Centre (Lett Smith Architects): [n/a]. CA O2, oversize Stadiums Rogers Center, Skydome (Crang & Boake Inc.): May 86; May 87. Toronto 18, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Subways Toronto Transit Commission - subway stations and streetcars (unknown architect): [n/a]. Toronto 7, CA T2 Synagogue architecture Beth David Synagogue, 7 Sultan Street (Grossman, Irving): [n/a]. Toronto 10, CA T9 Beth Tzedec Synagogue (Page & Steele Architects; Markus, Isadore; Kohl, Harry B.): March 58. Toronto 13, CA T9 Shaarei Tefillah (Grossman, Irving): June 63. Toronto 16, CA T3 Television stations City TV and Much Music (Quadrangle Architects Limited): Sept 87. Toronto 29 + 1 oversize, CA T9 Theaters O'Keefe Centre (Page & Steele Architects; Morgan, Earle C.): Mar 61; May 71. Toronto 3, CA T14 University buildings University of Toronto, Architecture, Landscape and Design Library (Shore and Moffat): Sept 86. Toronto 17, CA T9 University of Toronto,Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and Design (unknown architect): Sept 86. Toronto 5, CA T5 University of Toronto, Faculty of Music, Edward Johnson building (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Jan 63. Toronto 2, CA T5 University of Toronto, John P. Robarts Research Library (Mathers & Haldenby; Warner Burns Toan & Lunde): Aug-74. Toronto 1, CA T5 University of Toronto, Koffler Student Services Centre (Chapman, Howard P.; Walker, Howard V.): Mar-86. Toronto 30, CA T4 University of Toronto, Massey College (Thompson, Berwick, Pratt): Oct 63. Toronto 29, CA T4 University of Toronto, New College, Wetmore Hall (Fairfield & DuBois): May 70. Toronto 31, CA T4 University of Toronto, Scarborough Campus (John Andrews Architects; Page & Steele Architects): [n/a]. Toronto 3, CA T5 University of Toronto, Sidney Smith Hall (John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers): Jan-62. Toronto 4, CA T5 University of Toronto, St. Joseph's College (unknown architect): Mar 58. Toronto 22, CA T3 University of Toronto, Trinity College (George and Moorehouse; Darling & Pearson): April 80. Toronto 32, CA T4 York University, Central Square (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat): Aug 68. Toronto 30, CA T5 York University, Founders College (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Shore and Moffat): Aug 68. Toronto 31, CA T5 York University, McLaughlin College (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Shore and Moffat): [n/a]. Toronto 29, CA T5 York University, Osgoode Hall Law School (Marani, Rounthwaite & Dick, Architects): Dec 80. Toronto 26, CA T5 York University, Petrie Science and Engineering building (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; John B. Parkin Associates Architects & Engineers; Shore and Moffat): Nov 72. Toronto 28, CA T5

185

York University, Ross Humanities and Social Sciences building (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat): Aug-68. Toronto 34, CA T5 York University, Scott Library (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates; Searle, Wilbee, Rowland; Shore and Moffat): [n/a]. Toronto 33, CA T5 York University, Tait MacKenzie Centre (Adamson Associates): Aug 68; Nov 72. Toronto 27, CA T5 York University, Winters College Residence (Gordon S. Adamson & Associates): Aug-68. Toronto 32, CA T5 Urban parks Trinity Square Park (The Thom Partnership): Dec 84. Toronto 26, CA T4 Urban renewal Gasworks (Brown, Roy): May 71. Toronto 2, CA T11 Queen's Quay boardwalk (Li, Daniel): Sept 86. Toronto 12, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Wellington Square (unknown architect): May-85. Toronto 21, CA T5 Waterfronts Bathurst Quay, Harbourfront revitalization project (unknown architect): Sept 86. Toronto 8, CA T9 Queen's Quay boardwalk (Li, Daniel): Sept 86. Toronto 12, CA T2; CA O2, oversize Toronto Islands cityscape (unknown architect): Sept 57. Toronto 18, CA T4 Zoos (built complexes) Toronto Zoo (WZMH Architects): Mar 87. Toronto 7, CA T14

186

APPENDIX B Hypothetical `Subject Indexing Testing' Questionnaire CANADIAN ARCHITECT IMAGE ARCHIVE Subject Index Testing Date: About the Project: These subject indexes are for the Canadian Architect Image Archive located in Special Collections. Each has been created for researchers, students, and staff as a means to provide easy access as well as preserve the longevity of the archive. Purpose of Testing: To determine the effectiveness of the Canadian Architect Subject Indexes.

Look through and study each tab in the Subject Indexes. Each tab represents a searchable category. This should take 10-15 min. After, please answer the questions below and add your comments. 1. How well does the display (font, colour, layout) reflect the concept? Circle a rating: 1 2 3 4 5

2. The intended users are researchers and students interested in architecture and/or photographs. Are all needed facets included in the index? Suggestions for additions? Circle a rating: 1 2 3 4 5

3. Are the entry terms complete in the alphabetical list? What could make the entries more descriptive, if necessary? Circle a rating: 1 2 3 4 5

4. Is it easily searchable? If not, are there suggestions to make it easier? Circle a rating: 1 2 3 4 5

Please add any further comments?

187

188

