Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Newfoundland And Labrador Photographs From The George Eastman House Legacy Collection
Edith Cuerrier
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Photography Commons Recommended Citation
Cuerrier, Edith, "Newfoundland And Labrador Photographs From The George Eastman House Legacy Collection" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1082.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

NEWFOUNDLANDANDLABRADORPHOTOGRAPHS FROM THE GEORGE EASTMAN HOUSE LEGACY COLLECTION

By Edith Cuerrier BA Anthropology, Memorial University ofNewfoundland, 2006

A thesis presented to Ryerson University and George Eastman House in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Pro gram of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 ©Edith Cuerrier 2009

PROPERTY OF RYERSON ·w. ~.~SITY liBRARY

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

ii

NEWFOUNDLANDANDLABRADORPHOTOGRAPHS FROM THE GEORGE EASTMAN HOUSE LEGACY COLLECTION By Edith Cuerrier 2009 Master of Arts I Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University and George Eastman House

ABSTRACT Photographs of Newfoundland and Labrador contained in two albums from the George Eastman House Legacy Collection constitute the subject of this thesis project. The project consists in accessioning, numbering and cataloguing each image, 299 in total, and in enriching the records with historical and cultural context for the purpose of making these images searchable through the George Eastman House database and accessible to researchers for future projects. This is important because of the historic value associated with the life and deeds of George Eastman and because these images are part of a large and as yet not fully catalogued collection of Eastman's private photographs. The Newfoundland album photographs are consecutively numbered 2009:0039:0001 to 0110, the Newfoundland inventory sheets became objects 2009:0040:0001 to 0003, and the Labrador album photographs are numbered 2009:0041:0001 to 0189. These records are now available both electronically and as a hard-copy binder.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENT In the course of this thesis project, I have found that the more one researches photographs, the richer the experience. Over the last two years, I have been transformed from a former photographer and budding archaeologist into a new breed of photographic archivist and scholar and I remain enthralled with all the avenues that it has opened up to me. I am truly grateful to the PPCM faculty and staff at Toronto's Ryerson University as well as all the faculty, staff and volunteers at George Eastman House International Museum of Photography and Film for their exceptional expertise and guidance. I am also thankful to my PPCM classmates for their wonderful friendship and camaraderie. I am pleased to have carried out all of the practical aspects of my thesis project in Rochester, the city to which George Eastman gave so much, but I also like knowing that I not only worked on and wrote part of this text in Rochester but also while on the ferry from North Sydney to Port aux Basques and once in the island of Newfoundland. In effect, I retraced some of George Eastman's steps and experienced, in small part, some ofthe Newfoundland 1906 and Labrador 1910 journeys. I saw, as Eastman and his travel companions did, the rugged beauty of the landscapes of this part of the North American continent and the riches of its scenery, wildlife, and people. I am grateful to my family and friends across Canada and especially those on the Rock, as the island of Newfoundland is affectionately called, for their love, encouragement and support. From St John's, Toronto, Ottawa, Rochester, New York City and many other places in between, I now return to my home overlooking Conception Bay where I will continue to study photographs but most of all enjoy them and share them with others to further the field of photographic preservation and collections management.

iv

DEDICATION

To Daniel P. Finney (1950-2003) Beloved husband and best friend.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS

List of Illustrations List of Appendices Research, Analysis and Documentation Introduction Survey of Literature and other Resources Description of albums and photographs Background research Preservation Cataloguing methodology and product Future directions Conclusion Appendices Bibliography

page vn page vnt

page 1 page 4 page 7 page 14

page 43 page 47 page 48 page 49 page 59

vi

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS Illustration 1. "Newfoundland, The Tourist's Paradise" Illustration 2. "First tramp across barrens" Illustration 3. Fishing in Labrador. Illustration 4. "Album GE Trip to Newfoundland, 1906" Illustartion 5. "Box 19, Album GE trip to Labrador 191 0" Illustration 6. George Eastman carrying a camera case. Illustration 7. George Eastman taking a photograph. Illustration 8. "The Guides" Illustration 9. " ... Best salmon pool in Newfoundland" Illustration 10. "GE, developing & printing his pictures" Illustration 11. Caribou swimming across Adies Pond. Illustration 12. The Surf Illustration 13. On the ·motor launch. Illustration 14. On the deck of the Surf Illustration 15. Picnic lunch by a Labrador river. Illustration 16. Whale on wharf of whaling station. Illustration 17. "GE- taken by the light of the acetylene lamp" Illustration 18. Labrador campsite. Illustration 19. "Deer Lake Station" page tx page 6 page 6 page 9 page 9 page 13 page 13 page 26 page 26 page 27 page 29 page 33 page 33 page 38 page 38 page 42 page 54 page 54 page 56

vii

LIST OF APPENDICES

Appendix A- TMS catalogue worksheet Appendix B- Camp life and camp equipment Appendix C- Train and ferry travel Appendix D- The Grenfell Mission

page 49 page 50 page 55 page 57

viii

N~wfoundland
THE/ TOURIST' g

~ARAD ~SE

Opportunities for Spor~ unrivalled in North. America·
Salmon and Trout Streams Easily Accessible 3 ~ 3 Filled wtth Gamev Fish:

Ouf of Beaten Tr~ck ~f Tnnie1, this. Country . appeals irresistibly ·to the moot blasc.of Globe Trotters. . ~' ' '. ;

. Scenery flo.st Enchanthig
Majesticj Headlands and· Fjords Screen Y~lleys . of 1· · Sytvan Beauty. · . A Trip Newfoundh:ind is an Epoch in the Life of the :rourist) One Visit means many. . ' ·i .

to

.

~omfoxtable
J

Hotels in Every Settlement

.

Shooting Bungalows wi!hin E~sy Reach or the lordly Caribou, the

fidest Game in .the ·New World ·. I . . PROFICIENT..GUIDES TO. BE ~AD AT EVERY . I. . . . SPORTrNG · RESORT. Government and JRaiiway Officials !Ready t® Daer .i - To fmBJris.ts9 W~mK .
· NEWFOUNDLAND has bee~ · called The Norwau of Am~ri~, . bt~t · the comparison does not f1,11ly descr~ the Cl1krm~. of this . . ~ ~

J.ts ~Scebery~ is ~ore EntiancinR"· than that. of Norway and
~~llrnftrlle(s . longer aud ·More Salubrious.

m . , . I· 'I~Iarid iri · Tffe · sea ·. : I
,··c, .. · : . . '

_;

. . . . . -.:.J.......,y 6~0tJRS .A~·.
· : _,:·· SEA .·. ..
Go~~rmbent will ' gladly En.·nish any pro~~th·e· · Tourist . ,may ·. desire ·

iS 'EASILY

R~t~CIIF.D FROM NORTH SYDNEY, N. S .

.~::.r; p ~.l)1el~fo~l~dl:and4!hl':··r(

¥~::tE~:rrKJ~ei~rtani:Seivicif· Rendered to Visitors . . L ..
1. ·
1

· ·

ie';··V'islt'c>t.~·ai'·ol,eRsamt its ros~ible.
· -.,~· t

1)rov~rt:.iallv Hospilnble and aim' to nul:e
:
··! ·

· ·

·

A?> ,._ to , Sp()rtiug
, ·., .,· .:cao:.c · .·... . · '

I' · .- ·· , ··

R~.sort .i

...... .. . .

".)

1;~~~~·ro~~!~=

,,~ ~~£~· ~.,_o,di ~. ~, :;·, .. .., ~: \ t: l
· . ··'·4t
! ·....

etC.. 'nta}· ~

b"a(l;

br

Illustration 1. "Newfoundland, The Tourist's Paradise," The Western Star (Bay of Islands, Newfoundland), 13 July 1910.

ix

INTRODUCTION
It has already been 100 years since George Eastman frrst travelled to what is now the

Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador. An avid outdoorsman, Eastman had probably read about this part of the continent in outdoor sport publications or heard about it from enthusiastic hunters and fishermen among his friends and acquaintances. Newfoundland and Labrador is still a haven for outdoor enthusiasts; and while some of the places that Eastman encountered there remain virtually unchanged since his visit, others are completely different. In any case, the uniqueness and beauty of those places remain. Once I saw the images that had been taken during Eastman's trips to Newfoundland in 1906 and Labrador in 1910, I was fascinated, and once I realized that no one had ever researched them, I happily chose them as the subjects of this thesis project. I had lived in five other provinces within Canada when I moved to the province of Newfoundland and Labrador in late 2001 and proceeded to fall completely and utterly in love with that ruggedly beautiful part of my country. As a PPCM graduate student in search of a thesis topic, a random exploration of the George Eastman House database yielded unanticipated results. In the 1980s, two series of nitrate negatives, respectively described as "Labrador 191 0" and "Newfoundland 1906", had apparently been scanned and hastily catalogued, with a minimal amount of information, prior to being permanently placed in off-site cold storage due to their status as a fire hazard. My search for related materials led me to the George Eastman House Legacy Collection where Kathy Connor, long time curator of all things belonging to George Eastman and his house 1, assisted me in this line of inquiry.

Kathy Connor is the Curator of the George Eastman House Legacy Collection. She oversees the care and maintenance of George Eastman's 50-room Colonial Revival mansion and the George Eastman Archive which contains over 162,000 artifacts that tell the history of the Eastman Kodak Company and its founder, George Eastman.

1

1

Imagine my delight when I discovered that George Eastman had traveled to Newfoundland and Labrador on two occasions during the first decade of the twentieth century and that photographic albums had been compiled for each journey. Ms. Connor located two boxes, one labelled "Newfoundland 1906" and the other labelled "Labrador 1910," that contained album pages on which silver gelatin prints from those trips were mounted. These photographs had lain dormant in the vault since the 1950s. None of them had ever been documented; none were accessioned, let alone catalogued. While in the study centre, the curator also showed me a box ofunidentified loose photographs and a large number of them turned out to be Labrador 191 0 prints. It thus became my mission to learn as much as I could about these photographs in order to document them and eventually create records that would make them available to others for research and appreciation. To that end, research into primary and secondary sources of information was undertaken. A historical focus provided context for the albums and photographs while supplying information and clues about the locations and the subjects photographed, and extending our understanding of the images. Not only are these images charming and unique but they also have historical and social value. They document life at the tum of the twentieth century for Eastman and his entourage and for the people of Newfoundland and Labrador. All of the people in these images made contributions, great and small, to society during their lifetimes. Many of the places and activities in the images, such as the now defunct Newfoundland railroad and whaling stations, are barely recognizable because they have been altered to such an extent that they can never be photographed again in the same way, while others are surprisingly unchanged, such as the scenery and the local architecture. The cataloguing records are empirical (names, dates, places,

2

measurements) and dispassionate, but when one lingers over the photographs and their content, one fmds a sense of history and a glimpse of what it must have been like to be there at that time. These evocative images, photographs of Newfoundland and Labrador contained in two albums from the George Eastman House Legacy Collection, constitute the subject of my thesis project. The project consists of accessioning and cataloguing each image, 299 in total, and in enriching the records with historical and socio-cultural context, for the purpose of making these images searchable through the George Eastman House database and accessible to researchers for future projects. This is important because of the historic value associated with the life and deeds of George Eastman and because these images are part of a large and as yet not fully catalogued collection of Eastman's private photographs. In truth, the goal of this thesis project is for others to view these images and to enjoy and appreciate them for their wistfulness and charm as much as for their historical or cultural content. Due to time limitations, only the images of Newfoundland and Labrador mounted on the 1906 and 1910 album pages are included in the project. Someday, when there is more time and fmancial resources, the associated nitrate negatives, lantern slides and spare prints will perhaps be researched as well. Until then, this thesis project will serve as the record of George Eastman's visits to Newfoundland and Labrador and as my modest contribution to the George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

3

LITERATURE SURVEY AND OTHER RESOURCES Sources of reference materials on the topic of photography are plentiful but useful literature on the topic of photographic albums is much less abundant. My literature search began with Susan Stewart's On Longing: Narratives of the

Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Collection, a book-long essay on the relationship
between narratives and objects. Photographic albums can be viewed as narratives but Stewart's book is more closely related to the nostalgia that is fabricated by narratives through collections and souvenirs. She makes good points on that subject but does not include photographs or photographic albums in her discussions. I narrowed my search considerably to find Martha Langford's book, Suspended Conversations, which, in my view, was very useful and insightful in its discussions of photographic albums in terms oftheoretical framework. In order to situate the subjects of my thesis historically and geographically, I consulted Antonia McGrath's Newfoundland Photography 1849-1949, a lovely but modest compilation of images from the Newfoundland Museum "intended to provide us with a delightful and unselfconscious look into the past."2 Her accompanying essay on e~rly photography in Newfoundland is a short chronological and historical account which, though very interesting to me, was not relevant to my current research other than to confrrm that photography came to Newfoundland as early as 1843 through daguerreotypists Valentine and Doane 3 , long before George Eastman came along. Sean T. Cadigan's Newfoundland and Labrador: A History 4 provided the required geopolitical information about Newfoundland and Labrador in the first decade of the twentieth century.
Antonia McGrath, introduction to Newfoundland Photography, 1849-1949 (StJohn's, NL: Breakwater Books, 1980). 3 Antonia McGrath, "Early Photography in Newfoundland" in Newfoundland Photography, 1849-1949 (StJohn's, NL: Breakwater Books, 1980}. 4 Sean T. Cadigan, Newfoundland and Labrador: A History {Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009}.
2

4

Next, I focused on two books about George Eastman, the biographies written by Carl Ackerman in 1930 and Elizabeth Brayer in 2003, though neither expand on Eastman's personal life or his love of camping and the outdoors. In the 1930s, George Whipple, Eastman's good friend, published a small book called George Eastman: A Picture Story of an Out of Doors Man Camping, Fishing, Hunting in which Eastman's love of the outdoors is evident through images of many outdoor excursions, though the Newfoundland and Labrador trips are not included. 5 The bulk of the primary source research was done in the George Eastman Study Center at Eastman House, pouring over Eastman's archived correspondence spanning the years 1905 to 1912, concentrating on 1906 and 1910, to glean the clues that would fill the gaps of knowledge about the two albums at hand. A visit to the Department of Rare Books and Special Collections at the University of Rochester also yielded transcripts of interviews and letters that were useful to me. 6 Newspapers published in the first two decades of the twentieth century were also consulted. Finally, the Chronicles of an African Trip is a self-published book by Eastman created from his photographs and letters home. 7 Akin to a travel journal, it provides a frrst person point of view on the outdoorsman that Eastman was and serves to establish this side of his personality more clearly than his biographers did. Eastman's journey to Africa was taken more than a decade after his final visit to Newfoundland and Labrador, but I like to think that much of his wanderlust

George Whipple, George Eastman: A Picture Story of an Out of Doors Man- Camping, Fishing, Hunting (Rochester, NY: self published, c.1935). 6 University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives, Registers of George Eastman Papers (Rochester, NY: University of Rochester, 1980). 7 George Eastman, Chronicles of an African Trip (Rochester, NY: self published, 1927).

5

5

for great expanses of wilderness and wildlife was inspired on the barrens 8 ofNewfoundland and the rivers ofLabrador. (See illustrations 2 and 3.)

Illustration 2. "First tramp across barrens," 2009:0039:0031, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

Illustration 3. Fishing in Labrador, 2009:0041:0099, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
(Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum of Photography and Film.)
8

Barrens: noun, plural, elevated land or plateau with low, scrubby vegetation. Dictionary of Newfoundland English Online, http://www.heritage.nf.ca/dictionary/.

6

DESCRIPTIONS OF ALBUMS AND IMAGES George Eastman travelled to Newfoundland in 1906 and to Labrador in 1910. Two separate albums, both held within the Legacy Collection at George Eastman House, Rochester, NY, were created to hold the photographs from those trips. While George Eastman never married and did not have children of his own, he traveled and vacationed with close friends on a regular basis and he enjoyed their company and that of their children as though they were his family. As such, many of his photographic albums can be regarded as family albums. In this case, the photographs from Newfoundland and Labrador document Eastman's private life and personal interest in camping, hunting and fishing as well as photography so they could also be regarded as travel albums. The archival box labelled "Album GE Trip to Newfoundland, 1906" contains fourteen album pages individually housed in clear Mylar polyester archival sleeves, and three pages of notes written by George Eastman. (See illustration 4.) The album pages, with three or four silver gelatin prints mounted on each side, are made from sheets of black paper measuring 11x14 inches. Since the prints, 109 photographs in all, are numbered consecutively, the original order of the album pages has been preserved in spite of the fact that these pages are not bound together and that there is no album cover associated with them. The box also holds three legal-size ledger sheets filled with numbered notes that correspond to the numbers inscribed on the top left comer of every photograph. All of these notes are written in Eastman's own handwriting. Together, these three sheets constitute a full descriptive inventory of the images on these album pages, and they were invaluable to me as a research tool for this album. The archival container labelled "Box 19, Album GE trip to Labrador 191 0" reveals forty two album pages, also measuring 11x14 inches, and also in individual clear Mylar polyester

7

archival sleeves, laid on top of an album cover, separated from it with a single sheet of thick interleaving paper. (See illustration 5.) The 333 mounted photographs, of which 189 are from the Labrador trip, are not numbered (except for the first four) and no inventory was found, so the original order is not recorded. Nevertheless, the order in which the pages were sequenced in the box displayed a seemingly logical order, similar to that of the Newfoundland album. Once the Labrador trip itinerary was reconstructed from Eastman's correspondence, it was obvious that the order of the pages followed a chronological and thematic pattern, i.e. New York harbour images at the beginning and end of the trip, and sailing images before and after camping scenes. I have therefore preserved this page order in the course of my research. Equally valuable as finding the inventory sheets for the Newfoundland 1906 photographs, was locating a box of unidentified loose photographs of which 136 turned out to be images of Labrador 1910. These photographs, showing different views and angles of the same scenes as those in the Labrador album, provided a host of additional information which proved invaluable in piecing this trip together. For both albums, the pages are solid black paper in excellent condition, without abraded edges or dog-eared comers. None of the pages bear captions or embellishments of any kind, and there are no other artifacts, such as newspaper clippings or postcards, in either of these albums. The album cover, which has been kept under the album pages at the bottom of the Labrador box, is a commercially available black leather cover with post binding. The outside of the cover bears no stamped or written inscriptions, and neither does the inside. A small label on the inside back cover indicates that it was manufactured by The Hein Company. The cover has worn comers and abrasions along its edges. It is safe to assume that the Newfoundland pages would have been originally held in a similar album cover.

8

Illustration 4. Archival box labelled "Album GE Trip to Newfoundland, 1906." (Photo by author.)

Illustration 5. Archival box labelled "Box 19, Album GE trip to Labrador 1910." (Photo by
author.)

9

In the Labrador 1910 box, the page at the top appears to be the original frrst page since it bears the date 191 0 (pencil, handwritten, centered at top) and the prints affixed to it are numbered from one to four. This is the only page that bears numbered prints in this album. It is also the only page that has photos affixed on only one side. All other forty one pages have three or four prints mounted on both sides. Because of the scenery and activities pictured in the photographs, the frrst twenty three pages appear to be from the Labrador fishing trip, followed by what I would call a transition page that is followed by eighteen pages of images depicting a hunting trip on horseback through landscape reminiscent of the Canadian Rockies, obviously a different trip especially since we know that horseback riding and game hunting was not part of the Labrador agenda. One side of the transition page has similar images to the first page (i.e. views of NY harbour from a ship), and handwritten inscription "191 0", while the reverse bears the handwritten date "1915" and shows photos of George Eastman and guests near a train station in what appears to be the start of the second trip. Eastman's trip to Riga, North Dakota, in 1915 9 would be consistent with the photos that show horseback riding in mountainous areas. Some guests were both on the Labrador and North Dakota trips and this may suggest why these two trips were paired in the same album. 10 In both albums, all the photographs are securely in place, not held in the albums by comers as one might expect, but by the dry mounting method, a method that was available to Eastman. 11 Mark Osterman, a member of the George Eastman House conservation department and expert in nineteenth century processes, explained that dry mounting dates back to the 1890s.

9

Trip companion list, n.d., D138 Box 6, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 10 The images from the 1915 trip to North Dakota are outside the scope of my project and therefore are not included in the research and thesis project. 11 In other albums formerly owned by Eastman, and now held in the George Eastman House Legacy Collection, most of the photographs have also been dry mounted to the album pages.

10

This method involves the use of shellac sheets cut to size then tacked in place between the photograph and the album page with the use of an iron. These were then placed in a heat press so that the shellac melted, uniformly bonding the photographs to the album page. According to Osterman, this method can be beneficial to the preservation of photographs as it isolates them from the paper on which they are mounted and protects them from the acids that the paper
. 12 usua 11y contams.

The prints are of the same approximate size throughout, 3.25x5.5 inches, either vertically or horizontally. Some of the prints show slight signs of silvering in the darkest areas and slight yellowing, which is not unexpected in gelatin silver prints of this vintage, but all are generally in very good condition. In a few prints, Eastman is shown using a folding camera with which I believe most of the photos were made. (See illustration 6 and 7.) George Eastman House database records for the corresponding 1906 and 191 0 nitrate negatives indicate that they were all most likely made with a Kodak Folding 3A Autographic Special camera. Todd Gustavson, Technology Collection Curator at George Eastman House, indicated that this camera model was one of the high-end Kodak cameras produced at that time, and that Eastman owned one and was
knpwn to have used it.
13

However, I have since ascertained that while the camera was indeed the

Folding 3A model (made from 1903 to 1915 to produce 3.25x5.5 inches size negatives on 122 roll film), it could not be an Autographic Special because the autographic feature was not available for the 3A until1914. 14

Mark Osterman, personal communication, 17 February 2009. Todd Gustavson, personal communication, 15 May 2009. 14 James McKeown and Joan McKeown, Price Guide to Antique and Classic Cameras, 8th Edition, 1992-1993 (Grantsburg, WI: Centennial Photo, 1992), 96 and 110; Eaton 5. Lothrop Jr., A CenturyofCamerasfrom the Collection of the International Museum of Photography at George Eastman House, Revised and Expanded Edition (Dobbs Ferry NY: Morgan and Morgan Inc Publishers, 1982), 157; Kate Rouse, The First- Time Collector's Guide to Classic Cameras (London: Quintet Publishing Limited, 1994), 28-31.
13

12

11

All photographs in both albums are well composed; they have an aesthetic quality indicating the work of a serious amateur. We can assume that Eastman took most of the photos, but since there are photos of Eastman in both albums, we also know that one or more of his guests also took some of them. Nonetheless, all the images are attributed to Eastman unless indicated otherwise. In addition, it is not clear whether George Eastman was the compiler of the albums or whether he had assistance. Moreover, we do not know if these albums were compiled for Eastman's personal use or if they were designed as a gift. We know that he had to have seen the frrst album in order to number the prints and compile the three page inventory that is in his own handwriting. We can surmise that he was about to do the same for the second album since he had begun to number the frrst page's prints in the same way. Most of the Newfoundland and Labrador photographs include people within the landscapes. George Eastman and his travel companions are pictured fishing, canoeing, clam digging, outdoor cooking, as well as lounging on a yacht, and camping in tents in the wilderness. Interspersed among the photographs of people are lovely scenic views of sailing ships, icebergs, waterfalls, and other vistas. The subjects of the Newfoundland 1906 photographs can be broken down into four categories of roughly equal numbers: train and ferry travel, hunting and fishing, portaging and canoeing the waterways, and camp life. Among the Labrador 1910 photographs, the four roughly equivalent categories of images are: yacht life and activities, landscapes and scenery, fishing and canoeing, and camp life, also in approximately equal numbers. Camp life and camp equipment, train and ferry travel, and the Grenfell Mission are noteworthy subjects that warrant separate discussion and are respectively discussed in appendices B through D.

12

Illustration 6. George Eastman carrying a camera case, (detail of) 2009:0040:0121, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. The back of the camera is visible and has no autographic feature. (Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

Illustration 7. George Eastman taking a photograph, (detail of) 2009:0040:0033, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum
ofPhotography and Film.)

13

BACKGROUND RESEARCH George Eastman As the instigator of both journeys to what is now the province of Newfoundland and Labrador (NL ), George Eastman is the central figure in the cast of characters featured in so many of the photographs. Much has been written about Eastman and the significant role that he played in the history of photography as an inventor and businessman, and about the impact that he made on the world as a civic minded philanthropist and community leader. However, his private life and personal pursuits are documented to a much lesser extent due to his reserved personality and his preference for personal privacy. He has not been described as gregarious or outgoing but it is clear that he very much enjoyed entertaining in his home and spending time in the company of his friends as is evident in what remains of his correspondence with them. He owned an estate in North Carolina called Oak Lodge where he hosted friends and family for weeks at a time each year. His friends, the Eastwoods, Mulligans and Newhalls, were all frequent visitors to his Rochester home as well as to Oak Lodge. Knowing that George Eastman was a very wealthy man explains the elaborate amenities he and his fellow travellers enjoyed even when in the wilderness ofNewfoundland and Labrador. One of the fellow travellers, Albert ("Bert") Eastwood, explains that Eastman always paid all the bills on these trips. Eastwood wanted to pay his share, but "Eastman quietly insisted in a very tactful way." 15
It was Eastman's old friend, Bert Eastwood, who told of Eastman's frrst camping trip to

Lake Nippigon in 1899 as his first outing in rough country: "he entered into the spirit of this

15

A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, 04 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives.

14

rough country with zest." 16 Eastman applied his rigorous acumen as a business executive to the task of planning and organizing life at camp, from outdoor cooking to sleeping tents. 17 Eastman especially enjoyed camp life because he could "cook, fish, shoot, ride over the mountains and be himself without anyone making a 'fuss' over him." 18 (For details on camp life and equipment, see appendix B.) Eastman's travel companions For his 1906 Newfoundland trip, Eastman invited only three guests: Dr. Converse, Dr. Mulligan and Mr. Eastwood, Dr. Converse being the least known of the three. It is not clear when Converse came to Rochester, what his connection to Eastman was, or even how he came to be invited on the 1906 trip. Dr. Rob Roy McGregor Converse was born in 1844 in Cincinnati, Ohio. He had been ordained in 1879, after having served in the Civil War
19

and was the rector of Rochester's St.

Luke's church from 1897 until his death in September 1915. At the time of the Newfoundland trip with Eastman, he, at 62, was the oldest member of the group. We only know that Eastman was still in contact with him several years later because he is mentioned in a 1910 letter that Eastman wrote to their fishing guide: "I saw Dr. Converse night before last and he asked particularly after you."
20

As rector of a nearby church, he may have been an acquaintance

through Eastman's mother, who was still alive and living with Eastman in 1906 and who, unlike

A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, D4 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 17 Ibid. 18 Carl W. Ackerman, George Eastman: Founder of Kodak and the Photography Business (Washington, DC: Beard Books, 2000, [c.1930]), 475. 19 Cyrus Roy. Note 1 in "Mrs. Gilman H. Perkins and Her World," University of Rochester Library Bulletin, volume XXIX Autumn 1975, Number 1. 20 George Eastman to George Nichols, 23 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

16

15

Eastman21 , was religious and maintained connections with neighbouring parishes. In any case, in a note written to Eastman after the trip, Dr. Converse expressed his gratitude and qualified the vacation as "the trip of my lifetime. " 22 In contrast, Eastman's other two guests, Eastwood and Mulligan, were both well-known members of Eastman's social circle, long-time friends and frequent travel companions. Albert Bigelow Eastwood, sometimes referred to by the initials A.B.E. in Eastman's notes, and informally known as Bert, was one of Eastman's neighbours and best friend since the 1880s. 23 Eastwood was born in Rochester on October 3, 1867 and died on January 7, 1958 at age 90. 24 He was president and, later, chairman of the board for the successful retail shoe company that his father had founded. He was an active community leader throughout his life; he chaired and served as board member for a number of organizations such as the Chamber of Commerce, the Genesee Hospital, and the Community Chest to name a few. 25 From 1892 to her death on July 5, 1942, Eastwood was married to Eleanor Haughton Motley (born October 28, 1870), one of six daughters from a prominent Rochester family in the flour milling business. 26 They had no children. 27 Eastwood and his wife were frequent guests at Oak Lodge for more than 25 years, and they also journeyed on other extended trips with Eastman over the years. 28 Eleanor was involved with WW1 sock knitting endeavours 29 and other charitable works but was somewhat reserved and less prominent in the community and therefore
Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 336. Dr Converse to George Eastman, 10 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 23 Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 122. 24 Tombstone Inscriptions from Section C of Mt Hope Cemetery, Rochester NY. http://www.rootsweb.ancestry.com/"'nymonroe/cem/mh-intro.htm. 25 "Albert B. Eastwood Dies; Civic Leader", Times Union, 7 January 1958. 26 Ibid.; Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 122; Tombstone Inscriptions from Section C of Mt Hope Cemetery, Rochester NY, http://www.rootsweb.ancestry.com/"'nymonroe/cem/mh-intro.htm. 27 "Albert B. Eastwood Dies; Civic Leader", Times Union, 7 January 1958. 28 Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 283, 285. 29 Ibid., 408.
22 21

16

is not as well-known as her husband. Nevertheless, the Eastwoods were definitely Rochester socialites as were the Mulligans, but Dr. and Mrs. Mulligan were both more recognizable figures physically and socially. In the album photographs, Dr. Mulligan is easily identifiable as the very tall and bulky man while his wife always has her hair in a distinctive loose bun that creates a halo of hair around her head. In Brayer's biography of Eastman, Mulligan is described as "a rumpled hunk of a surgeon, said to resemble the backside of an elephant" while his wife Mary is "petite and vivacious". Dr. Edward Wright Mulligan (1858-1930) was Eastman's physician and friend for over thirty years. He was head of the surgical service at the Rochester General Hospital for many years, a long-time staff member at Strong Memorial Hospital, and one of the founders of the American College of Surgeons; hence, Rochester's most influential surgeon. 30 He loved the history of medicine and generously financed the acquisition of early and rare medical books for the University of Rochester Medical Library. He was born in Ontario 31 , Canada, on Sept 24, 1858, and moved to Illinois with his parents in 1869. He obtained his medical degree in 1881 from Rush Medical College in Chicago, specializing in surgery at New York Hospital and Bellevue before coming to Rochester. 32 His wife, Mary Durand Mulligan (1869-1927), whom he married in 1893, was also a close friend of George Eastman. 33 They had two daughters, Lelia Durand ( 1897-1901 ), who died

George W. Corner, "The Edwa~d W. Mulligan Collection of Early Medical Books," University of Rochester Library Bulletin, Volume 1- November 1945- Number 1. 31 Exact community unknown at this time. 32 "Edward W. Mulligan, Noted as Physician, Surgeon, and Civic Leader, Passes Away", Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, 3 January 1930. 33 Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 182.
30

17

at a young age, and Mary Stuart (1911-1982)? 4 (A son, Edward D., is also mentioned in some sources but remains a mystery at this time. 35 ) Mary Mulligan was born in Xenia, Ohio in 1869 and died during a trip to London, England in 1927. She was the daughter of a successful banker and financier and the youngest of four siblings, one of whom was Dr. Henry Strong Durand, a Yale graduate who was well known in Rochester as a community leader. Mary was also a society leader, a philanthropist and patron of the arts? 6 According to Brayer, Dr. Mulligan and his wife met Eastman as fellow Rochestarians and passengers on one of Eastman's transatlantic business trips to Europe? 7 Mary hosted Monday afternoon salons for the Rochester intelligentsia, 38 and was active in various committees including the Mechanic Institute and the Rochester Symphony39 and thus was one of a group of female community leaders of Eastman's time. 40 In a 1954 interview, Eastwood described Mary Mulligan as a colourful and highly energetic person who "would tire the average man out, dance all evening" and that "no one could keep up with her." 41 As early as 1902, the Mulligans had travelled with Eastman by private train car to California vta Toronto, Winnipeg, Calgary, Banff, Vancouver, and Portland back through Yellowstone and Minneapolis. 42 For the rest of Eastman's life, he and the Mulligans travelled and vacationed together almost annually. One of several regular Oak Lodge guests, Mary often

Tombstone Inscriptions from Section K of Mt Hope Cemetery, Rochester NY. http://www.rootsweb.ancestry.com/"'nymonroe/cem/mh-intro.htm. 35 "Edward W. Mulligan, Noted as Physician, Surgeon, and Civic Leader, Passes Away", Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, 3 January 1930. 36 "Mrs. E.W. Mulligan Dies of Pneumonia in London," Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, 8 July 1927. 37 Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 182. 38 Ibid. 39 Ibid., 367. 40 Ibid., 372. 41 A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, D4 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 42 Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 179.

34

18

rode horses with Eastman from the Enfield Train station to the Lodge. 43 In 1909, they went with Eastman to Jamaica in the spring and to Arizona in the summer44 . In the 1920s, Dr. Mulligan, as Eastman's personal surgeon, was involved with the beginning of Eastman's tonsil clinic in Rochester while Mary "furnished articles for the domestic science class of the Eastman Community School of Halifax County, NC, near Oak Lodge. " 45 Both Dr. Mulligan and his wife predeceased George Eastman. Mary died from pneumonia in July 1927 and Dr. Mulligan, from diabetes complications, just over a year and a half later. 46 Of Mary Mulligan's passing, Eastman wrote to a friend that it was "an almost unbelievable tragedy. " 47 Eastman regularly attended the Mulligans' soirees and Mary often played hostess for Eastman's soirees at his East Avenue residence. 48 The biggest party ever held at Eastman House, New Year's Eve night of 1914, saw over 900 people in attendance. Eastman's four official hostesses included Mary Mulligan and Eleanor Eastwood, as well as Nell Newhall and Josephine Dickman. 49 Interestingly, Nell, Mary and Eleanor were some of the very frrst people to be photographed with the new Kodachrome process in 1914. 50 They were three of the most prominent and significant women in Eastman's social life and private life for decades. Mulligan, Eastwood, and both of their wives, Mary and Eleanor, as well as another lesser known man, Mr. Newhall (Nell's husband) were the invited guests for Eastman's second journey to Newfoundland. Eastman's niece, Ellen Dryden, had brought her friend and college roommate,

43 44

45 46
47 48

49
50

Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 266. Ibid., 219. Ibid., 271. Ibid., 507. George Eastman to Anne W. Armstrong, 16 July 1907, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 182. Ibid., 405. Ibid., 223.

19

Evangeline Abbot, known as Nell, to visit her uncle George in Rochester during their years at Wells College (1890-94). 51 Nell, who also called Eastman "Uncle George," is described as "pretty, vivacious, and often flirtatious." 52 The two college roommates remained lifelong friends and Nell became an Eastman favourite and, thereafter, a frequent weekend and vacation visitor. Nell was particularly close to Eastman and, in a 1954 letter to Beaumont Newhall, she wrote of Eastman: "my life within his orbit was so full of fun and comedy that few people knew" and "I think I knew him as well as anyone could ..." 53 So, when Nell married Charles Newhall, he automatically entered Eastman's social circle. Charles Newhall was a mathematics teacher at Shattuck Academy in Faribault, Minnesota, and later became headmaster there. 54 Nell, Charles, and their son, Watson, became as close to Eastman as any family. In addition to Oak Lodge visits, the Newhalls often spent Christmas with Eastman at 900 East Avenue. 55 However, it appears that the Labrador trip was the only true camping jaunt that Charles Newhall ever attended since he was described as somewhat of a "misfit in the open spaces. " 56 Perhaps he already knew that roughing it in the wilderness was not his favourite way to vacation as he had initially declined the invitation to attend, citing various commitments. 57 Upon Eastman's insistence 58 , he eventually agreed to go. 5 9 Afterwards, Newhall thanked Eastman profusely for the trip and for making him feel at home and welcome among "this party of your old friends" as he was the youngest of Eastman's guests
Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 404. Ibid., 288. 53 Nell Newhall to Beaumont Newhall, 1954, D4 Box 1 Folder 9, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 54 There is a Newhall Auditorium in what is now Shattuck-St Mary's School, a co-ed private prep school in Faribault, Minn. 55 Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 404. 56 A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, D4 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 57 Charles Newhall to George Eastman, 25 April 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 58 George Eastman to Charles Newhall, 2 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 59 Charles Newhall to George Eastman, 7 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
52

51

20

in Labrador. 60 In the same letter, he thanked Eastman for sending him a full set of photos from
the trip including the "whale pictures". 61 Eastman had sent him "prints from about two hundred of the best and most typical negatives" 62 which undoubtedly included images that are now in the album but also copies from the group of unidentified loose prints. It is not known how close Eastman and Charles Newhall ever became but Nell remained very dear to Eastman until his death in 1932.
63

One last figure that was a part of both the 1906 and 1910 trips, and very important to their success, was hunting and fishing guide George Nichols Junior of Nicholsville, Newfoundland. Born on 12 June 1864, George Nichols came from Cape Breton Island to Newfoundland with his parents as a twelve year old and grew into an expert guide and woodsman. 64 His father had settled and farmed an area, near Deer Lake in the Bay of Islands region, which became Nicholsville. 65 As a professional hunting and fishing guide, Nichols reportedly guided famous visitors such as Franklin Delano Roosevelt and, of course, George Eastman. 66 I believe he was referred to Eastman by a Mr. Warham Whitney who is mentioned in the first letter that Eastman ever wrote to Nichols in October 1905. 67 This letter set the stage for Eastman's first trip to Newfoundland.

6

Ibid. George Eastman to Charles Newhall, 8 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 63 Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 503,512,518. 64 "The Nichols name is linked closely with the early history of Deer Lake", Western Star, 4 April1950, sec. 3. 65 Town of Deer Lake website, Visitors I About the Town, http://www.town.deerlake.nf.ca/about.html. 66 Ibid. 67 George Eastman to George Nichols, 17 October 1905, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
62

61

°Charles Newhall to George Eastman, 13 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

21

Newfoundland and Labrador Newfoundland is a large rocky island off the east coast of Canada, and Labrador is a large parcel of territory between Quebec's northern border and the Labrador seacoast. Together, they form the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador, the tenth and fmal province to join confederation, in 1949. 68 At the time of George Eastman's 1906 trip, Newfoundland was simply a British colony but, in 1907, was officially declared a Dominion within the British Commonwealth. 69 As a British colony and, later, a Dominion, Newfoundland was on equal footing with Canada; it had its own governor and prime minister, its own monetary currency and postage stamps, its own culture and identity. 70 The coast of Labrador was always included in its territory although the exact inland boundaries were not defined until 1927. 71 In 1906, when Eastman made inquiries in regards to customs and tariffs involved when crossing the border, he was informed by a Toronto outfitting company that "As Newfoundland is an entirely separate Colony, having their own Tariff', they were "unable to send Provisions there free ofDuty." 72 Eventually, arrangements were made for their gear to be "bonded direct to North Sydney" and once there, "exported to Newfoundland where all arrangements can be made with the customs by the owners of the goods." 73 This was a concern to Eastman since he brought hunting and fishing equipment as well as his entire camping outfit on both trips. Through Eastman's correspondence with his travel companions, as well as equipment suppliers, outfitters and other agencies, and especially through personal and business letters
The province was named Newfoundland until, on 6 December 2001, the Canadian Government approved a constitutional amendment officially changing the province's name to Newfoundland and Labrador, to be abbreviated as NL. "Name Change to Become Official", The Telegram StJohn's, 6 December 2001. 69 B. Hunter, ed, The Statesman's Year-Book 1996-97 {London: McMillan Press Ltd, 1997), 302-303. 70 Ibid. 71 G.O.Rothney, Newfoundland: A History {Ottawa: Canadian Historical Association, 1973), 24. 72 Michie and Co. Ltd. Grocers and Wine Merchants, Outfitters of Camping and Canoeing Parties, Provisions, Tents, Utensils, Maps, Etc. to George Eastman, 27 July 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 73 General Passenger and Ticket Office of the Maine Central Railroad Co. to J.C. Kalbfleisch, D.P.A. New York Central R.R. Rochester NY, 15 August 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
68

22

recounting his trips to friends and acquaintances after his return, it is possible to reconstruct both of his journeys to Newfoundland and Labrador, and in many instances, to confidently identify the locations and the people portrayed in a large number of photographs. Newfoundland 1906 From September 8 to October 8, 1906, George Eastman went to Newfoundland to hunt and fish in the company of three friends, Dr Converse, Dr Mulligan, and Mr Eastwood. Eastman, who completely organized this trip, travelled with his companions by train, ferry and canoes in order to hunt for caribou and fish for salmon and trout Humber River. In communications with W.E. Hamilton, the General Passenger Agent for the Newfoundland railroad company, they obtained copies of "Customs Circular No. 15," informing them of the duties on camping equipment as well as the "Fishing and Shooting" booklet, which included the dates of fishing and hunting seasons. 75 The latter prompted GE to adjust the dates of their trip to include the early September fishing season. George Nichols, ofNicholsville, Newfoundland, was hired by Eastman as the guide. His services had been officially retained by Eastman almost a year before, in November 1905. 76 In tum, Nichols hired guides and helpers as Eastman had instructed him to do: "in addition to the four guides for the members of the party," hire a "cook and as many helpers as you think is necessary to make the party thoroughly comfortable." 77 The eight men hired to accompany Eastman and his three friends up the Humber River are all included in the group photo taken on
74

on and near Newfoundland's famous

George Eastman to Frank Seaman, 21 June 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection; George Eastman to George Nichols, 9 July 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 75 George Eastman to W.E. Hamilton, 27 June 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection; W.E. Hamilton to George Eastman, 3 July 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 76 George Eastman to George Nichols, 15 November 1905, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 77 George Eastman to George Nichols, 23 August 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

74

23

the banks of Upper Falls. (See Illustration 8.) Eastman later sent Nichols some of the Newfoundland photographs including extra copies of the group shot for distribution to each guide. 78 A friend who had already been caribou hunting in Newfoundland told Eastman that it was "all swamp and rain and water, with absolutely no conveniences: but the hunting is great" and that the caribou "were so tame it was absolutely no sport in killing them more than there would be in killing your grandmother's cows." 79 Fortunately, Eastman chose to go to Newfoundland anyway. Incidentally, this friend's guide had also been Nichols, whom he described as a "crackerjack". 80 In an ensuing letter, he wrote: "Am glad to learn that you are going to have George Nichols. You will find him an excellent guide, and you can rely on him to get you all the game you care to get out." 81 Eastman, Eastwood, Mulligan, and Converse travelled by train from Rochester to North Sydney, Nova Scotia, Canada, where they took a ferry to Port aux Basques, Newfoundland, and, once there, boarded the train to Deer Lake where they were to meet their hunting and fishing guides. They obtained their fishing and hunting licences at Port aux Basques from a Mr. Pike as instructed by Nichols. 82 (See appendix C for details on train and ferry travel.) The inventory pages on which George Eastman made notes about each photograph were invaluable at this stage. These notes, though not detailed, still identified many of the pictured locations and activities in which Eastman and his travel companions took part during their journey to Newfoundland. They confirm that they went to Nicholsville, which someone

78

79

80
81
82

George Eastman to George Nichols, 26 November 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. Frank Seaman to George Eastman, 22 June 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. Ibid. Frank Seaman to George Eastman, 27 June 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Nichols to George Eastman, 19 August 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

24

described as "a large Newfoundland town with one house," 83 where they met some of the colourful locals along with their pets (i.e. a goat, a dog and, surprisingly, a monkey). We also learn from Eastman's notes that, once on the Humber River, the men came across a birch bark salmon smoke house in a cave at Upper Falls, and that they set up camp above that cave. 84 Another note tells us that Eastman saw salmon going up the Upper Falls on September 15th. 85 They fished the Humber River for salmon and trout and found at Upper Falls what they believed was the best salmon pool in Newfoundland. (See illustration 9.) They "went up the Humber River about 50 miles and camped two weeks on a very pretty lake" and "saw plenty of caribou but only shot three. I got some nice pictures ... " 86 The lake in question is Adies Pond. 87 A favourite image from this trip is the one labelled "GE, developing & (sic) printing his pictures" which show Eastman holding a contact printing frame while another is propped up towards the sun on a tree stump next to him. (See illustration 10.) In a 1950 newspaper article that recounts Nichols' days as a guide, the author alludes to "many unique blue prints of early Humber scenes'' that George Eastman, "of photographic fame," had left behind. 88 In an effort to track down these prints, I contacted the Comer Brook museum archivist, and visited the Deer Lake Museum and StJohn's Provincial Archives, all to no avail. I believe that these prints would have been the ones that Eastman was making with his contact printing frames.

Frank Seaman to George Eastman, 22 June 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman, photo inventory note #29, 2009:0040:0001, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 85 George Eastman, photo inventory note #28, 2009:0040:0001, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 86 George Eastman to Frank Pattillo, 9 Oct 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 87 George Eastman to W.J. Ehrich, 10 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection; Pond: noun, a natural body of still water of any size: lake. Dictionary of Newfoundland English Online, http://www. heritage. nf. ca/dictionary/. 88 "The Nichols Name Is Linked Closely With The Early History of Deer Lake", The Western Star, 4 April1950.
84

83

25

Illustration 8. "The Guides", 2009:0039:0092, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
(Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

Illustration 9. "Upper Falls- Humber River- Best salmon pool in Newfoundland", 2009:0039:0026, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House,
International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

26

Illustration 10: "GE, developing & printing his pictures," 2009:0039:0063, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum of Photography
and Film.)

27

Eastman wrote to friend Frank Pattillo: "We did not do very much in the way of killing caribou but had a mighty good time and got a lot of good pictures, one of which I send you herewith." 89 This is most likely the same photograph that Eastman gave out to other friends and family. (See illustration 11.) To a relative, he wrote "I enclose a picture of some caribou swimming in the lake just in front of where we camped." 90 About the photograph of the "swimming caribou", he added in a subsequent letter: "I was probably not over twenty-five or thirty feet away from the nearest one when I snapped the shutter." 91 It is not known whether Eastman agreed to a request from a Philadelphia company to publish his image of the caribou crossing the river in a line of advertising calendars. 92 Dr. Converse wrote: "That is a superb picture of the caribou family out on a river. Personally I would rather have taken that picture than to have shot the biggest head in Newfoundland." 93 Eastman gave copies of that photograph to many and, in one instance, used it as a thank you gift. 94 Eastman felt that they did not fish very much as the season closed on Sept 15 but they "got a few good strings of small brook trout. " 95 Eastman sent his taxidermist three caribou heads for mounting and one skin to be tanned. 96 These were not "big heads", in Eastman's estimation, as the largest of the three "was only twenty points". 97 Eastman planned to have the skin made

George Eastman to Frank Pattillo, 10 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman to George Dryden, 12 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 91 George Eastman to Frank Pattillo, 17 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 92 A.M. Collins Manufacturing Company, Philadelphia PA, to George Eastman, 17 November 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 93 Dr Converse to George Eastman, 10 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 94 George Eastman to E.A. Swenson, 27 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 95 George Eastman to Frank Pattillo, 17 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 96 W.O. Hinds, Taxidermist, to George Eastman, 9 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 97 George Eastman to W.J. Ehrich, 10 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
90

89

28

into a waistcoat. 98 In Eastman's words, "as far as game was concerned the trip was not a great success but in every other respect it was most enjoyable." 99 Their return journey saw them leave Deer Lake for Port aux Basques by train on October
3rd, and take the same ferry back to Nova Scotia where they boarded a private Pullman car to

Truro. From there, unlike their frrst itinerary, they reached Rochester via Quebec City and Montreal. They arrived home on October gth, after an absence of exactly one month.

Illustration 11. "A buck- 2 does and 2 fawns- taken by G.E. Aidies (sic) Pond," 2009:0039:0067, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House,
International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

98 99

George Eastman to W.O. Hinds, 11 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman to R.R. Debacher, 20 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

29

Labrador 191 0 When Eastman returned to the country of Newfoundland four years later, he chose to explore the Labrador coast, much further north than the frrst time. He chartered a boat since that region was not accessible by any other means; neither train nor roads went there. The main object of the trip was fishing for salmon 100 though he told his old friend Frank Babbott that the object was "to see the Labrador coast and perhaps get some fishing." 101 (Frank Babbott was the oldest friend Eastman had. Born on the same street, they played together until Eastman moved to Rochester at age six but renewed their friendship later in life: "He is one the finest men I

From July 4 to August 25, 1910, George Eastman chartered the Surf, a steam powered schooner, to sail from New York City up the east coast of the continent to enjoy fishing (for salmon and sea trout 103 ) and camping as far north as Labrador's Sandwich Bay. He expected to "live in tents at least three weeks out of the two months" that they were going to be gone. 104 He wrote a friend that "the Bert Eastwoods and the Mulligans, and a young chap from Faribault, Minn., who is a mathematical shark, are going with me ..." 105 The young man from Faribault was, of course, Charles Newhall, Nell's husband. Eastman and Nichols began corresponding in regards to the Labrador trip as early as January of 1910, 106 and were frrming up plans by April, deciding on the gear and number of guides that would be needed. 107 GE ordered goods (such as reels, rods, lines, gaffs, wading pants

George Eastman to Thomas Baker, 22 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman to FrankL. Babbott, 25 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection . 102 George Eastman to Henry A. Strong, 5 March 1909, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 103 George Eastman toW. J. Ehrich, 14 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 104 Ibid. 105 George Eastman to Ernest R. Willard, 14 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 106 George Nichols to George Eastman, 10 January 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 107 George Eastman to George Nichols, 20 April 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
101

100

30

and fishing flies) from Hardy's in London through his friend Frank Pattillo 108 , a fellow fishing enthusiast, and owner of a wholesale company through which Eastman procured all manner of fishing gear. Pattillo, who was apparently aware that mosquitoes and flies could be a nuisance in Labrador, recommended that Eastman have mosquito netting "for your face and gloves for your hands". 109 In the spring, Eastman also frrmed up his plans to charter the Surf with Tams, Lemoine and Crane, Yacht and Ship Brokerage firm.II 0 (See illustration 12.) The Surf, owned by John H. Hanan 111 , was a steam powered schooner (O.A. 195', W.L. 166'6", Beam 24'6", draft 13' 112) fuelled by coal, equipped with two motor launches that ran on "motor naphtha." 113 She was captained by Capt Cordeson 114 who had taken her even further north the previous year and was thus experienced in these waters. 115 The crew included the Captain, two engineers, two mates, a boatswain, two stewards, three cooks, a pantry man, a waiter, two quartermasters, two mess men, two launch men, five sailors, two oilers and four frremen. 116 In preparation for the voyage, Eastman purchased nautical charts (for a total cost of $2) from the Navy Department's Hydrographic Office to use during the voyage for the following areas: St Anne Harbour and Great Bras D'Or; West and South Coasts of Newfoundland, Bonne Bay to Burgeo Island; St Genevieve Bay to Orange Bay, and the strait of Belle Isle; and Atlantic Coast from Flemish Cap to New York, including the Gulf ofSt Lawrence and the Great Bank of

Frank Pattillo to George Eastman, 14 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. Ibid. 110 George Eastman to J.F. Tams, 23 April1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 111 J.F. Tams to George Eastman, 21 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 112 Tams, Lemoine & Crane to George Eastman, 23 May 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 113 Tams, Lemoine & Crane to George Eastman, 26 May 1910, and Tams, Lemoine & Crane to William Roche, 29 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 114 J.F. Tams to George Eastman, 17 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 115 George Eastman to Rev Murray Bartlett, 2 July 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 116 Payroll of NY Surf, undated (c.1910), George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
109

108

31

Newfoundland. 117 The charts were allegedly returned to Eastman at the conclusion of the trip, 118 and flags were "left with Eastman or someone in his party" by the ship's captain. As a registered sailing vessel, the Surf was required to fly flags and pennants. To indicate that the Surf was a licensed "private yachts not engaged in trade or commerce" and therefore exempt from customs inspection, she had to fly the American yacht ensign, an "American Ensign with the addition of a foul anchor in the union." 119 The vessel was also required to fly pennants of the yacht club of origin as well as Eastman's personal pennant. In this case, they flew the Rochester Yacht Club pennant and a blue flag with Eastman's monogram in red as his personal flag. 120 These pennants were flown atop of the two masts of the Surf and smaller versions were also used on the two motor launches. 121 (See illustration 13.) Eastman had asked for the pennants to be returned to him 122 and, according to a letter dated Sept 10, they were 123 , however, neither they nor the nautical charts are in the Legacy Collection, and their whereabouts are unknown today. The Surf and Eastman's party· sailed from Pier 23 in East River, New York City (NYC) Harbour. 124 All the dry, wet and perishable goods needed for cabin and crew were already on

Hydrographic Office, Navy Dept, Wash DC to George Eastman, 13 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 118 George Eastman to J.F Tams, 10 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 119 New York Yacht Club History, Yachting Ensign, http://www.nyyc.org/history/article_14/ accessed 7 May 2009. 120 J.F. Tams to George Eastman, 3 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 121 Order for 3 Rochester yacht club burgees and 3 custom personal flags, Tams, Lemoine & Crane to Annin and Co, 9 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 122 George Eastman to Tams, Lemoine & Crane, 26 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 123 George Eastman to J.F. Tams, 10 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 124 FrankL. Babbott to George Eastman, 5 July 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

117

32

board

125

,

including wine from Eastman's cellar

126

.

On Monday, July 4 1910, they traveled on the

9:45pm overnight train from Rochester to NYC in order to sail on the morning of the fifth. 127

Illustration 12. The Surf, 2009:0041:0001, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

Illustration 13. On the motor launch, 2009:0041:0063, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (The pennant is attached to the prow and ensign is flying at the stem.) (Courtesy of
George Eastman House, International Museum of Photography and Film.)
Tams, Lemoine & Crane to George Eastman, 14 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman to J.F. Tams, 16 June 1910 (misdated July), George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 127 J.C. Kalsfleisch, NY Central & Hudson River Railroad Co., to George Eastman, 27 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
126 125

33

I believe that the best description of this trip was written by GE to Thomas Baker, the man in charge of Kodak Australasia at that time . ... I went 'down on the Labrador' with a party of six, consisting of Dr. and Mrs. Mulligan, Mr. and Mrs. Eastwood, whom you know, Mr. C.W. Newhall, a professor of mathematics from Faribault, Minn., and myself. I chartered the steam yacht 'Surf,' New York, starting July 5th, touching at Halifax, several places in Newfoundland, and then up through the straits of Belle Isle as far north as Sandwich Bay. We had splendid fishing for trout and salmon and could have had bear hunting if we had wanted it. We had a great variety of interesting experiences and fmally on our way home camped for a week on a beautiful body of water called St Anne's Bay, on the coast of Cape Breton Island. Returning, we stopped at Plymouth, Boston, Newport, New York, and the yacht brought us up the Hudson as far as Hudson City, a few miles from Albany. Altogether we had a splendid time. 128 They had the option of taking coal at Halifax, Bay of Islands and at Sandwich Bay. 129 We know that they "coaled" in Halifax 130 and also took 200 tons of soft coal at Sandwich Bay for the return trip. 131 On the way up the coast, they made a stop before Halifax, in Portsmouth. 132 Eastman explained that "Mrs. Newhall is only going as far as Portsmouth, where she will leave the ship with her little boy, to join Mrs. [Ellen] Dryden at South Duxbury." 133 This explains her presence on the Surf in some photographs. (See illustration 12.) Nell Newhall was indeed aboard the Surf for a short part of the journey but she did not go up to Labrador. 134 In her biography of Eastman, Brayer alludes that Josephine Dickman was also on the Labrador trip 135 but we now know that she was not. Eastman wrote that in was not until they stopped in Boston on the way home from

128 129 13

°

131 132 133 134 135

George Eastman to Thomas Baker, 31 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. J.F. Tams to George Eastman, 21 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. FrankL. Babbott to George Eastman, 28 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. Tams, Lemoine & Crane to William Roche, 21 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman to Frank Pattillo, 30 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman to Rev Murray Bartlett, 2 July 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. Ibid. Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman: A Biography (Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 285.

34

Labrador that he "had the pleasure of seeing Mrs. Dickman out at Dr. Tenney's house tn Magnolia. " 136 About their itinerary, Eastman wrote: "We expect to run up from Portsmouth .. . to Halifax; thence to the Bay of Islands, Newfoundland [to pick up licenses, Nichols and guides with their boats and camping gear 137 ]. .. ; then go up through the Straits of Belle Isle probably as far as Sandwich Bay." 138 "On our way back we intend to try for horse mackerel in St. Ann's Bay. I shall take my entire camp outfit along, with the intention of camping where it is necessary. " 139 On Tuesday July 19, 1910, the Rochester Democrat and Chronicle newspaper picked up a story published the previous Wednesday in the Western Star, a Newfoundland regional paper which, like the Democrat and Chronicle in Rochester, is still published to this day. The article recounted how Eastman hosted a dinner-dance aboard the Surf while in the Bay of Islands on July 9, 1910. In last Wednesday's Western Star, a paper published in Bay of Islands Newfoundland, is an account of a dinner given by George Eastman, of Rochester, on his yacht, the Surf The affair was a dinner-dance, and was entirely impromptu and informal, although Mr. Eastman had the co-operation of the residents of that locality in his plans. The dinner was served in the main dining room, which was beautifully decorated with red carnations. Here Mr. Eastman welcomed his guests, and after coffee was served, led them to the main deck, where a phonograph concert was in progress. At the conclusions of the concert the decks were cleared and the orchestra struck up "The Chocolate Soldier" as an opening selection for the long programme of dance music. Fancy dances were introduced at intervals by guests and were received with much enthusiasm. The illumination was brilliant, both shores being decorated in electric lights and colored rays, and every lighthouse on the coast illuminated. A flash light and phosphorescent fire which had been placed at advantageous positions by the host made the brilliancy complete.

136 137 138 139

George George George George

Eastman Eastman Eastman Eastman

to Caryl D. Haskins, 29 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. to George Nichols, 10 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. to Rev Murray Bartlett, 2 July 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. to Frank Pattillo, 11 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

35

Mr. Eastman and party are on their way to Labrador, and are skirting the eastern shores of the continent, putting in at the points of interest along the way. The party includes Dr. and Mrs. E.W. Mulligan and Mr. and Mrs. A.B. Eastwood, of this city.140 The original Western Star article also mentions that the ladies were "gowned in white" and that "choice wines were constantly served in the chart house, and it was a late hour before the merry party dispersed." 141 In interviews that Eastwood gave years after Eastman's death, he mentioned their travels to Newfoundland and Labrador, particularly having a phonograph on board of the yacht, listening to Melba and Caruso and dancing to the latest hits 142, confirming what was described in the newspaper articles. The Surf set sail for the Labrador coast on July 13th. 143 Nichols and guides joined the Surf at Bay of Islands while Jacob Brooks of Truro NS 144 had already joined the Surf in Halifax. Brooks was recommended to Eastman by Pattillo who referred to him as the "Indian" who had guided many others in Labrador. 145 Pattillo urged Eastman to take this man along, praising his skills. 146 He was hired once Eastman ensured that this man was agreeable to Nichols 147 · In response to an inquiry in January 1910, Eastman was informed that the Newfoundland government was about to introduce a rod tax on foreign anglers. 148 By June, Nichols told him that the fee was set to $10 per rod and this was payable when they arrived at Bay ofislands. 149

"Gives Dinner on His Yacht: Rochester Man entertains in Bay of Island, Newfoundland/' Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, 19 July 1910. 141 · "Brilliant Function On Board "Surf": Captain Eastman Entertains His Guests/' Western Star, 13 July 1910. 142 A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, D4 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 143 "Bay of Islands", Western Star, 13 July 1910. 144 Frank Pattillo to George Eastman, 18 January 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 145 Frank Pattillo to George Eastman, 26 May 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 146 Frank Pattillo to George Eastman, 11 and 18 January 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 147 George Eastman to George Nichols, 20 April1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection; George Nichols to George Eastman, 26 April1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 148 A.M. Prescott, Dept of Marine and Fisheries, Newfoundland, to George Eastman, 12 January 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 149 George Nichols to George Eastman, 1 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

140

36

Pattillo had told Eastman about the Sandhill River and what Brooks, the "Indian" guide, had told him about it which was that they had to take canoes up river for a day and a half to the Falls for the best fishing but that they could fish all the way up the river. 150 Prior to departure, Eastman had written to Charles Newhall: "They say that the mosquitoes are liable to be very troublesome. All of my tents are well fitted with mosquito nettings so there will be no trouble about sleeping peacefully no matter how bad they are." 151 All the photographs taken in that region show Eastman and his guests wearing headnets at all times. (See illustration 15.) Eastman mentioned the black fly problem to several friends in his letters. To a cousin, he wrote that "the black flies and mosquitoes in some places were bad, in fact so bad on the Sandhill River that they drove us away."
152

He wrote to one friend that they "were unable, on

account of the flies, to fish in the Sandhill River, where we expected to get the best fishing, so went on to Eagle River, where we got one hundred and six salmon in three days, beside a lot of trout. We also had fine trout fishing in Hawkes Bay and south of that point." 153 Writing about the 106 salmon, he added that "there were no large ones but all were grand fighters" and that he "got almost all of [his] in one day, ten in one aftemoon." 154 To another friend, he also wrote that they had "splendid trout fishing" 155 He described Labrador aptly saying "it is very wild country up there." 156

15

°Frank Pattillo to George Eastman, 7 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
George George George George Ibid. Ibid. Eastman Eastman Eastman Eastman to to to to Charles Newhall, 13 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. Caryl D. Haskins (Cousin Carrie,) 29 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. Sidney M. Colgate, 26 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. Frank Seaman, 26 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

151 152 153 154 155 156

37

Illustration 14. On deck of the Surf: Mrs Mulligan, young Watson Newhall sitting on Mrs Eastwood's lap, Charles Newhall in back, Nell Newhall, George Eastman and Dr. Mulligan. 2009:0041:0187, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House,
International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

Illustration 15. Picnic lunch by Labrador River, 2009:0041:0085, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

38

In a 1954 interview, Eastwood recounted that "on the Labrador trip, they visited the Grenfell Hospital at Battle Harbour," 157 a location that is depicted in a number of the loose photographs, though not included in the album. (For details on the Grenfell Mission, see appendix D.) It is not known if they stopped there on their way to Sandwich Bay or on the return trip. This uncertainty also applies to their visit to a whaling station depicted in two photographs in the album and several others in the group of loose prints. (See illustration 16.) Hawke Harbour, Cape Charles, L' Anse-au-Loup, Hawke's Bay and Lark Harbour are places where whaling was taking place along the Newfoundland and Labrador coasts at the time of Eastman's visit. 158 Cape Charles is located in close proximity to Battle Harbour and Lark Harbour is at the entrance to Bay of Islands, both places that Eastman's party visited, and Hawke Harbour was on their way to Sandwich Bay. Luckily, one letter from Eastman to Sydney Colgate provided the likeliest location as Hawke's Bay, near Sandwich Bay, where they were trout fishing. 159 This is also the place where they had bear sightings. One evening, Eastman saw a bear "when [he] was out fishing at Hawkes Bay" and the crew also saw one "as [they] were sailing out of the Bay one morning before [Eastman] was up." 160 Eastman adds that the bears seemed to be "plenty and not
. "d .,161 very tlmt

During the return voyage, they stopped to camp at St Anne's Bay, Cape Breton Island, NS (just west of Sydney. 162 ) Eastman wrote that they "had a week in a wonderfully beautiful

A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, D4 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 158 Anthony B. Dickinson and Chesley W. Sanger, Norwegian Whaling in Newfoundland (Kingston: Queen's University Press, 2001), 19. 159 George Eastman to Sidney M. Colgate, 26 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 160 George Eastman to Caryl D. Haskins (Cousin Carrie,) 29 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 161 Ibid. 162 George Eastman to J.F. Tams, 8 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

157

39

camp on St Anne's Bay... " 163 John Morrison, ofEnglishtown, Cape Breton Island, was the owner of the land on which they camped that week. Eastman acknowledged his generosity in a thank you note which he wrote from Rochester after his return. He indicated that they "endeavoured to clean it up and leave it in as good condition as we found it as far as possible so that you would not regret having given [them] the permission." 164 St Anne's Bay is where Eastman was looking for "the big fish," a 400 to 500 pound tuna, which he also referred to as horse mackerel. 165 He had obtained two tuna fishing reels that he had seen in an issue of Field and Stream magazine. 166 Ultimately, they had a "fine time" camping at St Anne's Bay, but were ''unable to get fast to any [tuna]." 167 Apparently, they had not been successful in fishing for cod either during their trip. Newhall sent Eastman a copy of the Western Star newspaper forwarded to him by a Mr. Allan, most likely a guide whom he had befriended, in reply to an inquiry about the state of the cod fishing as he wondered if it had "continued, all summer, as bad as we saw it." 168 We know that they stopped in Plymouth on the return trip because that is where Newhall left the ship to join his wife, Nell, who was still visiting with Eastman's niece, Ellen Dryden. 169 Eastman mentioned this to another friend: " ... we sailed along the coast, stopping at Duxbury where Ellen and Mrs. Newhall and their children were: went up to Boston and then back around Cape Cod to Newport, where we saw the Atlantic Fleet: then to new York and up the Hudson as far as we could go with the yacht, Hudson City." 170 Many of the images from the trip depict the sights and the stops that were made going to and from Labrador. Case in point, the US Navy's
163

George Eastman to Alfred Benedict (Cousin Carrie,) 26 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman to John Morrison, 30 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 165 George Eastman to James Heddon and Sons, 31 May and 9 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 166 George Eastman to Edward Vom Hofe, 31 May and 3 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 167 George Eastman to Sidney M. Colgate, 26 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 168 Charles Newhall to George Eastman, 2 October 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 169 George Eastman to Flossie Bleckenstein, 30 August 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 170 George Eastman to Rev Murray Bartlett, 17 October 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
164

40

Great White Fleet must have impressed Eastman as he included six prints of its ships in the album and several others were among the loose photographs. Bert Eastwood must have particularly enjoyed the yachting aspect of this voyage because he had been a sailing enthusiast since his student days at the Cayuga Lake Military Academy, had been part owner of a Canada Cup winner and was a long-time member of the Rochester Yacht Club. 171 For Eastman however, yachting had been a "new undertaking" 172 and, after their return, when he was solicited by ship brokers to purchase a yacht of his own, 173 he declined. He wrote to his old friend Babbott that while he enjoyed life on the vessel, he did not think he would "ever become a regular yachtsman" for two reasons. 174 He "would not like to have a vessel on [his] hands and feel that [he] ought to use it," and he cited the lack of exercise as a drawback. 175 Nevertheless, Eastman wrote: "the Labrador trip was a great success and yachting turned out to be even more of a pleasure than I anticipated. "176 Eastman once said "What we do in our working hours determines what we have in the world. What we do in our play hours determines what we are." 177 Accordingly, by researching and cataloguing photographic albums depicting Eastman's leisure time, we are getting closer to the man that Eastman really was. Eastman had a passion for camping and the outdoors, and he was as meticulous in his leisure time as he was in his professional life. The research, development and execution of his vacation plans were as thorough as any of his business dealings.
"Albert B. Eastwood Dies; Civic Leader", Times Union, 7 January 1958. George Eastman to Ernest R. Willard, 14 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 173 Frank Bowne Jones, NYC yacht agent and ship broker, to George Eastman, 11 October 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection; Ox and Stevens, NYC yacht and vessel brokers, to George Eastman, 21 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 174 George Eastman to FrankL. Babbott, 27 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection . 175 Ibid. 176 George Eastman to Mrs. Amos Southwick (Cousin Mary), 14 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection; George Eastman to Frank L. Babbott, 27 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 177 George Eastman, May 1925, Kodak Park, Rochester NY.
172 171

41

Eastman enjoyed looking after his friends and guests, and ensuring their comfort and enjoyment of the trip but also delighted in sharing his interest in the equipment and gadgets of his hobbies, in this case photography and camping as well as hunting and fishing. Altogether, Eastman and his guests thoroughly enjoyed their vacations both to Newfoundland and to Labrador as proven by the highlights of each journey that have been captured and preserved to this day in the Legacy Collection at George Eastman House.

Illustration 16. Whale on wharf of whaling station with Eastman's guests looking on (at far left), 2009:0041:0049, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House,
International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

42

CATALOGUING METHODOLOGY AND PRODUCT Following the research performed to collect every detail possible about Eastman's two voyages to Newfoundland and Labrador, the cataloguing process began. Early on, a request was placed with the George Eastman House Photography Department to photograph all the album pages so that the digital versions could be used as reference. This served to minimize handling of the originals during the course of my research. These digital images will eventually be given file names corresponding to the accession numbers and will be linked to the records in George Eastman House's electronic database called TMS (The Museum System database software.) The next step was to request accession numbers for the original objects from the George Eastman House Registrar, Wataru Okada. As every single item entering collections in the institution must go through his department, there is a backlog of such requests but my submission was given priority and the accession numbers were received within a short time. Each accession number is made up of three parts separated by a colon; the frrst part represents the year catalogued, the second represents an associated group of objects and the last number represents individual objects in sequence. In this case, the Newfoundland album photographs are consecutively numbered 2009:0039:0001 to 0110, the Newfoundland inventory sheets became objects 2009:0040:0001 to 0003, and the Labrador album photographs are numbered 2009:0041:0001 to 0189. For both albums, each accession number was then written in pencil below the lower left comer of each photograph and, for the inventory, written on the back of the sheets at lower left. Once accession numbers were assigned, two database groupings, called object packages, were created within the TMS software. Object packages are generated to group collection items

43

in order to perform organizational tasks such as exhibition planning or, in my case, to perform data entry that is common to a large number of objects prior to breaking up these groupings into individual records for each image. I entered the following information in two TMS object packages, called Newfoundland 1906 and Labrador 1910: the location of the objects as the Legacy Collection vault, their classification as photographs, their process as gelatin silver prints, and their date as the start and end date of the respective trips. I also entered the most common dimensions of the prints so that I would only need to enter those few that were different. The provenance was entered to reflect the fact that both albums had been at George Eastman House since the museum's inception when all assets were transferred from the University of Rochester. In preparation for cataloguing the individual album photographs, I designed an electronic version of the George Eastman House Legacy Collection Cataloguing Worksheet (See appendix A.) I customised it somewhat since I would not require all of the headings included on the original form. For instance, I did not need the measurement blocks that are used to physically describe three dimensional objects that are catalogued in the Legacy Collection, such as furniture. I further adapted it by making two templates, one for each album, entering the data that is common to all images in each template in order to reduce the amount of typing required later. Since I was not always able to have a computer next to me when taking notes on individual images, I printed out a record sheet for each image in order to keep written notes. (Since data entering of information in the TMS database is not feasible from a remote location, the catalogue data entry has to be done in situ. If time constraints had prevented me from entering the data in TMS prior to my departure from Rochester, a George Eastman House staff or volunteer could have entered the data from my written notes.)

44

At this point, the Legacy Collection curator made a request that the object packages be broken down into individual records so ·that I could begin the task of entering the individual cataloguing information for each photograph in the database. Any descriptive information that was available in identifying the content of the images, including location and people's names, was entered in the description field. Eastman's notes from the Newfoundland 1906 inventory sheets were transcribed, in quotes, within this field as well. In the additional notes field, I provided extra insights into the images or their content in order to contribute an added understanding of the photograph. In many instances, I was able to include cross references to accession numbers of corresponding nitrate negatives and of a few accessioned lantern slides of the same images. Every bit of information available for each image was included in the database in the hope that it will serve as clues to future researchers. As the curator pointed out, any information was a marked improvement on the absence of data that existed before this project began. Once the data entry for the 299 images was completed, the record sheet hard copies were assembled in a large binder. This binder will now serve as a fmding aid that is separate from the electronic database, for the convenience of George Eastman House Legacy Collection volunteers and staff as well as outside researchers, especially those who are not comfortable with computer databases and those who are not proficient in the use of TMS software. In regards to the box of unidentified loose photographs in the George Eastman House Legacy Collection, I identified 136 Labrador 1910 prints, 66 of which were matched to nitrate negatives accessioned in the collection. All 136 prints have now been housed in. individual clear Mylar polyester archival sleeves but have not been accessioned or catalogued due to time constraints. Nevertheless, the curator has chosen to store them within the Labrador box so that

45

they will remain associated with that trip until such time as they can be fully documented and catalogued. In the box of loose photographs, I also found one Newfoundland 1906 image which is now sleeved, catalogued and housed in the Newfoundland box. In addition, the three inventory sheets associated with the Newfoundland images, catalogued as 2009:0040:0001 to 3, were also housed in a Mylar sleeve and returned to the Newfoundland box where they were initially located. Since I left Rochester, I understand that digital scans of each image have been linked to their respective entry in the last step to fmalizing the cataloguing process associated with my thesis project.

46

FUTURE DIRECTIONS After months of background research on Eastman and his travel companions and on the places that they visited in Newfoundland and Labrador, a lot of unanswered questions remain, many of which could be answered given more time and more financial resources. Time in Rochester might allow one to track down the artifacts of Eastman's voyage, i.e. the nautical charts and flags and the caribou head, among others, and time in Newfoundland and Labrador would allow for searching, and perhaps fmding, the elusive "blue prints" that Eastman left behind. One might also identify more of the locations visited and perhaps fmd more references to Eastman's visit in newspapers published at the time. Additionally, there are several topics that could be further developed in connection with the Newfoundland and Labrador photographs in the Legacy Collection. It would certainly be gratifying to see the loose Labrador photographs fully researched, and the nitrate negatives and lantern slides from both trips fully catalogued. Moreover, it would be interesting to search the International Grenfell Association archives to ascertain if Eastman and Grenfell ever met and whether Eastman made a donation to this medical pioneer's cause. It would also be interesting to confrrm, with greater certainty, the location of the whaling station Eastman and his travel companions visited by finding historical images for comparison purposes. Financial resources would be needed to implement all of this research since travel costs alone can be a major stumbling block, in addition to minor costs and fees charged by some institutions for services such as registration, photocopying and digital scanning.

47

CONCLUSION Exploring and studying George Eastman's 1906 and 1910 trips to Newfoundland and Labrador lets us into the private world of George Eastman in the ftrst decade of the twentieth century, but also increases our understanding of the social and historical values of his photographs and in a small way increases our knowledge of photography as a research tool and a window into the past. By researching primary and secondary sources to contextualize the 299 Newfoundland and Labrador photographs found in the George Eastman House Legacy Collection, and performing the practical work of accessioning and cataloguing the images, a valuable contribution has been made to the George Eastman House Legacy Collection. The photographs are now recorded and documented for the beneftt of researchers, historians and photographic scholars alike. Descriptive and explanatory data is available for the individual images and is accessible on the George Eastman House database. The images and the database records offer glimpses into George Eastman's character and into his social life, adding to our understanding of this remarkable man as well as adding to our knowledge of the cultural and historical context at the time of his travels to Newfoundland and Labrador, thereby fulfilling the purpose and goals of the thesis project.

48

Appendix A
George Eastman Collection Catalogue Worksheet

Accession number: Location: Object: Maker, Attribution: Other id#: Date I Date Range: Dimensions of Image: Height Marks: Location of marks: Inscriptions: Width

GEH Neg#:

Classification:

Old GEH #: Process:

Location of Inscription:
Description of the image:

Condition: Provenance: References I Bibliography:

Value: Additional Notes:

Entered: Scanned: Cataloguer:

I Date:
49

Linked:

PROPERTY OF

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

Appendix B - Camp Life and Camp Equipment: Camp life was very important to Eastman, judging by the fact that almost one quarter of all the images in both albums document campsites and camp activities. Eastman is said to have enjoyed telling stories while sitting by the campfire at night. 178 Some images include Eastman and, while it is not known if these are self portraits or if they were taken by his companions, they portray him in a host of mundane camping activities which he obviously enjoyed. He is pictured while sewing a small item of clothing, perhaps mending a sock, in one photograph, sitting by the campfire in another, and while reading by the light of an acetylene lamp in yet another. (See illustration 17.) GE had borrowed the acetylene lamp from Pattillo: "As for the acetylene outfit, it was a great success. The number of times that the party called you a jolly good fellow for loaning it to us could not the counted. I have had a good deal of experience with acetylene lamps first and last in connection with bicycles and motor cars but this is the very best thing that I have ever seen. I like it so well that I have decided to keep it and have ordered a new one and some carbide sent to you from Montreal. We used it to eat our dinner by every night." 179 Eastman was what we would call today a technology junky. He had built his own camp kitchen and was a frequent customer to outfitters Abercrombie and Fitch Co, NYC, from whom he purchased his frrst tent. 180 He later modified tents and tested them in his garage on East Avenue. 181 This is shown in the extensive correspondence that GE exchanged with Abercrombie

A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, D4 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 179 George Eastman to Frank Pattillo, 10 October 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 180 A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, D4 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 181 Ibid.

178

so

and Fitch Company. 182 At the time, Abercrombie and Fitch Company letterhead boasted "Makers of Complete outfits for Explorers, Campers, Prospectors and Fishermen" and "largest Manufacturers of fine hand finished waterproof tents in the World". Eastman made full use of their expertise even as he gave them suggestions for improving their products. Eastman was very specific in his requests, especially immediately prior to both the Newfoundland 1906 and Labrador 1910 trips when he was ensuring that all the tents would be fitted with mosquito netting. He wrote: "Please send me one of your special waterproof tents, 16 ft. in diameter, with 2 ft. walls, complete with jointed poles and metal stakes. Also a floor cloth sewed in, with a 4ft. circular opening in the center. This circular opening to be provided with small loops for staking down. Include no stakes for this center opening. Please include mosquito proof door. The tent to be enclosed in dark brown canvas bag same as previous tents had from you." 183 In a post scriptum, he added: "Please let me hear from you in reply to my previous letters." 184 Afterward he sent them a letter asking for a reply for his "letters of July 21st, 23rd and 31 st ... " 185 soon followed by a similar vehement telegram. 186 The date of departure was close and he was eager to have all the equipment ready. I believe that being very well prepared allowed Eastman to fully enjoy himself during the voyage. For the 1906 trip, Eastman purchased all kinds of camping and hunting gear for himself and his party including: "sleeping pockets" 187 , shooting suits 188 , camp stools and wash stand/ 89

George Eastman to Abercrombie and Fitch, 1906 and 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman to Abercrombie and Fitch, 31 July 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 184 Ibid. 185 George Eastman to Abercrombie and Fitch, 3 August 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 186 Telegram, George Eastman to Abercrombie and Fitch, 10 August 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 187 Metropolitan Air Goods Co. to George Eastman, 9 April, 14 June 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 188 George Eastman to Upthegrove Sporting Goods Co., 14 June 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 189 George Eastman to God Medal Camp Furniture Mfg. Co., 29 August 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
183

182

51

camp stoves 190 , and assorted items such as collapsible tables, tents and accessories, blankets, waterproof silk flies, tent pegs, and folding lantems. 191 GE discussed his choice of equipment with fellow outdoorsmen. He wrote W.J. Ehrich: "I have just set up one of the tents that I am going to take to Newfoundland. I obtained them from Abercrombie & Fitch on Reade St. They are made of silk, with a waterproof canvas floor cloth sewed in and a mosquito netting. They are very light. If you have not seen these tents... it would be worth your while to investigate them." 192 "We expect to be in camp about three weeks." 193 He was also equipped with fishing rods and flies as well as hunting rifles and ammunitions. 194 On page two of Eastman's handwritten photograph inventory, he drew a diagram of the camp at Adies Pond in Newfoundland. Seven tents made up the "permanent" camp. According to Eastman's diagram, Drs. Mulligan and Converse shared a tent that was set up near the water's edge while Eastman and Eastwood's tent was just down from them but slightly away from the shore, separated by another shelter which Eastman labelled as "general assembly". The provisions tent as well as the guides dining and sleeping tents were parallel to these three but further into the woods. The main dining tent was also located by the shore, near Eastman's tent. Several photographs show the men in camp tending to the campfrre, or cooking over it, while others show them simply sitting by the campfrre. Bert Eastwood recounted that when "in the Sandhill and Humbert (sic) River section they were greatly annoyed by mosquitoes which got in under their hoods and gloves, and they were plagued by black flies which were very numerous that summer." He explained how Eastman

George Eastman to D.W. Cree, 18 June 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. George Eastman to Abercrombie and Fitch, 21 July 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 192 George Eastman to W.J. Ehrich, 12 July 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 193 George Eastman to Sir G. William Des Voeux, 23 July 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 194 George Nichols to George Eastman, 19 August 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection; George Eastman to Dr Converse, 24 August 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
191

190

52

remained behind one day "to fix up the camp" while he, his wife and the Mulligans went salmon and trout fishing but were "bitten so badly by flies that they had to return to camp" and that Eastman, who was also bitten bloody about the face, had hung the mosquito netting on all the tents so that they could all get "a little respite from pests." 195 (See illustration 18.) In addition to purchasing much of the camp equipment, Eastman paid for all of the travel expenses. For instance, in planning for the 1910 trip, he had "closed the deal on the Surf' for $13,500 for a 2 month lease. 196 The payroll for the ship's crew alone was $1500. In addition, the "Indian" guide's regular rate was $2 a day, expenses paid, from the day he left home. 197 The other guides were paid $2.50 a day by Nichols. 198 After the trip, Eastman gave the entire staff a bonus of approximately one week's wage as gratuity. 199 This demonstrates not only Eastman's concern for his and his guests' comfort during their voyage but also his considerate and generous nature towards those who helped to make the trip successful. A recurring comment that Eastman made about the yachting trip was that he could not get enough exercise on the ship: "The only drawback to the trip was that there was not exercise enough to be had on the yacht. As I grow older I find that I need a strenuous vacation to keep me in condition, so I enjoy a camping trip more than anything else. " 200 This was remedied when they camped at St Anne's Bay: "We, however, had nine days in camp which helped out some because

A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, 04 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 196 Telegram from Tams, Lemoine & Crane to George Eastman, 26 May 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection . 197 Frank Pattillo to George Eastman, 4 June 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 198 George Eastman to Frank Pattillo, 31 May 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 199 J.F. Tams to George Eastman, 8 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 200 George Eastman to Joseph Thacher Clarke, 19 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

195

53

I always arrange to have the party do all of their own work, except getting wood and water, when camptng.
. ,,201

Illustration 17. "GE- taken by the light of the acetylene lamp," 2009:0039:0051, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum of
Photography and Film.)

Illustration 18. Labrador campsite, 2009:0041:0080, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.
(Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

201

George Eastman to Mrs Amos Southwick (Cousin Mary,) 14 September 1910, George Eastman House Legacy Collection.

54

Appendix C- Train and Ferry Travel According to the train itinerary supplied to Eastman by the New York Central & Hudson River Railroad Company 202 , we know that he and his party boarded the train in Rochester on the evening of September 8, 1906. They travelled on the Columbia, a private Pullman railroad car, specifically hired by George Eastman for their use from Rochester to North Sydney. They arrived in Boston on the morning of the gth. From Boston, they travelled to Portland and on to Vanceboro that night. Early on the morning of September 1ot\ they left Vanceboro and, after short stops in New Brunswick, at St John in the morning and Moncton in the afternoon, they arrived in Truro, Nova Scotia, for an overnight stay. September 11th saw them make their way from Truro through to North Sydney, Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia, a route which included a ferry ride. At the time, the Canso Causeway that now links Cape Breton Island to mainland Nova Scotia was not in existence so Eastman's private Pullman car was ferried to Cape Breton Island on the Scotia, a ferry operated by the Intercolonial Railway Company. 203 Once in North Sydney, they boarded the S.S. Bruce 204 , a 237 feet steamer passenger ferry, for the night crossing to Port Aux Basques, their destination on the south western tip of the island of Newfoundland. 205 Train cars were not ferried between these two points 206 because the Newfoundland railway used narrow-gauge tracks which were not compatible with the standard-gauge of Canadian and American train cars. 207

J.C. Kalbfleisch, NY Central & Hudson River Railroad Co., to George Eastman, 21 August 1906, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 203 George Eastman, photo inventory note #3, 2009:0040:0001, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 204 George Eastman, photo inventory notes #9 to 11, 2009:0040:0001, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. 205 Today, North Sydney/Port-Aux-Basques remains the only year-round ferry crossing to NL. 206 The 5.5. Bruce, which they also took for the return trip, was built in 1897 for the Reid Newfoundland Railway company to connect the Newfoundland railway with Canadian lines, and serviced the North Sydney/Port Aux Basques crossing until it was shipwrecked in 1911. William Connors, By The Next Boat: A Photo History of Newfoundland Coastal Boats (StJohn's, NL: Johnson Family Foundation, 2002}, S-8. 207 Newfoundland Railway: The End of the Line, http://www.railwaycoastalmuseum.ca/end.htm (accessed May 23, 2009).

202

55

Early on the morning of September 12, 1906, Eastman and his three friends boarded the Reid Newfoundland Company train from Port Aux Basques to Deer Lake, where they would meet George Nichols and the rest of their guides. For their return journey on October 3rd, Eastman's party travelled by train from Deer Lake to Port aux Basques, then crossed the Cabot Strait to North Sydney overnight on the S.S. Bruce. At dawn on October
4th,

they once again headed for Truro on board the Columbia, their

private Pullman car. That evening, however, their itinerary changed from their initial journey in that the next leg of the train trip went through Levis, across the St Lawrence River from Quebec City. Their car was ferried to Quebec City on October
5th

and carried on to Montreal on the

6th.

After an overnight trip from Montreal, they finally arrived back in Rochester on the morning of October
gth,

exactly one month from the day they had left.

Illustration 19. "Deer Lake Station", 2009:0039:0106, George Eastman House Legacy Collection. (Courtesy of George Eastman House, International Museum ofPhotography and Film.)

56

Appendix D - Grenfell Mission When Eastman and his travelling companions visited the Grenfell Hospital at Battle Harbour, it appears that they failed to realize that the amenities to which affluent Rochestarians were accustomed were not available in these remote fishing outposts, especially without financial support. Of the hospital visit, Eastwood recounted that "Mr Eastman was interested in this not only because of its fame but also because he had been asked to make donations to it. Dr Mulligan was along and it gave him great distress, for it was far from being sanitary, with its hangings and drapes and soft, dirt-gathering furnishings. Mr Eastman regarded these as frre hazards, for he felt hospitals should have sprinklers and other apparatus for protection in case of frre."208 In 1892, Dr Wilfred Thomason Grenfell (1865-1940) came to Newfoundland from England, his native country, as a medical doctor and a member of the Royal National Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen, and devoted his life to improving conditions for the people of Labrador by building hospitals, schools and orphanages and operating hospital ships to service remote villages. 209 For these achievements, he is a hero to Newfoundlanders and Labradorians to this day. He lectured in the UK and North America (frrst tour of USA in 1896) to raise funds to support the Grenfell Labrador Medical Mission which he founded in 1894 after having built his frrst hospital in Battle Harbour in 1892, the hospital that Eastman and his travel companions visited in 1910. In 1905, Andrew Carnegie had donated a traveling library to the Grenfell Mission, and many Eastman contemporaries were aware of Dr Grenfell's accomplishments. I

208

A.B. Eastwood interview transcript, January 1954, 04 Box 1 Folder 4, George Eastman Papers, University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. 209 Grenfell Historical Society, Grenfell Chronology, http://www.grenfell-properties.com/chronology.html accessed 13 March 2009.

57

have not been able to ascertain if Eastman ever donated to the Grenfell Association of America that had been formed in 1907, or if Eastman and Grenfell ever met, although they may have had acquaintances in common due to Grenfell's extensive tour schedule in New York State during the first decade of the century. 210 In 1917 and 1922, Dr Grenfell reportedly gave lectures in Rochester about his Labrador work and experiences. 211 It is safe to assume that he had been to Rochester prior to those dates since he had been lecturing regularly in New York State for decades. His lectures usually consisted of a running commentary during a lantern slide presentation. These slides, approximately 1300 produced over the years, are now part of the International Grenfell Association Archives held at the Provincial Archives in StJohn's, NL.

Grenfell Historical Society, Grenfell Chronology, http://www.grenfell-properties.com/chronology.html accessed 13 March 2009. 211 "Dr Grenfell to Lecture: To Tell of His Work and Experiences in Labrador/' Rochester Democrat And Chronicle, 9 December 1917; and "Bleak Northland to be Described: Dr Wilfred T. Grenfell Will Tell of His Work in Labrador," Rochester Democrat And Chronicle, 13 January 1922.

210

58

BIBLIOGRAPHY Ackerman, Carl W. George Eastman: Founder of Kodak and The Photography Business. Washington, DC: Beard Books, 2000, [c.1930]. Brayer, Elizabeth. George Eastman: A Biography. Rochester NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006. Cadigan, Sean T. Newfoundland and Labrador: A History. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009. Connors, William. By The Next Boat: A Photo History of Newfoundland Coastal Boats. StJohn's, NL: Johnson Family Foundation, 2002. Corner, George W. The Edward W Mulligan Collection of Early Medical Books. University of Rochester Library Bulletin, Volume 1 Nov 1945. Number 1. Dickinson, Anthony B. and Chesley W. Sanger. Twentieth Century Shore-Station Whaling in Newfoundland and Labrador. Kingston: Queen's University Press, 2005. Eastman, George. Chronicles of an African Trip. Rochester, NY: self published, 1927. Lothrop, Jr. Eaton S. A Century of Cameras from the Collection of the International Museum of Photography at George Eastman House, Revised and Expanded Edition. Dobbs Ferry NY: Morgan and Morgan Inc Publishers, 1982. 157 McGrath, Antonia. Newfoundland Photography, 1849-1949. StJohn's, NL: Breakwater Books, 1980. McKeown, James, and Joan McKeown. Price Guide to Antique and Classic Cameras, 8th Edition, 1992-1993. Grantsburg, WI: Centennial Photo, 1992. Newfoundland Historical Society. A Short History of Newfoundland and Labrador. 2008. Rouse, Kate. The First-Time Collector's Guide to Classic Cameras. London: Quintet Publishing Limited, 1994. Rothney, G.O. Newfoundland: A History. Ottawa: Canadian Historical Association, 1973. Roy, Cyrus. "Mrs. Gilman H Perkins and Her World." University of Rochester Library Bulletin, Volume XXXIX Autumn 1975, Number 1. Stewart, Susan. On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Collection. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984.

59

Story, G.M., W.J. Kinwin and J.D.A. Widdowson, Dictionary of Newfoundland English Online, 2nd Ed with Supplement. Toronto: University ofToronto Press, 1999. University of Rochester Library Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives. Registers of George Eastman Papers: Department of Rare Books, Manuscripts and Archives, Rush Rhees Library, University of Rochester. Rochester NY: University of Rochester, 1980. Whipple George, George Eastman: A Picture Story of an Out of Doors Man - Camping, Fishing, Hunting. Rochester, NY: selfpublished, c.1935.

60

