Teaching Human Development to Early Childhood Education Students: A Cultural-Contextual Perspective

Judith K. Bernhard
Ryerson University

Howard A. Smith
Queen's University

digital.library.ryerson.ca/object/18

Please Cite: Bernhard, J. K., & Smith, H. A. (1997). Teaching human development to early childhood education students: A cultural contextual perspective. Canadian Journal of Research in Early Childhood Education, 6(1), 7-19.

library.ryerson.ca

Teaching Human Development to Early Childhood Education Students: A Cultural-Contextual Perspective
Judith K. Bernhard
Ryerson Polytechnic University

Howard A. Smith
Queen:~

University

Abstract The focus of a cultural-contextual approach to development is to recognize the fact that considerable differences exist among human individuals, especially in terms of their diverse sociocultural backgrounds. This paper examines how a group of early childhood education students responded to the presentation of a cultural-contextual approach during a human development course. A variety of data were gathered on the reactions of 81 students enrolled in the course during their first year of a four-year undergraduate degree program in early childhood education. The data reflected a number of course-related issues, and the investigation looked for signs that the cultural approach was salient for the students. There appeared to be evidence for only a small degree of success in conveying the approach in terms of students actually mentioning such issues. In analyzing the findings we propose that to reach a larger number of students, it may be neces5.:1.ry to address in a deliberate way the explicit and implicit messages concerning what is important to know about human development. The underlying assumptions of the \\ider course of study may need to be addressed as well, both at the program level and within the individual courses themselves. Implications for teaching are presented.

Resume Le point focal d 'une approche culturelle-contextuelle au deveIoppement est de reconnaitre Ie fait qu 'il existc des differences considerables parmi tcs individus humains surtout au niveau de leurs antecedents socioculturels divers. Cet article examine comment un groupe d' etudiants a reagi ala presentation d'une approche culturelle-contextuelle pendant un cours de dcveioppement humain. Des donnees sur Ies reactions des 81 cleves, dans leur premiere annee d'un programme de quatre ans dans l'etude de la petite enfance, ant ete recueillies. Ces donnees refletenl un nombre de sujets abordes pendant Ie cours ou I' enquele visait atrouver des signes que I' approche cuIturelIe elail significative pour les etudiants. Il semblait avoir des preuves pour seuIement un degre limite de succes en termes d'etudianls qui mentionnaieot veritablement ces genres d' idees. En analysant les resuItats, pour atteindre un plus grand nombre etudiants oous proposons qu' il serait peutNre nccessaire d'adresser directement les messages implicites et explicites concernant ce qui est important de savoir sur Ie dcveloppement humain. De plus, nous devrions peut-etre aussi regarder Ies suppositions sous-jacentes au niveau du programme ainsi qu'au niveau des cours individuels. Les implications au niveau de l'enseignemenl sont presentees.

Correspondence should be addressed to: Dr. Judith K. Bernhard, School of Early Childhood Education, Ryerson Polytechnic University, 350 Victoria St., Toronto, OntariO. M5B 2K3 Email: jbernhar@acs.ryerson.ca

