AN EXAMINATION OF A BRIEF INTERVENTION TARGETING CAUSAL  ATTRIBUTIONS FOR DAYTIME FATIGUE  by  Andrea L. Harris  Bachelor of Arts, The University of Western Ontario, 2007 

A thesis  presented to Ryerson University  in partial fulfillment of the  requirements for the degree of  Master of Arts  in the program of  Psychology 

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2010  © Andrea L. Harris 2010

Author's Declaration 

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.  I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or  individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. 

__________________________________________________  Signature 

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or  by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the  purpose of scholarly research. 

__________________________________________________  Signature

ii 

Abstract  An Examination of a Brief Intervention Targeting Causal Attributions for Daytime Fatigue  Master of Arts, 2010  Andrea L. Harris  Psychology  Ryerson University  Research has shown that poor sleepers focus primarily on their sleep as a cause of daytime  fatigue rather than the multitude of other possible causes of fatigue. This can create sleeprelated  anxiety and further perpetuate the insomnia. In order to lessen the increased focus on sleep, the  present study investigated whether people could learn to consider other attributions for fatigue  via an informationbased intervention, and whether this cognitive change would have  implications for relevant mood states. Participants were randomized to receive either "causes of  fatigue" information (FI), or generic sleepinformation (control), and were tested pre and post  intervention. FI participants were significantly more likely to consider nonsleeprelated  attributions for fatigue at postintervention, relative to control participants. There were no  significant group differences on relevant mood states. These results demonstrate that attributions  for fatigue are amenable to change via an informationbased intervention thus, this research  explores one avenue toward refining insomnia treatments.

iii 

Acknowledgments  I would like to thank my supervisor, Dr. Colleen Carney, for her invaluable guidance and  the considerable time she has spent working with me throughout this research process. Both her  expertise in insomnia research and excellent instruction in research methodology and writing  style have helped me be successful in the completion of this project. I would also like to thank  Dr. Kristin Vickers for her input regarding the design of the thesis, as well as the excellent  feedback she has provided me throughout the writing process. Special thanks to Dr. Michelle  Dionne for taking the time to be a member of my examination committee and for her helpful  feedback.  Thank you to my fellow lab members and classmates for providing me with valuable  advice as I prepared for my defense presentation and the submission of the thesis. Finally, thank  you to my family and friends for their unconditional support and encouragement throughout this  process.

iv 

Table of Contents  Introduction ..............................................................................  Method  Design............................................................................  Participants......................................................................  SelfReport Measures..........................................................  Outcome Measures.............................................................  Intervention Materials..........................................................  Procedure........................................................................  Analyses..........................................................................  Results  Preliminary Analyses........................................................  Main Analyses................................................................  Discussion.................................................................................  Appendices ...............................................................................  References..................................................................................  29  32  38  52  63 19  19  21  23  26  26  28  1 

v 

List of Tables  Table 1: Participant Demographics and SelfReport Measure Psychometrics....  Table 2: Frequency of NonSleepRelated Attribution Categories ................  Table 3: Correlations among SelfReport Measures..................................  Table 4: Means and Standard Deviations for PreIntervention Scores on  SelfReport Measures...........................................................  31  Table 5: Means and Standard Deviations for VAS Pre and PostIntervention...  37 20  24  30 

vi 

List of Figures  Figure 1: Number of sleeprelated attributions relative to the total number of  attributions for FI and control at pre and post intervention...........  Figure 2: Rank scores of sleeprelated attributions for FI and control at  pre and post intervention...................................................  Figure 3: Proportion allotted to sleeprelated attributions relative to total  proportion for FI and control at pre and post intervention.............  38 34  33 

vii 

List of Appendices  Appendix A: List of Attributions Task (LAT)..............................................  Appendix B: Visual Analogue Scales (VAS)..............................................  Appendix C: Fatigue Information (FI) Intervention.......................................  Appendix D: Sleep Control Information (Control) Intervention.........................  Appendix E: Consent Agreement.............................................................  Appendix F: Debriefing Form................................................................  Appendix G: Depression Debriefing Form..................................................  52  53  54  56  58  61  62

viii 

AN EXAMINATION OF A BRIEF INTERVENTION TARGETING CAUSAL  ATTRIBUTIONS FOR DAYTIME FATIGUE  Insomnia is a devastating disorder which is diagnosed based on a subjective complaint of  difficulty falling asleep, maintaining sleep, waking up too early, or feeling poorly rested despite  adequate sleep. Impaired daytime performance, such as fatigue, difficulty concentrating and poor  social or vocational functioning, are also frequent complaints among individuals with insomnia.  (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). Epidemiological studies suggest that insomnia is a  highly prevalent disorder affecting approximately 10 ­ 15% of the adult population (Ford &  Kamerow, 1989 Ohayon, 2002). This condition is also associated with a host of significant  personal and societal costs for Canadians (Daley, Morin, LeBlanc, Gregoire & Savard, 2009).  Specifically, insomnia has been linked to reduced quality of life, increased healthcare utilization,  increased use of prescription and over thecounter medication, increased absenteeism, decreased  work productivity and increased traffic and workrelated accidents (Edinger & Wohlgemuth,  1999 Roth & AncoliIsrael, 1999). With respect to economic burden, annual costs for Canadians  associated with insomniarelated absenteeism and decreased work productivity are estimated to  be $970.6 million and $5.0 billion respectively (Daley et al., 2009). Further, insomnia often  presents as comorbid with other psychiatric disorders, especially depression and anxiety  (Ohayon, Caulet, & Lemoine, 1998), and these comorbid groups are particularly challenging to  treat (Smith, Huang, & Manber, 2005).  The development of chronic insomnia is primarily dependent on three factors:  predisposing factors, precipitating events, and perpetuating factors (Spielman & Glovinsky,  1991). Predisposing factors are specific individual characteristics such as sensitivity to light  (Chesson et al., 1999) or propensity to worry (Lichstein & Rosenthal, 1980) that can increase

1 

vulnerability for developing insomnia. When an individual with such predisposing characteristics  comes into contact with precipitating factors (e.g., stressful life events), they may then develop  an acute sleep disturbance (Healy, Kales, Monroe, Bixler, Chamberlin, & Soldatos, 1981  Morgan & Clarke, 1997). Given the discomfort associated with this sleep difficulty, people may  begin to engage in maladaptive thought processes and behaviours in order to help cope with their  temporary sleep loss, such as increased sleeprelated anxiety and poor bedtime habits. It is these  cognitive and behavioural perpetuating factors that will ultimately turn their acute sleep  disturbance into chronic insomnia. Furthermore, these perpetuating factors have adverse impacts  on the sleep regulatory processes (Bootzin, 1972 Harvey, 2002), and it is the interaction  between such perpetuating factors and sleep regulatory processes which works to maintain the  insomnia.  There are three primary processes which regulate sleep: the homeostatic, circadian, and  arousal systems (Saper, Cano, & Scammell, 2005 Webb, 1988). The homeostat controls the  propensity for sleep (i.e., sleep drive) by building "pressure" to sleep with increasing hours of  wakefulness (i.e., sleep debt) this pressure is then released during sleep. Behaviours such as  napping, going to bed earlier than usual, sleepingin, or being sedentary, all result in lowered  homeostatic drive for sleep, and thus more disturbed sleep. The circadian system affects the  timing of our sleepwake schedule in the 24hour day. Poor bedtime habits, such as varying bed  times and rise times, disrupt the circadian system in the same way that jet lag taxes our system.  Finally, while the circadian and homeostatic systems work to regulate sleep, both systems can be  trumped by the arousal system. Even during periods of high homeostatic drive (e.g., periods of  sleep deprivation) or optimal timing for sleep (i.e., during the night), if the body perceives a  threat, the arousal system allows people to stay awake. In this sense, repeated pairings of sleep

2 

disturbances with the bedroom unintentionally conditions the bed to be an alerting/wakeful  stimulus, and thus, the arousal system is an important factor in insomnia. In sum, while  predisposing and precipitating factors work to create the sleep disturbance, it is the perpetuating  factors, and their interaction with the sleep regulatory processes, which contribute to the  development and the maintenance of clinical insomnia. As such, in order to better understand,  prevent and treat insomnia, identification of these perpetuating factors needs further exploration  in both the research and treatment literatures.  There is extensive evidence that both behavioural and cognitive processes are key factors  in the maintenance and perpetuation of insomnia. With respect to behavioural factors, many  people with insomnia problems have poor bedtime habits and do not maintain consistent sleep  wake schedules (Bootzin, 1972). For example, insomnia sufferers often attempt to catchup on  sleep by napping during the day or sleepingin (Morin, 1993). As explained above, while these  may seem to be effective strategies, they interfere with the body's homeostatic sleep drive, which  itself is designed to compensate for accumulated sleep loss by increasing our ability to sleep  (Feinberg, March, Floyd, Jimison, BossomDemitrack, & Katz, 1985 Webb, 1988). Other  behavioural routines, such as remaining inactive during the daytime (Morgan, 2003 Sherrill,  Kotchou, & Quan, 1998) or engaging in mentally demanding activities too close to bedtime  (Broman & Hetta, 1994), may also prolong sleep onset. Over time, these sleep disruptive habits  come to perpetuate one another, and ultimately can lead to the inception of chronic insomnia.  An important question is how do people come to develop such disruptive sleep habits?  The answer may lie in the thinking processes and general cognitive styles of those with  insomnia. Such cognitive processes include maladaptive beliefs and misperceptions about sleep  (Morin, Stone, Trinkle, Mercer & Remsberg, 1993), as well as heightened anxiety and worry

3 

regarding the consequences of sleep loss (Lichstein & Rosenthal, 1980 Wicklow & Espie,  2000). These cognitive factors may underlie the behavioural processes which are thought to lead  to sleep deficits. For example, some individuals believe they require a certain number of hours of  sleep each night in order to function the following day. If they do not meet this specific  requirement, they may then decide to sleepin or nap in order to compensate for this sleep debt.  However, as discussed above, oversleeping can disrupt the body's homeostatic mechanism,  which can then make it more difficult to fall asleep at night. As another example, people who  worry about their sleep, particularly at night, are more likely than their non anxious counterparts  to have sleeponset difficulties (Hall, Buysse, Reynolds, Kupfer & Baum, 1996 Haynes, Adams  & Franzen, 1981). Ultimately, it appears that the cognitions support and maintain the sleep  disruptive habits, which in turn perpetuate the insomnia.  Some may notice that many normal sleepers adopt the abovementioned maladaptive  behaviours, such as napping during the day, and do not develop any sleep disturbances. There are  several reasons why this might occur. As discussed in the first section, people with insomnia  may have specific predisposing factors which enhance their susceptibility to developing a  chronic sleep problem. In particular, the homeostatic mechanism known to standardize our sleep  wake patterns has been found to be dysregulated in those with insomnia (Pigeon & Perlis, 2006).  As such, a daytime nap for some individuals (i.e., noninsomniacs) may not be sufficient to  produce sleeponset difficulties, whereas for those with a more sensitive homeostat (i.e., those  with insomnia), this may result in deleterious consequences for sleep. In addition, what may be  more important than the behaviour itself, such as a nap, is the significance and meaning assigned  to the particular event. Take the following analogy as an example. For most people, eating a  single chocolate cupcake does not have a significant impact on their lives. However, for someone

4 

with diabetes, such a treat would present a health risk to the individual and thus he or she would  be more inclined to monitor for and stay away from such healthrelated threats. In this vein, if a  given individual does not have a cognitive orientation to attribute meaning to sleep loss, then he  or she is less likely to consider the event threatening, and as a result there are no functional  consequences for sleep.  Given the instrumental function of cognitive processes in the development and  maintenance of insomnia, recent theoretical models have outlined how these mechanisms work  to perpetuate the disorder. In particular, Harvey's (2002) contemporary cognitive model of  insomnia describes these cognitive processes in detail. Briefly, Harvey's model states that  individuals with sleep difficulties often experience negatively toned mental activity regarding  their sleep and subsequent daytime functioning. This cognitive activity usually stems from  thoughts about not getting enough sleep and about the impact that sleep disturbance will have on  daytime functioning and performance. These negative thoughts can trigger a state of increased  arousal and distress, which is associated with an attentional bias towards threat, whereby poor  sleepers focus their attentional resources on distressing sleeprelated cues (i.e., threats). Given  their negative thoughts about sleep and attentional bias, they selectively monitor for sleeprelated  threats both internally (within themselves) and externally (in the environment). Together, the  increased sleeprelated anxiety and bias toward sleep threat can actually make it more difficult to  fall asleep, as research has shown that the optimal conditions for sleeponset include minimal  cognitive activity and effort in the presleep period (Espie, 2002 Kohn & Espie, 2005). This lack  of sleep during the night can also lead to impaired daytime performance, which is then often  exclusively attributed to the previous night's poor sleep. In general, the model suggests that the

5 

aforementioned cognitive processes work to trap the individual in an ongoing cycle, wherein  they become more absorbed by and anxious about their sleep difficulty.  In addition to Harvey's model, there are other theories that suggest cognitive processes  play a central role in the maintenance of insomnia. For example, Espie's (2002) psychobiological  inhibition model posits that intrusive thinking in the presleep period inhibits the normal  reductions in arousal necessary for sleep to unfold. Similarly, Lundh and Broman's (2000)  theory of sleepinterfering and sleepinterpreting processes suggests that the interaction of  stressful life events, arousal, and negative appraisal of sleep conspire to produce insomnia. Taken  together, in the context of both Harvey's (2002) and these other models, it is cognitive arousal  and interpreting or attributional processes which operate to maintain insomnia, and as such, are  important targets of research.  Maladaptive SleepRelated Beliefs and Attributions in Insomnia  Harvey (2002) acknowledges additional factors can further maintain the negatively toned  cognitive activity, and thus the insomnia. These are known as unhelpful beliefs about sleep. An  example of such a belief is the common notion that one must obtain a minimum of eight hours of  sleep in order to function the following day. In fact, sleep quantity is a relatively unimportant  predictor of daytime functioning in comparison to sleep quality, and as such, many people  function adequately with less than eight hours of sleep (Pilcher, Ginter, & Sadowsky, 1997).  Although many people strictly adhere to this "golden rule" of needing a minimum of eight hours  of sleep, it is the strength of this belief, or the conviction with which it is believed to be true, that  differentiates between good and poor sleepers (Morin et al., 1993). For example, someone with  insomnia would likely be quite concerned if they received seven or nine hours of sleep due to  their inflexibility regarding such sleep beliefs, whereas a good sleeper who holds the same belief

6 

may be more adaptable in this situation. That is, a good sleeper knows that there are a range of  possibilities with respect to the link between daytime functioning and sleep. One can obtain eight  hours of sleep and feel sluggish during the day, or obtain six hours and feel great. According to  Harvey's model, holding these maladaptive, rigid beliefs combined with the reduced capacity to  produce eight hours of sleep per night can create anxiety within the individual and continue to  fuel the negative cognitive activity. Thus, unhelpful beliefs about sleep are additional  exacerbating factors that work to further perpetuate the insomnia. Indeed, research has found that  poor sleepers tend to endorse stronger unhelpful beliefs and attitudes about sleep than do good  sleepers (Morin et al., 1993).  Attributions are a specific type of belief implicated in sleep disturbance and insomnia  (Morin et al., 1993). As an example of a sleeprelated attribution, people with insomnia may  attribute their sleep disturbance to a specific type of medication, or perhaps to a difficult week at  work. As another example, poor sleepers may attribute a bad day to the fact that they did not  sleep well the night before. While such attributions may be true, inaccurate attributions can have  deleterious consequences for poor sleepers. In the latter case above, if negative daytime  experiences are exclusively, or incorrectly attributed to poor sleep, it increases pressure to sleep  well (i.e., to avoid further negative experiences during the day). In support of this idea are studies  showing that similar to maladaptive beliefs about sleep, faulty attributions are significant  precursors of heightened cognitive arousal and thus play an influential role in perpetuating the  insomnia (Espie, 2002 Lundh & Broman, 2000 Morin, 1993). However, while general  unhelpful beliefs about sleep have been subject to a number of empirical tests in the literature  (Carney, Edinger, Manber, Garson, & Segal, 2007 Edinger, Carney & Wolgemuth, 2008 Morin

7 

et al., 1993), and are outlined as exacerbating factors in Harvey's (2002) model, misattributions  related to insomnia have not received as much attention in the literature.  Nevertheless, several early studies have demonstrated the importance of attributions in  cognitive models of insomnia. For example, Storms and Nesbitt (1970) found that after  instructing a group of insomnia patients that a placebo pill would have an arousing affect, they  had shorter sleep onset latency compared to those who were told the pill would have a relaxing  effect. The authors suggested that the participants' faster sleep onset was a result of attributing  their arousal to the pill rather than to processes within themselves. This attribution decreased  their anxiety, thus enabling them to fall asleep more quickly. In a similar study, people with  insomnia received treatment including both behavioural therapy as well as sleep medication  (Davison, Tsujimoto, & Glaros, 1973). Following the drug therapy, half of the participants were  told that they received an optimal dose of the drug whereas the other half was notified that the  dosage was not sufficient to produce any noticeable change. As expected, the group informed  that they received a suboptimal dose achieved greater maintenance of their improvements, as  they did not attribute their success to the drug. The group that was told they received an adequate  dose, however, did attribute their improvement to the drug, and were not able to maintain these  improvements in the long term. These manipulation studies demonstrate that attributing sleep  loss to internal versus external factors can have a significant influence on whether their sleep  improves as a result.  While the aforementioned studies examined different types of attributional tendencies  within insomnia sufferers, the question remains whether the content of attributions differ among  those with and without insomnia. To answer this question, Van Egeren, Haynes, Franzen and  Hamilton (1983) examined the content of sleeprelated attributions among individuals with

8 

varying degrees of sleeponset insomnia. The attribution measure used in this study consisted of  a list of commonly perceived causes of sleep loss which were rated along three dimensions:  location (internalexternal cause), stability (transientstable cause), and intentionality (degree of  perceived control over the event). The results indicated that the most important predictor of sleep  disturbance were attributions over which participants had no control, suggesting that individuals  with sleeponset insomnia perceive their sleep problem as uncontrollable.  Daytime Fatigue and its Causes  In addition to sleeprelated cognitions which operate during the night, research has begun  to consider daytime experiences in insomnia, most notably fatigue. Fatigue is a feeling of low  energy during the daytime that is a common complaint among people with insomnia. Today, the  research literature agrees that insomnia is both a nighttime and a daytime disorder (Buysse et al.,  2007 Harvey, 2002 Moul, Nofzinger, Pilkonis, Houck, Miewald, & Buysse, 2002), and as a  result, cognitive models of insomnia (i.e., Harvey, 2002) can be applied to both nighttime and  daytime symptoms. In this sense, poor sleepers' heightened arousal and awareness of sleep  related stimuli during the night tends to mirror their increased attention to sleeprelated cues  during the daytime, which typically manifests as fatigue. For example, during the night, people  may notice their heart pounding and thoughts racing, preventing them from falling asleep,  whereas during the day, they may notice fatigue or inability to concentrate, precluding their  ability to function effectively. In either case, this type of monitoring and detection of threatening  cues continues to fuel sleeprelated anxiety and worry, and thus the insomnia (Harvey, 2002).  It is important to note, however, that daytime experiences of insomnia (e.g., fatigue) may  in fact be a byproduct of the increased attentional bias toward sleeprelated threats during the  daytime. In this sense, if poor sleepers monitor for sleep threats within their body and in their

9 

environment, they are more likely to detect instances of fatigue compared to those who do not  monitor. Indeed, research has found that people with insomnia have an increased attentional bias  toward sleeprelated stimuli, suggesting that they are more emotionally and cognitively impacted  by such stimuli (Spiegelhalder, Espie, Nissen, & Riemann, 2008). As such, it is possible that  daytime fatigue in those with insomnia is a reflection of a sleeprelated attentional bias rather  than objective fatigue.  Nevertheless, daytime fatigue is a very frequent complaint among those with insomnia,  (Roth & AncoliIsrael, 1999 Ustinov et al., 2010) and as such, warrants research attention.  Indeed, recent research found support for the notion that poor sleepers are highly concerned by  the prospect of fatigue (Harris & Carney, 2009). This study explored the concept "fear of  fatigue", which states that poor sleepers have an increased aversion to the experience of fatigue  and will attempt to avoid this experience if possible. Indeed, results of this study indicated that  poor sleepers view fatigue as threatening, and engage in behaviours to avoid this experience.  Essentially, these findings demonstrate that poor sleepers have a preoccupation with fatigue,  which, similar to their increased focus with sleeprelated cues, can contribute to their sleep  related anxiety and further perpetuate the insomnia.  There are many possible causes of fatigue. Whereas insomnia sufferers tend to assume  that lack of sleep is always the most likely cause of daytime fatigue, several research studies  have demonstrated that there are a multitude of causes of fatigue, many of which are unrelated to  sleep. Some particularly common examples include: 1) a natural daily midafternoon dip in core  body temperature and alertness controlled by the circadian pacemaker (Hayashi, Watanabe, &  Hori, 1999) 2) boredom and low stimulation (Grandjean, 1979) 3) physical under or over  activity (Puetz, O'Connor, & Dishman, 2006) 4) illnesses such as a virus or anemia (Sobrero et

10 

al., 2001) 5) depression and anxiety (Greenberg, 2002) and 6) caffeine withdrawal (Juliano &  Griffiths, 2004).  Indeed, many physical and psychological factors, such as low systolic blood pressure,  increased heart rate, sleepiness, high levels of anxiety and worry, depressed mood, and unhealthy  lifestyle are significant predictors of fatigue (Wijesuriya, Tran & Craig, 2007). Similarly,  research exploring fatigue in cancer patients revealed that weight loss, muscle abnormalities,  pain, circadian rhythms, depression, and stress are all correlates of cancerrelated fatigue  (AncoliIsrael, Moore, & Jones, 2001 Stone, Richards & Hardy, 1998). While sleep disruption is  also a common complaint among cancer patients, to date, there is no evidence that daytime  fatigue and sleep difficulties are causally related in this patient population (AncoliIsrael et al.,  2001). Further, in Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, a condition whose primary symptom is daytime  fatigue, sleep disturbance is not considered to be a fundamental causal factor (White, 2004). As  such, the primary causes of daytime fatigue may be more multifaceted than one would expect.  Attributions of Daytime Fatigue  Given the burdensome nature and high prevalence of daytime fatigue (Roth & Ancoli  Israel, 1999), recent research has begun to examine people's causal attributions for this daytime  impairment. As demonstrated above, there are many possible causes of daytime fatigue.  Nevertheless, research has shown that poor sleepers tend to focus on sleep as an explanation of  their fatigue and ignore other equally likely causes. For example, Morin and colleagues (1993)  found that individuals with insomnia made stronger attributions of mood disturbance and low  energy to poor sleep than did good sleepers. Further, they found that good sleepers disagreed  with the statement, "one can hardly function during the day without a good night's sleep" more  strongly relative to poor sleepers. Other researchers agree that people with insomnia tend to

11 

misattribute daytime symptoms to sleep more often than do those without sleep disturbances  (Carney & Edinger, 2006 Espie, 2002).  The psychobiological inhibition model of insomnia presents a parsimonious rationale for  the misattribution of daytime impairment to poor sleep (Espie, 2002). This model posits that  insomnia arises from the disruption, or inhibition, of one or more processes which contributes to  normal sleep in good sleepers. As such, Espie argues that good sleepers have more accurate  sleepwake attributions, such that they are less likely to attribute fatigue and other daytime  impairments to the preceding night's sleep. Instead, he explains, they are more likely to associate  fatigue with corresponding life events (e.g., work stress) rather than a maladaptive sleep pattern.  According to this model, it is the disruption of the accurate sleepwake attribution system which  contributes to misattributions of fatigue among poor sleepers.  Consequences of Misattributions of Fatigue  When considering these research findings, it is important to understand why people with  insomnia are more likely to attribute fatigue to poor sleep, and more importantly, what the  consequences are of these mis or overattributions. As previously mentioned with regard to  Harvey's (2002) model, those with insomnia tend to focus their attention on sleep as a result of  negative cognitive activity and subsequent arousal. At this point, they become preoccupied with  sleep and monitor internally and externally for sleeprelated threats. In this sense, fatigue can be  considered a sleeprelated threat that occurs during the daytime. Given their preoccupation with  sleep, the fatigue will likely be attributed to poor sleep, rather than the other myriad of  possibilities. This process of attributing fatigue solely to a poor night's sleep will again lead to  negative cognitive activity related to sleep. Thus, according to the model, attributing fatigue

12 

solely to poor sleep can perpetuate the insomnia cycle via increased sleeprelated anxiety and  monitoring for sleep threats.  Misattributing fatigue exclusively to poor sleep can also affect people's behaviours in the  presleep period. Along with the increased negative cognitive activity and sleeprelated anxiety,  insomnia sufferers begin to feel pressured to sleep better in order to overcome their daytime  fatigue problems (Harvey, 2002). As such, they often go to bed at night with the intention to fall  asleep. However, sleep is one of the few things humans do wherein increased effort and pressure  actually increases the likelihood of the problem persisting (Broomfield & Espie, 2005 Espie,  2002). Indeed, research has found that putting forth effort to fall asleep can effectively  discriminate good and poor sleepers (Kohn & Espie, 2005). Further, Ansfield, Wegner and  Bowser (1996) provided experimental evidence that sleep effort is a maintaining factor of  insomnia. The authors instructed good sleepers to either fall asleep quickly or whenever they  desired, under high or low mental load conditions. Participants who were instructed to fall asleep  immediately in the high mental load condition had the longest sleeponset latency, as this was the  most cognitively demanding condition. Given that insomnia sufferers are prone to increased  cognitive activity (i.e., high mental load) in the presleep period, these findings confirm that  putting forth effort to sleep will result in poor sleep outcomes. In sum, overattributing fatigue to  poor sleep can lead to increased sleep effort at night, which can make it even more difficult to  bring on sleep, thus perpetuating the insomnia.  Implications for Treatments of Insomnia  Given the substantial research findings and theory supporting the problematic outcome of  attributing fatigue solely to poor sleep, it might be important for poor sleepers to learn to  consider other potential attributions for daytime fatigue. Doing so may reduce anxiety about

13 

sleep and decrease the likelihood of further maintaining the insomnia. Specifically, it would be  interesting to see whether a brief cognitive intervention can reduce insomnia sufferers' over  attribution tendency and allow them to consider other plausible reasons for feeling tired. Indeed,  such an intervention may be an important addition to current treatments for insomnia.  There are currently several treatment options for individuals with insomnia, including  Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT). CBT is a multicomponent treatment which is comprised  of cognitive and behavioural interventions for treating insomnia, such as sleep restriction,  stimulus control, and cognitive therapy. Its theoretical underpinnings are supported by empirical  research findings which demonstrate that cognitive and behavioural changes leads to symptom  improvement in individuals with insomnia. CBT is currently the firstline treatment for insomnia,  given its welldocumented empirical support in insomnia populations (Morin et al., 2006). CBT  has been found to be efficacious when compared to control groups (e.g., Lichstein, Wilson, &  Johnson, 2000), placebo treatments (e.g., Lichstein, Riedel, Wilson, Lester, & Aguillard, 2001),  standalone behavioural interventions (e.g., Edinger, Wohlgemuth, Radtke, Marsh & Quillian,  2001), and pharmacotherapy treatments (e.g., Jacobs, PaceSchott, Stickgold, & Otto, 2004).  More recently, research has provided evidence for the efficacy of CBT in the treatment of  comorbid disorders (e.g., Edinger et al., 2009 Rybarczyk, Lopez, Alsten, Benson & Stepanski,  2002), and the clinical effectiveness of CBT in primary care settings (e.g., Espie, Inglis, Tessier,  & Harvey, 2001). These research findings are consistent with the results of two metaanalyses on  nonpharmacological treatments of insomnia (Morin, Culbert, & Schwartz, 1994 Murtagh &  Greenwood, 1995), wherein CBT had effect sizes in the large range for most outcome variables  (Cohen, 1988).

14 

Despite the overwhelming empirical support for CBT in insomnia populations, there  continues to be room for improvement. For example, the overall average improvement was  found to be only 5060% (Morin et al., 1994) and there are a subset of insomnia patients for  whom CBT does not work at all (Harvey & Tang, 2003 Morin et al.,1994). Further, many  individuals who do improve continue to have residual sleep disturbance, which may pose a risk  for future relapse (Morin et al., 2006). As such, research aimed at improving treatment outcomes  for this highly burdensome disorder is urgently needed.  Importantly, while many research studies have provided evidence for behavioural  strategies for treating insomnia (Morin et al., 1994 2006), research examining cognitive  treatments is still in its infancy. Nonetheless, as discussed above, it is the cognitive processes  which are often hypothesized to be the driving force behind the sleepdisruptive behaviours, and  which ultimately maintain the insomnia. Indeed, recent research suggests that targeting  maladaptive cognitions in treatment may have important implications for improving response  rates. For example, people with insomnia who benefitted most from CBT were the patients who  had the highest degree of cognitive change with respect to their maladaptive sleep beliefs  (Edinger et al., 2008). Similarly, an open trial of cognitive therapy for insomnia found  improvements in both nighttime and daytime measures of sleep impairment during treatment and  up to 12month followup (Harvey Sharpley, Ree, Stinson, & Clark, 2007). Taken together, it  appears that exploring the value of adding cognitive strategies into CBT is a worthwhile research  endeavor. Although some studies have examined maladaptive sleep beliefs and other components of  cognitive therapy for insomnia, no studies to date have directly explored whether attributional  biases can be effectively modified and whether this would have implications for improving mood

15 

or anxiety. Specifically, Harvey and colleagues (2007) targeted fatigue attributions in their  treatment, but it is not clear if the sleep improvements were due to changes in attributions or  other treatment targets in the intervention. As such, the goal of the present study was to fill this  gap in the literature. By examining whether people could change their sleepfocused tendency  with a minimal attributiontargeted intervention, this study investigated a new and unexplored  avenue toward refining insomnia treatments.  The Present Study  The present study examined people's attributions for fatigue. The results of Storms and  Nesbitt (1970) indicated that when participants were given an alternative explanation for their  arousal before bed (the pill), they were able to fall asleep more quickly, as they no longer  attributed their arousal to internal factors that were under their control. Similarly, when  individuals are fatigued during the day, it is likely that they would overattribute, or perhaps  misattribute that sleepy state to insufficient sleep. Indeed, as Harvey's (2002) model suggests,  poor sleepers have a tendency to attend to and scan their body for sleeprelated threats, thus  increasing the likelihood that they would attribute their fatigue to poor sleep. However, if  alternative explanations were provided, they may be more likely to attribute their fatigue to  something else, thereby reducing their sleeprelated anxiety. As such, the purpose of this study  was to determine whether presenting alternative explanations for fatigue would increase the  likelihood that participants would attribute their fatigue to reasons unrelated to sleep, and  whether this cognitive change would have implications for relevant mood states.  To answer this research question, participants were randomized to either a Fatigue  Information (FI) group or a ControlInformation (control) group. Participants in the FI group  were given information related to possible causes of fatigue whereas the control group was

16 

provided with information related to sleep but unrelated to the causes of fatigue. Cognitive  change was determined via pre and postintervention outcome measures designed for the  purpose of this study, which were as follows: 1) a participantgenerated list of attributions (LAT)  that account for them feeling tired, 2) a ranking of the frequency (i.e., in accounting for their  fatigue) of the participantgenerated attributions, 3) the participants' rating of the likelihood that  each of these participant generated factors contributes to their fatigue, and 4) unipolar Visual  Analog Scales (VAS) to measure fatigue, positive mood and worry. Using this design, this study  examined whether fatiguerelated information was helpful in orienting participants to the other  possibilities for the causes of their fatigue.  While both good and poor sleepers were eligible to participate in the study, only  participants who scored above the clinical cutoff of 3.8 (Carney et al., 2010) on the  Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitudes about Sleep Scale (DBAS16: Morin, Vallieres, & Ivers,  2007) were included in the analyses. Individuals who scored above this cutoff have a high degree  of maladaptive sleep beliefs and an increased cognitive vulnerability to insomnia (Carney et al.,  2010 Morin et al., 1993). There are several reasons as to why participants were selected based  on their presumed cognitive vulnerability on the DBAS16. First, given that this study was  testing a cognitive intervention, it made intuitive sense to use a cognitively vulnerable subset of  participants. Second, such participants were selected so not to exclude participants who indicated  that they did not have insomnia at the time of their testing (i.e., if their insomnia was not  activated), or if they had an acute sleep disturbance as a result of one difficult week. Indeed,  insomnia can be a transient phenomenon which may be influenced by the time of year, physical  wellbeing and several other factors for undergraduate students (Jensen, 2003 Lack, 1986), and  it was important to ensure that we would capture an enduring measure of insomnia susceptibility

17 

as opposed to a temporary assessment of sleep disturbance. Finally, selecting a vulnerable  sample enabled us to get a sense of whether this intervention would be effective for the  prevention of insomnia in future studies.  In order to determine whether those vulnerable to insomnia could adopt other, nonsleep  related attributions for fatigue via a brief information intervention, the following predictions  were proposed:  Primary Hypotheses: ·  Hypothesis 1: the number of generated sleeprelated attributions for feeling tired during  the day, relative to nonsleeprelated attributions, in the list of attributions task, would  decrease for those in the FI condition only. ·  Hypothesis 2: the rank and proportion allotted to sleeprelated attributions, relative to  nonsleeprelated attributions, in the generated list would decrease after FI.  Secondary Hypothesis: ·  Hypothesis 3: the VAS fatigue and worry ratings would decrease, and the positive mood  rating would increase for those in the FI condition.

18 

Method  Design  This study used a randomized 2x2 experimental design with one betweensubjects  variable representing group with two levels (FI and control) and one withinsubjects variable  representing time with two levels (pre and postintervention). In this design, an interaction  between condition and time was expected. That is, the study hypotheses predicted that cognitive  and mood change on the dependent variables would occur between pre and post intervention  for the FI group, but not for the control group. The study procedures were completed within a  onehour testing session.  Participants  Participants were undergraduate students enrolled in an introductory psychology course  at Ryerson University. The students were recruited via SONA, the psychology department's  online recruitment system. Students who were interested in this study volunteered to participate  in partial fulfillment of their introductory psychology course requirement. They were not  financially compensated.  A total of 93 undergraduate students participated in this study. The sleep of people  approaching age 18 may be different from those aged 18 or older because of circadian influences  that relate to puberty and brain development thus, two participants under the age of 18 were  excluded from the analyses. Another three participants did not complete all outcome measures at  pre and post intervention and were not included in the analyses. Thus, there were 88  participants available for analyses between the ages of 18 and 39 (M = 20.00, SD = 4.30).  Participant demographics are presented in Table 1.

19 

Table 1  Participant Demographics and SelfReport Measure Psychometrics for Total Sample  Variables  Sex  Female  Male  Ethnicity  Caucasian  Asian  Black  MiddleEastern  Aboriginal  Other  SelfReport Measures 
a 

Proportion (%) 

81.8  18.2 

34.1  31.8  9.1  3.4  2.3  19.3  Mean (SD)  9.97 (4.71)  57.42 (12.79)  4.91 (1.60)  14.69 (9.31)  Alpha  .80  .89  .85  .89 

ISI 

MFI  DBAS16  BDIII 

Note. ISI = Insomnia Severity Index, MFI = Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory, DBAS16 =  Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitudes about Sleep Scale, BDIII = Beck Depression Inventory.  a  73.8% above clinical cutoff of ISI > 7 (Bastien et al., 2001).

20 

SelfReport Measures  The Insomnia Severity Index (ISI: Morin, 1993).  The ISI is a recommended selfreport  measure for assessing insomnia (Buysse, AncoliIsrael, Edinger, Lichstein, & Morin, 2006).  It is  a 7item scale which measures the severity of insomnia symptoms as well as degree of  dissatisfaction, daytime interference, noticeability of impairment, and distress caused by the  sleep disturbance. Each item is measured on a 5point Likert scale ranging from 0 ("not at all")  to 4 ("extremely"). Total scores range from 0 to 28, with higher scores suggesting increased  insomnia severity. The recommended interpretation guidelines are as follows: scores of 0 ­ 7  suggest no clinical insomnia, scores of 8 ­ 14 suggest subthreshold insomnia, scores of 15 ­ 21  suggest moderate insomnia, and scores of 22 ­ 28 suggest severe insomnia (Bastien, Vallieres, &  Morin, 2001). The ISI has been found to have good internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha =  .91) (Sierra, GuillénSerrano, & SantosIglesias, 2008) and good concurrent validity, as it  correlates with sleep diary measures and polysomnography (Bastien et al., 2001). See Table 1 for  the psychometric properties of each of the selfreport measures in the present sample.  The Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI: Smets, Garssen, Bonke, & DeHaes,  1995).  The MFI is a 20item scale that assesses various dimensions of fatigue, including:  general, physical, mental, reduced motivation, and reduced activity. These five dimensions  represent distinct subscales of the MFI, each of which contains four items. Responses range on a  5point scale from "yes that is true" to "no that is not true". The MFI has good internal validity  (Chronbach's alpha = .84) and adequate convergent validity, as was demonstrated by correlations  between the MFI and Visual Analog Scales measuring fatigue (Smets et al., 1995). The MFI has  been tested in insomnia populations with breast cancer (Quesnel, Savard, Simard, Ivers, &

21 

Morin, 2003) and with comorbid alcohol dependence (Arnedt, Conroy, Rutt, Aloia, Brower, &  Armitage, 2007).  The Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitudes about Sleep Scale (DBAS16: Morin et al.,  2007). The DBAS16 is a selfreport measure assessing unhelpful sleeprelated beliefs.  The  DBAS16 is an abbreviated version derived from the original 30item DBAS. The measure  assesses beliefs about the consequences of insomnia, worry about sleep, sleep expectations, and  causal attributions for insomnia. The individual rates his/her level of agreement with each  statement on a 10point scale ranging from 0 ("strongly disagree") to 10 ("strongly agree"). The  total score is obtained via a mean item score, with higher mean scores representing more  maladaptive sleep beliefs. The DBAS16 demonstrates adequate internal consistency  (Chronbach's alpha = .79) and has appropriate convergent validity with the ISI, sleep diaries and  polysomnography (Morin et al., 2007). It can also effectively discriminate between those who do  and do not have clinical levels of unhelpful sleep beliefs via a cutoff score of 3.8, which  maximized both sensitivity (80%) and specificity (76%) based on an ROC curve (Carney et al.,  2010). In the present study, only those above this suggested cutoff score of 3.8 were selected for  the main analyses.  The Beck Depression Inventory, Second Edition (BDIII: Beck, Steer & Brown, 1996).  The BDIII is a 21item measure that assesses common depressive symptoms, such as depressed  mood, hopelessness, suicidal ideation, sleep disturbance, and appetite change. Total scores range  from 0 to 63, with higher scores representing greater levels of depression. The recommended  interpretation guidelines are as follows: scores of 0 ­ 13 suggest no depression, scores of 14 ­ 19  suggest mild depression, scores of 20  28 suggest moderate depression, and scores of 29 or  above suggest severe depression. The BDIII has very good internal consistency (split half

22 

Pearson = .93) and is correlated with similar measures of depression, such as the Hamilton  Rating Scale for Depression (r = .71 Beck et al., 1996). It also has well established content  validity and is good at differentiating between depressed and nondepressed individuals (Beck et  al., 1996 Richter, Werner, Heerlein, Kraus, & Sauer, 1998). The BDIII has been used and  validated in insomnia patients (Carney, Ulmer, Edinger, Krystal, & Knauss, 2009).  Outcome Measures  List of Attributions Task (LAT) (see Appendix A).  Participants were instructed to fill  in a chart representing their attributions for fatigue, which was developed for the purposes of this  study. In the first column, participants were asked to list factors that could account for them  feeling tired during the day. The purpose of this list was to determine whether the attributions  were related or unrelated to sleep. To this end, the data were coded according to sleeprelated  versus nonsleeprelated attribution categories. For example, items such as "didn't get enough  sleep", "up late at night studying", and "waking up too early" were coded as sleeprelated items.  Table 2 presents the most frequent categories and examples of responses which were coded as  nonsleeprelated. In order to come up with a single aggregate score for each participant, the  number of attributions in each category (i.e., sleeprelated and nonsleeprelated) were added  together for both pre and post intervention. The score was computed by dividing the number of  sleep attributions by the total number of attributions, producing a score which represents the  proportion of sleeprelated attributions. This score will be subsequently referred to as  NumberAttributionScore.  In the second column, participants rank ordered each listed attribution in order of  frequency of occurrence, by assigning a rank of 1 to the factor that accounts for their fatigue  most often. The rankings were scored in such a way that each rank would get a score from 1 to

23 

Table 2  Frequency of NonSleepRelated Attribution Categories  Category  School/Work  Examples  "Too much school work"  "Studying all the time"  "Working many hours"  "Poor diet"  "Ate too much"  "No proper breakfast"  "Stressed out"  "Worrying about the future"  "Nervous"  "Overexerted myself"  "Not active enough"  "Too much exercise"  "Headaches"  "Low iron"  "Not feeling well"  Frequency  105 

Food/Nutrition 

69 

Anxiety/Stress 

50 

Exercise 

40 

Physical Illness 

19 

Note. Frequency = Number of times this attribution category appeared in the dataset.

24 

10, with a score of 10 representing the highest ranked attribution and a score of 1 representing  the lowest ranked attributions. Specifically, a rank of 1 was given a score of 10, a rank of 2 was  given a score of 9, a rank of 3 was given a score of 8...and a rank of 10 or higher was given a  score of 1. This scoring system allowed for sufficient variability of scores, as most participants  did not list more than 10 attributions. The resulting scores for the sleeprelated attributions were  then added together to compute an aggregate score representing the frequency with which sleep  related attributions account for their fatigue. As an example, if a participant listed two sleep  attributions and assigned them ranks of `1' and `3' from their total list of attributions, their  aggregate score would be 18 (10 + 8). This variable will be referred to as FrequencyScore.  In the third column, participants were asked to indicate the likelihood that each factor  accounts for their fatigue. To this end, participants were able to allocate a specific proportion  (out of 100%) to each attribution, with allocating a greater proportion to those factors that were  considered to be more important or more likely in accounting for their fatigue. For example, a  factor that was considered to be most likely to account for their fatigue may be allocated a  proportion of 90%, whereas an attribution that was perceived to be less likely to contribute to  their fatigue may be given a proportion of 25%. The aggregate score was computed in the same  manner as was done in the first column: The total proportion for sleeprelated items was divided  by the total proportion for all attributions in order to retrieve a single score, which will be  referred to as ImportanceScore.  Visual Analog Scales (VAS) (see Appendix B). The VAS queried current states of  fatigue, positive mood and worry. Participants were instructed to mark an "X" on a 100  millimetre line which represented their current state. The VAS was a unipolar scale, whereby the  responses ranged from "not at all" to "extremely". The VAS was scored with a ruler, whereby

25 

the millimetre distance from the left edge of the line to the centre of the X was the score given  for that particular VAS.  Intervention Materials  Fatigue Information (FI) Intervention (see Appendix C). The FI intervention consisted  of a doublesided sheet containing information regarding common factors that can explain  feeling fatigued during the day. This information was obtained from several studies throughout  the literature which examine common causes of fatigue (e.g., Chaudhuri & Behan, 2004  Grandjean, 1979 Greenberg, 2002 Hayashi, Watanabe, & Hori, 1999 Juliano & Griffiths, 2004  Puetz et al., 2006 Resnick, Carter, Aloia, & Phillips, 2006 Sobrero et al., 2001 Wijesuriya,  Tran & Craig, 2007). Some examples include caffeine rebound, poor nutrition, physical  inactivity, and postlunch changes in body temperature. Along with each listed factor was a short  blurb explaining how fatigue can be caused by that particular factor.  Sleep Control (Control) Intervention (see Appendix D). The control intervention  consisted of a comparable amount of information to the FI condition however the information  was about sleep, and unrelated to the causes of fatigue. For example this information session  included information regarding sleep stages and tips to improve sleep. The control condition was  necessary to control for the amount of time and sleeprelated information inherent in the FI  condition, but there should not have been any reason for the control group to alter their  subsequent fatigue attributions or VAS ratings on the basis of the sleep information.  Procedure  Participants completed this study in a onehour session in the Sleep and Depression  Laboratory at 105 Bond Street, Ryerson University. The study candidates were first informed  about the purpose and description of the study as well as the risks and benefits associated with

26 

participation, after which they were required to provide written consent in order to participate  (see Appendix E). To determine which information session they would receive, a Microsoft  Excel random number generator was used to randomize participants into the two conditions. In  the first part of the study, all participants completed a booklet of baseline measures, including the  selfreport questionnaires (ISI, MFI, DBAS16, BDIII) and outcome measures of the study  (LAT and VAS). This took approximately 30 minutes.  After completing these measures, the participants either received information about  reasons for fatigue (FI condition) or generic sleep information (control condition). The study  investigator read the information sheet alongside each participant individually, which took  approximately 5 minutes. All of the participants once again filled out the outcome measures  (LAT and VAS), which took approximately 10 minutes. Once the participants completed the  study, they were verbally debriefed, given a written debriefing form (see Appendix F), and had  the opportunity to ask the study investigator any further questions regarding the study. Given that  we asked participants about depression via the BDIII, they were given another debriefing form  which provided additional information regarding the signs and symptoms of depression, as well  as resources for where to seek help (see Appendix G).  The written responses on the LAT were coded into sleeprelated versus nonsleeprelated  attributions by a lab volunteer blinded to the study hypotheses. The study investigator then  reviewed the categories while being blind to participants' random assignment to ensure that there  was agreement. Responses on which there was discrepancy between the lab volunteer and the  study investigator were flagged and were discussed. The majority of such items were responses  which identified environmental issues related to sleep, such as "uncomfortable bed" or "loud  roommate during the night". It was decided that these responses would fall under the category of

27 

"sleeprelated attributions", given that they would interfere with sleep. In total, only 12 responses  out of 870 were changed, representing 1.38% of all item responses in the database. Once the  attributions were coded into the appropriate categories, aggregate scores for the dependent  variables on the LAT were created in order to test the study hypotheses, which were described in  the preceding section.  Analyses  To ensure that the study sample was valid and comparable to other samples reported in  the literature, Cronbach's alphas, means, and standard deviations were reported for the self  report measures (see Table 1).  As discussed above, only those participants who scored above the clinical cutoff of 3.8 on  the DBAS16 were selected for the main analyses. Independent ttests were conducted to  determine whether those high and low on the DBAS16 were significantly different on subjective  measures of insomnia (ISI) and fatigue (MFI). Independent ttests and chisquare analyses were  used to assess for any preexisting group differences between those in the FI and the control  group. For the main analyses, mixed withinbetween analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were  conducted to determine whether participants' attributions for fatigue, based on the LAT, changed  from pre to postintervention for those in FI relative to the control group. These same analyses  were used to determine whether VAS ratings of fatigue, positive mood, and worry changed  significantly, depending on group assignment. In each of the main analyses, the hypothesis was  that there would be a significant group x time interaction that is, that the FI group would alter  their posttreatment cognitive and mood responses in the hypothesized direction, whereas the  control group would not change their responses significantly.

28 

Results  Preliminary Analyses  Prior to conducting the primary analyses, the data were screened for violations of the  normality assumption. An inspection of the distribution of the mean scores on the ISI, MFI,  DBAS16, and BDIII suggest that the distributions were approximately normal and the  skewness and kurtosis values were within the normal ranges of |2| and |7| respectively (West,  Finch, & Curran, 1995).  Participant demographic characteristics as well as mean scores and Cronbach's alpha  values for the selfreport questionnaires are displayed in Table 1. The correlations among these  selfreport measures are reported in Table 3. All of the questionnaires were significantly  correlated with one another (p < .01).  Validity check for DBAS16 cutoff score. To understand the characteristics of those  participants selected for cognitive vulnerability for the main analyses, group differences were  assessed (i.e., those above and below the DBAS16 cutoff) on measures of insomnia and fatigue.  Participants who were above the DBAS16 cutoff had significantly higher levels of selfreported  insomnia (M = 11.05, SD = 4.78) compared to those below the cutoff (M = 6.96, SD = 2.90), t  (86) = 3.85, p < .01. Group differences were also found on the MFI, with those above the DBAS  16 cutoff scoring higher (M = 60.97, SD = 11.59) than those below (M = 47.39, SD = 10.69), t  (86) = 4.92, p < .01.  The remaining analyses are based on the cognitively vulnerable subset of 65 participants.  Mean scores and standard deviations for the selfreport measures for each group of this selected  sample are displayed in Table 4. As in the total sample, there were no violations of the normality  assumption and the selfreport measures were all significantly correlated with one another.

29 

Table 3  Correlations among SelfReport Measures for the Total Sample  Measure  1. ISI  2. MFI  3. DBAS16  4. BDIII  1    2  .38*    3  .49*  .52*    4  .46*  .55*  .47*   

Note. ISI = Insomnia Severity Index, MFI = Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory, DBAS16 =  Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitudes about Sleep Scale, BDIII = Beck Depression Inventory.  *p < .01.

30 

Table 4  Means and Standard Deviations for PreIntervention Scores on SelfReport Measures  FI  (n = 35)  SelfReport  Measures  ISI  MFI  DBAS16  BDIII  M  11.31  60.06  5.46  18.62  SD  5.17  11.17  1.13  10.01  M  10.73  62.03  5.85  16.03  Control  (n = 30)  SD  4.34  12.16  1.11  7.65 

Note. FI = Fatigue Information, ISI = Insomnia Severity Index, MFI = Multidimensional Fatigue  Inventory, DBAS16 = Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitudes about Sleep Scale, BDIII = Beck  Depression Inventory.

31 

Preexisting group differences. The FI and control groups did not differ significantly 
2  2  with respect to age: t (63) = .79, p = .43, sex:   (1) = .12, p = .76, or ethnicity:   (1) = .21, p = 

.90. As well, no significant preintervention group differences were found for any of the self  report measures [ISI: t (63) = .49, p = .63 MFI: t (63) = .68, p = .50 DBAS16: t (63) = 1.39, p  = .17 BDIII: t (63) = 1.16, p = .25]. There were also no significant preexisting differences on  the LAT outcome measures [NumberAttributionScore: t (63) = .97, p = .33 FrequencyScore: t  (63) = .58, p = .57 ImportanceScore: t (63) = .40, p = .67]. Finally, there were no significant pre  existing group differences on the VAS [Fatigue: t (63) = .12, p = .90 Positive Mood: t (63) =  .52, p = .61 Worry: t (61.75) = .34, p = .74].  Main Analyses  The mixed betweenwithin subjects ANOVA results are as follows. For  NumberAttributionScore, there was a significant interaction between group and time, F (1, 63) = 
2  7.06, p = .01,   = .10, such that the number of sleep attributions relative to the total number of 

attributions decreased for those in FI (pre: M = .32, SD = .23 post: M = .22, SD = .23), but not  for those in the control group (pre: M = .27, SD = .19 post: M = .31, SD = .24) (see Figure 1). 
2  There was no main effect of group, F (1, 63) = .11, p = .75,   = .00, nor was there a main effect  2  of time, F (1, 63) = 1.61, p = .21,   = .03. 

With regard to FrequencyScore, there was a significant interaction between group and 
2  time, F (1, 63) = 7.85, p = .007,   = .11. Thus, the rankings of how frequently each sleeprelated 

attribution contributes to daytime fatigue significantly decreased for the FI group (pre: M =  13.77, SD = 9.56 post: M = 8.66, SD = 7.87), whereas no significant changes were found in the  control group (pre: M = 12.43, SD = 9.07 post: M = 12.50, SD = 9.75) (see Figure 2). There was 
2  no main effect for group, F (1, 63) = .37, p = .55,   = .01. However, there was also a significant

32 

0.4 
NumberAttributionScore 

0.35  0.3  0.25  0.2  0.15  Pre  Post  p = .010 

Figure 1. Number of sleeprelated attributions relative to the total number of attributions for FI  and control at pre and post intervention.

33 

15  14  13  12  11  10  9  8  7  6  5  Pre  Time  Post 

FrequencyScore 

FI  Control 

p = .007 

Figure 2. Rank scores of sleeprelated attributions for FI and control at pre and post  intervention.

34 

2  main effect of time, F (1, 63) = 7.45, p = .008,   = .11. 

Finally, a significant interaction was found for ImportanceScore, F (1, 63) = 5.10, p = 
2  .027,   = .08, such that compared to the control group (pre: M = .35, SD = .25 post: M = .36, SD 

= .28), the proportion of importance allotted to sleeprelated attributions relative to the total  proportion significantly decreased at postintervention for those in the FI group (pre: M = .38, SD  = .27 post: M = .27, SD = .27) (see Figure 3). There was no significant main effect for group, F 
2  2  (1, 63) = .29, p = .60,   = .01, or time, F (1, 63) = 3.85, p = .054,   = .06. 

The means and standard deviations for the VAS outcome measure are presented in Table 
2  5. There was no significant interaction on VAS fatigue ratings, F (1, 63) = .69, p = .41,   = .01,  2  nor was there a significant main effect of group, F (1, 63) = .21, p = .65,   = .00. However, there  2  was a main effect of time, F (1, 63) = 4.54, p = .04,   = .07, such that levels of fatigue decreased 

between pre (M = 63.61, SD = 19.69) and post (M = 59.65, SD = 21.58) intervention, regardless  of group assignment. For VAS ratings of positive mood, there was no significant interaction 
2  between group and time, F (1, 63) = .00, p = .98,   = .00. There were also no significant main  2  2  effect of group, F (1, 63) = .31, p = .58,   = .01, or time, F (1, 63) = 1.35, p = .25,   = .02.  2  Finally, there was no significant interaction for selfrated worry, F (1, 63) = 1.12, p = .29,   =  2  .02, and no main effect of group, F (1, 63) = .00, p = .98,   = .00. However, there was a 

significant main effect of time, such that selfrated worry did decrease significantly from pre (M  = 75.64, SD = 30.55) to post (M = 64.92, SD = 32.71) intervention for both FI and control 
2  conditions, F (1, 63) = 18.89, p < .01,   = .23.

35 

Figure 3. Proportion of importance allotted to sleeprelated attributions relative to total  proportion for FI and control at pre and post intervention.

36 

Table 5  Means and Standard Deviations for VAS Pre and PostIntervention  PreIntervention  VAS  Fatigue  Positive Mood  Worry  FI  63.88 (21.45)  55.83 (21.93)  58.19 (27.02)  Control  63.28 (17.79)  53.25 (17.36)  60.16 (19.98)  PostIntervention  FI  61.38 (23.47)  57.97 (21.76)  51.73 (30.31)  Control  57.63 (19.33)  55.48 (16.49)  49.53 (19.01) 

Note. FI = Fatigue Information, VAS = Visual Analogue Scales.

37 

Discussion  In this test of a brief psychoeducational intervention for those with a cognitive  vulnerability to insomnia, the results revealed significant changes in cognitive attributions for  fatigue. Specifically, the findings demonstrated that educating people about the many causes of  daytime fatigue was successful in broadening their scope of nonsleeprelated fatigue  attributions. However, the intervention did not produce significant improvements in fatigue,  positive mood, or worry, relative to those who did not receive this educational information.  With respect to the primary hypotheses regarding cognitive change, the results  demonstrated that attributing fatigue to poor sleep was indeed amenable to change for people  who have a cognitive vulnerability to insomnia. In particular, with regard to the number of  attributions reported, the proportion of sleeprelated attributions decreased significantly for the  group provided with information about the many causes of fatigue (i.e., FI) relative to those who  were provided with generic sleep information (i.e., control). This finding suggests that  participants in FI were less likely to attribute fatigue back to poor sleep, and more likely to  consider additional nonsleeprelated attributions postintervention. Thus, as predicted, the  number of sleep attributions decreased in the group who was informed about the contribution of  factors other than sleep in producing daytime fatigue.  The expected results were also found for the perceived frequency and importance of the  respective attributions. Specifically, the rank scores allotted to sleeprelated attributions  significantly decreased postintervention for those in FI, suggesting that the sleeprelated factors  were perceived to cause their fatigue less often than they were preintervention. The significant  time x group interaction suggests that those who received information about the causes of fatigue  were less likely to consider sleeprelated attributions as the more frequent causes of fatigue.

38 

Likewise, the proportions of importance allotted to sleeprelated attributions relative to the total  proportion allotted to attributions also decreased postintervention for FI participants. This  finding suggests that the perceived importance (i.e., the likelihood that the fatigue is caused by  the attribution) of these sleeprelated attributions declined over time for those who received  information regarding the many possible causes of fatigue.  Taken together, the expected findings for the primary hypotheses suggest that the  minimal cognitive intervention used in this study was sufficient to create a change in people's  reported attributions for their daytime fatigue. More importantly, this change was in the expected  direction, as those who received the relevant fatigue information emphasized sleeprelated  attributions to a lesser degree, and were more likely to consider nonsleeprelated factors as  potential causes of their fatigue at postintervention. Finally, in addition to these statistically  significant findings, the effect sizes for the time x group interactions were all within the medium  to large range (Cohen, 1988).  The secondary hypothesized decrease of negative mood states (i.e., as a result of  cognitive change), was not supported in this sample. There was no interaction between time and  the type of information received (i.e., group) for fatigue, positive mood, or worry. One possible  explanation is that, while the study intervention had an effect on participants' reported  attributions for fatigue, it may not have been sufficiently potent to bring about change in relevant  mood states. Specifically, the cognitive intervention used in this study was akin to a psycho  educational intervention.  Thus, this intervention should be regarded as quite minimal in that it  consisted of a twopage sheet of information read by the study investigator to the participants. In  order to ensure that each participant received the same information, the study investigator did not  elaborate on the information provided in the session, nor was the information personalized for

39 

each individual participant. As a result, the participants were quite passive during the  information sessions. This differs markedly from traditional cognitive therapy, where the patients  play an active role in session and the information can be discussed at length and individualized  for specific cases. Given the wellestablished efficacy of several of these cognitivebased  treatments (Beck, Hollon, Young, Bedrosian, & Budenz, 1985 DeRubeis & CritsChristoph,  1998 Hollon, Thase, & Markowitz, 2002), perhaps a longer and more interactive cognitive  intervention would be needed in order to see improvements in fatigue, mood and worry. In sum,  the information session used in this study was a minimal intervention, which may not have  contained enough active ingredients to produce state change.  Despite the nonsignificant VAS time x group interactions, there were significant time  effects for both selfrated fatigue and worry thus levels of fatigue and worry decreased post  intervention regardless of the type of information received. While these results were not  anticipated (i.e., in the absence of a significant interaction effect), there are several possibilities  as to why these effects may have occurred. Although each group received different information  sessions, it may be that the information provided in both groups was helpful in alleviating  feelings of fatigue and anxiety. For example, it is possible that learning novel information,  regardless of the content, may have increased mental stimulation, thus reducing fatigue levels. In  a similar vein, perhaps learning about relevant sleep information, such as tips for improving  bedtime habits in the control condition, was able to relieve sleeprelated anxiety, thus reducing  VAS ratings of worry.  In addition to receiving information, both the FI and control conditions were instructed to  write down their attributions for fatigue before and after the interventions. Research has shown  that the simple act of writing can have a profound effect on mood and psychological health

40 

(Baikie & Wilhelm, 2005 Pennebaker, 1993). As such, although the written component of the  LAT was relatively minimal, it is possible that generating written responses was sufficient to  alleviate anxiety. Further, given that writing is a mentally stimulating activity, it could have also  brought about minimal improvements in levels of fatigue.  In many respects, the study sample was comparable to other samples in the literature.  Cronbach's alphas for each of the selfreport questionnaires (ISI, MFI, DBAS16 and BDIII)  were good and similar to those reported in the literature (Bastien et al., 2001 Beck et al., 1996  Morin et al., 2007 Sierra et al., 2008 Smets et al., 1995). Correlational analyses revealed  significant relationships between insomnia (ISI), fatigue (MFI), maladaptive sleep beliefs  (DBAS16) and depression (BDIII). These correlations were all similarly correlated with one  another (r's range from .38 to .55) and suggest that while these measures do share some common  variance (14 ­ 30%), they are indeed measuring distinct constructs. These findings are  comparable to previous examinations in the literature which too have documented significant  relationships among insomnia, depression, and fatigue (Ferentinos et al., 2009 Greenberg, 2002  Moul et al., 2002 Ustinov et al., 2010). More recent studies have documented similar  associations between maladaptive sleep beliefs (measured by DBAS16) and insomnia  (measured by the ISI), as well as depression (measured by the BDIII) (Carney et al., 2007  Morin et al., 2007). However, this is the first study to date establishing a correlation between  maladaptive sleep beliefs and daytime fatigue, which is important to note given that  improvements in maladaptive sleep beliefs may have implications for associated improvements  in fatigue. Taken together, these results demonstrate that this study sample appears to be valid  and comparable to previous samples found in the literature.

41 

Given that the purpose of this study was to test a cognitive intervention, there are several  notable treatment implications which can be drawn from the study findings. As discussed in the  introduction, while CBT currently addresses maladaptive sleep beliefs, unhelpful attributions for  daytime fatigue is not a current target of treatment. However, the study findings demonstrated  that misattributions of fatigue to poor sleep are amenable to change with a minimal psycho  educational intervention. In light of the findings in the literature which suggest that over  attributing fatigue to poor sleep can increase sleeprelated anxiety and further perpetuate the  insomnia cycle (Espie, 2002 Harvey, 2002 Lundh & Broman, 2000), this type of intervention  may prove to be a helpful adjunct to CBT. Indeed, as there is little known about effective  cognitive interventions for insomnia (Morin et al., 2006), these promising results provide one  possible avenue toward successfully targeting and altering maladaptive cognitions in poor  sleepers.  The lack of support for the secondary hypothesis also has important implications for the  treatment of insomnia. Early research on insomnia treatments focused primarily on behavioural  interventions, while cognitive therapy was kept on the sidelines, with the idea being that psycho  education was sufficient to bring about cognitive change in insomnia patients (see Harvey,  2005). Indeed, until recently, the only type of cognitive intervention included in CBT was in the  format of education, whereby one session was used to alter maladaptive beliefs about sleep via  educational information regarding sleep needs, the biological clock, and the effects of sleep loss  on daily functioning (e.g., Edinger et al., 2001). However the nonsignificant interactions for the  VAS ratings suggest that psychoeducation (i.e., the information session used in this study),  while may be effective in altering reported attributions and beliefs about sleep, was not sufficient  to produce change in levels of fatigue, mood, and worry, relative to those who did not receive the

42 

fatigue information. This is particularly problematic given that the modification of such mood  states is an important secondary goal of many therapies.  In order to improve the intervention as it currently stands, additional treatment  components are needed to supplement the psychoeducation piece. Indeed, Harvey (2005)  proposed that essential components of successful cognitive therapy for insomnia include Socratic  questioning, guided discovery, behavioural experiments, assigning homework, and eliciting  feedback. For example, behavioural experiments allow participants to actually test their  maladaptive cognitions and associated predictions via real life behavioural trials. Likewise,  doing homework provides patients with the opportunity to apply the strategies that they learn in  session to their everyday lives. Both cognitive therapy techniques allow patients to challenge  their cognitions in reallife situations, which is often more effective than challenging them  verbally in session, as was done in the present study.  Further, Harvey, along with others (e.g.,  Beck, 1995), states that the cornerstone of effective cognitive treatment is the therapeutic  alliance, which is characterized by an active collaboration in therapy, including input from both  the therapist and the client. Understandably, the brevity of the information session used in the  present study precluded the opportunity to develop such a therapeutic alliance.  For optimal results, future research should expand this psychoeducation information  session in order to incorporate these other wellestablished cognitive treatment components, such  as Socratic questioning, guided discovery and behavioural experiments. As an example of a  behavioural experiment, participants can test whether exercise has an influence on their energy  levels by rating their fatigue levels after exercise versus no exercise. Indeed, it will be interesting  to see whether having participants playing a more active role, and catering this information to

43 

each individual participant, may increase the likelihood that the intervention produces changes in  relevant mood states.  There are several strengths and limitations to this study. One notable strength of this  study is its wellcontrolled experimental design. Given that participants were randomized to two  groups, and no preexisting differences were found, the most plausible explanation for post  treatment differences between each group was the information condition to which they were  assigned. As such, the differences at postintervention between each condition are likely directly  attributable to the type of information that they received.  Another strength of this study is that participants had the opportunity to generate their  own attributions for fatigue in the LAT. Whereas many selfreport based studies require  participants to select a response from several options, generating their own responses does not  allow participants to be influenced by the responses provided on the page. It also compels  participants to think about the question at hand rather than simply recognizing attributions that  seem to align with their perceptions of their fatigue.  One could argue that attributions are simply an epiphenomenon of insomnia, such that  these maladaptive beliefs are simple a consequence of the sleep problem and do not warrant  treatment of their own. If this was the case, a study such as this might not be clinically useful, as  targeting the sleep disturbance only should resolve any insomnia. However, there is some  evidence in the literature that suggests that this may not be the case. Specifically, previous  studies have demonstrated that maladaptive sleep beliefs improve with belieftargeted CBT for  insomnia to a significantly greater extent than they do with pharmacotherapy (Morin, Blais, &  Savard, 2002) or nonbelieftargeted behavioural therapy (Carney & Edinger, 2006). Further, in  the former study, both pharmacotherapy and CBT for insomnia produced equivalent

44 

improvements in other indices of sleep quality, suggesting that improved sleep itself is alone not  sufficient to produce changes in maladaptive sleep beliefs. In addition, both studies revealed that  decreases in maladaptive sleep beliefs from pre to post treatment were associated with  clinically relevant improvements in other sleep indices. Taken together, these findings suggest  that unhelpful beliefs about sleep are likely not simply a byproduct of poor sleep, but warrant  their own attention with respect to both research and treatment.  Admittedly, this study is somewhat limited in that it used a nonclinical sample of  participants, consisting of undergraduate students. The use of an analog sample limits the  generalizability of the study findings, as undergraduate students have specific features that  distinguish themselves from that of clinical insomnia populations. For example, the gender  distribution for clinical populations is estimated to be approximately 60% female (Hale et al.,  2009 Zhang & Wing. 2006), whereas females in the current study comprised approximately  85% of the total sample. As well, clinical insomnia is a problem across the lifespan (Roth, 2007),  and the use of undergraduate students precludes generalization of the results to older adults.  However, as discussed above, this sample is comparable to other samples with respect to the  internal consistency and the correlations among the selfreport measures of insomnia, fatigue,  depression and maladaptive sleep beliefs. Furthermore, the mean scores for the ISI, BDIII and  DBAS16 in this sample were above the mild clinical cutoffs as per the guidelines suggested in  the literature (Bastien et al., 2001 Beck et al., 1996 Carney et al., 2010). As such, while the  demographic characteristics of the study sample may differ from that of a clinical population, the  clinical features of this sample are somewhat similar to those found in clinical insomnia.  Given that the study sample consisted of an analog population, no formal diagnostic  assessment of insomnia was used to determine whether study participants met criteria for clinical

45 

insomnia. However, while this sample was not a clinical insomnia population per se,  undergraduate students are a uniquely vulnerable population, particularly to the development of  insomnia (Coren, 1994 Jensen, 2003). Studies have shown that increased stress levels among  college students coupled with their highly irregular schedules can have a negative impact on  sleep (Carney, Edinger, Meyer, Lindman, & Istre, 2006 Verlander, Benedict, & Hanson, 1999).  Indeed, undergraduate students' sleep habits are among the first daily habits to change after  beginning college (Pilcher et al., 1997). Furthermore, while there was no formal assessment of  insomnia, we selected only those above a clinical cutoff on an insomnia beliefs questionnaire  (DBAS16). As such, the participants selected for the main analyses in this study were  particularly vulnerable to the development of sleep disturbances. Indeed, previous studies have  shown that scores on the DBAS16 are able to distinguish good from poor sleepers (e.g., Morin  et al., 1993). Finally, a large proportion of the sample (i.e., 74%) had ISI scores above the  recommended clinical cutoff, which suggests that this sample was particularly prone to sleep  disturbances. Nevertheless, while efforts were taken to select a study sample with increased  vulnerability to insomnia, future research should test subsequent attributionbased interventions  on insomniadiagnosed clinical populations.  Insomnia is highly comorbid with other disorders, such as depression, anxiety and  substance abuse (Ohayon, Caulet, & Lemoine, 1998), with estimates of psychiatric comorbidity  at approximately 40% (Ford & Kamerow, 1989 Roth, 2007). Thus, the fact that there was no  formal assessment of comorbid psychiatric disorders could be construed as a potential limitation.  In this sense, it is difficult to know the extent to which these results would generalize to those  with or without comorbid psychiatric problems, because the distribution of comorbid psychiatric  issues in this sample is unknown. Likewise, there was also no formal diagnostic assessment of

46 

other comorbid sleep disorders. Thus it is not known whether an occult sleep disorder, such as a  circadian rhythm disorder, could account for the findings. However, research has shown that  insomnia is the most frequent sleep disorder found among college students (Giesecke, 1987  Jensen, 2003). Indeed, a study on the prevalence of sleep disorders among young adults found  that the rate of insomnia was substantially higher than hypersomnia, a disorder characterized by  daytime sleepiness (Breslau, Roth, Rosenthal, & Andreski, 1999). Other research has found that  the prevalence of disorders such as obstructive sleep apnea and certain circadian rhythm  disorders are more common in middleage groups relative to college populations (Guilleminault  & Bassiri, 2005 Sharma & Feinsliver, 2009). As such, sleep disturbances found among college  students are more likely due to insomnia than they are to these other occult sleep disorders.  Nevertheless, future studies should include a more formal diagnostic assessment for sleep  disorders and comorbid conditions to determine the extent to which these results would  generalize to complex clinical groups. Specifically, with the use of formal assessment tools such  as the Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders (DSISD: Edinger, Lineberger, Loiselle,  Wohlgemuth, & Means, 2004) and the Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM Axis I  Disorders (SCIDI: Spitzer, Williams, Gibbons, & First, 1996), patients can be tested pre and  postintervention to determine changes in both clinical insomnia as well as comorbid Axis I  disorders. While the use of an undergraduate population can be construed as a potential limitation to  this study, there are several reasons why an undergraduate sample was indeed suitable for this  type of research. It was appropriate to enlist an analog population given that this study is the first  step in a series of untested research questions. In this sense, this was the first study to test an  attributionbased cognitive intervention, and thus it was important to see whether sleeprelated

47 

attributions were, at minimum, amenable to change, before testing this intervention within  insomnia populations. Indeed, the first step of research is often not to establish external validity,  but instead to determine whether something can happen (Mook, 1983). To this end, establishing  that reports of fatigue attributions can change with psychoeducation will allow future research  to move beyond this first stage, and examine whether this can be replicated in clinical  populations.  Another potential limitation of this study was the brevity of the experiment. Given that  this study was completed in a onehour session, there was only a short span of time between  completing the pre and postintervention outcome measures. Perhaps we would have received  different results if people were tested across a longer span of time. In this sense, a longer testing  interval may have permitted greater consolidation of the material. The brief nature of the study  also precluded the use of a more inclusive information session, which could have included other  cognitive therapy components. Finally, given that an integral goal of this research is to reduce  insomnia symptoms, a longer testing interval would allow for assessment of pre to post  changes in relevant sleep indices.  In a similar vein, some may think that the short time span may have increased the  likelihood of participants remembering the responses they originally indicated in the pre  intervention LAT and VAS, or the information contained in FI. While this may be the case, the  outcome measures used in this study were designed in a manner in which would decrease the  likelihood of participants remembering exactly what they wrote preintervention. For example,  VAS's were chosen as the measure of mood change because they instructed participants to place  an X along a continuum. This type of scale would make it less likely that they would remember  their exact placement of the X in the preinformation VAS, as compared to selecting a number

48 

from 1 to 10 or 1 to 100. Similarly, the LAT had three different components, whereby  participants were instructed to list possible attributions for their fatigue, rank the frequency of the  attributions, and indicate the likelihood that each of them accounts for their fatigue. Given that  this task was relatively complex and incorporated multiple components, it is unlikely that  participants were able to recall their exact responses from the preintervention measures.  It is also possible that demand characteristics played a role in FI participants' post  intervention responses on the LAT. During this study, FI participants first generated reasons for  their fatigue during the day, they were then educated about the nonsleeprelated attributions, and  finally their causal attributions for fatigue were retested. Given the nature of this prepost  intervention design, participant responses may have been influenced by their perception of what  the study investigator was looking for. That is, they may have speculated that the purpose of the  study was to identify an increase in nonsleeprelated attributions after being taught them in the  intervention. Indeed, previous studies examining levels of maladaptive sleep beliefs before and  after psychoeducation also acknowledged the possibility that demand characteristics played a  role in participants decrease in such beliefs (e.g., Carney & Edinger, 2006). With regard to  demand characteristics and remembering information in the FI, it is important to note that the  LAT specifically instructed the participants to focus on themselves when listing their fatigue  attributions. That is, the participants were told to list possible attributions related to their personal  experiences with fatigue, rather than people's fatigue in general. Furthermore, participants were  also asked to rank the frequency and rate how likely each factor accounts for their fatigue,  further personalizing the LAT measure. Looking at this issue from a different perspective, the  primary objective of the intervention was to inform participants of the many causes of fatigue,  and have participants consider these factors as potential causes of their daytime fatigue. As such,

49 

participants who did in fact use the causes contained in the information session as their own  attributions may have been internalizing these factors as causes of their own fatigue. Indeed,  increased consideration for these nonsleeprelated causes of fatigue was the ultimate objective  of the intervention.  Taken together, future research should consider running this experiment over a longer  span of time, to allow for deeper consolidation of the material. A longitudinal study would also  allow for the development of a more potent and inclusive cognitive intervention with the addition  of the supplementary cognitive techniques listed above. Indeed, an important endgoal of this  research is to establish whether this intervention can produce both cognitive and mood change,  as well as improve sleep, in the longterm.  Certainly, future studies should examine whether targeting attributions via cognitive  strategies would be effective in clinical insomnia populations. Given that this intervention is  geared to individuals with clinical insomnia, further research needs to establish whether this  intervention can, in fact, produce significant changes within such a clinical sample. Ultimately,  cognitive change should produce sleep improvement, so future studies could move beyond the  selfreport outcome measures used in this study and prospectively monitor sleep to see whether  there are pre to postintervention improvements in relevant sleep indices.  Given that insomnia is the number one rated health problem facing people (Canals,  Domenech, Carbajo & Blade, 1997), maximizing the effectiveness of interventions is critically  important work. With respect to future research in this area, it would be helpful to know if an  attributionbased intervention could increase treatment response rates if it were incorporated into  the more general cognitive therapy for insomnia. As noted previously, while CBT for insomnia is  efficacious (Morin et al., 2006), there is room for improvement. As such, establishing whether

50 

the inclusion of attributiontargeted interventions into CBT can improve treatment response rates  is an important and longterm goal of this research. To this end, the promising findings of the  present study revealed that people can learn to broaden their scope of fatigue attributions via a  minimal cognitivebased intervention. Given such encouraging findings, it is exciting to consider  the improvements that could be made with a more expanded and inclusive cognitive intervention.  In establishing that these cognitions are amenable to change, this study's findings are both  important and necessary in order to inform future research whose endgoal is to improve  treatment response and refine our treatments for insomnia.

51 

Appendix A  List of Attributions Task (LAT)  What tends to account for you feeling tired? First, list below all factors that you think could  account for you feeling tired. Please do not list "other." Next, please rank these factors in order  of frequency, with #1 indicating the factor that most often accounts for your fatigue. Finally, next  to each factor, please indicate the likelihood out of 100% that you think each factor accounts for  your fatigue, with allocating a greater proportion to those factors that are considered to be more  important in contributing to your fatigue.  For example, Factor A accounts for my fatigue most often so it is rated #1 and the likelihood that  it accounts for my fatigue is 80%. Factor B occurs less often so I rank it #2 and its likelihood is  60%.  Example: 
What factors account for my feeling tired?  Rank in order of  frequency  Likelihood (0 ­ 100%)  that this factor accounts  for you feeling tired? 

Factor A  Factor B 

#1  #2 

80%  60% 

Please fill in your response below: 
What factors account for my feeling tired?  Rank in order of  frequency  Likelihood (0 ­ 100%)  that this factor accounts  for you feeling tired?

52 

Appendix B  Visual Analogue Scales (VAS)  Please mark an "X" on the line below to indicate how you are currently feeling.  Use the labels  below the line to help you in your judgment. 

1. 

How fatigued do you feel?  ____________________________________________________________  Not at all  fatigued  Extremely  fatigued 

2. 

How positive is your mood?  ____________________________________________________________  Not at all  positive  Extremely  positive 

3. 

How worried do you feel?  ____________________________________________________________  Not at all  worried  Extremely  worried

53 

Appendix C  Fatigue Information (FI) Intervention  There are many reasons other than poor sleep that account for feeling tired.  The list below  contains the most common factors implicated in feeling tired.  Please note that these factors may  or may not apply to you. ·  Caffeine rebound ­ Sometimes caffeine can have the opposite effect and cause you to be  more fatigued. While a caffeinated beverage like an energy drink, pop, tea or coffee may  initially make you feel alert, it will subsequently lead to a drop in energy and in some  cases, an experience described as a "crash". ·  Post lunch changes in body temperature ­ Your level of alertness is controlled in part by  our biological clock. Your body temperature naturally rises and falls over the course of a  24hour day and you are most sleepy when temperatures are falling at night.  One other  time the body temperature falls is during a brief dip in temperature usually sometime  between 12 PM and 3 PM.  It is temporary but people experience a dip in their energy  levels during this time everyday. ·  Inactivity ­ When you engage in physical activity, your metabolism speeds up and your  body releases endorphins, both of which give you more energy. As such while exercising  is a strenuous activity, it makes you feel less tired in the long run. ·  Overactivity/physical exertion ­ Fatigue can also result from overextending yourself and  engaging in too much physical activity. This can lead to feelings of exhaustion and as a  result your body will not have sufficient resources to carry on with your day. ·  Diet ­ We need appropriate nutrients from foods in order to maintain energy in our  bodies. Following certain diets, such as those low in carbohydrates, can deprive your  body of vital nutrients and fuel that you need to get through the day. ·  Dehydration-- Given that our bodies are more water than anything else, we need to keep  them replenished by drinking water. Not replenishing your body's fluids can reduce your  energy level, causing you to feel fatigued. ·  Depression/Low Mood ­ Fatigue and low energy are common symptoms of depression.  When you feel down, you are less activated and thus more likely to feel fatigued. ·  Pain ­ The physical and emotional energy your body uses to deal with pain can cause you  to feel fatigued. ·  Anxiety/Stress ­ People who are overly anxious or stressed keep their bodies in  overdrive. The body often uses adrenaline to deal with anxiety and stresses, causing  fatigue to set in.

54 

·  Boredom ­ Engaging in mundane activities can lead to fatigue, as your brain is not being  stimulated. For example, staring at a computer screen or doing repetitive work without  frequent breaks can cause eye strain, mental and physical fatigue. ·  Constipation ­ When you are constipated, toxins in your body are not being eliminated  properly. The toxins can thus build up and demand more of your body's energy to  process and store. ·  Iron levels (anemia) ­ Anemia often results in decrease oxygen delivered to the heart and  other vital organs throughout the body. This can drain your energy and thus cause fatigue. ·  Infections ­ Fatigue can be brought on by various infections such as the flu, HIV  infections and food allergies. Your body uses a lot of energy to fight these infections,  thus leaving you feeling fatigued. ·  Hypothyroidism  An underactive thyroid can cause fatigue, as the thyroid controls your  metabolism, the speed at which your body operates.

55

Appendix D  Sleep Control Information Intervention 

The following is some information about sleep ·  Purpose of sleep ­ While we know that sleep is important, the exact purpose of sleep is not  known. Some possible reasons why sleep is needed is so our bodies can restore and repair  themselves or so that they can maintain a constant body temperature. ·  Stage 1 sleep ­ This is a very light stage of sleep that takes up only about 5% of the night's  sleep. If you were awakened from this stage of sleep, you would likely believe that you were  not asleep at all. This stage is a segue to the deeper stages of sleep ·  Stage 2 sleep ­ Stage 2 is somewhat deeper than stage 1 and takes up about half of a night's  sleep. It is more difficult to wake a person from this stage of sleep and people tend to report  being asleep when they are awoken. ·  Delta sleep ­ This is the deepest stage of sleep, which takes up approximately 10 ­ 20% of  your night's sleep.  During this stage, the body is restoring and rebuilding itself. It is most  difficult to wake a person from delta sleep. ·  Rapid Eye Movement (REM) ­ REM sleep takes up about 20 ­ 25% of the night's sleep and  is the stage during which most dreaming takes place. There is also increased bloodflow to the  brain during this stage, and this activity is very similar to that seen during wakefulness. As a  result this is a very light stage of sleep. ·  Sleep Architecture ­ Represents the structure of sleep throughout the night. Sleep cycles  progresses through light sleep, followed by deep sleep and finally a REM period. The sleep  cycle takes approximately 90 minutes, and we usually have 4 ­ 6 cycles per night. Most deep  sleep occurs in the first cycle. REM sleep tends to predominate towards the second half of  the night. This is why some dreams may seem very vivid when people wake up. ·  Prevalence of Sleep Problems ­ Sleep problems are quite common. Approximately 9 ­ 10%  of people in Canada have problems falling or staying asleep. Very few of these people get  treatment for their sleep. 

Some basic good habits for improving sleep ·  Bedtime snack ­ Having a light snack before bed may be beneficial for sleep. Foods such as  milk, cheese or peanut butter contain chemicals that your body uses to bring on sleep. Sleep environment ­ In order to have a good night sleep, try to ensure your bedroom is quiet  and dark. 56 

· 

· 

Temperature  Make sure the temperature in your bedroom is comfortable, preferably not  much higher than 75 degrees Fahrenheit.

57

Appendix E  Consent Agreement  Title of Study: Attributions for Fatigue  You are being asked to participate in a research study. Before you give your consent to be a research  volunteer, it is important that you read the following information to be sure that you understand what you  will be asked to do.  Investigators:  Andrea Harris, B.A.  Graduate Student (Supervisor: Dr. Carney), Department of Psychology, Ryerson  University  Colleen Carney, Ph.D.  Assistant Professor, Department of Psychology, Ryerson University  Purpose of the Study:  Insomnia refers to a difficulty falling asleep, staying asleep or waking too early from sleep. In order to better  understand and help people with insomnia, we are conducting an investigation of the experience of feeling  tired, or fatigued, during the day. In particular, we are interested in understanding what you believe causes  you to feel tired during the day. A maximum of 300 people will be asked to participate for this study.  Participants will be volunteers from undergraduate introductory psychology courses at Ryerson University.  Description of the Study:  You will be asked to complete a study consisting of questionnaires and information regarding sleep. The  completion of the study will take approximately 1 hour. The procedures in this study will include:  1.  Completing questionnaires that ask about your sleep habits, fatigue and mood  2.  Filling out a form that asks you about what causes your fatigue  3.  Reading information regarding the daytime and nighttime experience of sleep  4.  Answering some more questions about fatigue and mood  5.  Reading a Study Conclusion form that contains a thank you for participating, a summary of information  about the study and contact information if you have any further questions  What is Experimental in this Study:  We are not testing any interventionsthe only experimental aspect of this study is whether or not people's  perspective change based on reading information about the daytime and nighttime experience of sleep.  Risks or Discomforts:  One risk of this study is that some of the measures you will be asked to complete might be perceived as  revealing "personal" information, so you could feel uncomfortable.  However, these brief measures ask  about basic symptoms and behaviors, not emotionally sensitive or personally relevant history. If you feel  uncomfortable at any point throughout the study, you may discontinue participation and still get the credit.  Also, all studies carry the risk of an accidental breach of confidentiality.  We have a number or procedures  in place to protect you from such an occurrence.  Instead of using your name or any identifying information,  we will assign a study number so that your data is not identifiable (i.e., not linked to your name).  Benefits of the Study: 58 

Participating in this study will give you a chance to see what is involved with clinical research. This  research will contribute to science and society as it will allow us to identify potential factors associated with  insomnia, thereby enabling us to better understand and treat the disorder.  Confidentiality:  In order to protect your confidentiality, we will assign you a distinct research code number and use this code  number rather than your name on studyrelated data.  When your survey responses are transferred to an  electronic database for use in the planned analyses, these data sets will include only your research code  numbers as identifiers. The database will be password protected.  No names or other unique identifiers will  be included in any of the data sets used in the analyses of this project.  Confidentiality will be maintained to  the extent of the law for 10 years.  Incentives to Participate:  You will be completing this study in partial fulfillment of your course requirement for introductory  psychology, as you will receive one percent toward your final grade. If you decide not to complete the  study, you will still be granted the credit. No financial compensation will be offered to participate in this  study.  Voluntary Nature of Participation:  Participation in this study is voluntary. Your choice of whether or not to participate will not influence your  future relations with Ryerson University. If you decide to participate, you are free to withdraw your consent  and to stop your participation at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which you are allowed.  At any particular point in the study, you may refuse to answer any particular question or stop participation  altogether. If you decide not to answer a particular question, you can simply leave it blank.  Questions about the Study:  If you have questions about the research, you may contact:  Dr. Colleen Carney (416) 9795000 ext. 2177  If you have questions regarding your rights as a human subject and participant in this study, you may  contact the Ryerson University Research Ethics Board for information.  Alexander Karabanow  Research Ethics Board  c/o Office of the Vice President, Research and Innovation  350 Victoria Street, Ryerson University  Toronto, ON M5B 2K3  4169795000 Ext. 7112  Email: alex.karabanow@ryerson.ca

59 

Agreement:  Your signature below indicates that you have read the information in this agreement and have  had a chance to ask any questions you have about the study. Your signature also indicates that  you agree to be in the study and have been told that you can change your mind and withdraw  your consent to participate at any time. You have been given a copy of this agreement.  You have been told that by signing this consent agreement you are not giving up any of your  legal rights. 

____________________________________  Name of Participant (please print) 

_____________________________________  Signature of Participant 

__________________  Date 

_____________________________________  Signature of Investigator 

__________________  Date

60 

Appendix F  Debriefing Form  Thank you very much for participating in our study. We are interested in what  people think about fatigue and what causes fatigue. People who sleep poorly tend to  focus solely on poor sleep as an explanation for their fatigue when there are actually  many other possible causes of fatigue, such as low mood, boredom and lack of physical  activity.  If a person thinks that the only reason they feel tired during the day is because  they slept poorly, they begin to feel increasingly pressured to sleep well.  The more  pressure there is to sleep, the more likely it is that the idea of sleep will produce anxiety  or tension (Broomfield & Espie, 2005 Harvey, 2002)  The purpose of this study is to determine if providing information about fatigue  would increase the likelihood that nonsleep related fatigue factors would be considered  as an explanation for fatigue and if this would decrease anxiety.  Half of the people  participating in this study received information about fatigue and the other half received  information about sleep.  We will examine if the fatigueinformation group changed their  mind about the importance of other causal factors for fatigue or whether their opinions  and mood remained the same.  For those in the fatigueinformation group, please note  that the information about fatigue contained a variety of possible explanations for being  tired, which may or may not apply to you.  Once again, we would like to thank you very much for your participation. If you  are interested in further information, you are encouraged to take a look at the references  provided below. Finally, please feel free to contact us if you have any further questions  pertaining to this research. 

REFERENCES  Broomfield, N. M., & Espie, C. A. (2005). Toward a valid, reliable measure of sleep effort.  Journal of Sleep Research, 14, 401 ­ 407.  Harvey, A. G. (2002). A cognitive model of insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40, 869  ­ 893. 

Andrea Harris, BA  Psychology Master's Student  aharris@psych.ryerson.ca 

Dr. Colleen Carney  Professor of Psychology  ccarney@psych.ryerson.ca  4169795000 x.2177

61 

Appendix G  Depression Debriefing Form  Sometimes people who have difficulty with sleeping also have difficulties with depression. Please note that our  study methods do not provide diagnostic information regarding depression. However, if you would like more  information about depression, we have included this information below as well as resources for where to find  help.  Here are some common depression signs: ð  You feel sad, empty, down, agitated, angry on most days for at least 2 weeks ð  Over the past few weeks, you have had difficulty enjoying things that you normally like to do ð  Over the past few weeks, you have had trouble getting interested in things, or persistent troubles with  motivation  If any of these problems have been present most of the last two weeks or more, you should be evaluated for  depression.   Below are some other "signs" of depression that often accompany one or more of the symptoms  described above (e.g., low mood, difficulty enjoying things or motivational problems): ð  You have been withdrawing from people you would normally enjoy being around ð  You feel tired much of the time on most days ð  You are feeling bad about yourself, thinking that you are worthless, struggling with poor selfesteem or  having selfcritical thoughts that are more than usual ð  You are struggling with guilty thoughts, or thoughts relating to feeling "punished" in some way ð  You have had an increase or decrease either in your appetite or weight. Any decreases in your weight  should not be due to a weight loss program (e.g., the weight loss should be unintentional). ð  People notice that you are either: 1) moving/talking unusually slow, or 2) moving/talking unusually  fast. ð  You have more difficulty making decision than usual ð  You have greater difficulty concentrating or remembering things than usual  If these signs of depression apply to you and/or you would like a referral for evaluation, please do not hesitate  to contact Dr. Colleen Carney (416) 9795000 ext. 2177 for assistance.  If you would prefer to arrange an evaluation privately, please consider the Ryerson's Centre for Development  and Counseling.  They are located on the Lower Ground of Jorgenson Hall in JOR07C and can be reached by  telephone at (416) 9795195 during their regular office hours, or a message can be left after hours and a  receptionist will return your call on the next business day. Regular operating hours throughout the year are  Monday through Friday from 9:00am to 5:00pm. There are no fees for their service.  If you are having any thoughts or images relating to harming yourself, for example, "My family would be better  off if I were dead," or picturing yourself driving off the road, you should immediately present for evaluation.  It  is important to seek help in this situation to protect yourself from harm. If you are having thoughts of harming  yourself, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room and ask to speak with the psychiatrist on call.

62 

References  American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 
th  4  ed. Washington, DC: Author. 

AncoliIsrael, S., Moore, P. J., & Jones, V. (2001). The relationship between fatigue and sleep in  cancer patients: A review. European Journal of Cancer Care, 10, 245 ­ 355.  Ansfield, M. E., Wegner, D. M., & Bower, R. (1996). Ironic effects of sleep urgency. Behavior  Research and Therapy, 34, 523 ­ 531.  Arnedt, J. T., Conroy, D., Rutt, J., Aloia, M. S., Brower, K. J., & Armitage, R. (2007). An open  trial of cognitivebehavioral treatment for insomnia with alcohol dependence. Sleep  Medicine, 8, 176 ­ 180.  Baikie, K. A., & Wilhelm, K. (2005). Emotional and physical benefits of expressive writing.  Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 11, 338 ­ 346.  Bastien, C. H., Vallieres, A. & Morin, C. M. (2001). Validation of the insomnia severity index as  an outcome measure for insomnia research. Sleep Medicine, 2, 297 ­ 307.  Beck, A. T., (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford Press.  Beck, A. T., Hollon, S., Young, J., Bedrosian, R., & Budenz, D. (1985). Combined cognitive  pharmacotherapy versus cognitive therapy in the treatment of depressed outpatients.  Archives of General Psychiatry, 42, 142 ­ 148.  Beck, A.T., Steer, R.A., Brown, G.K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory, 2nd ed.  (BDIII). The Psychological Association: San Antonio, TX.  Bootzin, R. R. (1972). A stimulus control treatment for insomnia. Proceedings of the American  Psychological Association, 7, 395 ­ 396.

63 

Breslau, N., Roth, T., Rosenthal, L., & Andreski, P. (1996). Sleep disturbance and psychiatric  disorders: A longitudinal epidemiological study of young adults. Biological Psychiatry,  39, 411 ­ 418.  Broman, J. E., & Hetta, J. (1994). Perceived presleep arousal in patients with persistent  psychophysiologic and psychiatric insomnia. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 48, 203   207.  Broomfield N, M. & Espie, C, A. (2005). Toward a valid, reliable measure of sleep effort.  Journal of Sleep Research, 14, 17.  Buysse, D. J., AncoliIsrael, S., Edinger, J. D., Lichstein, K. L., & Morin, C. M. (2006).  Recommendations for a standard research assessment of insomnia. Sleep, 29, 1155 ­  1173.  Buysse, D. J., Wesley, T., Scott, J., Franzen, P. L., Germain, A., Hall, M., Moul, D. E.,  Nofzinger, E. A., & Kupfer, D. J. (2007).  Daytime symptoms in primary insomnia: A  prospective analysis using ecological momentary assessment. Sleep Medicine, 8, 198 ­  208.  Canals, J., Domenech, E., Carbajo, G., & Blade, J (1997). Prevalence of DSMIIIR and ICD10  psychiatric disorders in a Spanish population of 18yearolds. Acta Psychiatrica  Scandinavia, 96, 287 ­ 294.  Carney, C. E., & Edinger, J. D. (2006). Identifying critical dysfunctional beliefs about sleep in  primary insomnia. Sleep, 29, 325­333.  Carney, C. E., Edinger, J. E., Manber, R., Garson, C., & Segal, Z. V. (2007). Beliefs about sleep  in disorders characterized by sleep and mood disturbance. Journal of Psychosomatic  Research, 62, 179 ­ 188.

64 

Carney, C. E., Edinger, J. E., Meyer, B., Lindman, L., & Istre, T. (2006). Daily activities and  sleep quality in college students. Chronobiology International, 23, 623 ­ 637.  Carney, C. E., Edinger, J. E., Morin, C. M., Manber, R., Rybarczyk, B., Stepanski, E., Wright,  H., & Lack, L. (2010). Examining maladaptive beliefs about sleep across insomnia  patient groups. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 68, 57 ­ 65.  Carney, C. E., Ulmer, C., Edinger, J. D., Krystal, A. D., & Knauss, F. (2009). Assessing  depression symptoms in those with insomnia: An examination of the Beck Depression  Inventory second edition (BDIII). Journal of Psychiatric Research, 43, 567 ­ 582.  Chaudhuri, A., & Behan, P. O. (2004). Fatigue in neurological disorders. The Lancet, 363, 978 ­  988.  Chesson, A. L., Littner, M., Davila, D., Anderson, W. M., GriggDamberger, M., Hartse, K.,  Johnson, S., & Wise, M. (1999). Practice parameters for the use of light therapy in the  treatment of sleep disorders. Sleep, 22, 641 ­ 660. 
nd  Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. (2  ed.). Hillsdale, N.J.: 

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  Coren, S. (1994). The prevalence of selfreported sleep disturbances in young adults.  International Journal of Neuroscience, 79, 67 ­ 73.  Daley, M., Morin, C. M., LeBlanc, M., Gregoire, J. P., & Savaard, J. (2009). Economic burden  of insomnia: Direct and indirect costs for individuals with insomnia syndrome, insomnia  symptoms and good sleepers. Sleep, 32, 55 ­ 64.  Davison, G. C., Tsujimoto, R. N., & Glaros, A. G. (1973). Attribution and the maintenance of  behaviour change in falling asleep. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 82, 124 ­ 133.

65 

DeRubeis, R., & CritsChristoph, P. (1998). Empirically supported individual and group  psychological treatments for adult mental disorders. Journal of Consulting and Clinical  Psychology, 66, 37 ­ 52.  Edinger, J. D., Carney, C. E., & Wohlgemuth, W. K. (2008). Pretherapy cognitive dispositions  and treatment outcome in cognitive behavior therapy for insomnia. Behavior Therapy, 39,  406 ­ 416.  Edinger, J., Kirby, A., Lineberger, M., Loiselle, M., Wohlgemuth, W., & Means, M. (2004). The  Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders. Duke University Medical Center.  Edinger, J. D., Olsen, M. K., Stechuchak, K. M., Means, M. K., Lineberger, M. D., Kirby, A., &  Carney, C. E. (2009). Cognitive behavioral therapy for patients with primary insomnia or  insomnia associated predominantly with mixed psychiatric disorders: A randomized  clinical trial. Sleep, 32, 499 ­ 510.  Edinger, J. D., & Wohlgemuth, W. (1999). The significance and management of persistent  primary insomnia: The past, present and future of behavioural insomnia therapies. Sleep  Medicine Review, 3, 101 ­ 118.  Edinger, J. D., Wohlgemuth, W. K., Radtke, R. A., Marsh, G. R., & Quillian, R. E. (2001).  Cognitive behavioral therapy for treatment of chronic primary insomnia: A randomized  controlled trial. The Journal of the American Medical Association, 285, 18561864.  Espie, C. A. (2002). Insomnia: Conceptual issues in the development, persistence, and treatment  of sleep disorders in adults. Annual Review Psychology, 53, 215 ­ 243.  Espie, C. A., Inglis, S. J., Tessier, S., & Harvey, L. (2001). The clinical effectiveness of  cognitive behavior therapy for chronic insomnia: Implementation and evaluation of a  sleep clinic in general medical practice. Behavior Research and Therapy, 39, 45 ­ 60.

66 

Feinberg, I., March, J. D., Floyd, T. C., Jimison, R., BossomDemitrack, L., & Katz, P. H.  (1985). Homeostatic changes during postnap sleep maintain baseline levels of delta  EEG. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neuropshysiology, 61, 134 ­ 137.  Ferentinos, P., Kontaxikis, V., HavakiKontaxaki, B., Paparrigoloulos, T., Dikeos, D., Ktonas,  P., & Soldatos, C. (2009). Sleep disturbances in relation to fatigue in major depression.  Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 66, 37 ­ 42.  Ford, D. E., & Kamerow, C. A. (1989). Epidemiologic study of sleep disturbances and  psychiatric disorders. An opportunity for prevention? Journal of the American Medical  Association, 262, 1479 ­ 1484.  Giesecke, M. E. (1987). The symptom of insomnia in university students. Journal of American  College Health, 35, 215 ­ 221.  Grandjean, E. (1979). Fatigue in industry. British Journal of Internal Medicine, 36, 175 ­ 186.  Greenberg, D. B. (2001). Clinical dimensions of fatigue. Primary Care Companion Journal of  Clinical Psychiatry, 4, 90 ­ 93.  Guilleminault, C., & Bassiri, A. (2005). Clinical features and evaluation of obstructive sleep  apneahypopnea syndrome and upper airway resistance syndrome. In M. H. Kryger, T. 
th  Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practices of sleep medicine (4  ed., pp. 

1043 ­ 1052). Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders.  Hale, L., Do, D. P., BasurtoDavila, R., Heron, M., Finch, B. K., Dubowitz, T., Lurie, N., &  Bird, C. E. (2009). Does mental health history explain gender disparities in insomnia  symptoms among young adults? Sleep Medicine, 10, 1118 ­ 1123.  Hall, M., Buysse, D. J., Reynolds, C. F., Kupfer, D. J., Baum, A. (1996). Stress related intrusive  thoughts disrupt sleep onset and continuity. Sleep Research, 25, 163.

67 

Harris, A. L., & Carney, C. E. (2009, November). Are people with insomnia afraid of fatigue?  Poster presented at the annual meeting of the Association of Behavioral and Cognitive  Therapies, New York, NY.  Harvey, A. (2002). A cognitive model of insomnia. Behavior Research and Therapy, 40, 869 ­  893.  Harvey, A. G. (2005). A cognitive theory and therapy for chronic insomnia. Journal of Cognitive  Psychotherapy: An International Quarterly, 19, 41 ­ 59.  Harvey, A. G., Sharpley, A. L., Ree, M. J., Stinson, K., & Clark, D. M. (2007). An open trial of  cognitive therapy for chronic insomnia. Behavior Research and Therapy, 45, 2491 ­  2501.  Harvey, A. G., & Tang, N. K. Y. (2003). Cognitive behaviour therapy for primary insomnia: Can  we rest yet? Sleep Medicine Reviews, 7, 237 ­ 262.  Hayashi, M., Watanabe, M., & Hori, T. (1999). The effects of a 20 minute nap in the mid  afternoon on mood, performance and EEG activity. Clinical Neurophysiology, 110, 272 ­  279.  Haynes, S. N., Adams, A. E., & Franzen, M. (1981). The effects of presleep stress on sleeponset  insomnia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 90, 601 ­ 606.  Healy, E. S., Kales, A., Monroe, L. J., Bixler , E. O., Chamberlin, K., & Soldatos. C. R., (1981).  Onset of insomnia: Role of lifestress events. Psychosomatic Medicine, 43, 439 ­ 451.  Hollon, S., Thase, M., & Markowitz, J. (2002). Treatment and prevention of depression.  Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 3, 39 ­ 77.  Jacobs, G. D., PaceSchott, E. F., Stickgold, R., Otto, M. W. (2004). Cognitive behavior therapy  and pharmacotherapy for insomnia. Archives of Internal Medicine, 164, 18881896.

68 

Jensen, D. R. (2003). Understanding sleep disorders in a college student population. Journal of  College Counselling, 6, 25 ­ 34.  Juliano, L. M. & Griffiths, R. R. (2004). A critical review of caffeine withdrawal: Empirical  validation of symptoms and signs, incidence, severity, and associated features.  Psychopharmacology, 176, 1 ­ 29.  Kohn, L., & Espie, C. A. (2005). Sensitivity and specificity of the insomnia experience: A  comparative study of psychophysiological insomnia, insomnia associated with a mental  disorder and good sleep. Sleep, 28, 104 ­ 112.  Lichstein, K. L., Riedel, B. W., Wilson, N. M., Lester, K. W., & Aguillard, R. N. (2001).  Relaxation and sleep compression for latelife insomnia: A placebocontrolled trial.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 227­239.  Lichstein, K. L. & Rosenthal, T. L. (1980). Insomniacs' perceptions of cognitive versus somatic  determinants of sleep disturbance. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 89, 105 ­ 107.  Lichstein, K. L., Wilson, N. M., & Johnson, C. T. (2000). Psychological treatment of secondary  insomnia. Psychology and Aging, 15, 232­240.  Lundh, L. & Broman, J. (2000). Insomnia as an interaction between sleepinterfering and sleep  interpreting processes. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 49, 299 ­ 310.  Mook, D. G. (1983). In defense of external invalidity. American Psychologist, 38, 379 ­ 387.  Morgan, K., & Clarke, D. (1997). Risk factors for latelife insomnia in a representative general  practice sample. British Journal of General Practice. 47, 166 ­ 169.  Morgan, K. (2003). Daytime activity and risk factors for late life insomnia. Journal of Sleep  Research, 12, 231  238.

69 

Morin, C. M. (1993). Insomnia: Psychological assessment and management. New York:  Guilford.  Morin, C. M., Blais, F., & Savard, J. (2002). Are changes in beliefs and attitudes about sleep  related to sleep improvements in the treatment of insomnia? Behavior Research and  Therapy, 40, 741 ­ 752.  Morin, C. M., Bootzin, R. R., Buysse, D. J., Edinger, J. D., Espie, C. A., Lichstein, K. L. (2006).  Psychological and behavioral treatment of insomnia: Update of the recent evidence (1998  ­ 2004). Sleep, 29, 1398 ­ 1413.  Morin, C. M., Culbert, J. P., & Schwartz, M. S. (1994). Nonpharmacological interventions for  insomnia: A metaanalysis of treatment efficacy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151,  1172 ­ 1180.  Morin, C. M., Stone, J., Trinkle, D., Mercer, J., & Remsberg, S. (1993). Dysfunctional beliefs  and attitudes about sleep among older adults with and without insomnia complaints.  Psychology and Aging, 8, 463 ­ 467.  Morin, C. M., Vallieres, A., & Ivers, H. (2007). Dysfunctional beliefs and attitudes about sleep  (DBAS): Validation of a brief version (DBAS16). Sleep, 30, 1547 ­ 1554.  Moul, D. E., Nofzinger, E. A., Pilkonis, P. A., Houck, P. R., Miewald, J. M., & Buysse, D. J.  (2002). Symptom reports in severe chronic insomnia. Sleep, 25, 553 ­ 563.  Murtagh, D. R., & Greenwood, K. M. (1995). Identifying effective psychological treatments for  insomnia: A metaanalysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 79 ­ 89.  Ohayon, M. M. (2002) Epidemiology of insomnia: What we know and what we still need to  learn. Sleep Medicine Review, 6, 97 ­ 111.

70 

Ohayon, M. M., Caulet, M., Lemoine, P. (1998). Comorbidity of mental and insomnia disorders  in the general population. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 39, 185 ­ 197.  Pennebaker, J. W. (1993). Putting stress into words: Health, linguistic, and therapeutic  implications. Behavior Research and Therapy, 31, 539 ­ 548.  Pigeon, W. R., & Perlis, M. L. (2006). Sleep homeostasis in primary insomnia. Sleep Medicine  Reviews, 10, 247 ­ 254.  Pilcher, J. J., Ginter, D. R., & Sadowsky, B. (1997). Sleep quality versus sleep quantity:  Relationships between sleep and measures of health, wellbeing, and sleepiness in college  students. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 42, 583 ­ 596.  Puetz, T. W., O'Connor. P. J., & Dishman, R. K. (2006). Effects of chronic exercise on feelings  of energy and fatigue: A qualitative synthesis. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 866 ­ 876.  Quesnel, C., Savard, J., Simard, S., Ivers, H., & Morin, C. M. (2003). Efficacy of cognitive  behavioural therapy for insomnia in women treated for nonmetastatic breast cancer.  Journal of Consulting Clinical Psychology, 71, 189 ­ 200.  Resnick, H. E., Carter, E. A., Aloia, M., & Phillips, B. (2006). Crosssectional relationship of  reported fatigue to obesity, diet, and physical activity: Results from the third national  health and nutrition examination survey. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 2, 163 ­  169.  Richter, P., Werner, J., Heerlein, A., Kraus, A., & Sauer, H. (1998). On the validity of the Beck  Depression Inventory: A review. Psychopathology, 31, 160­168.  Roth, T. (2007). Insomnia: Definition, prevalence, etiology, and consequences. Journal of  Clinical Sleep Medicine, 3, S7 ­ S10.

71 

Roth, T. & AncoliIsrael, S. (1999). Daytime consequences and correlates of insomnia in the  United States: Results of the 1991 National Sleep Foundation Survey II. Sleep, 22, S354  ­ S358.  Rybarczyk, B., Lopez, M., Benson, R., Alsten, C., & Stepanski, E. (2002). Efficacy of two  behavioral treatment programs for comorbid geriatric insomnia. Psychology and Aging,  17, 288 ­ 298.  Saper, C. B., Cano, G., & Scammell, T. E. (2005). Homeostatic, circadian, and emotional  regulation of sleep. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 493, 92 ­ 98.  Sharma, B., & Feinsilver, S. (2009). Circadian rhythm sleep disorders: An update. Sleep and  Biological Rhythms, 7, 113 ­ 124.  Sherril, D. L., Kotchu, K., & Quan, S. F. (1998). Association of physical activity and human  sleep disorders. Archives of Internal Medicine, 158, 1894 ­ 1898.  Sierra, J. C., GuillenSerrano, V., SantosInglesias, P. (2008). Insomnia severity index: Some  indicators about its reliability and validity on an older adults sample. Revista de  Neurologia, 47, 566 ­ 570.  Smets, E. M. A., Garssen, B., Bonke, B. & De Haes, C. J. M. (1995) The Multidimensional  Fatigue Inventory (MFI) Psychometric qualities of an instrument to assess fatigue.  Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 39, 315­325.  Smith, M. T., Huang, M. I., & Manber, R. (2005). Cognitive behavioural therapy for chronic  insomnia occurring within the context of medical and psychiatric disorders. Clinical  Psychology Review, 25, 559 ­ 592.

72 

Sobrero, A., Puglisi, F., Guglielmi, A., Belvedere, O., Aprile, G., Ramello, M., & Grossi, F.  (2001). Fatigue: A main component of anemia symptomatology. Seminars in Oncology,  28, 16 ­ 18.  Spiegelhalder, K., Espie, C., Nissen, C., & Riemann, D. (2008). Sleeprelated attentional bias in  patients with primary insomnia compared with sleep experts and healthy controls.  Journal of Sleep Research, 17, 191 ­ 196.  Spielman, A. J., & Glovinsky, P. B. (1991). The varied nature of insomnia, In P. Hauri (Ed.),  Case studies in insomnia (pp. 1 ­ 18). New York: Plenum Medical Book.  Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., Gibbons, M., & First, M. B. (1996). Instruction manual for the  structured clinical interview for DSMIV (SCIDIV). New York: Biometrics Research  Department, New York Psychiatric Institute.  Stone, P., Richards, M., & Hardy, J. (1998). Fatigue in patients with cancer. European Journal of  Cancer, 34, 1670  1676.  Storms, M. D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1970). Insomnia and the attribution process. Journal of  Personality and Social Psychology, 16, 319 ­ 328.  Ustinov, Y., Lichstein, K. L., Vander Wal, G. S., Taylor, D. J., Riedel, B. W., & Bush, A. J.  (2010). Association between report of insomnia and daytime functioning. Sleep  Medicine, 11, 65 ­ 68.  Van Egeren, L., Haynes, S. N., Franzen, M., & Hamilton, J. (1983). Presleep cognitions and  attributions in sleeponset insomnia. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 6, 217 ­ 232.  Verlander, L. A., Benedict, J. O., & Hanson, D. P. (1999). Stress and sleep patterns of college  students. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 88, 893 ­ 898.  Webb, W. B. (1988). An objective behavioral model of sleep. Sleep, 11, 488 ­ 496.

73 

West, S. G., Finch, J. F., & Curran, P. J. (1995). Structural equation models with nonnormal  variables: Problems and remedies. In R. H. Hoyle (Ed.), Structural equation modeling:  Concepts, issues and applications (pp. 5675). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  White, P. D. (2004). What causes chronic fatigue syndrome? Infections, physical inactivity, and  enhanced interoception may all play a part. British Medical Journal, 329, 928 ­ 929.  Wicklow, A., & Espie, C. A. (2000). Intrusive thoughts and their relationship to actigraphic  measurement of sleep: Towards a cognitive model of insomnia. Behavioral Research and  Therapy, 38, 679 ­ 699.  Wijesuriya, N., Tran, Y., & Craig, A. (2006). The psychological determinants of fatigue.  International Journal of Psychophysiology, 63, 77 ­ 86.  Zhang, B., Wing, Y. K. (2006). Sex differences in insomnia: A metaanalysis. Sleep, 29, 85 ­ 93.

74 


