Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Viability Of Hybrid Ground Source Heat Pump System With Solar Thermal Collectors
Farzin M. Rad
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Mechanical Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Rad, Farzin M., "Viability Of Hybrid Ground Source Heat Pump System With Solar Thermal Collectors" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1330.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

VIABILITY OF HYBRID GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM WITH SOLAR THERMAL COLLECTORS

By

Farzin Masoumi Rad Bachelor of Science, Mechanical Engineering, Shiraz University, 1986

A thesis presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the degree of Master of Applied Science In the program of Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 © Farzin Masoumi Rad, 2009

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

ii

Abstract
This thesis presents a study for examining the viability of hybrid ground source heat pump (GSHP) systems that use solar thermal collectors as the supplemental component in heating dominated buildings. Loads for an actual house in the City of Milton near Toronto were estimated. TRNSYS, a system simulation software tool, was used to model the yearly performance of conventional GSHP as well as the proposed hybrid GSHP system. The house was equipped with a data monitoring system which was installed to read and record fluid flow, temperature and electricity consumption in different components of the system. The actual yearly data collected from the site was examined against the simulation results. In addition, a sensitivity analysis was carried out to determine the relationship between the solar collector area and the ground loop heat exchanger (GHX) length. It was shown that the ratio of GHX length reduction to solar panel area of 4.7 m/m2 results in the optimum ratio, which corresponds to 32 m GHX length reduction with a 6.81m2 solar collector area. This study demonstrates that a hybrid GSHP system, combined with solar thermal collectors, is a feasible choice for space conditioning for heating dominated houses. It was shown that the solar thermal energy storage in the ground could reduce a large amount of ground loop heat exchanger length. Combining three solar thermal collectors with a total area of 6.81m2 to the GSHP system will reduce GHX length by %15 (from 222 m to 188 m). System malfunctioning in the cooling season was also detected, and options for fixing the problem were presented. A sensitivity analysis was carried out on different cities in Canada, and results demonstrated that Vancouver, with the mildest climate compared to other cities, was the best candidate for the proposed solar hybrid GSHP system with 7.64 m/m2 GHX length reduction to solar collector area ratio. Overall system economical viability was also evaluated using a 20-year life-cycle cost analysis. The analysis showed that there is a economic benefit in comparing to GSHP. The net present value of the proposed hybrid system and GSHP system were estimated to be $44,834 and $41,406, respectively.

iii

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Dr. Alan Fung and Dr. Wey Leong for supporting me throughout this research and giving me guidance and assistance for this work. A special thanks to Larry Brydon from OZZ Corporation and the staffs of Dimax Controls and Mattamy Homes Ltd. in Milton for assisting us in getting access to the field data. Thanks to the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and Solar Building Research Network (SBRN) for their financial supports in this research. Lastly, but most importantly, I would like to thank my wife Roya for her encouragement and support during the production of this thesis.

iv

Table of Contents
Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgments Table of contents List of Figures List of Tables Nomenclature Chapter 1: Introduction 1 Introduction 1 2 3 4 4 ii iii v vi ix xi viii

1.1 Benefits of Solar Assisted Ground Source Heat Pump Systems 1.2 Disadvantage of Solar Assisted Ground Source Heat Pump Systems 1.3 Purpose and Goal of Research 1.4 Scope Of Work and Approach to Research Chapter 2: Literature Review 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Introduction Early Solar Assisted Heat Pump Systems Different Types of Solar and Ground Source Heat-Pump Systems Viability of Hybrid Geothermal Heat Pump Systems with Solar Thermal Collectors

6 6 8

10 Chapter 3: House Load Simulation 3.1 3.2 House Model Description House Load Profile 14 16

Chapter 4: Hybrid Ground Source Heat Pump with Solar Thermal Collector Model 4.1 System Equipment Configuration 4.2 SAGSHP Component Model Description 4.2.1 House Model 4.2.2 Heat Pump Model 4.2.3 Ground Loop Heat Exchanger Model 4.2.4 Solar Collector Model
v

19 21 21 23 26 29

4.2.5 Water Tank Model 4.2.6 In-Floor Radiant Heating Model 4.2.7 Gray Water Heat Recovery Model 4.2.8 Ventilation Model 4.2.9 Flow Control and Pump Component Model 4.2.9.1 Control Flow Mixer 4.2.9.2 Control Flow Diverter 4.2.9.3 Tee Piece 4.2.9.4 Tempering Valve 4.2.9.5 Single Speed Pump 4.2.10 Heat Pump Equipment Control and Scheduling 4.2.10.1 Thermostat 4.2.10.2 Heating Setback Forcing Function 4.2.10.3 Season Heating and Cooling Forcing Function 4.2.11 Solar Thermal Equipment Controls and Scheduling 4.2.12 Domestic Cold and Hot Water Draw Model 4.3 System Layout in TRNSYS studio

31 33 36 37 38 38 38 38 39 39 39 39 40 40 41 41 43

Chapter 5: Ground Loop and Solar Thermal Collector Sizing 5.1 Unknowns of the As-Built House 5.1.1 Ground Soil Characteristic and Thermal Properties 5.1.2 Solar Collector Fluid Flow Rate 5.1.2.1 Base Case 5.1.2.2 As-Built Solar Collector Case 5.2 Controls on Fluid Flow to the Solar Collectors Chapter 6: Analysis of System Performance and Sensitivity Analysis 6-1 Field Testing and Verification of Hybrid Solar-GSHP System 6-2 Solar Collector Area and Ground Loop Length Relations 6-3 6-4 6-5 Life-Cycle Cost Analysis System Perfomnce in Different Cities of Canada Sizing Suggestions for the House System 53 60 63 66 67 44 44 49 49 49 50

vi

Chapter 7: Conclusions and Recommendations 7.1 7.2 7.3 TRNSYS versus HOT2000 Optimum Flow to Solar Thermal Collectors Sensitivity Analysis of the Ground Thermal Conductivity 69 69 70 70 71 71 72 72 73 73 74

7.4 Solar Collector Area and Ground Loop Heat Exchanger Length Relation 7.5 System Cost Analysis 7.6 7.7 Field Study and Verification Solution to the Problem of the As-built System

7.8 System Viability in Different Cities of Canada 7.9 Viability of System 7-10 System Simulation Approach References List of Appendixes Appendix A: Floor Plans of the House Appendix B: HOT2000 Output Report for the House Appendix C: System Input File Generated by TRNSYS Appendix D: Heat Pump Performance Data

78 82 101 129

vii

List of Figures
Figure 3-1: A Mattamy house located at Milton, Ontario, with the back facing due south (photo
By FMRAD 2007)

14 16 17 18 20 21 34 40 42 42 43 46 46 47 47 48

Figure 3-2: Hourly heating and cooling load for whole year simulation Figure 3-3: Accumulated space heating load Figure 3-4: Accumulated space cooling load Figure 4-1: Schematic diagram of SAGSHP system configuration Figure 4-2: Ground loop borehole layout Figure 4-3: Basement floor slab coverage plan Figure 4-4: Heating set back temperature control in 24 hours Figure 4-5: Hot water consumption in 24 hours vs. flow rate (kg/hr) Figure 4-6: Cold water temperature (°C) during a year (monthly) Figure 4-7: TRNSYS Model Schematic Figure 5-1 (a): EFTs to HP for soil thermal conductivity of 0.85 W/mK Figure 5-1 (b): EFTs to HP for soil thermal conductivity of 1 W/mK Figure 5-1 (c): EFTs to HP for soil thermal conductivity of 2 W/mK Figure 5-1 (d): EFTs to HP for soil thermal conductivity of 2.5 W/mK Figure 5-2: Annual variation of soil temperatures in three different depths ­ Toronto

Figure 5-3: As-Built heat pump energy consumption and entering fluid temperature (one year) 51 Figure 5-4: Heat pump EFT in the cooling mode in a typical summer week. (With and without night time fluid circulation in solar collectors) Figure 6-1(a): Actual versus simulated EFT to the heat pump (HP) 52 54

Figure 6-1(b): Actual versus simulated minimum EFT to the heat pump (HP) ­ Heating Season 54 Figure 6-2: Existing heat pump EFT limits (System with three solar panels) Figure 6-3: Existing heat pump EFT limits (System without solar panels) Figure 6-4: Heat pump EFT in a typical week of cooling season Figure 6-5: Heat pump EFT in a typical week of heating season
viii

56 56 57 57

Figure 6-6: Ground loop length reduction percentage versus number of solar panels Figure 6-7: Ground loop length replaced by solar collector area Figure 6-8: Annual EFTs to the HP for SAGSHP and GSHP systems

62 62 65

ix

List of Tables

Table 3-1: House Heating and Cooling Requirements ­ Compassion of HOT2000 and TRNSYS Table 4-1: Input parameters to the house Table 4-2: Selected output parameters to the house Table 4-3: Ground source heat pump parameters Table 4-4: Ground source heat pump input parameters Table 4-5: Ground source heat pump output parameters Table 4-6: Ground loop heat exchanger parameters Table 4-7: GHX loop input parameters Table 4-8: GHX output parameters Table 4-9: Solar collector parameters Table 4-10: Solar collector input parameters Table 4-11: Solar collector output parameters Table 4-12: Hot water tank parameters Table 4-13: Hot water tank input parameters Table 4-14: Hot water tank output parameters Table 4-15: Radiant floor heating parameters Table 4-16: Radiant floor heating input parameters Table 4-17: Radiant floor heating output parameters Table 4-18: Grey water heat recovery (heat exchanger) parameters Table 4-19: Grey heat water heat recovery input parameters Table 4-20: Grey heat water heat recovery output parameters Table 4-21: Cooling and Heating Season timing Table 5-1: Thermal conductivity of different soil types 18 22 23 24 25 25 28 29 29 30 31 31 32 33 33 34 35 36 36 37 37 41 45

Table 5-2: HP annual energy consumption and peak ground loop Temperature for base case 49 Table 5-3: Heat pump annual energy consumption with different solar collector flow rate 50 Table 6-1: Actual versus simulated data for heat pump IN and OUT fluid temperature
x

53

Table 6-2: Actual and simulated heat pump energy consumption Table 6-3: Actual versus simulated heat pump energy consumption in heating mode Table 6-4: Actual year 2007 degree days versus TRANSYS, TMY2, weather data

58 58 59

Table 6-5: Adjusted deviation between actual and simulated heat pump energy consumption 60 Table 6-6: System components fluid flow rates and controls in different scenarios Table 6-7: Ground loop heat exchanger length with different solar collector area Table 6-8: GLHE length reduction and its corresponding solar panel area Table 6-9: Net Present Value of Hybrid Solar-Ground Source Heat Pump System 60 61 61 63

Table 6-10: Net Present Value of Systems with Minimum and Maximum Bore hole Cost 64 Table 6-11: Annual heating load to annual cooling load ratio of the house in different cities 66 Table 6-12: System performance in different cities Table 6-13: Suggestions for improvement the existing as-built system performance 67 68

xi

Nomenclature
GHP GHX SAGSHP BNL GROCS SESHPS SAHP SSHP SGSHP HVAC UTES TMY ASHREA IGSHPA USGPM COP RSI-value R-value ACH HDD CDD HRV Pa GJ MJ kW DB WB RH Ground Source Heat Pump Ground Loop Heat Exchanger Solar Assisted Ground Source Heat Pump Brookhaven National Laboratory Ground Coupled System Solar-Earth Heat Pump System Solar Assisted Heat Pump Solar Energy Source Heat Pump Solar-Ground Source Heat Pump Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Under Ground Thermal Storage Typical Meteorological Year
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning

International Ground Source Heat Pump Association US Gallon per Minute Coefficient of Performance Thermal Resistance to Heat Flow- SI Unit Thermal Resistance to Heat Flow- Imperial Unit Air Change per Hour Heating Degree Day Cooling Degree Day Heat Recovery Ventilation Pascal Giga Joules Mega Joules Kilo-Watt Dry Bulb Wet Bulb Relative Humidity
xii

DHW UA EFF EFT IAM Q q atm lT a0 a1 a2 b0 b1 Cp      
T

Domestic Hot Water Overall Heat Transfer Coefficient Efficiency Entering Fluid Temperature Incident Angel Modifier Energy Transfer, J Heat Transfer Rate, W Atmosphere Global Radiation Incident, kJ/h-m2 Intercept efficiency Efficiency Slope Efficiency Curve First Order Incident Angel Modifier Second Order Incident Angel Modifier Specific Heat at Constant Pressure, J/kg.K Mass Density, kg/m3
Kinematic Viscosity, m2/s Thermal Diffusivity, m2/s Volumetric Thermal Expansion, 1/K Prandtl Number Rayleigh Number Temperature, °C Nusselt Number Convective Heat Transfer Coefficient, W/m2.K Flow Rate, m/s Solar Collector- Heat Pump Flow Fraction

   
y

xiii

Chapter 1

Introduction
1.0 Introduction The claimed advantages of ground-source heat pump (GSHP) systems over their conventional alternatives, such as air-source and water source heat pumps make these systems attractive for space heating and air conditioning for residential and commercial as well as institutional buildings. GSHP, which exchange heat to and from the underground environment to provide cooling and heating, have an increasing number of applications, such as space heating and cooling, water heating, crop drying, agricultural greenhouse, housing facilities, and so on. The primary advantage of ground source/sink versus air source/sink is that the underground environment has a more moderate temperature swing than the ambient air temperature and, therefore, has a better thermodynamic advantage. Having an underground thermal source incurs a higher initial cost, and must be offset by reduced operating costs leading to a lower life cycle cost. Geothermal applications for buildings are mostly limited to full dependence on ground soil temperatures for 100% of the heating and cooling energy. Although there are advantages of low energy and maintenance costs in favour of this approach, space limitations and high initial costs may restrict a full geothermal installation. Restrictive regulations, such as mandating a minimum borehole size, grouting materials, wage rates and heat exchange methods, generally increase the cost of such a system. The initial cost may put the project above the budget, and in some cases, the drilling conditions may prevent the use of a large conventional closed-loop bore field [1, 2]. In many buildings, annually, the amounts of heat extracted from and injected into the ground are not balanced. The vertical closed-loop is a common type of earth coupling mostly used in buildings that have limited land areas. In designing this type of system, consideration must be made of the thermal response of the ground throughout the expected project life (i.e., 25 years). An annual imbalance in ground load will lead to lower heat pump entering fluid temperatures (EFT) in heating-dominated buildings, or higher heat pump EFT in cooling-dominated buildings, to a point where equipment capacity may be compromised if the ground loop heat exchanger is not large enough. This imbalance requires either a very large ground loop heat exchanger or some mechanism for assisting the system by supplementing deficit heat or rejecting excess heat.
1

Because the cost of installing a very large ground loop heat exchanger may be excessive, there are a number of alternate ways to assist a GSHP. These include a solar collector, which injects additional heat into the ground for heating dominated buildings, and a cooling tower, which rejects excess heat into the atmosphere for cooling dominated buildings [3]. Systems that incorporate both a ground heat exchanger and an above-ground heat exchanger are commonly referred to as hybrid GSHP. In hybrid systems, the peak heat pump EFTs from year-to-year should be approximately equal. In this study, the system utilizes a solar thermal collector as an above- ground heat exchanger, called a solar assisted ground source heat pump (SAGSHP).

1.1 Benefits of Solar Assisted Ground Source Heat Pump Systems When using a GSHP system that would not cover the heating and cooling load of a building, utilizing a hybrid system makes sense in order to benefit from GSHP systems with the assistance of other systems, such as solar thermal systems. The GSHP itself has several advantages over other systems [4], and combining it with other sources of energy, such as solar thermal, enhances the advantages. Compared with other heating and cooling systems, it is possible to achieve significant energy savings. This is due to its use of a free resource of heat stored in the ground, solar energy and its high efficiency. While most GSHP systems are initially more expensive than conventional building heating and cooling systems, their maintenance costs are generally lower, and their very high efficiency results in low operating costs. As a result, they can be the most cost effective heating and cooling system on a life-cycle cost basis. GSHP require less space than conventional heating and cooling systems. Heating and cooling only requires one unit. In large buildings, where a conventional system would require voluminous air ducts to transport heating and cooling from a central plant to the extremities of the building, a compact liquid loop can be used to transport heat between the ground and multiple, smaller heat pumps scattered around the building. The GSHP generally provides a more comfortable interior environment and better air quality than conventional heating and cooling systems. There are a number of reasons for this. The temperature of the air heated by a GSHP tends to be lower than that of a combustion system, and

2

the volume of heated air is higher. In addition, in cooling mode, better air quality results from increased removal of humidity [4]. The cooling surfaces of a GSHP are often kept at a lower temperature than those of airsource heat pumps and conventional air conditioners; more water vapour condenses on these colder surfaces, reducing humidity levels. A final advantage of GSHP is reduced peak electricity consumption during summer time. During this season, peak loads generally coincide with periods of high cooling loads, so GSHP, which are more efficient than conventional systems due to the relative constant sink temperature of the ground, can lower peak electricity load charges levied on commercial or industrial buildings, and can reduce strain on the electric network. In addition to the above-motioned advantages, more savings can be realised when the GSHP systems provides part of the heating and cooling load along with other renewable energy sources. The combination of solar collectors with ground-coupled heat pumps is a relatively recent development. There are two reasons for combining solar collectors with ground-coupled heat pumps: (1) the ground can act as a convenient and low-cost heat storage device for solar energy, and (2) by using the ground and solar collectors as heat sources together with a heat pump to upgrade ground heat to those high enough for space heating. Relative to reason (1), the ground could act as a seasonal storage device for solar energy. This would allow ample storage of solar energy during the summer for use in heating during the winter. Relative to reason (2), solar collectors can be operated at lower temperatures and thus higher efficiencies than if they were used directly for space heating or water heating.

1.2 Disadvantages of SAGSHP Systems As heat is extracted from the deep ground (50 to150 m) under the earth's surface by a heat pump, and with the need for the sun's radiation for solar thermal panels, the main disadvantage is related to finding a suitable building location. Initial installation cost for this system is up to 2.5 times as expensive as other types of equipment, due to the cost of installing a ground heat exchanger and solar panels [2]. In solar thermal assisted GSHP, a very sophisticated control system is required for switching or redirecting the solar energy. This happens when the extra heat, usually during the summer, would be against the system's functionality. Dumping unwanted heat to the ground would be
3

another issue that must be dealt with properly. Finally, not all air conditioning contractors are familiar with this technology.

1.3 Purpose and Goal of Research The purpose of this study was to evaluate the performance and viability of hybrid geothermal heat pump systems with solar thermal collectors. The main objective was to perform a system simulation approach to assess the feasibility of this kind of hybrid systems in heating dominated buildings. An actual residential building was modelled and the results compared to the actual data collected by monitoring the related operation of equipments through specific months. It would be ideal if this study attracts the interest of researchers and contractors, and provides valuable information for designing and installing this kind of hybrid system in heating dominated buildings in Canada.

1.4 Scope of Work and Approach to Research An existing residential house near Toronto was chosen and constructed as an energy efficient house, using a SAGSHP for heating and cooling. The as-built mechanical system of the house was not functioning in the cooling season. The house was modelled in TRNSYS 16 [5] and HOT2000 [6], and the results validated and compared to each other, as well as with the actual data derived from monitoring the operation of such system. The study consisted of the following tasks: 1- Modeling the house in TRNBuild (a part of TRNSYS) to generate annual heating and cooling loads of the house, and to compare the simulation results with HOT2000 simulation results and to discuss reason for any deviations. 2- Modeling the SAGSHP system in TRNSYS software. 3- Finding the unknown parameters in the as-built system design, such as soil thermal conductivity, percentage of ground loop fluid diversion to solar collectors and system configuration and specifications. 4- Field study and verification of the SAGSHP system to validate this study. Detecting the problem of the existing system in the cooling season and suggesting solutions to resolve it.

4

5- Conducting a sensitivity analysis by varying the thermal conductivity of the ground and discussing the effects of this parameter in system design. 6- Finding an optimum fluid flow to the solar thermal panels in order to get the highest efficiency of the system in heating season, and proposing an improved system configuration for the cooling season. 7- Modeling the house with only a GSHP system (base case) and comparing the results with the SAGSHP system. 8- Conducting a sensitivity analysis on the variation of the solar thermal collector area to determine the optimum balance between ground exchanger length and solar collector area. 9- Conducting system cost analysis. 10- Feasibility study of SAGHP system for different cities of Canada with different climates.

5

Chapter 2

Literature review
2.1 Introduction The published research to date on solar assisted ground source heat pumps (SAGSHP) contains four main aspects of study: technical feasibility, economic feasibility, detailed modeling, and field trial experiments. Historically these studies were examined on an individual basis and the authors typically generated their own algorithms to perform simulations. Recent improvements in computers and simulation software have allowed the complete integration of these aspects into all encompassing programs such as TRNSYS [5] and other simulation software. In spite of the advancement of integrated simulation, published studies of SAGSHP continue to include major simplifying assumptions such as using a simple basic heat pump component (in early editions of TRNSYS) as well as a simplified ground loop heat exchanger with a long time step temperature response factor (Yavuzturk and Spitler [7]). In addition, the majority of the SAGSHP models were based on theory, not on real product performance and field experience. A research opportunity exists, since a number of new models based on actual ground source heat pumps (GSHP) with transient behaviour are currently being developed. No study has been conducted to date on a residential house with existing equipments and actual monitoring data, in conjunction with the most advanced simulation modeling.

2.2 Early Solar Assisted Heat Pump Systems Different studies and research on solar assisted heat pumps (SAHP) started in 1978 [8, 9]. In 1982 Metz [10] suggested a SAGSHP system using ground-coupled tanks and the earth as the heat source/sink or storage element. As a part of his research carried at the Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), four buried tank experiments were operated between December 1978 and March 1981 to determine the feasibility of using ground coupled tanks in series of SAHP systems. In these systems, solar heat was stored and delivered to the load via the heat pump when the storage temperature was too low for direct heating. Research questions included: 1- Do ground-coupled tanks have a thermal or economic advantage over conventional insulated tanks?
6

2- Can the ground-coupled tank reduce the amount of auxiliary heat required by buffering transient fluctuations in the storage temperature? 3- Can surplus solar heat, collected during the summer and fall, be retrieved in winter to reduce auxiliary heating or solar collector area? 4- Is the ground-coupled tank a useful space-cooling heat sink? 5- Can a model be developed to reliably simulate the behaviour of ground-coupled tanks? 6- What is the optimal design for a ground-coupled tank? The experimental results from these tank experiments were compared to results from a model, GROCS [11] (GROund Coupled Systems) developed at BNL. Tank experiment designs and heat inputs were based on computer simulations of a moderately well-insulated 140 m2 house with a full basement and a heating load of 19.0×106 J/°C-day. The local (New York) heating season was taken as 2.78×103°C-day/year, yielding an annual building heating requirement of 52.8×109 J/year. The annual space cooling load was 15.8 × 109 J/year. The simulated solar collector was a low-temperature single glaze collector. The heat pump was assumed to have an efficiency of 50% of the theoretical Carnot cycle. The results answered the question posed, at least for the climate and soil properties encountered in these experiments. The experimental data indicated that ground-coupled tanks have small thermal advantage over perfectly insulated tanks in a system with low (2-15 °C) winter storage temperatures. Both tank systems extract modest amounts of heat from the ground during the winter after little or no summer heat input. Ground-coupled tanks can be built in large sizes (0.35 m3/m2 of solar collector) without requiring insulation or indoor space. The resultant large thermal inertia can buffer short term storage temperature fluctuations, preventing short-term "heat starvation," and thus reducing auxiliary heating. Heat added to these tanks during the summer and fall had no important effect on mid-winter experimental tank temperatures or heat retrieval. Considerable amounts of heat can be dissipated by the ground-coupled tank in summer. Without summer solar heat input, such a tank can be a useful space cooling heat sink at lower temperatures, e.g., for daytime storage and nocturnal rejection of heat. In summary, SAHP systems in series with low winter storage temperatures of groundcoupled tanks were found to have a modest wintertime thermal advantage over conventional insulated tanks. Ground-coupled tanks are also suitable for summer heat dissipation. No
7

important carry-over of summer-collected heat to winter was observed in the experiment conducted at BNL.

2.3 Different Types of Solar and Ground Source Heat-Pump Systems Yang et al [12] portrayed a numerical simulation of the performance of a solar-earth source heat pump system (SESHPS) in two system configurations: 1- Alternate operation mode and 2Combined operation mode. The alternate mode is defined as an operation in which SAHP is operating during the day and a GSHP is started in the evening. The aim of this mode is to overcome the problem of the GSHP, in that the earth temperature surrounding the buried coils drops very quickly with continuous heat extraction of ground heat from the earth, and that could deteriorate the performance of the heat pump. Integrating solar energy to GSHP makes it possible for the GSHP to operate intermittently and the resumption of earth temperature can be achieved during the day when the SAHP is started. At the same time, integrating earth energy to SAHP makes it possible for the system to work in the evening or on a rainy day when the GSHP is operating. Furthermore, the redundant energy collected by the solar collector during the day may be stored partly in the earth , so other energy storage equipment can be reduced. Yang et al [12] classified the combined operation mode of SESHPS into three modes. Mode 1 is the coupling of the solar collector and buried coil connected in series. The heat-carrying fluid flows through the buried coil first and then through the solar collector. Mode 2 is with same coupling style, but the heat carrying fluid flows through the solar collector first and then through the buried coil. Mode 3 is a coupling of the solar collector and buried coil in parallel. In this mode, the ratio of the flow rate in the solar collector to the total flow rate in the heat pump is defined as "S", and three sub-cases are defined with the following ratios: S=0.25, 0.5, 0.75. A numerical simulation on the SESHPS was undertaken for the area of Qingdao, China. The heating load for the building was set to 5 kW. The borehole length was considered as 55 m with a PVC (Polyvinyl chloride) U-tube. The solar collector area was set to 6m2. A storage water tank with a volume of 0.5 m3 was used for the simulation. By analysing the output data, it was found that when GSHP was operating continuously, the earth temperature variation near the buried coil was high. The magnitude of affected earth temperature gradually grew over the operating time. The earth temperature variation is significant when the GSHP started but it became steady with
8

continuous operation. The earth temperature resumption rate was very dependent on the GSHP operation time during an alternate period. Considering the system economy, the energy efficiency and earth temperature resumption state, the proportion of operating time for the SAHP should be confined to 42 to 58 % with an alternate operating period of 24 hours. The combined operation mode, compared with a GSHP, had a notable energy exchange effect. The energy saving rate with and without a water tank was 14.5% to 10.4%, respectively, for combined Mode 2 (flow passing through solar collector first and then through buried coil). As for the internal operation effect, the serial operation with Mode 2 was the best and could be used as an optimized scheme in practical engineering design and operation. The climate condition, solar energy resources and the characteristics of the earth vary at different geographical regions and, therefore, the results in different modes will vary. In 2004, Bi et al [13] published a combined theoretical and experimental study on a solar ground source heat pump (SGSHP) system, with a vertical double-spiral coil ground heatexchanger (GHX). This was the basis for Yang et al [12] numerical simulation for different SGSHP combination systems. The heating mode of the SGSHP system was alternated between a solar energy source heat pump (SSHP) and a GSHP, using a low grade energy utilization system built by Bi et al [13]. The performances were measured for the SSHP, GSHP, and SGSHP systems, as well as the GHX. When the alternating use of the SSHP and GSHP is controlled per time allocated in different months from weather data, the total average performance in the heating season was: For the SSHP system, the heating load was 2334 W and the COP (Coefficient of Performance) was 2.73; For the GSHP system, the heating load was 2298 W and the COP was 2.83; For the SGSHP system, the heating load was 2316 W and the COP was 2.78.

In 2005 Ozgener and Hepbasli [14] presented a study investigating the performance characteristics of a SAGSHP greenhouse heating system with a U-bend GHX using the exergy analysis method, along with a experimental performance analysis [15,16]. The system was installed at the Solar Energy Institute of Ege University, Izmir, Turkey. The exergy transport between the components and the destructions in each of the components of the SAGSHP greenhouse heating system were determined for the average measured parameters obtained from experimental results. The exergetic efficiencies of the system components were also calculated to
9

assess their individual performance. Exergy analysis is a tool used in the thermodynamic analysis of energy systems. In order to calculate exergy, the environment must be specified. Because of the lack of thermodynamic equilibrium in the surrounding nature, only its common components can be used for the above-mentioned purpose. With a 32 mm diameter vertical 50 m U-band GHX, a flat plate solar collector was directly connected (in series) to the ground-coupled loop. In the modeling, the exergy balance for every single component of the system was employed to determine the rate of exergy decrease as well as irreversibility and exergy deficiencies. In conclusion the exergetic efficiency values for both the GSHP unit and the whole system were shown to be 71.8% and 67.7%, respectively. The results show that a mono-source central heating operation (independent of any other system) cannot meet the overall heat loss of the greenhouse if the ambient temperature is very low. If peak load heating can be easily controlled, the bi-source operation (combined solar and geo-thermal system) is suggested as the best solution in Mediterranean region.

2.4 Viability of Hybrid Geothermal Heat Pump Systems with Solar Thermal Collectors In 2003, Chiasson and Yavuzturk [17] presented a study of a system simulation approach to assess the feasibility of hybrid GSHP systems with solar thermal collectors in heatingdominating building. An actual school building was modelled using typical meteorological year weather data for six United States (U.S) cities with varying climates and insulation: Buffalo, New York; Cheyenne, Wyoming; Chicago, Illinois; Denver, Colorado; Omaha, Nebraska; and Salt Lake City, Utah. The building loads were calculated using Building Loads Analysis and System Thermodynamics (BLAST 2000) [18], and the system was modelled as a primary/secondary loop system using the TRNSYS simulation software tool [19]. The primary circuit was the building loop plus a ground loop heat exchanger and the secondary circuit was the solar collector loop. The flow circuits were separated by a plate-and-frame heat exchanger (TRNSYS component Type 5), and modelled with a constant effectiveness. The fluid in the building loop was an aqueous solution of 20% propylene glycol, the fluid in the solar collector loop was modelled with an aqueous solution of 50% propylene glycol to avoid extreme freezing conditions during night time winter hours. The heat pump model was a simple water-to-air heat pump model developed for this and other GSHP system simulations. Inputs to the heat pump model included the building loads, entering fluid temperature, and fluid mass flow rate. The
10

model used quadratic curve-fit equations to manufacturer's catalogue data to compute the heat of rejection in cooling mode, heat of absorption in heating mode, and the heat pump energy consumption. The model's output included exiting fluid temperature, energy consumption and fluid mass flow rate. The ground loop heat exchanger component used a model described by Yavuzturk and Spitler in 1999 [7]. This was an extension of the long time step temperature response factor model of Eskilson in 1987 [20]. It was based on dimensionless and time-dependent temperature response factors known as g-functions, which were unique for various borehole field geometries. Eskilson's long time step g-functions are not applicable for modeling borehole temperature responses corresponding to typical short time step (hourly) load fluctuations of buildings. Yavuzturk and Spitler [7] used a two-dimensional finite volume approach to model the heat transfer around a single borehole and extend the g-functions down to time scales of less than one hour. These short time step g-functions used by Yavuzturk and Spitler [7] were used to develop a GHX component model for system simulation programs such as TRNSYS (SEL 2000). The model included a flexible load aggregation algorithm that significantly reduces computing time. Inputs include EFT and mass flow rate. Model parameters include number and depth of boreholes, borehole radius, borehole thermal resistance, ground thermal properties, and the file containing the g-function response factors. The main output from the model was the exiting fluid temperature from the ground. The solar collector model used a theoretical flat plate solar collector. The thermal performance of the collector was modelled using the Hottel-Whillier steady state model described by ASHRAE 1999 [21]. In this study energy simulations were run in three cases: 1) with only GSHP considered as base case; 2) with GSHP and fixed solar collectors; and 3) with GSHP and an azimuth-tracking solar collector. The results of this study showed that hybrid solar geothermal heat pump systems are viable choice for space conditioning of heating-dominated buildings. For the school building simulated, the seasonal thermal solar energy storage in the ground in the hybrid configuration was sufficient to offset a larger ground storage volume that would have been required for a conventional geothermal heat pump system.

11

Based on a 20-year life-cycle cost analysis of system performance, there appears to be only small economic benefit in using an azimuth-tracking solar collector array as opposed to a fixed solar collector array. This is because the savings in the initial cost of the azimuth-tracking collector over the fixed collector are negligible compared to the annual system operating costs. For the fixed solar collector cases, borehole length reductions per solar collector area ranged from 1.4 ft per ft2 (4.5m per m2) (Cheyenne, Wyoming) to 2.4 ft per ft2 (7.7m per m2) (Omaha, Nebraska). In all cases, hybrid GSHP systems with solar thermal collectors appeared to be economically viable as drilling costs exceeded a range of $6/ft ($19.68/m) (Cheyenne, Wyoming) to $10/ft ($32.8l/m) (Omaha, Nebraska). This range of breakeven points is due to varying building loads, insulation, and geographic location. A sensitivity analysis of the ground thermal conductivity for the fixed solar collector case in Cheyenne, Wyoming, showed that doubling the thermal conductivity results in a 16% decrease in the reduction of the ground loop length per unit collector area. Halving the thermal conductivity resulted in an increase in the reduction of 159% in the ground loop length per unit collector area. An exponential relationship was observed between the thermal conductivity of the ground and the reduction in borehole length per collector area. This study demonstrates the value in utilizing a system simulation approach to evaluating alternatives in complex systems. Specifically, the short time step simulation allows for the implementation of sophisticated control and operating strategies that enable the assessment of short-term transient system responses.

Some specific recommendations for further research arising from Chiasson's study [17] Implementation of an optimization routine into the system simulations to verify optimum values of desired parameters would be beneficial. In particular, it would be useful to find the optimum balance between the ground loop size and the solar collector size. The objective function would aim to minimize the overall system life-cycle cost by optimizing the size of the ground loop heat exchanger versus the size (area) of the solar thermal collector by considering constraints defined by system parameters and economics. Further research and development of low-cost solar thermal collectors, coupled with photovoltaic collectors, have the potential to make hybrid GHP systems highly attractive.

12

Field testing and verification of a hybrid GHP system with solar collectors is desirable to validate the conclusions of this study. Finally Chiasson's research did not address any Canadian cites with cold climates, such as Toronto, Ontario. However, analysis of the results for the simulated cities reveals that the benefits of solar hybrid systems appear to be a function of the ratio of annual heat extracted from the ground to the annual heat rejected in to the ground (ranging from 2 to 20 for the simulated cases). All the cities simulated in his study had a moderate cooling load, since some summer occupancy (10%) for the school was assumed. The results showed benefits for the case where the above-mentioned ratio was as low as two (Salt Lake City, Utah). It is reasonable to assume that most Canadian sites would have a ratio of annual heating to cooling greater than two, so there should be some benefits. However, analysis of Canadian cities is the subject of future work.

13

Chapter 3

House Load Simulation
3.1 House Model Description The house selected for the proposed study is located in the City of Milton, Ontario. The house was one of two energy efficient demonstration houses built by a local builder, Mattamy Homes [22] in 2005. Appendix A shows the house floor plans. It is a detached two storey building having 5,360 ft2 (498 m2) of heated area including the basement with the following characteristics: Construction: Light wood frame, 50 × 150 mm (2×6 in) exterior wall construction installed on 610mm (24 in) centers. Insulation: Spray foam insulation for walls with RSI 3.5 (R20), RSI 7 (R40) attic insulation. Windows: Low E/Argon filled with insulated spacers, Vinyl, RSI 0.35 (R2) Occupant: two adults and two children for 50% of time Basement Flooring: Concrete floor, hydronic slab under heating, RSI 2.11 (R12). Figure 3.1 shows the back of the house with solar thermal collectors on its roof.

Figure 3-1: A Mattamy house located in Milton, Ontario, with the back facing due south (photo By FMRAD 2007) As per builder specifications, the house temperature is set at 21°C and 24°C in the heating and cooling periods, respectively. Air leakage at 50 Pa. is 1.41ACH (518 l/s) with an equivalent
14

leakage area at 10 Pa. of 697 cm2. A continuous ventilation of 0.3ACH (110 l/s) through heat recovery ventilation system (HRV) is also considered. The sensible internal heat gain from occupants is set to be 2.4 kWh/day. The occupancy of the house is two adult and two children for 50% of the time with a hot water consumption of 225 litres/day. The base loads are considered to be 22 kWh/day, including lighting, appliances, exterior use and others. TRNBuild [23], a component of the TRNSYS simulation software was used to generate the house load profile. TRNBuild was developed as a part of TRNSYS for simulating multi-zone building. It works under Type 56 in the TRNSYS studio. This component models the thermal behaviour of a building divided into different thermal zones. In order to use it, a separate preprocessing program must be first executed. The TRNBuild program reads in and processes a file containing the building description, and then generates two files used by the TYPE 56 component during TRNSYS simulation. TRNBuild generates an information file describing the outputs and required inputs of TYPE 56. There are two ways to model the equipment for heating, cooling, humidification, and dehumidification. The two methods are similar to the "energy rate" and "temperature level" control modes available in the TYPE 12 and 19 load models. With the "energy rate" method, a simplified model of the air conditioning equipment is implemented within the TYPE 56 component. The user specifies the set temperatures for heating and cooling, set points for humidity control, and maximum cooling and heating rates. These specifications can be different for each zone of the building. If the user desires a more detailed model of the heating and cooling equipment, a "temperature level" approach is required. In this case, separate components are required to model the heating and/or cooling equipment. The outputs from the TYPE 56 zones can be used as inputs to the equipment models, which in turn produce heating and cooling inputs to the TYPE 56 zones. To get the idea of the total house load in this chapter, internal TRNBuild equipment component characteristic are used and later in this study separate equipment components are externally linked to the house. It uses a simulation time step that may not be equal to the time base on which the wall transfer function relationships are based. Finally, the optical and thermal window model, the way in which solar and internal radiation are distributed within each zone, the moisture balance calculations and the integrated model for thermo-active walls are considered. Thermo-active building elements (slabs or walls of a building) are used to condition buildings by integrating a fluid system into massive parts of the building itself. An example is
15

the radiant floor heating system used in the basement floor. The climate of Toronto, Ontario (which is about 60km east of Milton) was chosen for this study. For the purpose of comparison and validation the house was also modelled with HOT2000 ver10.12 software developed by Natural Resources Canada [24]. HOT2000 is a simplified residential heat loss/gain analysis program, widely used in North America by builders, engineers, architects, researchers, utilities and government agencies and by a number of users in Europe and Japan [24]. Utilizing current heat loss/gain and system performance models, the program aids in the simulation and design of buildings for thermal effectiveness, passive solar heating and the operation and performance of heating and cooling systems. HOT2000 uses a bin based method and long term monthly weather files to analyze the performance of the house. HOT2000 is a three-zone model (attic, main floors and basement), which considers utilized solar and internal gains and heat transfer between zones when calculating loads. It also accounts for on and off cycling and part load factors when determining the performance of the heating system.

3.2 House Load Profile The house load was calculated using both TRNBuild [23] and HOT2000 [24]. Figures 3-2, 33 and 3-4 show the results.

1st Floor 2nd Floor Basement

Figure 3-2: Hourly heating and cooling load for whole year simulation
16

In TRNbuild the house was separated in three zones: 1- Basement, 2- First floor 3- Second floor. The blue color shows the hourly load of the first floor and the pink color shows the second floor load. Maximum heating and cooling demand is 11.5 kW and 9.5 kW respectively. The annual space heating total load for the house was estimated to be 95 GJ, shown in Figure 3-3, with an annual space cooling load of 19 GJ, illustrated in Figure 3-4.

Basement 1st Floor 2nd Floor Total Heating Load

Figure 3-3: Accumulated space heating load. The heating season was set from 1st of October (6552 hr) to 30th of April (2880 hr), and the cooling season from 1st of May (2881 hr) to 31st of September (6553 hr). Table 3-1 shows the house load results from HOT2000. When comparing these with the TRNSYS results, it can be seen that there is good agreement between the two models. The differences between the two simulations are most likely attributed to the difference in analysis method between TRNSYS and HOT2000. As mentioned earlier TRNSYS is an hourly simulation program using the transfer function method, and HOT2000 uses the much simpler bin method which may be less accurate. Appendix B contains the detailed results of the HOT2000 simulation.

17

1st Floor 2nd Floor Total Heating Load

Figure 3-4: Accumulated space cooling load.

Table 3-1: House heating and cooling requirements ­ comparison of HOT2000 and TRNSYS TRNSYS
Zone 1

TRNSYS
Zone 2

TRNSYS
Zone 3

TRNSYS
Total

HOT2000 92 18.5 17.6 9.4

Total Heating Load (GJ) Total Cooling Load (GJ) Maximum Heating Demand (kW) Maximum Cooling Demand (kW)

25 0 1.9 0

33 12 4.8 5.9

37 7 4.8 3.6

95 19 11.5 9.5

18

Chapter 4

Hybrid Ground Source Heat Pump with Solar Thermal Collector Model
4.1 System Equipment Configuration Figure 4-1 shows a schematic of the solar assisted ground source heat pump (SAGSHP) system. The system is constructed from the following major components: 1- Atlas AT060 ground source heat pump (GSHP) with a desuperheater [25] 2- Enerworks solar thermal collector with three panels [26] 3- Rheem 620T hot water tank [27] 4- Power Pipe grey water heat recovery [28] 5- Venmar Vane 1.3HE Heat Recovery Ventilator (HRV) [29] The ground heat exchanger (GHX) system consists of four vertical closed loop circuits, joined in parallel. Each borehole has 0.25 m (10 in) diameter and 55 m (180 ft) length. They are located 3.6 m (12 ft) apart from each other in the backyard and merge at 1.8 m (6 ft) below grade. Figure 4-2 shows this arrangement. The GHX loop is connected in parallel to the solar thermal collectors. The solar collectors receive a percentage of the total flow from the ground loop exchanger. Two circulation pumps from part of the heat pump system, and they are located upstream and down-stream of the GHX flow. A solenoid valve and a control valve control the flow rate to the solar collectors. The heat pump is selected to suit the space heating requirements of the house for both radiant floor heating and forced air heating. The same heat pump provides cooling in the summer. The heat pump has a dedicated domestic hot water generation through the desuperheater with internally mounted pump. The hot water from the desuperheater loop flows into the water tank. Both the hot water tank and heat pump are equipped with auxiliary electric heaters. Domestic cold water is directed to the grey water heat recovery equipment and then sent to the hot water tank and/or desuperheater. Basement in-floor radiant heating is directly fed from the hot water tank, and its flow pressure is boosted by a dedicated pump included in the model.

19

Irrigation To DCW To GWHR

Sprinkler System

From GWHR FM City Water FM

FM Mixed Water Drain

Solar Panels
To Radiant Floor From Radiant Floor LEGENDS DCW DHW Domestic Cold Water Domestic Hot Water GWHR Gray Water Heat Recovery Solenoid Valve FM Flow Meter Pump Check Valve Drawn By: FMRAD Date: FEB 2008 FM Electric Heater FM

DHW

Ground Loop Exchanger

Figure 4-1: Schematic diagram of the SAGSHP system configuration

20
Hot Return Air cold Supply Air
Expansion Tank

Hot Water Tank
RHEEM 620T Desuperheter
Drain

Heat pump ATLAS AT060

Drain

Figure 4-2: Ground loop borehole layout

4.2 SAGSHP Component Model Description The TRNSYS modelling environment (studio) was used to construct the system using standard and non-standard component models. The component models and their functions are each described separately. 4.2.1 House Model As described in Chapter 3, the house was modelled in TRNBuild, a separate component of TRNSYS. Type 56 was used to link the files generated with TRNBuild. Several parameters were defined as input variables for the house and are shown in Table 4-1. The weather data reader and radiation processor, Type 109 is the main TRNSYS component that the house simulation relies on. This component serves the purpose of reading weather data from a data file at regular time intervals, and converting it to a desired system of units, and processing the solar radiation data to obtain the tilted surface radiation and angle of incidence for an arbitrary number of surfaces. Type 109 reads the file in a typical meteorological year (TMY2) format, which is same as used by the National Solar Radiation Data Base (USA) [30]. Two other TRNSYS components process the mentioned data to the house:

21

1- Type 69 calculates the effective sky temperature for long-wave radiation exchange. 2- Type 33 (Psychometrics) obtain the dry bulb temperature and relative humidity from weather data, and calculates the corresponding wet bulb temperature and percent relative humidity. Table 4-1: Input parameters to the house Input Parameters Ambient temperature Relative humidity Wind velocity Wind direction Atmospheric pressure Extraterrestrial radiation on horizontal Solar zenith angle Solar azimuth angle Total radiation on horizontal Beam radiation on horizontal Sky diffuse radiation on horizontal Ground reflected diffuse radiation on horizontal Angle of incidence on horizontal surface Slope of horizontal surface Total radiation on tilted surface Beam radiation on tilted surface Sky diffuse radiation on tilted surface Ground reflected diffuse radiation on tilted surface Angle of incidence for tilted surface Slope of tilted surface Slab Heat Forced air heating from heat pump Forced air cooling from heat pump Heat recovery ventilator (HRV) Data source Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data Weather data
Weather data Basement Slab Heat Pump Heat Pump HRV

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
20

21 22 23 24

The heat pump, through forced air system distribution and basement slab heating, provides heating or cooling to the house. Fresh outdoor air is supplied to the house through the heat recovery system (HRV), which exchanges heat with exhaust air from the house. Type 667b in TRNSYS models this component. In this module, the fresh air temperature and relative humidity is fed by the weather data component. Otherwise, the exhaust air would be from the return air of the house. The heat
22

recovery efficiency for selected equipment is dependent on the supply air temperature (fresh air) which in the worst case would read 69% [29]. The air change rate per hour for house ventilation is 0.3 and corresponds to 110 l/s. Table 4-2 shows the selected output data from the house. Total simulation time has been set to one year (8760 hours). The online graphical plotter graphs house temperatures from different zones (Basement, 1st Floor and 2nd Floor), with the output file as Type 65. The same component is also used to plot and file the zone energy demands through simulation period. For calculating the accumulated energy demand of different zones as well as the total accumulated energy demand of the house, Type 24, the Quantity Integrator has been utilized along with an equation component to obtain the desired report through a plot of the model. Table 4-2: Selected output parameters from the house
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Output Parameters Air Temperature of Zone 1 ( Basement) Air Temperature of Zone 2 ( 1st Floor)) Air Temperature of Zone 3 ( 2nd Floor) Sensible Energy demand of Zone 1 Sensible Energy demand of Zone 2 Sensible Energy demand of Zone 3 Relative humidity of Zone 1 Relative humidity of Zone 2 Relative humidity of Zone 3 Latent Energy demand of Zone 1 Latent Energy demand of Zone 2 Latent Energy demand of Zone 3 Data is sent to House_Temp Plotter House_Temp Plotter House_Temp Plotter Load Plotter Load Plotter Load Plotter Load Plotter Load Plotter Load Plotter Total Load Plotter Total Load Plotter Total Load Plotter

4.2.2 Heat Pump Model The water source heat pump is modelled as Type 505. This component models a single-stage liquid source heat pump with desuperheater for hot water heating. The heat pump conditions a moist air stream by rejecting energy to (cooling mode) or absorbing energy from (heating mode) a liquid stream. The desuperheater is attached to a secondary fluid stream. In cooling mode, the desuperheater relieves the liquid stream from some of the burden of rejecting energy. However, in heating mode, the desuperheater requires the liquid stream to absorb more energy than would be required for space heating only. This heat pump model is intended for residential GSHP application [31]. This model is based on user-supplied data files containing catalogue data for the
23

capacity (both total and sensible in cooling mode) and power, based on the water temperature entering the heat pump, the entering water flow rate and the air flow rate. The model is also equipped with two stage auxiliary heater. The Atlas AT060 GSHP with a desuperheater [25] is a good match with Type 505. Table 4-3 shows the parameters from the technical manual of the chosen heat pump needed for simulation. Table 4-3: Ground source heat pump parameters Density of liquid stream Specific heat of the liquid stream Specific heat of DHW fluid Blower Power Controller power Capacity of stage-1 auxiliary heater Capacity of stage-2 auxiliary heater Total air flow rate 1036 3.6 4.18 0.19 0.01 5 5 944 kg/m3 kJ/kgK kJ/kgK kW kW kW kW l/s

The fluid in the GSHP exchanger loop is modelled as an aqueous solution of 50% propylene glycol [32] to avoid extreme freezing condition during winter, especially for the part that passes through the solar collectors. Table 4-3 shows the physical properties of the liquid streams at 30°C. Table 4-4 tabulates the unit input parameters. The coupled GHX fluid flow rate is set as per equipment capacity and its temperature input comes from the GHX loop. Air pressure to the house is fixed. The second floor temperature dictates the return air temperature with a fixed relative humidity of 50%, so this return air is mixed with a specified amount of ventilation air from the HRV before entering the heat pump. Heat recovery output parameters feed the fresh air temperature and relative humidity. Domestic hot water (DHW) inlet flow rate is as per equipment capacity with fixed inlet temperature. The thermostat and seasonal schedule in model control the cooling, heating control signal (On/Off). Overall heat transfer coefficient (UA) between the heat pump and the desuperheater flow stream in heating and cooling mode are as per equipment specification. The temperature of the refrigerant in the desuperheater when the heat pump is operating in heating or cooling mode is also set as per equipment manual. This temperature is used to calculate the heat transfer to the domestic hot water flow stream. The

24

thermostat and seasonal schedule control the auxiliary heat signal for both cooling and heating, as well as heat pump fan operation. Table 4-4: Ground source heat pump input parameters Input parameter Data source Inlet liquid temperature from GHX Inlet liquid flow rate 1273 Return air temperature 2nd floor temp. Return air relative humidity 50% Return air pressure 1 Fresh air temperature from HRV Fresh air relative humidity from HRV Fresh air pressure 1 Inlet DHW temperature to heat pump From bottom of tank Inlet DHW flow rate (from tank to heat pump) 500 Cooling control signal 0 or 1 Heating control signal 0 or 1 Stage 1 auxiliary signal 0 or 1 Stage 2 auxiliary signal 0 or 1 Fan control signal 0 or 1 Cooling desuperheater temperature 60 Heating desuperheater temperature 55 Desuperheater UA-cooling 1500 Desuperheater UA-heating 1500

°C kg/hr

atm °C atm °C kg/hr

°C °C kJ/hrK kJ/hrK

The parameters tabulated in Table 4-5 are outputs from the GSHP selected to feed heating and cooling to the house, as well as heating to the hot water tank. Table 4-5: Ground source heat pump output parameters Output parameter Exiting fluid temperature Exiting fluid flow rate Outlet air temperature Exiting DHW temperature Exiting DHW flow rate Total heat transfer to air Data is sent to
to GHX to GHX to house to water heater to water heater to house

25

The outlet air temperature from the heat pump is directly connected to the house whereas the total heat transfer to the air is split into two zones through a TRNSYS equation component. Exiting DHW flow rate and temperature is directed to the hot water heater.

4.2.3 Ground Loop Heat Exchanger Model Type 557 models the vertical GHX that interacts thermally with the ground. GSHP applications commonly use this GHX model. This subroutine models identical vertical U-tube GHX or identical vertical tube-in-tube heat exchangers. A heat carrier fluid is circulated through the GHX and either rejects heat to or absorbs heat from the ground depending on the temperatures of the heat carrier fluid and the ground. In typical U-tube or tube-in-tube GHX applications, a vertical borehole is drilled into the ground. A U-tube or tube-in-tube heat exchanger is then pushed into the borehole. The top of the GHX is typically several feet below the surface. Finally, the borehole is filled with a fill material; either virgin soil or a grout of some type. The model assumes that the boreholes are placed uniformly within a cylindrical storage volume of ground. There is convective heat transfer within the pipes and conductive heat transfer to the storage volume. The temperature of the surrounding ground is calculated from three parts: a global temperature, a local solution, and a steady-flux solution. The global and local problems are solved with the use of an explicit finite-difference method. The steady-flux solution is obtained analytically. The resulting temperature is then calculated using superposition methods. This subroutine was written by the Department of Mathematical Physics at the University of Lund, Sweden, and is considered to be the state-of-the-art in dynamic simulation of ground heat exchangers [31, 33]. Table 4-6 tabulates the parameters and values used for the Type 557 GHX. These values are partly delivered by the house builder and some are estimated to the nearest suited value for the place. The volume of the cylindrical shaped storage region which contains the boreholes is set to 2,470 m3, with the boreholes placed uniformly within the storage volume. The properties of the ground within the storage volume are considered uniform while the properties of the ground outside the storage volume may be described for several vertical layers. In this study only one layer is considered because of insufficient ground soil information at site. By considering the

26

spacing between the boreholes to be 3.6 m, the storage volume is calculated from the relationship suggested in TRNSYS manual [19] and shown in Eq. (4-1). Storage Volume =  × Number of Boreholes × Borehole Depth × (0.525 × Borehole Spacing) 2 Storage Volume =  × 4× 55 × (0.525×3.6)2 = 2,470 m3 (4-1) The depth of one borehole (from the surface) is 55 m, which is also considered the height of the storage volume for determining the cross-sectional storage area. This value is also the length of one of the U-tube heat exchangers from the ground surface to the bottom of the U-tube bend. Header depth is the depth below the surface of the top of the U-tube GHXs. This value is also typically the depth below the surface of the horizontal header pipe which feeds the GHXs. The total number of boreholes within the storage volume is four. If each borehole contains one U-tube GHX then this value is also the number of U-tube GHXs. The radius of one of the identical boreholes (the holes drilled for the heat exchangers) is 100 mm. The boreholes are connected in parallel. The flow rate per heat exchanger is then the total flow rate divided by the total number of boreholes. The thermal conductivity of the ground comprising the storage volume is considered 2 W/mK [34, 35]. This is estimated for the regional soil properties. The properties of the ground are assumed uniform within the storage volume but can be specified for different ground layers beyond the storage volume boundary. The heat capacity (density × specific heat) of the ground comprising the storage volume is 1820 kJ/m3K. The properties of the soil within the storage volume are considered uniform. Fill thermal conductivity is the material used to fill the borehole after the U-tube GHX has been installed. The thickness of the gap between the U-tube pipes and the fill material is set to zero. The reference fluid flow rate per borehole for the calculation of the fluid to ground thermal resistance (borehole thermal resistance) is 350 kg/hr. This parameter is very important and corresponds to the expected borehole flow rate during operation. The general GHX model includes the heat transfer between the upward and downward flowing fluid in the U-tube GHX. The maximum temperature of the fluid entering the GHXs exchangers is 100 °C and as indicated in Section 4.2.2, heat exchanger fluid is modelled as an aqueous solution of 50% propylene glycol with a specific heat of 3.6 kJ/kgK and density of 1036 kg/m3. The number of unique vertical soil layers comprising the ground outside the boundary of the storage volume (assuming uniform soil storage volume) is one. The thermal conductivity of the
27

specified vertical layer at the outside boundary of the storage volume is set as the storage volume thermal conductivity. The volumetric heat capacitance of the specified vertical soil layer at the outside boundary of the storage volume is 2016 kJ/m3K and the thickness of the specified vertical soil layer at the outside boundary of the storage volume is 1000 m. Table 4-6 shows the ground loop exchanger parameters. Table 4-6: Ground loop heat exchanger parameters Storage volume Borehole depth Header depth Number of boreholes Borehole radius No. of borehole in series Storage thermal conductivity Storage heat capacity Inner radius of U-tube Outer radius of U-tube Center to center half distance Fill thermal conductivity Pipe thermal conductivity Gap thermal conductivity Gap thickness Reference borehole flow rate Reference temperature Pipe to pipe heat transfer Fluid specific heat Fluid density Number of simulation years Maximum storage temperature Number of preheating years Number of ground layers Thermal conductivity of layer Heat capacity of layer Thickness of layer 2470 55 1.8 4 100 1 2 1820 13.72 16.64 25.4 1 0.42 1.4 0 350 10 Considered 3.6 1036 1 100 0 1 2 2016 1000 m3 m m mm W/mK kJ/m3K mm mm mm W/mK W/mK W/mK kg/hr °C kJ/kgK kg/m3 °C

W/mK kJ/m3/K m

Table 4-7 shows the input parameters to the GHX. The inlet fluid temperature is dictated by the heat pump module and solar panel return that are mixed and fed to the ground loop.

28

Temperature on top of the soil is considered as the ambient temperature as the boreholes are exposed to ambient air. Table 4-8 shows the output parameters from the GHX loop. After pumping, flow from the ground loop is diverted to the solar panel and heat pump with adjustable ratio by a diverter valve. Table 4-7: GHX loop input parameters Input parameter Data source Inlet fluid temperature Mixer/Pump Inlet flow rate 1393 kg/hr Air temperature Ambient Temperature on top of soil Ambient Table4-8: GHX loop output parameters Output parameter Outlet temperature Outlet flow rate Average storage temperature Average heat transfer rate Data is sent to
Diverter/Pump Diverter Plotter Plotter

4.2.4 Solar Collector Model The TRNSYS solar collector used for this study is Type 1. This component models the thermal performance of a flat-plate solar collector. The solar collector array consists of three collectors connected in series. The number of modules in series and the characteristics of each module determine the thermal performance of the collector array. In this instance of Type1, a second order quadratic function is used to compute the incidence angle modifier. The coefficients of the function are supplied by an ASHRAE or an equivalent test [19]. The manufacturer (Enerworks) provided the results from standard tests of collector efficiency versus a ratio of fluid temperature minus the ambient temperature to solar radiation. The fluid temperature is the average temperature of the inlet and outlet temperatures. In Type 1, there are five possibilities for considering the effects of off-normal solar incidence. In this instance, a second order quadratic function is used to compute the incidence angle modifier. The coefficients of the function are supplied by ASHRAE [37].

29

A general equation for solar thermal collector efficiency is obtained from the Hottel-Whillier Equation [36] as: Modi ier  a
  T
T

a

 

a

 

T
T

(4 ­ 2)

where lT [kJ/h-m²] is the global radiation incident on the solar collector (tilted surface) and T is the difference between the inlet and ambient temperature. The thermal efficiency is defined by three parameters: a0, a1 and a2. These parameters are available for collectors tested according to ASHRAE 2003 [37]. Table 4-9 shows the parameters considered for the Type 1 module. Table 4-9: Solar collector parameters Number in series Collector area Fluid specific heat Efficiency mode Tested flow rate Intercept efficiency Efficiency slope Efficiency curvature Optical mode 2 1st-order IAM* 2nd-order IAM* * Incident angle modifier 3 8.7 3.6 1 40 0.8 13 0.05 2 0.2 0 m2 kJ/kgK Eff.=f(Tinlet) kJ/hr.m2 kJ/hr.m2K kJ/hr.m2K2

The efficiency parameters provided by the manufacturer are a function of the inlet temperature and therefore the efficiency mode is set to one. The total area of the solar collector array is taken from the supplied efficiency parameters (typically gross area and not net area) and the flow rate is per unit area at which the collector was tested in order to determine the collector efficiency parameters. Intercept efficiency, efficiency slope and efficiency curvature are a0, a1 and a2 in efficiency equation (4 ­ 2), and are obtained from ASHRAE collector test. Optical mode 2 is a parameter that specifies the second-order ASHRAE incidence angle modifiers should be used. Collector tests are performed on clear days at normal incidence so that the transmittance-absorbance product is nearly the normal incidence value for the beam radiation.

30

The intercept efficiency is corrected for non-normal solar incidence using of a modifying factor of the form: Modifier = 1 ­ b0 × S ­ b1 × S2 where S 
 
 

(4 ­ 3)

1 , "1st-order IAM" parameter is b0 and "2nd-order IAM" is b1

in the above equation for incident angle modifier (IAM). Table 4-10 shows the input parameters to the solar collector. The diverter module from the GHX loop feeds the temperature and flow rate to the collector, and the other parameters come from the weather data module. Table 4-10: Solar collector input parameters Input parameter Inlet temperature Inlet flow rate Ambient temperature Incident radiation Total horizontal radiation Horizontal diffuse radiation Ground reflectance Incident angle Collector slope Data source Diverter Diverter Weather component Weather component Weather component Weather component Weather component Weather component Weather component

Table 4-11 shows the output parameters from the solar collector. The outlet temperature and flow rate are fed to the mixer and then to the ground loop exchanger after mixing with fluid from the heat pump. Table 4-11: Solar collector output parameters Output parameter Outlet temperature Outlet flow rate Useful energy gain 4.2.5 Water Tank Model A Type 4, Stratified Storage Tank with variable inlets and uniform losses was selected for this model. The thermal performance of a fluid-filled sensible energy storage tank is subject to a thermal stratification that can be modelled by considering that the tank consists of N (N = 6)
31

Data is sent to Mixer Mixer Plotter

fully-mixed equal volume segments, as per manufacturer information data. The value of N determines the degree of stratification. If N is equal to one, the storage tank is modelled as a fully-mixed tank and no stratification effects are possible. In this instance, Type 4 models a stratified tank having variable inlet positions such that the entering fluid may be added to the tank at a temperature as near to its own temperature as possible. Here the node sizes are equal (but they do not need to be). Temperature dead band on heater thermostats are available. This further assumes that the heat losses from each tank node are equal and does not compute losses through electric auxiliary heater. The storage tank may operate in one of three modes in determining the inlet positions of the flow streams. Mode 2 is selected and it indicates that the heat source flow and the cold-side flow enter the tank in the nodes closest in temperature to the temperature of the respective flows. With a sufficient number of nodes, this permits a maximum degree of stratification. Table 4-12 shows the parameters and values selected for hot water storage tank. Table 4-12: Hot water tank parameters Tank volume Fluid specific heat Fluid density Tank loss coefficient Number of temperature level (nodes) Height of nodes (equal) Number of heating element in tank 0.22 m3 4.19 kJ/kgK 1000 kg/m3 3 kJ/hrm2K 6 0.3 m 2, on top of the tank

Tank volume has been selected as 0.22 m3 (60 gallons) with water density and specific heat. The specifications in Table 4-12 correspond to the equipment manufacturer, Rheem PRO620T. The heat source for the tank is a water loop from the heat pump desuperheater. The inlet location for this hot-side fluid is the node closest in temperature to that of the hot-side flow. Replacement fluid flowing into the storage tank is from the mixer that gets the return flow from the slab heating loop and the main cold water from the city that passes through the grey water heat recovery unit. The flow will enter the tank at the node which is closest in temperature to the cold-side flow at the bottom of tank. Table 4-13 shows the input parameters to the tank. The basement temperature would be the tank environment temperature and the controls of the
32

electric auxiliary heater are set to the "On" position to supplement the heat needed for the set tank temperature of 60°C. Table 4-13: Hot water tank input parameters Input parameter Data source Hot side temperature Heat pump desuperheater Hot side flow rate Heat pump desuperheater Cols side temperature Mixer Cold side flow rate Mixer Environment temperature (basement) 19 °C Control signal for element-1 On Control signal for element-2 On Table 4-14 shows the output from the hot water tank. The temperature and flow of the fluid flowing from the bottom of the storage tank are returned to the heat source (the bottom node temperature) or heat pump desuperheater. Flow from top of the tank is directed to a diverter for sending to the basement floor heating slab, as well as for domestic hot water use. Other out-put data is sent to the plotter and a file for further analysis. Table 4-14: Hot water tank output parameters Output parameter Temperature to heat source Flow rate to heat source Temperature to load Flow rate to load Thermal losses Energy rate to load Internal energy change Auxiliary heating rate Element 1 power Element 2 power Energy rate from heat source Average tank temperature Data is sent to Heat pump desuperheater Heat pump desuperheater Diverter Diverter Plotter Plotter Plotter Plotter Plotter Plotter Plotter Plotter

4.2.6 In-Floor Radiant Heating Model Type 653, Simple Floor Heating System/Radiant Floor is selected for the basement radiant slab heating. This component models a simple radiant slab system that operates under the assumption that the slab can be treated as a single lump of isothermal mass and that the fluid to slab energy transfer can be modelled using a heat exchanger effectiveness approach.
33

Table 4-15 shows the parameters selected for basement slab heating. Fluid running through the slab is the hot water from the hot water tank. Figure 4-3 shows the plan of the basement area covered by slab heating pipes. Table 4-15: Radiant floor heating parameters Capacitance of slab Specific heat of fluid Initial slab temperature 15000 kJ/K 4.19 kJ/kgK 35 °C

The capacitance of the massive slab for the floor heating system is a parameter for this module. The capacitance is calculated as follows: The thermal properties of concrete slab: 780 
.

,

1860 

Considering 100 mm thickness of slab then, Volume = 10.2 m3 and thermal capacity would be about 15000 kJ/K.

Figure 4-3: Basement floor slab coverage plan Table 4-16 shows the input parameters and values to the radiant slab heating. The inlet flow and temperature come from the mixer, which is controlled from the return flow from the slab and hot water tank is set to 35°C. The basement air temperature has been set to 19°C, while the environmental loss, which in this study is heat loss to the soil, is set to zero with an assumption of insulated bottom. The heat transferred to the ambient through natural convection and radiation is negligible. For the zone floor surface, the heat transfer coefficient is calculated as follows [38]:
34

Surface heat transfer by free convection from surface of slab, 29 °  ,   
 

19°   

 

19 2
/      

29

24°   

  297 °

The air properties are obtained from [38] as follows: 15.67 0.00336  10   ,
/

  ,

22.3 

10  
 

,

0.0263  / .K , 2.04 (refer to Figure 4-3)

0.706 ,

The Rayleigh number is calculated as   9.8 0.00336 10 2.04 15.67 10 22.3 10 8.0  10

Using a correlation from [38], the Nusselt number can be calculated as 0.15 . 300

Finally, the free convective heat transfer coefficient is obtained as follows: 3.87   . 102 = 395 W/K

Therefore heat transfer coefficient with area of 102 m2 would be 3.87 coefficient. It was examined with similar results.

There is also Type 80a, a component module for calculating convective heat transfer Table 4-16 shows the parameter input for the radiant floor heating module. Table 4-16: Radiant floor heating input parameters Input parameter Fluid inlet temperature Fluid flow rate Zone air temperature Environmental temperature Slab to ambient loss coefficient Slab to zone heat transfer coefficient Heat exchanger effectiveness Data source Mixer Mixer 19 °C 10 °C 0 395 W/K 0.6

Table 4-17 shows the output parameters from the radiant floor slab. The return flow of the heating liquid passes through the slab pump and then splits to two streams by diverter; one goes to the mixer for mixing with inlet flow from tank to a set temperature, and the other is directed

35

back to the water heater tank. The basement heat transfer is directed to an equation module and from there combined with the other zone heat simulation result before sending to the house. Table 4-17: Radiant floor heating output parameters Output parameter Outlet fluid temperature Outlet flow rate Zone heat transfer 4.2.7 Grey Water Heat Recovery Model The grey water heat recovery system works on the principal of a gravity film exchanger. This takes advantage of the ultra-high rates and thermal conductive properties of water film and copper. This system has been installed to conduct the transfer of heat from the drainage water to the incoming cold city water. The model considers scheduled hot water draw. The preheated water is then supplied to the hot water tank for further heating. Incoming cold water can get as much as 85% of the waste water (grey water) heat energy [39]. Type 91, a Heat Exchanger with constant effectiveness is a simple choice from the TRNSYS modules to simulate grey water heat recovery component. In this module a zero capacitance sensible heat exchanger is modelled as a constant effectiveness device which is independent of the system configuration. For the constant effectiveness mode, the maximum possible heat transfer is calculated based on the minimum capacity rate fluid and the cold side and hot side fluid inlet temperatures. In this mode the effectiveness is input as a parameter and the concept of an overall heat transfer coefficient for the heat exchanger is not used. Table 4-18 shows the parameters considered for this module. The effectiveness of the heat exchanger is considered as 0.85, as per "Power pipe" equipment manufacturer [39]. The effectiveness is a ratio of the actual heat exchanger heat transfer to the maximum possible heat transfer which could occur in the heat exchanger (Effectiveness = Q/Qmax). The specific heat of the fluid flowing through the hot-side and cold-side of the heat exchanger is set as water specific heat. Table 4-18: Grey water heat recovery (heat exchanger) parameters Heat exchanger effectiveness Specific heat of hot side fluid Specific heat of cold side fluid 0.85 4.19 kJ/kgK 4.19 kJ/kgK Data is sent to Pump/diverter Pump/diverter Equation module/house

36

Table 4-19 shows the input parameters to the heat recovery unit. The cold-side temperature is from the city water temperature profile (temperature forcing function module) and the flow rate is from the daily load equation module and diverter module. The hot-side temperature is estimated to be 37°C which represents the waste water temperature. Table 4-19: Grey heat water heat recovery input parameters Input parameter Hot side inlet temperature Hot side flow rate Cold side inlet temperature Cold side flow rate Data source Equation hot water waste module Equation hot water waste module City cold water diverter City cold water diverter

The hot-side flow rate is calculated by an equation module as follow:   where
 

4.19

(4 ­ 4) is hot

is the heat delivered by the system to heat the domestic hot water,
 

water temperature to the house, rate which is calculated as follows:   where
_

is the city water temperature from the water temperature

module and flow rate is the hot water flow rate. The hot water flow rate is the waste water flow

  

.

_

_

   
_

(4 ­ 5) cannot be less than city water

is estimated to be 37°C. As

temperature (Figure 4-6), it is assumed to be 12°C, considering the equipment effectiveness from the

manufacturer and the monthly water temperature profile. Table 4-20 shows the outputs from the grey water recovery heat exchanger that feed the temperature and flow rate to the hot water tank through the mixer. Table 4-20: Grey water heat recovery output parameters Output parameter
Hot side outlet temperature Hot side flow rate

Data is sent to
Mixer/ hot water tank Mixer/ hot water tank

4.2.8 Ventilation Model Type 667b, Air-to-Air Heat Recovery is used for modelling ventilation to the house. In this model, the inputs are ambient temperature and relative humidity from the weather module, and
37

the second floor temperature and flow rate are considered as return air characteristics. The outputs of the module are temperature (T_HRV) and relative humidity of the HRV. Section 4.2.1 presents information for this module and equipment.

4.2.9 Flow Control and Pump Component Model Mixers, diverters and pumps are modelled using TRNSYS standard library component models and are explained in the following sections. 4.2.9.1 Control Flow Mixer Type 11d, Controlled Flow Mixer is used in two places in the model: 1- for mixing return flows from the heat pump and solar panels, and 2- for mixing grey water exchanger cold-side output flow with part of the return flow from the radiant slab. The control flow mixer is used for mixing two stream flows with different percentage of flow in each stream. The flow rate and temperature of the two steams as well as the control signal are inputs to the module. The output would be the flow rate and temperature of mixture. Equation 4 ­ 6 shows the mathematical relation of the two flows:   1  1   2  (4 ­ 6) where " " represent the flow rates and "y" is the fraction of flow 0 < y <1. "y" is an important fraction for this study specially in solar collector-heat pump flow fractions. The default for this number is 0.1. This means that 10% of the fluid in GHX is from the solar panel and 90% is from the heat pump. 4.2.9.2 Control Flow Diverter Type 11f functions as the control flow mixer but in the opposite direction. The control signal sets the position of a damper controlling the proportion of fluid to each exit. =     = × (1-y) ×y (4 ­7) (4 ­8)

This module has been used in two places: 1- splitting the flow between the solar panels and the heat pump, and 2- diverting the hot water tank flow to the floor slab and house. 4.2.9.3 Tee Piece Tee piece is acting as a flow mixer without control. Module Type 11h is used in two locations in the model: 1- in the return slab flow and the hot water tank flow to slab, and 2mixing the domestic cold water with the hot water from hot water tank.
38

4.2.9.4 Tempering Valve Type 11b is an instance of the Type11 model that uses mode 4 or mode 5 to model a temperature controlled liquid flow diverter. In mode 4 the entire flow stream is sent through outlet 1 when Th (heat source fluid temperature) is less than Ti (temperature of inlet fluid). In mode 5, the entire flow stream is sent through outlet 2 under these circumstances. This module is used in two places in mode 4: 1- to control the temperature of hot water sent to the house, and 2to control the temperature of the hot water sent to the radiant floor slab. 4.2.9.5 Single Speed Pump Type 114, a single (constant) speed pump is selected for this model. It works as integral part of the heat pump for sending and receiving exchanger loop liquid to/from the ground. It is able to maintain a constant fluid outlet mass flow rate. Pump starting and stopping characteristics are not modelled, nor are pressure drop effects. As with most pumps in TRNSYS, Type 114 takes mass flow rate as an input but ignores the value except to perform mass balance checks. Type 114 sets the downstream flow rate based on its rated flow rate parameter and the current value of its control signal input. In this study, the parameters of pump are set per manufacturer specifications for a rated flow rate of 1600 kg/hr and a power of 750 W capacity. Fluid properties would be the same as the ground loop fluid, an aqueous solution of 50% propylene glycol. The overall pump efficiency is 0.6, and that includes the inefficiencies due to the motor and shaft friction. Considering the pump and its motor efficiencies to be 0.85 and 0.70, respectively, the overall pump efficiency would be 0.6 (0.85× 0.70 = 0.6). 4.2.10 Heat Pump Equipment Control and Scheduling To control the heat pump ON/OFF position, a thermostat has been defined for commanding the heat pump to start or shut off when heating or cooling is demanded. By utilizing the cooling and heating season controls, plus forcing functions for heating set back, heat pump is switched from heating mode to cooling mode, and vice versa when necessary.

4.2.10.1 Thermostat Type 698 is a five-stage multi zone room thermostat version. This ON/OFF differential device models a five stage room thermostat, which outputs five control signals that can be used to control an HVAC system having a three stage heating source and a two stage cooling source. This version of the model is designed to allow specifying multiple temperatures to be controlled
39

by specific set points. For this module, three zones were defined with a temperature dead band of 2°C. This means thermostat is having hysteresis effects of 2°C, that above and below set points, the thermostat activates. The basement zone temperature is set to 19°C, where as the first and second floor temperature set points are 24°C and 21°C in cooling and heating modes, respectively. The overall condition signal from the output parameters of the thermostat is sent to the heat pump to activate. This signal is ON when a zone commands for heating or cooling. 4.2.10.2 Heating Setback Forcing Function To complement the function of the thermostat, there is a heating setback forcing function through the Type 14e module. Figure 4-4 shows the setback schedule. The heating set point with this forcing function falls from 21°C to 19°C at night time, defined as between 22:00 to 08:00 hr.

Figure 4-4: Heating set back temperature control in 24 hours

4.2.10.3 Season Heating and Cooling Forcing Function The Type 14k module is selected for the heating forcing function and 14l selected for the cooling season cooling forcing function. Table 4-21 shows the values defined for these forcing functions. The output value, which is either 0 or 1, will be multiplied by the output value control of the thermostat through the equation module for final control to the heat pump.

40

Table 4-21: Cooling and heating season timing Time (hr) Cooling Season Heating Season 2881 to 6552 6552 to 2880
st

Time (Month) 1 May to 31st September 1st October to 30th April

4.2.11 Solar Thermal Equipment Controls and Scheduling An equation module controls the solar collector's circulating flow loop, which gives the output of multiplying the control value of the heating season and forcing functions that become "on" when the temperature of the solar collector is greater than the output temperature. This means that the flow control diverter closes the flow to the solar panels in the cooling season at nights and on cloudy days when there is no solar radiation.

4.2.12 Domestic Cold and Hot Water Draw Model Type 14b is used as a forcing function for cold water draw. Figure 4-5 shows typical water draw selected [40] for a typical house in Toronto. By considering 225 litres/day of hot water consumption for a typical house with occupancy of two adults and two children 50% of time, the cold water draw profiles are multiplied by 225/100 as a percentage factor and simulate the timely need of hot water for the house. The cold water temperature during a 24 hours period is also defined for Toronto [40] in a temperature forcing function as shown in Figure 4-6. The above temperatures, along with hot water demand are sent to a temperature control valve to control the hot water temperature to the house.

41

Figure 4-5: Hot water consumption in 24 hours vs. flow rate (kg/hr) [40]

Figure 4-6: Cold water temperature (°C) during a year (monthly) [40]
42

4.3 System Layout in TRNSYS studio Figure 4-7 shows the detail system layout as it looks in TRNSYS Studio. TRNSYS Studio is the main visual interface from which the project is being created. Appendix C shows generated input file through simulation studio.

Figure 4-7: TRNSYS Model Schematic

43

Chapter 5

Ground Loop and Solar Thermal Collector Sizing
5.1 Unknowns of the As-Built House In the as-built system model described in chapter four, there are two major unknown parameters: 1- Ground soil characteristic and thermal properties. 2- The solar collector fluid flow rate diverted from the ground loop. The system is modelled and simulated with different soil conductivities first to examine the effect of this parameter. Then the model is tested with different solar collector flow rates with an estimated soil thermal conductivity to obtain the optimum solar collector flow rate.

5.1.1 Ground Soil Characteristic and Thermal Properties According to Tarnawski and Leong [41], soils can be divided into three textural groups: · · · sandy: sands loamy: loamy sands, sandy loams, loams Clayey: clay loams, silty clay loams, clays.

Natural soils are a mixture of sand, silt, and clay, and therefore, have intermediate structure and properties. Soil heat capacity (specific heat) and thermal conductivity are two thermal properties needed for sizing the ground source heat pump (GSHP). Heat capacity indicates the ability of a substance to store thermal energy; the greater its heat capacity, the more heat it can gain (or lose) per unit rise (or fall) in temperature. The heat capacity of dry soil is about 0.836 kJ/kgK, which is only one-fifth of the heat capacity of water. Therefore, moist or saturated soils have greater heat capacity, typically in the range of 0.96 to 1.05 kJ/kgK [42]. For moderate soil moisture (30% mass) and a typical soil density of 1760 kg/m3 in Toronto [41, 42], input for the TRNSYS ground heat storage capacity is estimated to be 1820 kJ/m3K. Light, dry soils experience greater seasonal temperature swings at a given depth than wet soils. This is because their lower heat capacity causes their temperatures to rise or fall more than wet soils for a given amount of heat energy gained in the spring or lost in the fall. Thermal conductivity indicates the rate at which
44

heat can be transferred between the ground loop and the surrounding soil for a given temperature gradient. The thermal conductivity of soil and rock is a critical value that determines the length of pipe required. This, in turn, affects the installation costs as well as the energy requirements for pumping working fluid through the ground loop. Table 5-1 indicates the thermal conductivity of different soil types. The heat transfer capability tends to increase as soil textures become increasingly fine, with loam mixtures having an intermediate value between sand and clay. Also shown in Table 5-1, the thermal conductivity of any soil greatly improves if the soil is saturated with water. This effect is much greater for sandy soils than for clay or silt, since coarse soils are more porous and therefore hold more water. Therefore, groundwater level is another important site factor in evaluating a potential GSHP project and optimizing the depth at which loops should be installed. Table 5-1: Thermal conductivity of different soil types [42].
Soil Texture Class Sand Clay Loam Saturated sand Saturated silt or clay Thermal Conductivity (W/mK) 0.76 1.11 0.90 2.49 1.66

For the as-built condition of the system, the borehole length is 55 m. Examining the model with different soil thermal conductivities and a fixed entering fluid flow rate to the heat pump of 1273 kg/hr (5.8 USGPM), results in different heat pump (HP) entering fluid temperatures (EFT). Figures 5-1(a) to 5-1(d) show the entering fluid temperatures to the heat pump for four different selected soil thermal conductivities. For soil thermal conductivities less than 0.85 W/mK the peak EFT to the heat pump falls way below 0°C in heating mode and simulation stops (the EFT to the heat pump is the same as the exiting fluid temperature from the ground loop). The peak EFT to the heat pump is one of the most important and critical parameters in sizing a GSHP system [43].

45

Figure 5-1 (a): EFTs to HP for a soil thermal conductivity of 0.85 W/mK

Figure 5-1 (b): EFTs to HP for a soil thermal conductivity of 1 W/mK

46

Figure 5-1 (c) EFTs to HP for a soil thermal conductivity of 1.5 W/mK

Figure 5-1 (d): EFTs to HP for a soil thermal conductivity of 2 W/mK

47

As per ASHRAE E recommen ndation[21], selecting peak p EFT to o be 11 to 17 1 °C higher than ure of undi isturbed soi il in cooling g, and 6 to o 11°C low wer than the e temperatur re of temperatu undisturb bed soil in heating is s a good compromise c e between initial cost and efficiency. Consider ring the soil temperature e in the Toro onto region [44] to be an n average of 10°C (283 K), K as shown in n Figure 5-2, the minimu um and max ximum (peak k) design en ntering fluid temperature es are estimated d to be: E min= Tgrou EFT und ­ 11°C  EFTmin 0°C E max= Tgrou EFT und + 17°C  EFTmin  27°C (5-1) (5-2)

ure 5-2: Annu ual variation n of soil temp peratures at three differe ent depths ­ Toronto [44 4] Figu Acco ording to th he Internatio onal Ground d Source Heat H Pump Association A (IGSHPA) who establishes the desig gn and instal llation stand dard for geo othermal hea at pump syst tems, for clo osedloop syst tems the EFT Ts to the hea at pump are rated at 0°C for heating and 25°C fo or cooling. These T are a goo od match wit th the estima ated values [45]. Accord dingly, select ting soil ther rmal conductivity is restrict ted to be gre eater than 2 W/mK W with defined clos sed loop leng gths and cha aracteristics.

48

5.1.2 Solar Collector Fluid Flow Rate The percentage of the ground loop flow rate to solar collectors is controlled by the Diverter and Mixer control signal through separate control equations in the model. By setting the control signal from 0.1 to 0.9, there would be 10 to 90% of ground loop flow rate directed to the solar collectors, with the rest to the heat pump. In this study, five different controls are examined, and the results compared to the base case. 5.1.2.1 Base Case For this case, the ground loop heat exchanger is used without solar thermal collectors; the Diverter and Mixer control signal is set to "0". The simulation is run for one year and the results for ground loop fluid temperatures and heat pump energy consumptions are shown in Table 5-2. For comparison, the heating and cooling demand of the house was estimated to be 95 GJ and 19 GJ, respectively (Chapter 3). Table 5-2: HP annual energy consumption and peak ground loop temperatures for base case HEAT PUMP Heating Mode Cooling Mode Min. Fluid Max. Fluid Total Energy Total Energy Temperature (°C) Temperature (°C) Consumption Consumption (MJ) (MJ) IN OUT IN OUT 0 -7 44,793 32 40 6,434 5.1.2.2 As-Built Solar Collector Case As mentioned in Section 4.2.4 of Chapter 4, the as-built solar collectors are manufactured by Enerworks [26]. According to equipment data the maximum fluid flow rate that could be run through the three panels of the solar collector is 0.54 USGPM (120 kg/hr), considering the total flow rate through the ground loop to be 5.8 USGPM (1293 kg/hr). The maximum flow through the solar collectors would be less than 10% of the total ground loop flow rate. The model is examined with two different solar collector flow rates along with the base case, and their results are shown in Table 5-3. The results from Table 5-3 show that in heating mode, increasing the fluid flow to the solar collector favours system performance and reduces the total energy consumption of the heat pump. However, in cooling mode, this goes against system performance, and would increase the energy consumption of the heat pump. Also shown in heating mode, the minimum fluid temperature to the heat pump is in the range of the designed temperature, whereas in cooling
49

mode, the maximum temperature exceeds the suggested design temperature. This results in a lower heat pump performance in cooling season. In conclusion, in the as-built case, a thermal conductivity of soil of 2 W/mK and 10% fluid rate to the solar collectors would be the optimum and feasible. Table 5-3: Heat pump annual energy consumption with different solar collector flow rate HEAT PUMP Heating Mode % of Flow to Solar Collector 0% 5% 10% Min. Fluid Temp. IN (°C) 0 1 2 Total Annual Energy (MJ) 44,793 44,581 44,274 Cooling Mode Max. Fluid Temp. IN (°C) 32 33 35 Total Annual Energy (MJ) 6,434 6,945 6,950

Figure 5-3 shows the simulation result of the heat pump fluid entering temperature and accumulative energy consumption of the heat pump for the optimum case.

5.2 Controls on Fluid Flow to the Solar Collectors In order to stop circulating fluid flow through solar collectors at nights or on cloudy days when there is not solar energy available, the model uses a control to check the solar collector inlet and outlet fluid temperature. There would be no solar energy if the outlet temperature of the solar collectors is detected as being lower or equal to the inlet temperature. In this instance, the flow diverter control signal changes to zero to stop flow circulating to the solar collectors. In the cooling season, by stopping the circulating fluid flow to the solar collectors at nights, the sky cooling effect would be ignored. Figure 5-4 shows that when there is a continuous fluid flow through solar collectors during the nights, the EFT to the heat pump can be reduced by 1°C to 1.5°C. Therefore, having continuous fluid circulation to the solar collectors favours the system performance. Although it is interesting to know that night-time cooling at the solar collectors can improve ground source heat pump performance in the cooling season, it will not be further investigated, because it is not a focus in the thesis.

50

Figure 5-3: As-built heat pump energy consumption and entering fluid temperature (one year) .
51

42.5 42.0 41.5 Temperature  °C 41.0 40.5 40.0 39.5 39.0 38.5 38.0 5,740 (1st of August) 

EFT in a typical summer week under cooling mode

5,790

5,840 Time (hr)

5,890

5,940 (8th of August)

Night Fluid Circulation In Solar Panels "ON" Night Fluid Circulation In Solar Panels "OFF"

Figure 5-4: Heat pump EFT in the cooling mode in a typical summer week. (with and without night time fluid circulation in solar collectors)

52

Chapter 6

Analysis of System Performance and Sensitivity Analysis
6-1 Field Testing and Verification of Hybrid Solar-GSHP System The house selected and modelled for the purpose of this study was equipped with metering and measuring sensor devices in different locations of the house and its HVAC system. The data was recorded for more than a year mostly in year 2007. The metering sensors of interest for this study were located in the heat pump. They could measure the IN and OUT temperatures of the ground loop fluid to the heat pump, as well as metering the electricity consumption of the heat pump and its auxiliary heater. Due to some error in registering data, the following readings could only be extracted for the study: 1- Fluid temperature IN to heat pump from the ground loop for the period May to December 12, 2007. 2- Fluid temperature OUT from heat pump to the ground loop for the period May to December 12, 2007. 3- Heat pump electricity consumption for the month of August, 20 days; November, 30 days and December, 12 days. 4- Heat pump auxiliary heater electricity consumption for the month of August, 20 days; November, 30 days and December, 12 days. Table 6-1 shows the minimum and maximum actual data recorded for the IN and OUT fluid temperatures to the heat pump, along with the corresponding simulated data for comparison. Table 6-1: Actual versus simulated data for heat pump IN and OUT fluid temperature Months Year 2007 MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC Actual HP Entering Fluid Temp Min (°C) Max (°C) 17.0 34.0 10.0 38.0 9.0 38.0 9.0 36.0 8.0 35.0 5.0 35.0 2.0 15.0 0.3 12.5
53

Simulated HP Entering Fluid Temp Min (°C) Max (°C) 11.5 31.0 9.8 34.4 13.5 37.3 14.6 38.8 13.5 39.1 5.2 35.6 3.4 8.0 2.3 6.3

Figure 6-1(a) shows the actual maximum entering fluid temperature (EFT) to the heat pump (HP) versus the simulated data in the cooling season and Figure 6-1(b) shows the actual minimum EFT to the heat pump versus the simulated data in heating season.

Actual VS Simulated Max. HP EFT
45 40 35 30 25 20 MAY JUL AUG SEP Month of the Year Maximum EFT Actual Maximum EFT Simulated JUN

Figure 6-1(a): Actual versus simulated maximum EFT to the HP ­ Cooling Season

Temperature ( °C)

Actual VS Simulated Min. HP EFT 6.0
Temperature ( °C)

5.0 4.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 OCT  NOV
Month of the Year Minimum EFT Actual Minimum EFT Simulated

DEC

Figure 6-1(b): Actual versus simulated minimum EFT to the HP ­ Heating Season

54

From Figures 6-1(a) and 6-1(b), it can be seen that the actual fluid temperature entering the heat pump in the heating and cooling seasons almost matches the simulated data. From Figure 61(a), it can also be seen that in months of July to September, the actual heat pump entering fluid temperatures fall below the simulated data. This was because the heat pump was shut off during this period. The simulated data for the cooling season is obtained by selecting another heat pump data, rather than the actual installed heat pump data. As the capacity of the selected heat pump in cooling season is restricted to maximum 35 °C, the selected heat pump would not be able to work efficiently with an EFT greater than 25 °C, as its COP would fall below three, and by having an entering temperature above 35 °C, the heat pump would stop functioning. Appendix D shows the specification data for the heat pump installed in the house. By studying the simulation results, Figure 6-2 shows that the EFT would be above 35 °C in certain periods of the cooling season. This is mentioned as a "No performance period" where the heat pump stops functioning. This occurs between 4400 to 6570 hour, which is the beginning of June and the end of August. By disconnecting the solar thermal panels from the system, the simulation results show that the EFT will not pass 35°C. They also show that the heat pump functions well in cooling season, even though there would be a time when the heat pump would work in a lower COP. Figure 6-3 shows the entering heat pump fluid temperature limits in the same system without solar panels. One reported problem from the house was malfunctioning of the system during the cooling season. Based on the above discussions, for this system in cooling season, it is suggested that the fluid flow from the solar thermal panels should not be sent to the ground in the "No performance period". Alternatively in the existing case, a higher cooling capacity heat pump should be sized and selected. Both solutions apply if the ground exchanger loop is kept in its existing condition. Figures 6-4 and 6-5 show a typical one-week EFT to the heat pump in the cooling and the heating season, respectively. Both figures show the data for systems with three solar collectors and without solar collectors. The case with solar collectors always has higher EFT and can be up to about 2.5°C to 3.0°C higher than the case without solar collectors at some instances. It is evident that the solar collectors do devastate the performance of GSHP during the cooling season, but opposite is true for the heating season.

55

Figure 6-2: Existing heat pump EFT limits (system with three solar panels)

Figure 6-3: Existing heat pump EFT limits (system without solar panels)
56

EFT in a Typical Week Cooling Mode
38 37 36 Temperature °C 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 4,272 4,302 (1st of July)  4,333 4,363 Time (hr) 4,394 4,425 4,454 (8th of July) 

With 3 Solar Collectors

Without Solar Collectors

Figure 6-4: Heat pump EFT in a typical week of cooling season

12 11 10 9 Temperature °C 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 1,400 1,431

EFT in a Typical Week Heating Mode

1,462

1,493 Time (hr)

1,522

1,553

(1st of March) 

1,583 (8th of March) 

With 3 Solar Collectors

Without Solar Collectors

Figure 6-5: Heat pump EFT in a typical week of heating season
57

Table 6-2 shows the energy consumption of the heat pump in the months and dates available. N/A denotes that data in some of the actual readings were not available. There are only 20 days of data available in the cooling season in the month of the August. Here, the amount of energy consumed by the heat pump is unrealistic and shows that the heat pump is running with very low efficiency. It shows that if the heat pump was properly sized for cooling mode it would have consumed almost 72% less energy and system would have never failed and shut down. Table 6-2: Actual and simulated heat pump energy consumption Months Year 2007 AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC Number of days 20 days N/A N/A 30 days 12 days Actual (MJ) HP AUX 13,244 1,087 N/A N/A N/A N/A 12,747 4,140 6,559 756 Simulated (MJ) HP AUX 3,927 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A 11,448 4,392 5,007 2,106

In the heating season, the situation is fine. Table 6-3 shows, the energy consumed by the heat pump matches the simulated data. In November, there is a 6% deviation between the actual data and simulated data, whereas December, this is about 2.7%. The deviation ranges are quite acceptable, and most likely originate from actual and simulated weather data. As mentioned before, the weather data used in simulations was the default TMY2 data in TRNSYS. Table 6-4 shows the actual degree days in the year 2007 as reported by Environment Canada to compare with the default TRNSYS degree days for the City of Toronto [46]. Table 6-3: Actual versus simulated heat pump energy consumption in heating mode Months Year 2007 NOV DEC Number of days 30 days 12 days Total System Energy Actual (MJ) Simulated (MJ) 16887 15840 7315 7113 Deviation %
Actual vs. Simulated

6.0 2.7

Table 6-4 shows that the heating degree days in TRNSYS were 108.8% of heating degree days in 2007, and the cooling degree days in TRNSYS were 44.3% of the cooling degree days in 2007. In the heating season, the less actual degree days justifies the 6% deviation of actual and
58

simulated data, and higher actual degree days is against the system in cooling season. Table 6-5 shows the adjusted deviation percentage presented in Table 6-3. From these, it is concluded that the simulated model is within 0.01% to 2.7% of the actual model by considering the actual weather data in adjusting the simulation results. These small deviations could be the result of slight weather differences between Toronto and Milton, which is about 60 km west of Toronto. The hourly local weather data for Milton was not available at the time of this study. The approach of adjusting the simulation data follows the PRISM method [47]. PRISM is a statistical procedure that uses heating and cooling degree days to produce a weather-adjusted index of the energy consumption of a house or building. This finding shows that it is important to simulate using actual yearly weather data which corresponds to the year of actual field readings if excellent agreement between actual and simulated data is required; otherwise, differences within 10% can be expected when the default TMY2 data in TRNSYS is used. Table 6-4: Actual year 2007 degree days versus TRNSYS (TMY2) weather data YEAR 2007 TRNSYS TMY2 Percentage of 2007 Degree Days Degree Days Month Heating Cooling Heating Cooling Heating Cooling JAN 647.1 0.0 745.7 0.0 115.2 0.0 FEB 740.1 0.0 671.8 0.0 90.8 0.0 MAR 546.7 0.0 568.3 0.0 104.0 0.0 APR 356.4 0.0 360.7 0.0 101.2 0.0 MAY 136.4 22.4 168.7 0.9 123.7 4.0 JUN 16.5 99.2 48.5 33.2 294.2 33.4 JLY 3.2 106.1 3.9 90.9 123.5 85.7 AUG 5.2 141.0 8.2 59.6 159.3 42.3 SEP 36.9 47.5 106.1 8.4 287.4 17.7 OCT 137.7 19.8 288.1 0.0 209.2 0.0 NOV 462.5 0.0 440.7 0.0 95.3 0.0 DEC 630.7 0.0 636.7 0.0 101.0 0.0 Total 3,719.4 436.0 4048.0 193.0 108.8 44.3

59

Table 6-5: Adjusted deviation between actual and simulated heat pump energy consumption Months Year 2007 NOV DEC Number of days 30 days 12 days Total system Energy Actual (MJ) 16,887 7,315 15,840 7,113 Adjusted 16,650 7,113 Deviation% 6.0 2.7
Actual vs. Simulated(MJ) Simulated(MJ) Simulated

Adjusted Deviation % 0.01 2.7

6-2 Solar Collector Area and Ground Loop Length Relations One of the most important measures of solar assisted ground source heat pump (SAGSHP) systems is the length of the ground loop heat exchanger offset by the area of the solar collectors. For this purpose a sensitivity analysis was conducted by varying the solar collector area to assess changes in borehole length. The study was conducted in five different solar collector areas that would be of the capacity of a typical residential house. By increasing the total solar collector area, more fluid flow needs to be diverted to panels from ground loop fluid flow. As the flow rate of the heat pump is kept constant (1173 kg/hr), the ground loop flow and control flow diverter are adjusted in such a way as to meet the capacities of both the heat pump and solar collectors. Table 6-6 shows the relationship between the parameters mentioned. Table 6-6: System components fluid flow rates and controls in different scenario Solar Collector Area No. of Panels (m2) 0 0 3 6.81 6 13.62 9 20.43 12 27.24 System Flow (kg/hr) Ground Solar Loop % Control 0 1173 0 120 1293 10 240 1413 17 360 1533 23.5 480 1653 29

HP 1173 1173 1173 1173 1173

The house with as-built borehole length and layout, as shown in Figure 4-1, is set to be the base case scenario and the total system energy consumptions is recorded. By considering the base case energy consumption as a benchmark, the following steps are considered for the sensitivity analysis; 1- Four scenarios are defined based on system with different solar panel collector areas.

60

2- In each scenario the simulation is run with a different ground loop heat exchange length until the energy consumption of the system reaches the same value as its corresponding base case system. With the above steps and scenarios different simulations were run and the results are summarized in Table 6-7. EFT is also an important parameter needing to be controlled in order to avoid falling below heat-pump operating limits (i.e. 0°C). Table 6-7: Ground loop heat exchanger length with different solar collector area Solar Collector No. of Panels 0 3 6 9 12 Area (m2) 0 6.81 13.62 20.43 27.24 Ground Loop Heat Exchanger Total Min. Length Borehole EFT (°C) (m) 220 4 55(m) 5 188 4 47(m) 0 172.8 1 4 43.25(m) 150 0 3 50(m) 135 -1 3 45(m) Annual System Energy Consumption Space Heating and Cooling (MJ) Heating Cooling 44,793 6,434 44,749 6,931 44,041 7,446 44,126 7,967 44,070 8,124

The total ground loop heat exchanger (GLHE) parameters recorded in Table 6-7 are the minimum GLHE that the system could have in order to maintain the minimum EFT to the heatpump in heating mode. Table 6-8 shows the length of GLHE offset by the solar collector area. Figures 6-5 and 6-6 show these relations graphically. Table 6-8: GLHE length reduction and its corresponding solar panel area Solar Collector No. of Panels 0 3 6 9 12 Area (m2) 0 6.81 13.62 20.43 27.24 Total Length (m) 220 188 172.8 150 135 GLHE Borehole Reduction

Loop Length m/m2 (m) 4 55(m) 0 0 32 4.70 4 47(m) 47.2 3.47 4 43.25(m) 3 50(m) 70 3.43 3 45(m) 85 3.12

61

The greatest length of GLHE replaced by an area of the solar collector was observed for three solar panels scenario at 4.7 m/m2, and the least was observed for the twelve solar panels scenario at 3.12m/m2. This shows that the optimum number of solar panels for the system would be three (6.81m2).

45
Ground Loop length Reduction (%)

40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 0 3 6
Number of Solar Panels

9

12

Figure 6-6: Ground loop length reduction percentage versus number of solar panels

5.0
GLHE length replaceed by collector Area ( m/rm2 )

4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0 3 6
Number of Solar Panels

9

12

Figure 6-7: Ground loop length replaced by solar collector area

62

6-3 Life-Cycle Cost Analysis To evaluate the economics of various cases, a 20-year life-cycle cost analysis was performed. A present value approach was selected to compare the alternatives. The options utilized in cost analysis are: 1- Ground loop heat exchanger installation cost are expressed per meter of vertical borehole and include all labor and materials for drilling, grouting, horizontal trenching and headering, and building penetrations. Cost ranges are from $29/m to $39/m of borehole. In this study, $33/m is considered to be the GLHE cost [48]. 2- Heat pump costs including material and labor for installing are $6,500 [25]. 3- Solar collector cost is $125/m2 which includes all material and labor for installing the collector array, controls and all associated plumbing [26]. 4- Electricity rate cost is $0.10 per kWh for the Toronto area including delivey and tax charges [49]. 5- Interest rate is 6% compounded annually over the 20-year period [50]. The results of the economic analysis are summarized in Table 6-9. Table 6-9: Net present value of hybrid solar-ground source heat pump system Solar Collector Area No. of (m2) Panels 0 0 0 0 3 6.81 6 13.62 9 20.43 12 27.24 GLHE Total Length (m) 380 220 188 172.8 150 135 Solar Cost $0 $0 $851 $1,703 $2,554 $3,405 Cost Analysis Initial Cost Operation Cost GLHE and HP Annual Present Cost Cost Value $19,040 $2,050 $23,514 $13,760 $2,330 $26,721 $12,704 $2,330 $26,723 $12,202 $2,334 $26,776 $11,450 $2,337 $26,804 $10,955 $2,335 $26,786 Net Present Value $42,554 $40,481 $40,278* $40,681 $40,807 $41,146

*Optimum balance between the GLHE size and solar collector size

The first row of Table 6-9 is the base case considered for the financial analysis. This is the case of the house with a 380 m borehole length, which would have been designed if the house were only equipped with a GSHP system. The second row is the as-built house data that has been simulated without solar collectors.

63

The net present value calculation uses the discount rate and the time cost occurred to establish the present value of the cost in the base year of the study period. Since most initial expenses occur about the same time, initial expenses are considered to occur during the base year of the study period. Thus, there is no need to calculate the present value of these initial expenses because their present value is equal to their actual cost. Future cost is inccured every year between Year 1 and Year 20. In this case, future cost will be the operational cost and is only restricted to energy costs as there would be no or very minor maintenance cost. The operational cost is a recurring cost that occurs every year over the span of the 20 years. Table 6-9 shows that there is an economic benefit of $2,276 (5.3%) in using the system with three solar panels while the benefit is less for the system with more than three panels. However the economic benefit also depends on the interest rate. The higher the rate, the better is the benefit; for example, the benefit increases to $3,100 (8.5%) if the interest rate is 10%. This is due to the fact that the saving of initial cost in the ground loop heat exchanger installation cost for the system with more than three solar panels is not significant. In all cases the system would also be economically viable if GLHE cost fell into the higher range of drilling costs (i.e. $39/m). Table 6-10 shows the net present value of the systems with minimum and maximum bore hole costs. Table 6-10: Net present value of systems with minimum and maximum bore hole cost Solar Collector Area No. of Panels (m2) 0 0 0 0 3 6.81 6 13.62 9 20.43 12 27.24 GLHE Total Length (m) 380 220 188 172.8 150 135 System Cost Initial Cost Net Present Value $29.00/m $39.00/m $29.00/m $39.00/m $17,520 $21,320 $41,034 $44,834 $12,880 $15,080 $39,601 $41,801 $12,803 $14,683 $39,526 $41,406 $13,214 $14,942 $39,990 $41,718 $13,404 $14,904 $40,207 $41,707 $13,820 $15,170 $40,606 $41,956

One aspect needing to be considered in system cost analyses is the comparison of the GSHP and the SAGSHP total system energy consumptions in 20 years. The total annual energy consumption of the system in its life span varies from year to year. In the GSHP system, depending on the soil conditions, the annual minimum heat pump EFTs reduce from year to year whereas in the SAGSHP, the minimum heat pump EFTs are almost constant. This results in higher operating costs over the system life span for the GSHP system, making the SAGSHP
64

more beneficial. However, the exact yearly cost analysis for the two systems is beyond the scope of this study. Figure 6-8 shows the EFTs to the heat pump for both the SAGSHP and GSHP systems. Due to the limitation of the graph generator tool in Excel this figure is generated in 32,000 hours (3.6 years). Over the first three years, the minimum EFTs drop about 2°C for the SAGSHP system, whereas for the GSHP system the drop is as much as 3°C. From Figure 6-8 and the 20-year simulation analysis, it is concluded that the yearly drop in minimum EFT in the GSHP is much higher than for the SAGSHP.

System with 3 Solar Collectors (SAGSHP) System without Solar Collectors (GSHP) 45.0 40.0 35.0 Temperature ( °C ) 30.0 25.0 20.0 15.0 10.0 5.0 0.0 5.0 0 8,760
(Year 1)
EFT (SAGSHP) EFT (GSHP)

17,520 Time (hr)

(Year 2)

26,280
(Year 3)

Figure 6-8: Annual EFT to the HP for SAGSHP and GSHP systems

65

6-4 System Performance in Different Cities of Canada For investigating the performance of the system with different climatic and enviromental charactristics, simulations were run in five cities other than Toronto: Halifax, Nova Scotia; Montreal, Quebec; Ottawa, Ontario; Edmonton, Alberta; and Vancouver, British Columbia. In different cities, the house would have varying heating and cooling loads. A relative measure of heating dominance of the house of each city is expessed as the ratio of annual heating load to the annual cooling load for the base-case house (the house using only GHX as an energy source or sink) is tabulated in Table 6-11. Table 6-11 shows that the least heating dominated case is Vancouver, and the most is Edmonton. Running simulations for all mentioned cities with the base-case system and with three solar panels, the results are recorded in Table 6-12. Table 6-12 shows that the house in Vancouver with lowest annual heating load to annual cooling load (1.54), has the highest reduced GHX loop length to solar collector area ratio (of 7.64 m/m2). Whereas the house in Edmonton with highest annual heating load to annual cooling load ratio (3.80) has the lowest ratio of reduced GHX loop length to solar collector area (2.93 m/m2). It is concluded that the house in cities with a smaller annual heating load to annual cooling load ratio shows better reduced GHX loop length to collector area ratio. Table 6-11: Annual heating load to annual cooling load ratio of the house in different cities City Vancouver Toronto Montreal Ottawa Halifax Edmonton Degree Days * Heating Cooling 2926 4066 4575 4620 4367 5708 44 252 235 229 104 28 66.5 16.1 19.5 20.2 42.0 203.9 HDD/CDD House Energy Demand (MJ) Heating Cooling 49,794 32,392 93,608 40,150 106,606 43,799 109,079 40,323 83,831 25,018 133,121 35,019 Annual heating load / Annual cooling load 1.54 2.33 2.43 2.71 3.35 3.80

* Environment Canada Average Annual Totals, 1971-2000

66

Table 6-12: System performance in different cities Solar Collector City No. of Panels 0 3 0 3 0 3 0 3 0 3 0 3 Area (m2) 0 6.81 0 6.81 0 6.81 0 6.81 0 6.81 0 6.81 Total Length (m) 220 168 220 180 220 184 220 188 220 196 220 200 GHX Loop Borehole 4 55(m) 4 42(m) 4 55(m) 4 45(m) 4 55(m) 4 46(m) 4 55(m) 4 47(m) 4 55(m) 4 49(m) 4 55(m) 4 50(m) Min. EFT (°C) 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Annual System Energy Space Heating and Cooling (MJ) Heating Cooling 46,305 46,119 44,793 44,749 46,766 46,779 46,327 46,445 49,566 49,301 51,979 52,052 5,364 5,623 6,434 6,631 6,989 7,174 6,150 6,331 5,015 5,268 5,935 6,076 Reduced GHX length/Collector Area m/m2 (52m) 7.64 (40m) 5.9 (36m) 5.28 (32m) 4.7 (24m) 3.52 (20m) 2.93

Vancouver

Toronto

Montreal

Ottawa

Halifax

Edmonton

6-5 Sizing Suggestions for the House System As mentioned earlier, in the cooling season the house energy simulation with the current system specification including solar panels was not possible. In this case the heat pump capacity in the cooling season was increased in order to run the analysis in cooling mode. Existing heat pump specifications (Appendix D) show that the cooling capacity of the heat pump is between 11 and 16.7kW, and the heating capacity is between 1.5 and 20.6 kW. Exact heat pump capacity depends on the EFT. In the existing case, the house peak cooling and heating demands are 9.5kW and 11.5kW, respectively. The selected heat pump capacities for meeting these demands should be fine if the EFT falls below 25 °C. EFTs greater than 25°C reduces the heat pump cooling capacity to less than 9.5kW where the heat pump will not functioning properly. In order to avoid this problem following suggestions are made:

67

1- Select a heat pump which is still functional and has higher performance when the EFTs are greater than 35°C. 2- Increase the total borehole length. 3- Shut down the solar collectors and isolate them from the system in summer. Table 6-13 shows two proposed systems to compare with the existing house system. For the existing system, stopping the flow stream to the solar panels in summer is the easiest and most economical way. But in this case the occupants would have to endure thermal discomfort in the cooling season. As an alternative and more costly solution, the heat pump performance data file is substituted by another heat pump, i.e. WaterFurnace Model Synergy3D [51], with the same capacity but a better heat pump cooling performance at higher EFTs. However, for a new system, designing with a proper borehole length and heat pump size is essential. Table 6-13 shows that for the existing heat pump capacity the borehole length should be increased to 85 m from the existing 55 m. This highlights the importance of proper design of a SAGSHP system with appropriate length of ground loop; besides functioning well in the cooling season with lower maximum EFT, a substantial energy savings (14.4 GJ) for heating season is also achieved. Table 6-13: Suggestions for improvement of the existing as-built system performance No. of Panels 3 3 3 Heat pump system Total Loop Min. Max. EFT EFT length (m) (°C) (°C) 220 0 40 220 340 0 6 40 32 Annual System Energy Consumptions (MJ) Heating 44,749 44,749 30,314 Cooling N/A 6,631 5,842

Hybrid System Existing Higher heat pump performance Longer ground loop exchanger

68

Chapter 7

Conclusions and Recommendations
To assess the viability of hybrid ground source heat pump systems (GSHP) with solar thermal collectors, a system simulation approach was presented. An actual house located in Milton Ontario was modelled using TRNbuild and TRNSYS. The house was energy efficient, and equipped with a similar system to the subject of this study. The house also had sensors and a data acquisition system in order to read and save temperatures, flow rates, and electricity consumption of mechanical equipments in different locations of the system. There was a complaint by the owner about the house system operation as it was not functioning in the cooling season. There was no information for the system design from the design consultant. In this study, the overall system viability was evaluated and existing system problems were detected through dedicated modelling and simulation of the installed system. Some specific conclusions of this study are outlined in the following sections:

7.1 TRNSYS versus HOT2000 HOT2000 is widely used by builders in North America, as reported by Natural Resourses Canada [24]. The design heating and cooling loads, as well as the annual energy demands of the house were simulated using HOT2000 and TRNbuild, a module of TRNSYS. The purpose of this study was to verify the TRNbuild model of the house. The results show that both the HOT2000 and TRNbuild models are in good agreement in terms of overall annual energy demands. The TRNSYS results for annual heating and cooling demand of the house are almost 3% higher than the HOT2000 results. This deviation is acceptable considering the different calculation methods used in the two softwares. HOT2000 uses a bin method whereas TRNbuild uses a more accurate time step transfer function method. After the TRNbuild model of the house was verified, further studies with a hybrid GSHP system could be carried out with confidence.

7.2 Optimum Flow to Solar Thermal Collectors In the as-built system, the percentage of the ground loop flow rate diverted to the solar collectors was studied using three different flows. From the equipment manufacturer, the
69

maximum acceptable flow rates to the heat pump and the three solar panels were determined to be 1173 kg/hr and 120 kg/hr, respectively. This means that the total maximum flow rate in the ground loop exchanger was the sum of the two, i.e., 1293 kg/hr. The maximum flow diversion from the ground loop was determined to be 10% of the total flow. This study showed that by increasing the fluid flow to the solar panels from zero to 10% of the heat pump flow rate, the overall system energy consumption in the heating mode decreases, whereas, in the cooling mode the system energy consumption increases. This trend is in favour of the system performance in the heating season and against in the cooling season. This indicates that for Toronto weather conditions, a residential house with a hybrid GSHP system can benefit from higher flow diversion to solar thermal collectors in the heating season; however, the reverse is true in the cooling season.

7.3 Sensitivity Analysis of the Ground Thermal Conductivity Thermal conductivity is one of the physical properties needed for sizing GSHP. As the exact soil thermal conductivity for the site of the house was unknown, the house was modelled with different soil thermal conductivities and the effects recorded. Changing the soil thermal conductivity leads to a change in the entering fluid temperature (EFT) to the heat pump. This is a very important parameter for the efficiency of the heat pump. The heat pump of the house is designed to work between 0°C and 35°C. Analysis was carried out with four different soil types in the range of 0.85 W/mK to 2.5 W/mK. The result showed that in the heating season, the lower thermal conductivity leads to a lower EFT to the heat pump. Soil types with a thermal conductivity lower than 2 W/mK lead to an EFT lower than 0°C and cause a malfunction of the heat pump. On the other hand, a higher soil thermal conductivity leads to a higher EFT in the heating season and more efficient heat pump operation. In conclusion, based on overall regional soil type, soil with 2 W/mK is a reasonable selection , and this was the value used in the rest of the studies. Having better heat transfer in the vicinity of the ground heat exchanger loop is ideal for the system, whereas having lower thermal conductivity in the backfill volume would be good for overall thermal storage. 7.4 Solar Collector Area and Ground Loop Heat Exchanger Length Relation Finding the relationship between solar collector area and ground loop length was one of the important aspects of this study. In the heating season, the results of this study showed that for
70

this specific house located in Toronto region, three solar panels in the system helped to reduce the total ground loop heat exchanger (GLHE) length by 15% compared to the system that only has a heat pump. Increasing the number of solar panels from three to six does not double the GLHE length reduction, whereas its trend would be in the range of 8% to 13% after that. An optimum relationship of the two mentioned parameters would be a system with three solar panels and a reduced ground loop heat exchanger length of 15%. In the cooling season, adding solar panels to the system would have a negative impact on the system performance and an increase in the heat pump energy consumption; therefore, in heating dominated places, where the cooling season is short, this increment of energy consumption in the cooling season would not be significant compared to savings in heating season.

7.5 System Cost Analysis A 20-year life-cycle analysis of the system showed a small economic benefit for the hybrid system compared to the system with only GSHP. This was due to the low borehole drilling cost of $33/m. At the time of study, the borehole drilling costs were determined to be in the range of $29/m to $39/m for different ground conditions. However, for the case of higher drilling costs the economic benefits would be considerable, because of the 15% reduction of GLHE length due to the three solar collectors. During the system life cycle, the SAGSHP system energy consumptions increase slightly, corresponding to a reduction of 2°C in minimum EFT to the heat pump from year to year. However, in the GSHP system without solar collectors there would be more energy consumption due to an almost 4°C reduction of minimum EFT to the heat pump from year to year.

7.6 Field Study and Verification For this study there was limited field data available to validate the simulation results. For heat pump energy consumption there were only 42 days of data in heating season and no considerable data in cooling season; whereas for the EFT to the heat pump there were almost eight months of data available in 2007. The comparison of the simulation results with the field data showed a 2.7% to 6% deviation in energy consumptions. The source of this deviation was found to be the weather data used in the simulation. By adjusting the simulation results with the actual weather data for 2007 for Toronto, this deviation was reduced to 0.01 to 2.7%. The
71

approach of adjusting the simulation data follows the PRISM method [47]. PRISM is a statistical procedure that uses heating and cooling degree days to produce a weather-adjusted index of the energy consumption of a house or building. The study shows that it is important to simulate using actual yearly weather data which corresponds to the year of actual field readings if excellent agreement between actual and simulated data is required; otherwise, differences within 10% can be expected when the default TMY2 data in TRNSYS is used. This verification exercise is a means to confirm the TRNSYS simulation model of the hybrid GSHP system and the suitability of using TRNSYS in this study.

7.7 Solutions to the Problem of the As-built System The existing system had problems in functioning properly in the cooling season. The study results showed that the system was not properly sized for the cooling season as the EFTs to the heat pump were exceeding the allowable EFT defined by the manufacturer. This happened from June to August, almost the whole cooling season. Simulated solutions include: (a) stopping the flow to the solar panel in cooling season; (b) selecting a heat pump with a modified cooling capacity and specification; and (c) increasing the GLHE length. All three solutions are applicable with case (a) being the simplest and least cost to implement. This problem could have been preventable if the borehole lengths were increased by 35%. This solution could be justified as the system would perform better in the heating season in spite of the extra borehole cost. 7.8 System Viability in Different Cities of Canada By considering the same house characteristics, the effects of different climates in Canada were investigated. For this purpose, six Canadian cities in different regions were studied. The results showed that, in different cities, in general, as the ratio of annual heating load to annual cooling load of the house increased, the reduced ground loop heat exchanger length to solar collector area ratio decreased. This ratio was 7.64 m/m2 for Vancouver, with an annual heating to annual cooling load ratio of 1.54. For Edmonton, the annual heating to cooling load ratio was 3.8, having reduced ground loop heat exchanger length to solar collector area ratio of 2.93 m/m2. A higher ratio, such as for Vancouver, indicates better viability of the hybrid GSHP system. This would not be an absolute conclusion as other parameters, such as ratio of heating degree days to cooling degree days in each city also affects the conclusion.

72

7.9 Viability of System The result of this study have shown that the hybrid GSHP system combined with solar thermal collectors is a feasible choice for space conditioning for heating-dominated houses. For the house in this study, the seasonal solar thermal energy storage in the ground in the hybrid system was sufficient enough to offset large amount of ground loop heat exchanger length that would have been required in conventional GSHP systems. The economic benefit of such a system depends on climate as well as borehole drilling cost.

7-10 System Simulation Approach This study demonstrates the value in utilizing a system simulation approach to evaluating alternatives in complex systems. The hourly time step simulation for the implementation of complex control and operation strategies enabled the assessment of transient system responses. This study can be continued with examining and analysing different controls and configurations, and the interaction of different components as well as study in broader geographical areas.

7-10 Future Research Recommendations Some specific recommendations for further study and research arising from this study are: Implementing an optimization routine into the system simulation would be useful in order to obtain the optimum values of desired parameters. In particular, minimizing the system life-cycle cost by optimizing the size of ground loop exchanger versus the area of solar collectors. Further research in the system controls and configurations to increase the system performance. This could be diverting the extra energy harvested by the solar collectors during the cooling season for an independent DHW system. Using more efficient solar thermal collectors in the model. In particular, using vacuum tube solar thermal collectors with reduced initial and maintenance cost.

73

References
[1] Kavanaugh, S.P., "Analysis and Development of a Design Method for Hybrid Geothermal Heat Pumps," Draft, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, March 1997. [2] Singh, J.B. "Advantage of Using the Hybrid Geothermal Option," Letter to contractor, June 1996. [3] Bose, J.E., Smith, M.D., and Spitler, J.D. "Advances in Ground Source Heat Pump SystemAn International Over view", Proceedings of the seventh International Energy Agency Heat Pump Conference. 1: p.313-324. Beijing May 2002. [4] RETScreen International, "Clean Energy Support System", Minister of Natural Resource Canada. 2002-2004. [5] TRANSYS 16, "TRaNsient SYstem Simulation program" Solar Energy Laboratory, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2004. [6] HOT2000, "HOT2000 Computer simulation program", Natural Resources Canada, Ver9.0 2003. [7] Yavuzturk, C., and Spitler, Y.D., "A short time step response factor model for vertical ground loop heat exchangers". ASHRAE Transactions, Vol.105 (2), p.475-48 5, 1999. [8] Andrews, J.W., Kush, E.A., and Mets,P.D., "A Solar- Assisted Heat Pump System for Cost Effective Space Heating and Cooling," BNL 50819, Mar.1978. [9] Freeman, T.L., Mitchell, J. W., and Audit, T.E., "Performance of Combined Solar Heat Pump Systems," Solar Energy, Vol.22, p.125, 1979. [10] Metz, P.D. "The Use of Ground-Coupled Tanks in Solar Assisted Heat Pump Systems," ASME Transactions, Journal of Solar Energy Engineering, Vol 104 (4): p.366-372, 1982. [11] Metz, P.D. "A Simple Computer Program to Model Three-Dimensional Underground Heat Flow with Realistic Boundary Conditions," presented at ASME Winter Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., Nov. 15-20, BNL 29776, 1981. [12] Yang W. B., Shi M.H., and Dong H., "Numerical simulation of the performance of a solarearth source heat pump system," Applied Thermal Engineering, Vol. 26, p. 2367-2376, 2006. [13] Bi, Y., Guo, T., Zhanh, L., and Chen, L., "Solar and ground heat-pump system," Applied Energy Vol.78, p. 231-245, 2004.

74

[14] Ozgener, O. and Hepbasli, A., "Exergy Analysis of a Solar-Assisted Ground-Source (Geothermal) Heat Pump Greenhouse Heating System," Proceeding World Geothermal Congress 2005, Antalya, Turkey, 24-29 April 2005. [15] Ozgener, O. and Hepbasli, A., "Experimental Performance Analysis of Solar Assisted Ground-source Heat Pump Greenhouse Heating System," Energy and Buildings, Vol.37(1), p.101-110, 2005. [16] Ozgener, O. and Hepbasli, A., "Experimental Investigation of Performance of Solar Assisted Ground-source Heat Pump Greenhouse Heating System," International Journal of Energy Research, 2004. [17] Chiasson, Andrew D., Yavuzturk ,Cenk, "Assessment of the viability of hybrid geothermal heat pump system with solar thermal collector, "ASHRAE Transactions: Symposia KC-03-3-3, p.487-499, 2003. [18] BLAST, BLAST (Building Loads and System Thermodynamics) University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 2000. [19] TRNSYS Manual, a Transient Simulation Program, Version 15 and 16. Solar Engineering laboratory, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2000 and 2004. [20] Eskilson, P. "Thermal analysis of heat extraction boreholes", Doctoral thesis, University of Lund, Department of Mathematical Physics, Lund, Sweden. 1987. [21] ASHRAE, "ASHRAE Handbook ­ HVAC Applications." Atlanta: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1999. [22] Mattamy Homes, Green Initiative, Hawthorne Village, Milton, 2006, www.mattamyhomes.com [23] TRNbuild, and Multi-zone Building Modeling, TRNSYS 16 manual, Vol. 6, 2004. [24] HOT2000 ver 10.12, Natural Resources Canada, http://www.sbc.nrcan.gc.ca/software_and_tools [25] Essential Innovation Technology Corp., EI Geo-Exchange system, Surrey, BC, Canada , 2005, http://www.eitechcorp.com [26] Enerworks Inc., Solar water heating solutions, Dorchester, Ontario, Canada, 2005. http://www.enerworks.com [27] Rheem- Canada Ltd, Hot water tank, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. 2005. http://waterheating.rheem.com/content/canada/index.shtml
75

[28] Renewability Energy Inc., The Power-PipeTM, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 2005. http://www.renewability.com [29] Venmar Ventilation Inc. Drummondville (Québec), Canada, 2005. http://www.venmar.ca [30] NREL, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, US Department of Energy. http://www.nrel.gov/ [31] TRNSYS 16 Manual, TESS library Ver.2, 2004. [32] Curme and Johnston, Glycols. Reinhold Publishing Corp., New York, 1952. [33] Hellstrom, G., "Duct Ground Heat Storage Model, Manual for Computer Code," Department of Mathematical Physics, University of Lund, Sweden. [34] "Toronto Home Owner's Guide to Rain fall", Riverside Stewardship Alliance, Toronto, 2008 [35] Natural Research Council Canada (NRC), "The Canadian System of Soil Classification", third edition, 1998. [36] Duffie, JA, and Beckman, W.A., "Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes", Wiley Publication, 1991. [37] ASHRAE Standard 93-2003 "Methods of testing to determine the performance of solar collectors", ASHRAE, Atlanta, 2003. [38] Incropera, F.P. and DeWitt, D.P., "Introduction to heat transfer", 4th Edition, 2002. [39] Renewability Inc., "Power pipe drain heat recovery system" 2006, Waterloo, ON, 2006. [40] Perlman, M., and Mills, B.E., Development of Residential Hot Water Use Patterns, ASHRAE Transactions, Vol. 91, Part 2A, p. 657-679. 1985. [41] Tarnawski, V.R. and Leong, W.H., "Computer Simulation of Ground Coupled Heat Pump Systems", Report submitted to National Research Council, Ottawa, Canada, Contract No. 98944104R, 167 pages, 1990. [42] Department of Energy's State Energy Program through the Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy, a Special Energy Project, www.geo4va.vt.edu , 2002. [43] America Society of Heating Refrigerating and Air-conditioning Engineers, Inc. ASHRAE Handbook, HVAC System and Equipment, 32.15, 2007. [44] Williams, G.P., and Gold, L.W., CBD-180. Ground Temperatures, Canadian Building Digest, p. 180, July 1976.
76

[45] International Ground Source Heat Pump Association (IGSHPA), "Design and Installation Standard" 2007. [46]Environment Canada, Toronto, Pearson Airport, Weather data, year 2007 http://www.climate.weatheroffice.ec.gc.ca/climateData [47] Fels, M. (ed.), "Special Issue Devoted to Measuring Energy Savings, The Princeton Scorekeeping Method (PRISM)", Energy and Buildings, Vol. 9, Nos. 1 and 2, 1986. [48] Reliance Home Comfort Canada, Quote from Mr. Larry Brydon, 1-866-Reliance (7354262), Oshawa, Ontario, October 2008. [49] Toronto Hydro electric, Residential rates, 2007. http://www.torontohydro.com/electricsystem/residential/rates/index.cfm [50] Bank of Canada, Average loan rates, http://www.bankofcanada.ca, 2007. [51] WaterFurnace International Inc., Synergy3D, www.waterfurnace.com, 2007.

77

Appendix - A
Floor plans of the house

78

Figure A-1: Basement Floor plan
79

Figure A-2: Ground (First) Floor plan
80

Figure A-3: Second Floor plan

81

Appendix - B
HOT2000 output report for the house

82

HOT2000
Natural Resources CANADA Version 9.33 File: Application Type: Mattamy 04060-HV5018GH-C-CORNER AS BUILT (EDIT)_Thesis_Used.HSE General

Weather Data for TORONTO, ONTARIO

Builder Code: Data Entry by: Farzin Rad Date of entry: 21/01/2007 Ryerson University Company: Client name: Homes, Mattamy Street address: Lot 213 City: Postal code: Milton Region: Telephone: Ontario

GENERAL HOUSE CHARACTERISTICS
House type: Number of storeys: Plan shape: Front orientation: Year House Built: Wall colour: Roof colour: Soil Condition: Water Table Level: Single Detached Two storeys Other, 11 or more corners South 2005 Default Medium brown Normal conductivity (dry sand, loam, clay) Normal (7-10m/23-33ft)

Absorptivity: 0.40 Absorptivity: 0.84

House Thermal Mass Level: (A) Light, wood frame Effective mass fraction 1.000 Occupants : 2 Adults for 50.0% of the time 2 Children for 50.0% of the time 0 Infants for 0.0% of the time

Sensible Internal Heat Gain From Occupants: 2.40 kWh/day

83

HOUSE TEMPERATURES
Heating Temperatures Main Floor: Basement: TEMP. Rise from 21.1 °C: Cooling Temperature: Main Floor :

21.1 °C 20.0 °C 2.8 °C 23.89 °C

Basement is- Heated: YES Cooled: NO Separate T/S: NO Fraction of internal gains released in basement : 0.150 Indoor design temperatures for equipment sizing Heating: 22.2 °C Cooling: 23.9 °C

WINDOW CHARACTERISTICS
Label South door window door window copy front 1 front 1 front 2 front 2 front 3 front 4 East right 1 right 1 right basement North back 1 back 1 back 2 back 3 back basement West left 1 left 1 left 1 left 2 left 2 left 3 left 4 left basement 1 left basement 2 1st Flr. Stone 1st Flr. Siding 2nd Flr. Siding 1st Flr. Siding 2nd Flr. Siding 1st Flr. Siding 1st Flr. Siding Basement Basement 2 2 2 2 5 1 2 1 1 3.66 0.40 0.40 0.24 0.40 0.24 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.46 3.23 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.46 6.04 2.96 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1st Flr. Siding 2nd Flr. Siding 1st Flr. Siding 1st Flr. Siding Basement 3 2 5 1 1 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.51 0.15 0.30 3.20 3.20 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1st Flr. Siding 2nd Flr. Siding Basement 1 1 1 0.40 0.40 0.40 4.72 1.62 3.20 90.0 90.0 90.0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 fr / ext fr / ext 2 1st Flr. Stone 2nd Flr. Siding 1st Flr. Stone 2nd Flr. Siding 2nd Flr. Siding 2nd Flr. Siding 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 3 5.49 5.49 5.55 0.40 1.77 0.24 0.24 0.40 0.91 0.91 0.46 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 90.0 1.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Location # Overhang Width (m) Header Height (m) Tilt deg Curtain Shutter Factor (RSI)

84

Label South door window door window copy front 1 front 1 front 2 front 2 front 3 front 4 East right 1 right 1 right basement North back 1 back 1 back 2 back 3 back basement West left 1 left 1 left 1 left 2 left 2 left 3 left 4 left basement 1 left basement 2

Type

#

Window Width (m) 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 3 1 1 1 3 2 5 1 1 2 2 2 2 5 1 2 1 1 0.61 0.61 1.73 0.63 1.24 0.79 1.14 0.63 1.24 1.24 0.76 0.79 0.79 0.53 2.44 0.76 0.63 0.79 0.79 0.53 0.63 1.22 0.63 0.76 0.76

Window Height (m) 1.07 1.07 0.30 1.09 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.55 0.30 1.75 1.45 1.75 2.39 0.30 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 0.30 0.30

Total Area Window RSI (m2) 0.65 0.506 0.65 0.506 0.53 0.460 0.69 0.510 4.36 0.570 2.76 0.546 2.00 0.566 3.34 0.531 2.18 0.570 1.93 0.564 0.23 0.443 4.14 0.546 2.28 0.537 4.67 0.517 5.82 0.610 0.23 0.443 2.23 0.531 2.76 0.546 2.76 0.546 1.87 0.517 5.56 0.531 2.14 0.569 2.23 0.531 0.23 0.443 0.23 0.443

SHGC

18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W 18 W

0.3205 0.3205 0.2528 0.3256 0.3969 0.3698 0.3928 0.3522 0.3969 0.3903 0.2140 0.3698 0.3601 0.3348 0.4342 0.2140 0.3522 0.3698 0.3698 0.3348 0.3522 0.3959 0.3522 0.2140 0.2140

WINDOW CODE SCHEDULE
Name 18 W Internal Code 213224 Description (Glazings, Coatings, Fill, Spacer, Type, Frame) Double/double with 1 coat, Low-E .04 (soft), 13 mm Argon, Insulating, Slider with sash, Vinyl, ER* = -13.90, Eff. RSI= 0.38

* Window Standard Energy Rating estimated for assumed dimensions, and Air tightness type: CSA - A1; Leakage rate = 2.790 m3/hr/m

85

BUILDING PARAMETER DETAILS
CEILING COMPONENTS Construction Type 1st Flr. Alcoves 2nd Floor Flat Bdrm 4 Cathdral Greatroom Cathdr Attic/hip Attic/gable Cathedral Cathedral Code Type 18 Ceil 18 Ceil 18 Cath 18 Cath Roof Slope 6.0/12 8.0/12 8.0/12 7.6/12 Heel Ht.(m) 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 Section Area (m2) 1.67 146.17 3.02 40.03 R. Value (RSI) 7.33 7.07 5.95 6.48

MAIN WALL COMPONENTS Label 1st Flr. Siding Type: 18Wall 1st Flr. Stone Type: 18Wall 2nd Flr. Siding Type: 18Wall 2nd Flr.to Attic Type: 18Wall Garage Wall Type: 18Wall F. H. 1st Siding Type: 18002C0020 F. H. 1st Stone Type: 18002C0070 F. H. 2nd Siding Type: 18002C0020 F. H. 2nd Siding Type: 18002C0000 Lintel Type Fac. Dir Number of Corn. Number of Inter. Height (m) Perim. (m) Area (m2) R. Value (RSI) 3.43

101

N/A

17

2

3.02

33.43

101.09

101

N/A

5

0

3.02

15.40

46.58

3.55

101

N/A

15

6

2.77

53.14

147.06

3.65

101

N/A

4

0

2.67

7.62

20.32

3.85

N/A

N/A

1

2

3.02

11.13

33.64

3.90

000

N/A

4

4

0.23

26.17

5.98

3.18

000

N/A

4

4

0.23

22.67

5.18

3.32

000

N/A

4

4

0.23

53.14

12.15

3.18

000

N/A

4

4

0.23

7.62

1.74

3.06

WALL CODE SCHEDULE Internal Name Code 18002C0020 18002C0070 18002C0000 18002C0020 18002C0070 18002C0000

Description (Structure, typ/size, Spacing, Insull, 2, Int., Sheathing, Exterior, Studs) Floor header, N/A, N/A, RSI 2.1 (R 12) batt, N/A, None, None, Hollow metal/vinyl cladding, 2 studs Floor header, N/A, N/A, RSI 2.1 (R 12) batt, N/A, None, None, Stone, 2 studs Floor header, N/A, N/A, RSI 2.1 (R 12) batt, N/A, None, None, None, 2 studs

86

EXPOSED FLOORS Label Bdrm 4 Window Over Garage EXPOSED FLOOR SCHEDULE Internal Name Code 18 ExFlr DOORS Label fr / ext Loc: 1st Flr. Stone fr / ext 2 Loc: 1st Flr. Stone garage / foyer Loc: Garage Wall

Floor Code Type 18 ExFlr 18 ExFlr

Area (m2) 1.53 24.08

R. Value (RSI) 5.59 5.55

Description (Structure, typ/size, Spacing, Insull, 2, Int., Sheathing, Exterior, Studs) N/A, N/A, N/A, N/A, N/A, N/A, N/A, N/A, N/A

Type Steel polystyrene core Steel polystyrene core Steel polystyrene core

Height (m) 2.03 2.03 2.03

Width (m) 0.86 0.86 0.81

Gross Area (m2) 1.75 1.75 1.65

R. Value (RSI) 0.98 0.98 0.98

USER-DEFINED STRUCTURE CODES SCHEDULE Name 1118Wall 2118 Ceil 2118 Cath 3118 ExFlr FOUNDATIONS

Description

Foundation Name: Foundation Type: Data Type: Total Wall Height: Depth Below Grade:

Basement Basement Library 2.59 m 1.98 m

Volume: Opening to Main Floor: Non-Rectangular Floor Perimeter: Floor Area: R-value: R-Value: R-Value: R-Value:

402.5 m3 1.56 m2

61.30 m 155.36 m2 2.22 RSI 2.22 RSI 2.22 RSI 0.60 RSI

Interior wall type: Exterior wall type: Number of corners : Lintel type: Added to slab type : Floors Above Found.:

18 BWall 64 mm (2.5 in) XTPS IV 19 N/A User specified 4221000240

Exposed areas for: Basement Exposed Perimeter: 61.30m Configuration: BCCB_4 - concrete walls and floor - interior surface of wall insulated over full-height - exterior surface of wall insulated over full-height - sub-surface of floor slab fully insulated but no insulation under footings - thermal-break between walls and floor slab - any first storey construction type

87

FOUNDATION CODE SCHEDULE Added To Slab Name 64 mm XTPS IV (2 Code 00B00 Description (Framing, Spacing, Insulation, Int., Sheathing) None, 305 mm (12 in), N/A, None, None

Floors Above Foundation Internal Name Code 4221000240 4221000240

Description (Structure, typ/size, Spacing, Insul1, 2, Int., Sheathing, Exterior, Drop Framing) Wood frame, 38x184 (2x8), 400 mm (16 in), None, None, None, Waferboard/OSB 11.1 mm (7/16 in), Tile-linoleum, No

ROOF CAVITY INPUTS Gable Ends Sheathing Material Exterior Material: Sloped Roof Sheathing Material Exterior Material: Total Cavity Volume: Total Area: Plywood/Part. bd 9.5 mm (3/8 in) Hollow metal/vinyl cladding Total Area: Plywood/Part. bd 12.7 mm (1/2 in) Asphalt shingles 240.8 m3 Ventilation Rate: 32.50 m2 0.08 RSI 0.11 RSI 177.58 m2 0.11 RSI 0.08 RSI 0.50 ACH/hr

88

BUILDING ASSEMBLY DETAILS
Label CEILING COMPONENTS 1st Flr. Alcoves 2nd Floor Flat Bdrm 4 Cathdral Greatroom Cathdr MAIN WALL COMPONENTS 1st Flr. Siding 1st Flr. Stone 2nd Flr. Siding 2nd Flr.to Attic Garage Wall F. H. 1st Siding F. H. 1st Stone F. H. 2nd Siding F. H. 2nd Siding FLOORS ABOVE BASEMENTS Basement 4221000240 0.00 0.60 0.60 18Wall 18Wall 18Wall 18Wall 18Wall 18002C0020 18002C0070 18002C0020 18002C0000 4.38 4.38 4.38 4.38 4.38 2.80 2.80 2.80 2.80 3.43 3.55 3.65 3.85 3.90 3.18 3.32 3.18 3.06 3.43 3.55 3.65 3.85 3.90 3.18 3.32 3.18 3.06 18 Ceil 18 Ceil 18 Cath 18 Cath 7.05 7.05 7.14 7.14 7.04 7.06 5.95 6.48 7.33 7.07 5.95 6.48 Construction Code Nominal (RSI) System (RSI) Effective (RSI)

BUILDING PARAMETERS SUMMARY
ZONE 1 : Above Grade Component Ceiling Main Walls Doors Exposed floors South Windows East Windows North Windows West Windows Area m2 Gross 190.90 373.74 5.16 25.61 14.99 4.11 16.92 19.54 Area m2 Net 190.90 314.33 3.86 25.61 14.99 4.11 16.92 19.54 Effective (RSI) 6.92 3.58 0.98 5.55 0.54 0.57 0.56 0.54 Heat Loss MJ 9604.64 35913.80 1729.17 1859.09 12128.10 3183.34 13364.10 15969.16 93751.41 % Annual Heat Loss 6.82 25.50 1.23 1.32 8.61 2.26 9.49 11.34 66.55

ZONE 1 Totals: INTER-ZONE Heat Transfer : Floors Above Basement Area m2 Gross 155.36 ZONE 2 : Basement Component Walls above grade East windows North windows West windows Area m2 Gross 37.37 0.23 0.23 0.46 Area m2 Net 36.44 0.23 0.23 0.46 Effective (RSI) 0.44 0.44 0.44

Area m2 Net 155.36

Effective (RSI) 0.597

Heat Loss MJ 10515.30

Heat Loss MJ 5216.37 213.54 213.54 427.08

% Annual Heat Loss 3.70 0.15 0.15 0.30

89

Below grade foundation

276.80

276.80 ZONE 2 Totals:

-

14189.35 20259.87

10.07 14.38

Ventilation House Volume 1323.30 m3 Air Change 0.378 ACH Heat Loss MJ 26852.834 % Annual Heat Loss 19.06

90

AIR LEAKAGE AND VENTILATION
Building Envelope Surface Area: 904.42 m2 Air Leakage Test Results at 50 Pa.(0.2 in H2O) = 1.41 ACH Equivalent Leakage Area @ 10 Pa = 696.69 cm2 Terrain Description @ Weather Station : Open flat terrain, grass @ Building site : Suburban, forest Local Shielding: Walls: Flue : Ceiling: 0.200 Light None Walls: 0.650 Floors: 0.150 Height Anemometer Bldg. Eaves m 10.0 6.4

Leakage Fractions-

Normalized Leakage Area @ 10 Pa: Estimated Airflow to cause a 5 Pa Pressure Difference: Estimated Airflow to cause a 10 Pa Pressure Difference:

0.7703 cm2/m2 111 L/s 174 L/s

F326 VENTILATION REQUIREMENTS
Kitchen, Living Room, Dining Room Utility Room Bedroom Bedroom Bathroom Basement Rooms 3 rooms @ 5.0 L/s: 15.0 L/s 1 rooms @ 5.0 L/s: 5.0 L/s 1 rooms @ 10.0 L/s: 10.0 L/s 2 rooms @ 5.0 L/s: 10.0 L/s 2 rooms @ 5.0 L/s: 10.0 L/s : 10.0 L/s

CENTRAL VENTILATION SYSTEM
System Type: Manufacturer: Model Number: HRV VanEE 2001 HRV (Gold Series) 124 Watts 114 Watts 0 Watts 80% 80% 25% 0% (0%)

Fan and Preheater Power at 0.0 °C: Fan and Preheater Power at -25.0 °C: Preheater Capacity: Sensible Heat Recovery Efficiency at 0.0 °C Sensible Heat Recovery Efficiency at -25.0 °C Total Heat Recovery Efficency in Cooling Mode Low Temperature Ventilation Reduction: Low Temperature Ventilation Reduction: Airflow Adjustment

Vented combustion appliance depressurization limit: 5.00 Pa. Ventilation Supply Duct Location: Main floor Length: 1.5 m

Type: Diameter:

Flexible 152.4 mm

91

Insulation:

0.7 RSI

Sealing Characteristics: Sealed

Ventilation Exhaust Duct Location: Main floor Length: 1.5 m Insulation: 0.7 RSI

Type: Flexible Diameter: 152.4 mm Sealing Characteristics: Sealed

SECONDARY FANS & OTHER EXHAUST APPLIANCES
Control Dryer Continuous Supply (L/s) Exhaust (L/s) 1.20

Dryer is vented outdoors

AIR LEAKAGE AND VENTILATION SUMMARY
F326 Required continous ventilation: Central Ventilation Supply Rate (): Total house ventilation is Balanced Gross Air Leakage and Ventilation Energy Load: Seasonal Heat Recovery Ventilator Efficiency: Estimated Ventilation Electrical Load: Heating Hours: Estimated Ventilation Electrical Load: NonHeating Hours: Net Air Leakage and Ventilation Load: 73105.164 MJ 79.436 % 3533.697 MJ 373.219 MJ 28619.682 MJ 60.000 L/s (0.16 ACH) 110.908 L/s (0.30 ACH)

92

SPACE HEATING SYSTEM
Primary Space Heating Fuel: Space Heating Equipment: Manufacturer: Model: Capacity at XT3 °C: COP at XT3 °C: Crankcase Heater Power: Heat Pump Temperature Cut-Off: Balance point Natural Gas Ground Source Heat Pump Atlas ATO60 0.00 kW 3.82 60.00 watts

SPACE HEATING SYSTEM
Secondary Heating Fuel: Equipment: Manufacturer: Model: Calculated* Output Capacity: * Design Heat loss X 1.00 + 0.5 kW Steady State Efficiency: Fan Mode: Low Speed Fan Power: High Speed Fan Power: Electricity Baseboard/Hydronic/Plenum(duct) htrs.

18.00 kW 50.00 % Auto 0 watts 791 watts

AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM
System Type: Manufacturer: Model: Capacity: SEER Sensible Heat Ratio: Indoor Fan Flow Rate: Ventilator Flow Rate: Fraction of windows Openable Economizer control: Conventional A/C 10776 Watts 14.70 0.76 600.69 L/s 0.00 L/s 0.00 N/A Indoor Fan Operation: Continuous

Rated COP Fan Power (watts) Crankcase Heater Power (watts):

3.1 465.54 60.00

Air Conditioner is integrated with the Heating System

DOMESTIC WATER HEATING SYSTEM
Primary Water Heating Fuel: Water Heating Equipment: Manufactuer: Model: CSIA Solar Collector Rating: Solar Solar collector system Enerworks EWRA2 10400.00 MJ/Year

93

Secondary Water Heating Fuel: Water Heating Equipment: Manufactuer: Model: CSIA Solar Collector Rating:

Solar B-Medium, Wood frame Enerworks EWRA2 MJ/Year

ANNUAL SPACE HEATING SUMMARY
Design Heat Loss at -17.20 °C (13.43 Watts / m3): Including credit for HRV (0.00 Watts / m3): Gross Space Heat Loss: Gross Space Heating Load: Usable Internal Gains: Usable Internal Gains Fraction: Usable Solar Gains: Usable Solar Gains Fraction: Auxilary Energy Required: Space Heating System Load: Heat Pump and Furnace Annual COP: Heat Pump Annual Energy Consumption: Furnace/Boiler Annual Energy Consumption: Annual Space Heating Energy Consumption: 17774.13 Watts 0.00 140864.11 MJ 139450.69 MJ 24173.33 MJ 17.16 % 24260.95 MJ 17.22 % 91016.44 MJ 91016.41 MJ 2.94 27269.14 MJ 1694.82 MJ 28963.96 MJ

ANNUAL SPACE COOLING SUMMARY
Design Cooling Load for July at 31.00 °C: Design Sensible Heat Ratio: Estimated Annual Space Cooling Energy: Seasonal COP ( May to October): 10727.38 Watts 0.77 1654.89 3.45

ANNUAL DOMESTIC WATER HEATING SUMMARY
Daily Hot Water Consumption: Hot Water Temperature: Estimated Domestic Water Heating Load: Solar Domestic Water Heating System Contribution: Domestic Water Heating Energy Consumption: System Seasonal Efficiency: 225.00 Litres 55.00 °C 15341.32 MJ 8755.98 MJ 7621.24 MJ Secondary 86.41

BASE LOADS SUMMARY
Interior Lighting Appliances kwh/day 1.00 14.00 Annual kWh 365.00 5110.00

94

Other Exterior Use HVAC Fans HRV/Exhaust Space Heating Space Cooling Total Average Electrical Load

3.00 4.00 2.97 1.50 3.42 29.90

1095.00 1460.00 1085.25 547.56 1249.88 10912.69

FAN OPERATION SUMMARY (kWh)
Hours Heating Neither Cooling Total HRV/Exhaust Fans 981.58 0.00 103.67 1085.25 Space Heating 547.56 0.00 0.00 547.56 Space Cooling 0.00 1023.36 226.51 1249.88

95

ENERGY CONSUMPTION SUMMARY REPORT

Estimated Annual Space Heating Energy Consumption Ventilator Electrical Consumption: Heating Hours Estimated Annual DHW Heating Energy Consumption ESTIMATED ANNUAL SPACE + DHW ENERGY CONSUMPTION Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions 12.47 tonnes/year

= 37395.54 MJ = 3533.70 MJ = 7621.24 MJ = 48550.48 MJ

= 10387.65 kWh = 981.58 kWh = 2117.01 kWh = 13486.24 kWh

ESTIMATED ANNUAL FUEL CONSUMPTION SUMMARY
Fuel Natural Gas (m3) Electricity (kWh) Space Heating 173.39 9574.68 Space Cooling 0.00 1654.89 DHW Heating 0.00 2117.01 Appliance 0.00 9053.36 Total 173.39 22399.95

ESTIMATED ANNUAL FUEL CONSUMPTION COSTS
Fuel Costs Library = C:\PROGRA~1\H2KEGH~1\Stdlibs\FuelLib.FLC RATE $ Electricity (Ottawa97) 1781.58 Natural Gas (Ottawa97) 135.62 Oil (Ottawa97) 0.00 Propane (Ottawa97) 0.00 Wood (Sth Ont) 0.00 Total 1917.20

96

MONTHLY ENERGY PROFILE
Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Ann Energy Load (MJ) 24332.2 21310.6 19092.6 12490.5 7493.9 2397.6 819.0 1284.1 4525.5 9755.4 14622.3 21326.9 139450.7 Internal Gains (MJ) 2296.4 2067.8 2296.8 2241.9 2343.3 1700.0 794.1 1168.1 2312.2 2369.8 2267.2 2315.9 24173.3 Solar Gains (MJ) 2613.1 3049.3 3751.8 3210.5 2860.4 697.6 25.0 116.0 1837.8 2549.9 1583.4 1966.2 24260.9 Aux. Energy (MJ) 19422.8 16193.4 13044.0 7038.2 2290.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 375.6 4835.8 10771.7 17044.8 91016.4 HRV Eff. % 79.4 79.4 79.4 79.4 79.4 79.5 79.5 79.5 79.5 79.4 79.4 79.4 79.4

FOUNDATION ENERGY PROFILE
Heat Loss (MJ) Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Ann Crawl Space 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Slab 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Basement 1240.5 1034.1 832.9 449.4 146.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 24.0 308.8 687.8 1088.4 5812.1 Walkout 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Total 1240.5 1034.1 832.9 449.4 146.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 24.0 308.8 687.8 1088.4 5812.1

FOUNDATION TEMPERATURES & VENTILATION PROFILE
Temperature (Deg °C) Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Crawl Space 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Basement 20.0 19.9 19.8 19.9 20.1 20.5 21.3 Walkout 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Air Change Rate Natural 0.112 0.108 0.098 0.082 0.061 0.045 0.038 Total 0.417 0.413 0.403 0.387 0.366 0.350 0.343 Heat Loss (MJ 5463.8 4694.9 3949.1 2273.0 1072.0 171.9 -97.5

97

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Ann

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0

21.2 20.6 20.4 20.3 20.1 20.3

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0

0.038 0.048 0.065 0.085 0.101 0.073

0.343 0.353 0.370 0.390 0.406 0.378

-11.9 494.1 1555.9 2754.6 4532.9 26852.8

SPACE HEATING SYSTEM PERFORMANCE
Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Ann Space Heating Load (MJ) 19422.8 16193.4 13043.9 7038.2 2290.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 375.6 4835.8 10771.7 17044.8 91016.4 Furnace Input (MJ) 676.1 420.8 109.3 67.7 35.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.7 55.1 78.3 245.0 1694.8 Pilot Light (MJ) 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 27269.1 Indoor Fans (MJ) 431.6 386.2 314.9 161.0 47.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.4 83.6 197.3 342.7 1971.2 Heat Pump Input (MJ) 5725.8 4998.0 4174.5 2252.6 729.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 140.4 1348.6 3025.4 4874.5 0.0 Total Input (MJ) 6833.5 5805.0 4598.7 2481.4 812.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 153.5 1487.4 3301.0 5462.2 30935.2 System Cop 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.4 3.3 3.3 3.1 2.9

AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM PERFORMANCE
Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Ann Sensible 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 796.6 2810.4 5191.3 4184.7 1114.9 137.5 0.0 0.0 14235.4 Latent 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 149.0 867.0 1918.2 1650.5 395.7 46.1 0.0 0.0 5026.5 AirCond 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 66.1 254.1 474.3 392.6 105.8 13.0 0.0 0.0 1305.9 Fan 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 287.7 1206.7 1246.9 1246.9 451.3 60.1 0.0 0.0 4499.6 Ventilator 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Total 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 146.1 599.2 823.7 744.8 231.2 29.7 0.0 0.0 2574.6 COP 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.4 3.3 3.5 3.5 3.4 3.3 0.0 0.0 3.4 Av.RH 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.1 42.3 45.7 46.7 44.0 42.5 0.0 0.0 44.2

MONTHLY ESTIMATED ENERGY CONSUMPTION BY DEVICE (MJ)
98

Space Heating Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Ann Primary 5725.8 4998.0 4174.5 2252.6 729.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 140.4 1348.6 3025.4 4874.5 27269.1 Secondary 1224.8 916.4 658.0 598.7 584.4 531.0 548.7 548.7 537.7 603.8 609.3 793.7 8155.2

DHW Heating Primary 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Secondary 1242.0 954.8 867.7 434.5 297.5 85.3 88.2 116.9 398.9 792.3 1085.1 1258.1 7621.2

Lights & Appliances 2455.2 2217.6 2455.2 2376.0 2455.2 2376.0 2455.2 2455.2 2376.0 2455.2 2376.0 2455.2 28908.0

HRV & FANS 762.2 685.0 646.8 482.4 667.4 1528.1 1579.0 1579.0 779.1 475.8 518.7 674.1 10377.7

Air Conditioner 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 238.1 950.5 1718.3 1434.3 380.9 46.8 0.0 0.0 4768.9

MONTHLY ESTIMATED SOLAR DHW CONTRIBUTION (MJ)
DHW Heating Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Ann Primary 300.1 459.4 675.0 996.9 1094.5 1178.2 1154.1 1102.1 801.8 512.3 261.4 220.3 8756.0

ESTIMATED FUEL COSTS (Dollars)
Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Electricity 229.2 198.3 178.4 126.9 103.7 113.8 131.3 126.3 97.0 Natural Gas 11.4 11.0 11.4 11.3 11.4 11.3 11.4 11.4 11.3 Oil 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Propane 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Wood 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Total 240.6 209.4 189.7 138.1 115.0 125.0 142.7 137.7 108.3

99

Oct Nov Dec Ann

118.3 155.6 202.8 1781.6

11.4 11.3 11.4 135.6

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0

129.7 166.8 214.2 1917.2

The calculated heat losses and energy consumptions are only estimates, based upon the data entered and assumptions within the program. Actual energy consumption and heat losses will be influenced by construction practices, localized weather, equipment characteristics and the lifestyle of the occupants.

100

Appendix - C
System Input File Generated by TRNSYS

101

VERSION 16 ******************************************************************************* *** TRNSYS input file (deck) generated by TrnsysStudio *** on Monday, April 20, 2009 at 11:39 *** from TrnsysStudio project: M:\mattamy_27_Sep.TPF *** *** If you edit this file, use the File/Import TRNSYS Input File function in *** TrnsysStudio to update the project. *** *** If you have problems, questions or suggestions please contact your local *** TRNSYS distributor or mailto:iisibat@cstb.fr *** *******************************************************************************

******************************************************************************* *** Units ******************************************************************************* ******************************************************************************* *** Control cards ******************************************************************************* * START, STOP and STEP CONSTANTS 3 START=0 STOP=8760.000229455 STEP=1 * User defined CONSTANTS SIMULATION START STOP TOLERANCES 0.001 0.001 LIMITS 60 30 30 DFQ 1 WIDTH 72 LIST SOLVER 0 1 1 Maximum relaxation factor NAN_CHECK 0 OVERWRITE_CHECK 0 EQSOLVER 0 * EQUATIONS "Radiation" * EQUATIONS 27 AISZ = [109,10] AISA = [109,11] IT_H = Max([109,12],0) IB_H = Max([109,13],0) ID_H = [109,14] AI_H = [109,16] IT_N = [109,18] AI_N = [109,22] IB_N = [109,19] * LT(AI_N,90) IT_S = [109,24] IB_S = [109,25] STEP ! Start time End time Time step ! Integration Convergence ! Max iterations Max warnings Trace limit ! TRNSYS numerical integration solver method ! TRNSYS output file width, number of characters ! NOLIST statement ! MAP statement ! Solver statement Minimum relaxation factor ! Nan DEBUG statement ! Overwrite DEBUG statement ! EQUATION SOLVER statement

102

AI_S = [109,28] IT_E = [109,30] IB_E = [109,31] AI_E = [109,34] IT_W = [109,36] IB_W = [109,37] AI_W = [109,40] IT_SLOPE_E = [109,42] IB_SLOPE_E = [109,43] AI_SLOPE_E = [109,46] IT_SLOPE_W = [109,48] IB_SLOPE_W = [109,49] AI_SLOPE_W = [109,52] IT_SLOPE_S = [109,54] IB_SLOPE_S = [109,55] AI_SLOPE_S = [109,58] *$UNIT_NAME Radiation *$LAYER Main *$POSITION 196 125 *------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Model "Weather data" (Type 109) * UNIT 109 TYPE 109 Weather data *$UNIT_NAME Weather data *$MODEL .\Weather Data Reading and Processing\Standard Format\TMY2\Type109-TMY2.tmf *$POSITION 57 178 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 4 2 ! 1 Data Reader Mode 30 ! 2 Logical unit 4 ! 3 Sky model for diffuse radiation 1 ! 4 Tracking mode INPUTS 17 0,0 ! [unconnected] Ground reflectance 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slope of surface-1 0,0 ! [unconnected] Azimuth of surface-1 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slope of surface-2 0,0 ! [unconnected] Azimuth of surface-2 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slope of surface-3 0,0 ! [unconnected] Azimuth of surface-3 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slope of surface-4 0,0 ! [unconnected] Azimuth of surface-4 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slope of surface-5 0,0 ! [unconnected] Azimuth of surface-5 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slope of surface-6 0,0 ! [unconnected] Azimuth of surface-6 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slope of surface-7 0,0 ! [unconnected] Azimuth of surface-7 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slope of surface-8 0,0 ! [unconnected] Azimuth of surface-8 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 0.2 90 0 90 90 90 180 90 270 45 90 45 270 45 180 45 0

103

*** External files ASSIGN "SUI Transys\CA-ON-Toronto-716240.tm2" 30 *|? Weather data file |1000 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Psychrometrics" (Type 33) * UNIT 331 TYPE 33 Psychrometrics *$UNIT_NAME Psychrometrics *$MODEL .\Physical Phenomena\Thermodynamic Properties\Psychrometrics\Dry Bulb and Relative Humidity Known\Type33e.tmf *$POSITION 200 325 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 3 2 ! 1 Psychrometrics mode 1 ! 2 Wet bulb mode 1 ! 3 Error mode INPUTS 3 109,1 ! Weather data:Ambient temperature ->Dry bulb temp. 109,2 ! Weather data:relative humidity ->Percent relative humidity 0,0 ! [unconnected] Pressure *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 20 50 1 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Sky temp" (Type 69) * UNIT 69 TYPE 69 Sky temp *$UNIT_NAME Sky temp *$MODEL .\Physical Phenomena\Sky Temperature\read in cloudiness factor\Type69a.tmf *$POSITION 353 273 *$LAYER Main # # PARAMETERS 2 1 ! 1 mode for cloudiness factor 0 ! 2 height over sea level INPUTS 5 331,7 ! Psychrometrics:Dry bulb temperature ->Ambient temperature 331,8 ! Psychrometrics:Dew point temperature. ->Dew point temperature at ambient conditions 109,13 ! Weather data:beam radiation on horitonzal ->Beam radiation on the horizontal 109,14 ! Weather data:sky diffuse radiation on horizontal ->Diffuse radiation on the horizontal 0,0 ! [unconnected] Cloudiness factor - sky *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 00000 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Mattamy house" (Type 56) * UNIT 56 TYPE 56 Mattamy house *$UNIT_NAME Mattamy house *$MODEL .\Loads and Structures\Multi-Zone Building\With Standard Output Files\Type56a.tmf *$POSITION 948 573 *$LAYER Main # # *$#

104

PARAMETERS 6 31 ! 1 Logical unit for building description file (.bui) 1 ! 2 Star network calculation switch 0.5 ! 3 Weighting factor for operative temperature 32 ! 4 Logical unit for monthly summary 33 ! 5 Logical unit for hourly temperatures 34 ! 6 Logical unit for hourly loads INPUTS 36 331,7 ! Psychrometrics:Dry bulb temperature -> 1- TAMB (AMBIENT TEMPERATURE) 331,6 ! Psychrometrics:Percent relative humidity -> 2- ARELHUM (RELATIVE AMBIENT HUMIDITY) 69,1 ! Sky temp:Fictive sky temperature -> 3- TSKY (FIKTIVE SKY TEMPERATURE) IT_N ! Radiation:IT_N -> 4- ITNORTH (INCIDENT RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION NORTH) IT_S ! Radiation:IT_S -> 5- ITSOUTH (INCIDENT RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION SOUTH) IT_E ! Radiation:IT_E -> 6- ITEAST (INCIDENT RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION EAST) IT_W ! Radiation:IT_W -> 7- ITWEST (INCIDENT RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION WEST) IT_H ! Radiation:IT_H -> 8- ITHORIZONT (INCIDENT RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION HORIZONTAL) IT_SLOPE_E ! Radiation:IT_SLOPE_E -> 9- ITESLOPE (INCIDENT RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION ESLOPE) IT_SLOPE_W ! Radiation:IT_SLOPE_W -> 10- ITWSLOPE (INCIDENT RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION WSLOPE) IT_SLOPE_S ! Radiation:IT_SLOPE_S -> 11- ITSOUTHSLO (INCIDENT RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION SOUTHSLOPE) IB_N ! Radiation:IB_N -> 12- IBNORTH (INCIDENT BEAM RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION NORTH) IB_S ! Radiation:IB_S -> 13- IBSOUTH (INCIDENT BEAM RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION SOUTH) IB_E ! Radiation:IB_E -> 14- IBEAST (INCIDENT BEAM RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION EAST) IB_W ! Radiation:IB_W -> 15- IBWEST (INCIDENT BEAM RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION WEST) IB_H ! Radiation:IB_H -> 16- IBHORIZONT (INCIDENT BEAM RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION HORIZONTAL) IB_SLOPE_E ! Radiation:IB_SLOPE_E -> 17- IBESLOPE (INCIDENT BEAM RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION ESLOPE) IB_SLOPE_W ! Radiation:IB_SLOPE_W -> 18- IBWSLOPE (INCIDENT BEAM RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION WSLOPE) IB_SLOPE_S ! Radiation:IB_SLOPE_S -> 19- IBSOUTHSLO (INCIDENT BEAM RADIATION FOR ORIENTATION SOUTHSLOPE) AI_N ! Radiation:AI_N -> 20- AINORTH (ANGLE OF INCIDENCE FOR ORIENTATION NORTH) AI_S ! Radiation:AI_S -> 21- AISOUTH (ANGLE OF INCIDENCE FOR ORIENTATION SOUTH) AI_E ! Radiation:AI_E -> 22- AIEAST (ANGLE OF INCIDENCE FOR ORIENTATION EAST) AI_W ! Radiation:AI_W -> 23- AIWEST (ANGLE OF INCIDENCE FOR ORIENTATION WEST) AI_H ! Radiation:AI_H -> 24- AIHORIZONT (ANGLE OF INCIDENCE FOR ORIENTATION HORIZONTAL) AI_SLOPE_E ! Radiation:AI_SLOPE_E -> 25- AIESLOPE (ANGLE OF INCIDENCE FOR ORIENTATION ESLOPE) AI_SLOPE_W ! Radiation:AI_SLOPE_W -> 26- AIWSLOPE (ANGLE OF INCIDENCE FOR ORIENTATION WSLOPE) AI_SLOPE_S ! Radiation:AI_SLOPE_S -> 27- AISOUTHSLO (ANGLE OF INCIDENCE FOR ORIENTATION SOUTHSLOPE)

105

Basement_Heat ! Gain:Basement_Heat -> 28- HEATER_SLA (INPUT) 64,8 ! HRV:Fresh air %RH -> 29- RH_HVAC (INPUT) 64,6 ! HRV:Fresh air temperature -> 30- T_HVAC (INPUT) Heat_1stFLR ! Gain:Heat_1stFLR -> 31- HEATER1 (INPUT) Heat_2ndFLR ! Gain:Heat_2ndFLR -> 32- HEATER2 (INPUT) 0,0 ! [unconnected] 33- COOLING (INPUT) Cooling_1stFLR ! Gain:Cooling_1stFLR -> 34- COOLING1 (INPUT) cooling_2ndFLR ! Gain:cooling_2ndFLR -> 35- COOLING2 (INPUT) 30,1 ! Heating Sch:Heating enable signal -> 36- HEATING_SC (INPUT) *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 000000000000000000000000000000000000 *** External files ASSIGN "Mattamy\mattamy TRANSBUILD\Mattamy Home Transbuild 14 june.bui" 31 *|? Building description file (*.bui) |1000 ASSIGN "T56_std-Output.sum" 32 *|? Monthly Summary File |1000 ASSIGN "T56_std-temp.prn" 33 *|? Hourly Temperatures |1000 ASSIGN "T56_std-q.prn" 34 *|? Hourly Loads |1000 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Type505b" (Type 505) * UNIT 14 TYPE 505 Type505b *$UNIT_NAME Type505b *$MODEL .\HVAC Library (TESS)\Water Loop Heat Pump\Relative Humidity\Type505b.tmf *$POSITION 368 519 *$LAYER Main # *$# The value for power in the catalog data files for both heating and cooling mode should include the *$# indoor fan. *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# *$# PARAMETERS 21 2 ! 1 Humidity mode 39 ! 2 Logical unit for cooling data 40 ! 3 Logical unit for heating data

106

41 ! 4 Logical unit number for cooling correction data 42 ! 5 Logical unit number for heating correction data 3 ! 6 Number of water flow steps 4 ! 7 Number of water temps. - cooling 4 ! 8 Number of water temps. - heating 6 ! 9 Number of wet bulb steps 4 ! 10 Number of dry bulb steps - cooling 6 ! 11 Number of dry bulb steps - heating 2 ! 12 Number of airflow steps - cooling 2 ! 13 Number of airflow steps - heating 1036 ! 14 Density of liquid stream 3.6 ! 15 Specific heat of liquid stream 4.18 ! 16 Specific heat of DHW fluid 671.101145 ! 17 Blower power 35.999997 ! 18 Controller power 8999.999334 ! 19 Capacity of stage-1 auxiliary 0 ! 20 Capacity of stage-2 auxiliary 943.899617 ! 21 Total air flow rate INPUTS 29 22,1 ! Type11f:Temperature at outlet 1 ->Inlet liquid temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Inlet liquid flow rate 56,3 ! Mattamy house: 3- (air temperature of zone) TAIR 3 ->Return air temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Not used 0,0 ! [unconnected] Return air %RH 0,0 ! [unconnected] Return air pressure 0,0 ! [unconnected] Return air damper pressure drop 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fresh air temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Not used 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fresh air %RH 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fresh air pressure 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fresh air damper pressure drop 27,1 ! Hot Water Tank:Temperature to heat source ->Inlet DHW temperature 27,2 ! Hot Water Tank:Flowrate to heat source ->Inlet DHW flow rate HP_COOLING ! Heat Pump Control:HP_COOLING ->Cooling control signal HP ! Heat Pump Control:HP ->Heating control signal HP ! Heat Pump Control:HP ->Stage 1 auxiliary signal HP ! Heat Pump Control:HP ->Stage 2 auxiliary signal Fan_signal ! Heat Pump Control:Fan_signal ->Fan control signal 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fraction of outside air 0,0 ! [unconnected] Cooling desuperheater temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Heating desuperheater temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Desuperheater UA - cooling 0,0 ! [unconnected] Desuperheater UA - heating 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fraction of rated cooling power 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fraction of rated cooling capacity 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fraction of rated heating power 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fraction of rated heating capacity 0,0 ! [unconnected] Pressure rise through heat pump *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 5 1173 20.0 0.008 50.0 1.0 0 15 0.008 50. 1.0 0 12 500 0 0 0 0 0 0 60.0 55.0 1500.0 1500.0 1.0 1.0 1 1 0.0 *** External files ASSIGN "Atlas60_C.dat" 39 *|? Which file contains the heat pump cooling performance data? |1000 ASSIGN "Atlas60_Heating.txt" 40 *|? Which file contains the heat pump heating performance data? |1000

107

ASSIGN "C:\Program Files\Trnsys16\Tess Models\SampleCatalogData\GeothermalHeatPump\Samp_CT.DAT" 41 *|? Which file contains the heat pump cooling correction factor data? |1000 ASSIGN "C:\Program Files\Trnsys16\Tess Models\SampleCatalogData\GeothermalHeatPump\Samp_HT.DAT" 42 *|? Which file contains the heat pump heating correction factor data? |1000 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Solar Panel" (Type 1) * UNIT 15 TYPE 1 Solar Panel *$UNIT_NAME Solar Panel *$MODEL .\Solar Thermal Collectors\Quadratic Efficiency Collector\2nd-Order Incidence Angle Modifiers\Type1b.tmf *$POSITION 232 850 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 11 3 ! 1 Number in series 6.81 ! 2 Collector area 3.6 ! 3 Fluid specific heat 1 ! 4 Efficiency mode 40.0 ! 5 Tested flow rate 0.80 ! 6 Intercept efficiency 13.0 ! 7 Efficiency slope 0.05 ! 8 Efficiency curvature 2 ! 9 Optical mode 2 0.2 ! 10 1st-order IAM 0.0 ! 11 2nd-order IAM INPUTS 9 22,3 ! Type11f:Temperature at outlet 2 ->Inlet temperature 22,4 ! Type11f:Flow rate at outlet 2 ->Inlet flowrate 109,1 ! Weather data:Ambient temperature ->Ambient temperature 109,60 ! Weather data:total radiation on tilted surface-8 ->Incident radiation 109,12 ! Weather data:total radiation on horizontal ->Total horizontal radiation 109,14 ! Weather data:sky diffuse radiation on horizontal ->Horizontal diffuse radiation 0,0 ! [unconnected] Ground reflectance 109,64 ! Weather data:angle of incidence for tilted surface -8 ->Incidence angle 0,0 ! [unconnected] Collector slope *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 5 0 10.0 0. 0.0 0.0 0.2 45.0 45 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Type557a" (Type 557) * UNIT 18 TYPE 557 Type557a *$UNIT_NAME Type557a *$MODEL .\GHP Library (TESS)\Ground Heat Exchangers\Vertical U-Tubes\Standard\Type557a.tmf *$POSITION 143 433 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 44 1293 ! 1 Storage volume 55 ! 2 Borehole depth 1.8 ! 3 Header depth 4 ! 4 Number of boreholes

108

0.1 ! 5 Borehole radius 1 ! 6 No. of boreholes in series 1 ! 7 Number of radial regions 10 ! 8 Number of vertical regions 7.2 ! 9 Storage thermal conductivity 1820 ! 10 Storage heat capacity -1 ! 11 Negative of u-tubes/bore 0.01664 ! 12 Outer radius of u-tube pipe 0.01372 ! 13 Inner radius of u-tube pipe 0.0254 ! 14 Center-to-center half distance 3.6 ! 15 Fill thermal conductivity 1.512202 ! 16 Pipe thermal conductivity 6.000001 ! 17 Gap thermal conductivity 0.0 ! 18 Gap thickness 350 ! 19 Reference borehole flow rate 10 ! 20 Reference temperature -1 ! 21 Pipe to pipe heat transfer 3.6 ! 22 Fluid specific heat 1036 ! 23 Fluid density 0 ! 24 Insulation indicator 0 ! 25 Insulation height fraction 0 ! 26 Insulation thickness 0 ! 27 Insulation thermal conductivity 1 ! 28 Number of simulation years 100.0 ! 29 Maximum storage temperature 20.0 ! 30 Initial surface temperature 0.0 ! 31 Initial thermal gradient 0 ! 32 Number of preheating years 30.0 ! 33 Maximum preheat temperature 10.0 ! 34 Minimum preheat temperature 90 ! 35 Preheat phase delay 20.0 ! 36 Average air temperature 15.0 ! 37 Amplitude of air temperature 240 ! 38 Air temperature phase delay 1 ! 39 Number of ground layers 7.2 ! 40 Thermal conductivity of layer 2016.0 ! 41 Heat capacity of layer 1000.0 ! 42 Thickness of layer 0 ! 43 Not used (printing 1) 0 ! 44 Not used (printing 2) INPUTS 5 21,1 ! Type114-2:Outlet fluid temperature ->Inlet fluid temperature 21,2 ! Type114-2:Outlet flow rate ->Inlet flowrate (total) 109,1 ! Weather data:Ambient temperature ->Temperature on top of storage 109,1 ! Weather data:Ambient temperature ->Air temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Circulation switch *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 0 1533 0 0 1 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Type11f" (Type 11) * UNIT 22 TYPE 11 Type11f *$UNIT_NAME Type11f *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Flow Diverter\Other Fluids\Type11f.tmf

109

*$POSITION 139 733 *$LAYER Water Loop # PARAMETERS 1 2 ! 1 Controlled flow diverter mode INPUTS 3 20,1 ! Type114:Outlet fluid temperature ->Inlet temperature 20,2 ! Type114:Outlet flow rate ->Inlet flow rate Solar_Loop ! Control:Solar_Loop ->Control signal *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 501 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Type11h-2" (Type 11) * UNIT 23 TYPE 11 Type11h-2 *$UNIT_NAME Type11h-2 *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Tee-Piece\Other Fluids\Type11h.tmf *$POSITION 215 669 *$LAYER Water Loop # PARAMETERS 1 1 ! 1 Tee piece mode INPUTS 4 14,1 ! Type505b:Exiting fluid temperature ->Temperature at inlet 1 22,2 ! Type11f:Flow rate at outlet 1 ->Flow rate at inlet 1 15,1 ! Solar Panel:Outlet temperature ->Temperature at inlet 2 15,2 ! Solar Panel:Outlet flowrate ->Flow rate at inlet 2 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 5 1173 20 120 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Type114" (Type 114) * UNIT 20 TYPE 114 Type114 *$UNIT_NAME Type114 *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Pumps\Single Speed\Type114.tmf *$POSITION 97 541 *$LAYER Main # *$# SINGLE-SPEED PUMP PARAMETERS 4 1293 ! 1 Rated flow rate 3.6 ! 2 Fluid specific heat 2684.0001 ! 3 Rated power 0.0 ! 4 Motor heat loss fraction INPUTS 5 18,1 ! Type557a:Outlet temperature ->Inlet fluid temperature 18,2 ! Type557a:Outlet flow rate (total) ->Inlet fluid flow rate pump_sinal ! Control:pump_sinal ->Control signal 0,0 ! [unconnected] Overall pump efficiency 0,0 ! [unconnected] Motor efficiency *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 5 1293 1.0 0.6 0.9 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Type114-2" (Type 114)

110

* UNIT 21 TYPE 114 Type114-2 *$UNIT_NAME Type114-2 *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Pumps\Single Speed\Type114.tmf *$POSITION 182 541 *$LAYER Main # *$# SINGLE-SPEED PUMP PARAMETERS 4 1293 ! 1 Rated flow rate 3.6 ! 2 Fluid specific heat 2684.0001 ! 3 Rated power 0.0 ! 4 Motor heat loss fraction INPUTS 5 23,1 ! Type11h-2:Outlet temperature ->Inlet fluid temperature 23,2 ! Type11h-2:Outlet flow rate ->Inlet fluid flow rate pump_sinal ! Control:pump_sinal ->Control signal 0,0 ! [unconnected] Overall pump efficiency 0,0 ! [unconnected] Motor efficiency *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 20.0 1393 1.0 0.6 0.9 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Hot Water Tank" (Type 4) * UNIT 27 TYPE 4 Hot Water Tank *$UNIT_NAME Hot Water Tank *$MODEL .\Thermal Storage\Stratified Storage Tank\Variable Inlets\Uniform Losses\Type4c.tmf *$POSITION 448 786 *$LAYER Water Loop # PARAMETERS 25 2 ! 1 Variable inlet positions 0.22 ! 2 Tank volume 4.19 ! 3 Fluid specific heat 1000 ! 4 Fluid density 3 ! 5 Tank loss coefficient .3 ! 6 Height of node-1 .3 ! 7 Height of node-2 .3 ! 8 Height of node-3 .3 ! 9 Height of node-4 .3 ! 10 Height of node-5 .3 ! 11 Height of node-6 1 ! 12 Auxiliary heater mode 1 ! 13 Node containing heating element -1 1 ! 14 Node containing thermostat -1 60.0 ! 15 Set point temperature for element-1 5.0 ! 16 Deadband for heating element-1 9000 ! 17 Maximum heating rate of element -1 1 ! 18 Node containing heating element -2 1 ! 19 Node containing thermostat -2 60.0 ! 20 Set point temperature for element-2 5.0 ! 21 Deadband for heating element-2 8999.999334 ! 22 Maximum heating rate of element -2 0.0 ! 23 Not used (Flue UA) 20.0 ! 24 Not used (Tflue)

111

100.0 ! 25 Boiling point INPUTS 7 14,8 ! Type505b:Exiting DHW temperature ->Hot-side temperature 14,9 ! Type505b:Exiting DHW flow rate ->Hot-side flowrate 49,1 ! Mixer:Outlet temperature ->Cold-side temperature 49,2 ! Mixer:Outlet flow rate ->Cold-side flowrate 0,0 ! [unconnected] Environment temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Control signal for element-1 0,0 ! [unconnected] Control signal for element-2 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 45.0 1000 8 600 22 1 1 DERIVATIVES 6 0 ! 1 Initial temperature of node-1 0 ! 2 Initial temperature of node-2 0 ! 3 Initial temperature of node-3 0 ! 4 Initial temperature of node-4 0 ! 5 Initial temperature of node-5 0 ! 6 Initial temperature of node-6 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Heating set back" (Type 14) * UNIT 26 TYPE 14 Heating set back *$UNIT_NAME Heating set back *$MODEL .\Utility\Forcing Functions\Temperature\Type14e.tmf *$POSITION 460 393 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 0 ! 1 Initial value of time 19 ! 2 Initial temperature 8 ! 3 Time at point-1 19 ! 4 Temperature at point -1 8 ! 5 Time at point-2 21 ! 6 Temperature at point -2 22 ! 7 Time at point-3 21 ! 8 Temperature at point -3 22 ! 9 Time at point-4 19 ! 10 Temperature at point -4 24 ! 11 Time at point-5 19 ! 12 Temperature at point -5 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Thermostat" (Type 698) * UNIT 28 TYPE 698 Thermostat *$UNIT_NAME Thermostat *$MODEL .\Controllers Library (TESS)\5-Stage Multi-Zone Thermostat\Type698.tmf *$POSITION 713 542 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 7 3 ! 1 Number of zones to monitor 5 ! 2 # of oscillations permitted 1 ! 3 1st stage heating in 2nd stage? 1 ! 4 2nd stage heating in 3rd stage?

112

1 ! 5 1st stage heating in 3rd stage? 1 ! 6 1st stage cooling in 2nd stage? 2.0 ! 7 Temperature dead band INPUTS 8 26,2 ! Heating set back:Instantaneous temperature ->1st stage heating setpoint temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] 2nd stage heating setpoint temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] 3rd stage heating setpoint temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] 1st stage cooling setpoint temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] 2nd stage cooling setpoint temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Temperature of zone-1 56,2 ! Mattamy house: 2- (air temperature of zone) TAIR 2 ->Temperature of zone-2 56,3 ! Mattamy house: 3- (air temperature of zone) TAIR 3 ->Temperature of zone-3 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 21 15 15 24 24 20.0 20.0 20.0 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* EQUATIONS "Heat Pump Control" * EQUATIONS 4 HP = [28,19]*[30,1] HP_COOLING = [28,19]*[53,1] Ground_Loop = 0.7*[30,1] Fan_signal = HP+HP_COOLING *$UNIT_NAME Heat Pump Control *$LAYER Main *$POSITION 573 574 *------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Model "Heating Sch" (Type 14) * UNIT 30 TYPE 14 Heating Sch *$UNIT_NAME Heating Sch *$MODEL .\Utility Library (TESS)\Forcing Functions\Heating Season (Annual)\Type14k.tmf *$POSITION 683 380 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 0.0 ! 1 Start of the year 1 ! 2 Control signal-1 2880 ! 3 End of heating season 1 ! 4 Control signal-2 2880 ! 5 End of heating season again 0 ! 6 Control signal-3 6552 ! 7 Begin of heating season 0 ! 8 Control signal-4 6552 ! 9 Begin of heating season again 1 ! 10 Control signal-5 8760.0 ! 11 End of year 1 ! 12 Control signal-6 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Basement Slab" (Type 653) *

113

UNIT 33 TYPE 653 Basement Slab *$UNIT_NAME Basement Slab *$MODEL .\Ground Coupling Library (TESS)\Slab Heating and Radiant Floors\Simple 1-Node Model\Type653.tmf *$POSITION 881 680 *$LAYER Main # *$# FLOOR HEATING / HEATED SLAB / RADIANT SLAB PARAMETERS 3 20000 ! 1 Capacitance of slab 4.190 ! 2 Specific heat of fluid 35 ! 3 Initial slab temperature INPUTS 7 50,1 ! DHW Mixer-2:Outlet temperature ->Fluid inlet temperature 50,2 ! DHW Mixer-2:Outlet flow rate ->Fluid flow rate 0,0 ! [unconnected] Zone air temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Environment temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slab-to-ambient loss coefficient 0,0 ! [unconnected] Slab-to-zone heat transfer coefficient 0,0 ! [unconnected] Heat exchanger effectiveness *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 35 500 19 10.0 0 1367.999964 0.6 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* EQUATIONS "Gain" * EQUATIONS 6 Heat_1stFLR = .6*[14,10]*[54,1] Heat_2ndFLR = .4*[14,10]*[54,1] Basement_Heat = [33,5]*[54,1] cooling_2ndFLR = -0.5*[14,10]*[59,1] Cooling_1stFLR = -0.5*[14,10]*[59,1] total_Air_heat = [14,10] *$UNIT_NAME Gain *$LAYER Main *$POSITION 986 722 *------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Model "Slab pump" (Type 114) * UNIT 35 TYPE 114 Slab pump *$UNIT_NAME Slab pump *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Pumps\Single Speed\Type114.tmf *$POSITION 785 744 *$LAYER Main # *$# SINGLE-SPEED PUMP PARAMETERS 4 1000.0 ! 1 Rated flow rate 4.19 ! 2 Fluid specific heat 2684.0 ! 3 Rated power 0.0 ! 4 Motor heat loss fraction INPUTS 5 33,1 ! Basement Slab:Outlet fluid temperature ->Inlet fluid temperature 33,2 ! Basement Slab:Outlet flow rate ->Inlet fluid flow rate

114

0,0 ! [unconnected] Control signal 0,0 ! [unconnected] Overall pump efficiency 0,0 ! [unconnected] Motor efficiency *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 20.0 500 1.0 0.6 0.9 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "GLOOP TEMP" (Type 65) * UNIT 36 TYPE 65 GLOOP TEMP *$UNIT_NAME GLOOP TEMP *$MODEL .\Output\Online Plotter\Online Plotter With File\TRNSYS-Supplied Units\Type65a.tmf *$POSITION 273 424 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 3 ! 1 Nb. of left-axis variables 6 ! 2 Nb. of right-axis variables -15 ! 3 Left axis minimum 65 ! 4 Left axis maximum 0 ! 5 Right axis minimum 150000000 ! 6 Right axis maximum 1 ! 7 Number of plots per simulation 12 ! 8 X-axis gridpoints 0 ! 9 Shut off Online w/o removing 53 ! 10 Logical Unit for output file 2 ! 11 Output file units 0 ! 12 Output file delimiter INPUTS 9 18,1 ! Type557a:Outlet temperature ->Left axis variable-1 21,1 ! Type114-2:Outlet fluid temperature ->Left axis variable-2 14,17 ! Type505b:C.O.P. ->Left axis variable-3 61,1 ! Type24-2:Result of integration-1 ->Right axis variable-1 61,2 ! Type24-2:Result of integration-2 ->Right axis variable-2 61,5 ! Type24-2:Result of integration-5 ->Right axis variable-3 61,6 ! Type24-2:Result of integration-6 ->Right axis variable-4 61,3 ! Type24-2:Result of integration-3 ->Right axis variable-5 61,4 ! Type24-2:Result of integration-4 ->Right axis variable-6 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES HP_IN_TEMP HP_OUT_TEMP HP_COP Total_HP_Energy Total_HP_AUX_ Heat Heat_to_Water Heat_to_DHW Heat_to_air_S Heat_to_air_L LABELS 3 "G LOOP TEMP (C)" "Total Energy kJ/kg" "G_LOOP TEMP" *** External files ASSIGN "LOOP_TEMP.xls" 53 *|? What file should the online print to? |1000 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "HP TEMP" (Type 65) * UNIT 39 TYPE 65 HP TEMP *$UNIT_NAME HP TEMP *$MODEL .\Output\Online Plotter\Online Plotter With File\TRNSYS-Supplied Units\Type65a.tmf

115

*$POSITION 389 638 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 4 ! 1 Nb. of left-axis variables 0 ! 2 Nb. of right-axis variables 0 ! 3 Left axis minimum 80 ! 4 Left axis maximum 0 ! 5 Right axis minimum 20 ! 6 Right axis maximum 1 ! 7 Number of plots per simulation 12 ! 8 X-axis gridpoints 0 ! 9 Shut off Online w/o removing 45 ! 10 Logical Unit for output file 2 ! 11 Output file units 0 ! 12 Output file delimiter INPUTS 4 14,3 ! Type505b:Outlet air temperature ->Left axis variable-1 56,3 ! Mattamy house: 3- (air temperature of zone) TAIR 3 ->Left axis variable-2 27,1 ! Hot Water Tank:Temperature to heat source ->Left axis variable-3 14,8 ! Type505b:Exiting DHW temperature ->Left axis variable-4 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES SUPLY_AIR RETURN_AIR HP_DHW_IN HP_DHW_OUT LABELS 3 "HP-SPPLY_TEMP" "" "HP_SUPPLY_TEMP" *** External files ASSIGN "TEMP" 45 *|? What file should the online print to? |1000 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* EQUATIONS "Daily Load" * EQUATIONS 2 outflow = [43,1] * 225 / 100 temperature = [42,1] *$UNIT_NAME Daily Load *$LAYER Main *$POSITION 370 989 *------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Model "Temp. Forcing Function" (Type 14) * UNIT 42 TYPE 14 Temp. Forcing Function *$UNIT_NAME Temp. Forcing Function *$MODEL .\Utility\Forcing Functions\Temperature\Type14e.tmf *$POSITION 202 937 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 50 0 ! 1 Initial value of time 3.5 ! 2 Initial temperature 743.999974 ! 3 Time at point-1 3.5 ! 4 Temperature at point -1

116

743.999974 ! 5 Time at point-2 2.4 ! 6 Temperature at point -2 1415.999946 ! 7 Time at point-3 2.4 ! 8 Temperature at point -3 1415.999946 ! 9 Time at point-4 2.6 ! 10 Temperature at point -4 2160.000057 ! 11 Time at point-5 2.6 ! 12 Temperature at point -5 2160.000057 ! 13 Time at point-6 4.4 ! 14 Temperature at point -6 2880.000075 ! 15 Time at point-7 4.4 ! 16 Temperature at point -7 2880.000075 ! 17 Time at point-8 6.9 ! 18 Temperature at point -8 3624.000095 ! 19 Time at point-9 6.9 ! 20 Temperature at point -9 3624.000095 ! 21 Time at point-10 9 ! 22 Temperature at point -10 4344.000114 ! 23 Time at point-11 9 ! 24 Temperature at point -11 4344.000114 ! 25 Time at point-12 10.9 ! 26 Temperature at point -12 5088.000133 ! 27 Time at point-13 10.9 ! 28 Temperature at point -13 5088.000133 ! 29 Time at point-14 11.9 ! 30 Temperature at point -14 5832.000153 ! 31 Time at point-15 11.9 ! 32 Temperature at point -15 5832.000153 ! 33 Time at point-16 11.6 ! 34 Temperature at point -16 6552.000172 ! 35 Time at point-17 11.6 ! 36 Temperature at point -17 6552.000172 ! 37 Time at point-18 10.2 ! 38 Temperature at point -18 7296.000191 ! 39 Time at point-19 10.2 ! 40 Temperature at point -19 7296.000191 ! 41 Time at point-20 8 ! 42 Temperature at point -20 8016.00021 ! 43 Time at point-21 8 ! 44 Temperature at point -21 8016.00021 ! 45 Time at point-22 5.9 ! 46 Temperature at point -22 8760.000229 ! 47 Time at point-23 5.9 ! 48 Temperature at point -23 8760.000229 ! 49 Time at point-24 3.5 ! 50 Temperature at point -24 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Water Draw From City" (Type 14) * UNIT 43 TYPE 14 Water Draw From City *$UNIT_NAME Water Draw From City *$MODEL .\Utility\Forcing Functions\Water Draw\Type14b.tmf *$POSITION 187 1074 *$LAYER Main #

117

PARAMETERS 98 0 ! 1 Initial value of time 3 ! 2 Initial value of function 1 ! 3 Time at point-1 3 ! 4 Water draw at point -1 1 ! 5 Time at point-2 2.9 ! 6 Water draw at point -2 2 ! 7 Time at point-3 2.9 ! 8 Water draw at point -3 2 ! 9 Time at point-4 0.1 ! 10 Water draw at point -4 3 ! 11 Time at point-5 0.1 ! 12 Water draw at point -5 3 ! 13 Time at point-6 0.1 ! 14 Water draw at point -6 4 ! 15 Time at point-7 0.1 ! 16 Water draw at point -7 4 ! 17 Time at point-8 0.1 ! 18 Water draw at point -8 5 ! 19 Time at point-9 0.1 ! 20 Water draw at point -9 5 ! 21 Time at point-10 0.1 ! 22 Water draw at point -10 6 ! 23 Time at point-11 0.1 ! 24 Water draw at point -11 6 ! 25 Time at point-12 0.1 ! 26 Water draw at point -12 7 ! 27 Time at point-13 0.1 ! 28 Water draw at point -13 7 ! 29 Time at point-14 3.4 ! 30 Water draw at point -14 8 ! 31 Time at point-15 3.4 ! 32 Water draw at point -15 8 ! 33 Time at point-16 7.6 ! 34 Water draw at point -16 9 ! 35 Time at point-17 7.6 ! 36 Water draw at point -17 9 ! 37 Time at point-18 6.3 ! 38 Water draw at point -18 10 ! 39 Time at point-19 6.3 ! 40 Water draw at point -19 10 ! 41 Time at point-20 6.8 ! 42 Water draw at point -20 11 ! 43 Time at point-21 6.8 ! 44 Water draw at point -21 11 ! 45 Time at point-22 6.8 ! 46 Water draw at point -22 12 ! 47 Time at point-23 6.8 ! 48 Water draw at point -23 12 ! 49 Time at point-24 5.9 ! 50 Water draw at point -24 13 ! 51 Time at point-25 5.9 ! 52 Water draw at point -25 13 ! 53 Time at point-26 5.5 ! 54 Water draw at point -26 14 ! 55 Time at point-27

118

5.5 ! 56 Water draw at point -27 14 ! 57 Time at point-28 5 ! 58 Water draw at point -28 15 ! 59 Time at point-29 5 ! 60 Water draw at point -29 15 ! 61 Time at point-30 4.2 ! 62 Water draw at point -30 16 ! 63 Time at point-31 4.2 ! 64 Water draw at point -31 16 ! 65 Time at point-32 3.8 ! 66 Water draw at point -32 17 ! 67 Time at point-33 3.8 ! 68 Water draw at point -33 17 ! 69 Time at point-34 4.2 ! 70 Water draw at point -34 18 ! 71 Time at point-35 4.2 ! 72 Water draw at point -35 18 ! 73 Time at point-36 5 ! 74 Water draw at point -36 19 ! 75 Time at point-37 5 ! 76 Water draw at point -37 19 ! 77 Time at point-38 6.8 ! 78 Water draw at point -38 20 ! 79 Time at point-39 6.8 ! 80 Water draw at point -39 20 ! 81 Time at point-40 7.2 ! 82 Water draw at point -40 21 ! 83 Time at point-41 7.2 ! 84 Water draw at point -41 21 ! 85 Time at point-42 5.9 ! 86 Water draw at point -42 22 ! 87 Time at point-43 5.9 ! 88 Water draw at point -43 22 ! 89 Time at point-44 5 ! 90 Water draw at point -44 23 ! 91 Time at point-45 5 ! 92 Water draw at point -45 23 ! 93 Time at point-46 4.7 ! 94 Water draw at point -46 24 ! 95 Time at point-47 4.7 ! 96 Water draw at point -47 24 ! 97 Time at point-48 3.8 ! 98 Water draw at point -48 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Diverter" (Type 11) * UNIT 31 TYPE 11 Diverter *$UNIT_NAME Diverter *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Tempering Valve\Other Fluids\Type11b.tmf *$POSITION 533 1053 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 2 4 ! 1 Tempering valve mode 7 ! 2 Nb. of oscillations allowed

119

INPUTS 4 temperature ! Daily Load:temperature ->Inlet temperature outflow ! Daily Load:outflow ->Inlet flow rate 27,3 ! Hot Water Tank:Temperature to load ->Heat source temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Set point temperature *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 5 0 55 45 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "GWHR" (Type 91) * UNIT 44 TYPE 91 GWHR *$UNIT_NAME GWHR *$MODEL .\Heat Exchangers\Constant Effectiveness\Type91.tmf *$POSITION 563 904 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 3 .85 ! 1 Heat exchanger effectiveness 4.19 ! 2 Specific heat of hot side fluid 4.19 ! 3 Specific heat of cold side fluid INPUTS 4 waste_temp ! House DHW:waste_temp ->Hot side inlet temperature waste_flow ! House DHW:waste_flow ->Hot side flow rate 31,1 ! Diverter:Temperature at outlet 1 ->Cold side inlet temperature 31,2 ! Diverter:Flowrate at outlet 1 ->Cold side flow rate *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 20.0 200 20.0 100 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "DHW Mixer" (Type 11) * UNIT 32 TYPE 11 DHW Mixer *$UNIT_NAME DHW Mixer *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Tee-Piece\Other Fluids\Type11h.tmf *$POSITION 661 882 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 1 1 ! 1 Tee piece mode INPUTS 4 48,1 ! Diverter-2:Temperature at outlet 1 ->Temperature at inlet 1 48,2 ! Diverter-2:Flow rate at outlet 1 ->Flow rate at inlet 1 31,3 ! Diverter:Temperature at outlet 2 ->Temperature at inlet 2 31,4 ! Diverter:Flow rate at outlet 2 ->Flow rate at inlet 2 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 20.0 100.0 20.0 100.0 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* EQUATIONS "House DHW" * EQUATIONS 5 q_system = ([32,1] - [42,1] ) * 4.190 * [32,2] waste_flow = (q_system) / (4.19 * (waste_temp - 7.3)) * waste_part / 100 waste_temp = 37 waste_part = 100

120

qDHW = -q_system *$UNIT_NAME House DHW *$LAYER Main *$POSITION 898 882 *------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Model "Type24" (Type 24) * UNIT 46 TYPE 24 Type24 *$UNIT_NAME Type24 *$MODEL .\Utility\Integrators\Quantity Integrator\Type24.tmf *$POSITION 1107 389 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 2 8760 ! 1 Integration period 0 ! 2 Relative or absolute start time INPUTS 4 56,21 ! Mattamy house: 21- (cooling demand) QCOOL 1 ->Input to be integrated-1 56,22 ! Mattamy house: 22- (cooling demand) QCOOL 2 ->Input to be integrated-2 56,23 ! Mattamy house: 23- (cooling demand) QCOOL 3 ->Input to be integrated-3 Total_Q ! Total Load:Total_Q ->Input to be integrated-4 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Total Heating Load" (Type 65) * UNIT 47 TYPE 65 Total Heating Load *$UNIT_NAME Total Heating Load *$MODEL .\Output\Online Plotter\Online Plotter With File\TRNSYS-Supplied Units\Type65a.tmf *$POSITION 1111 307 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 4 ! 1 Nb. of left-axis variables 0 ! 2 Nb. of right-axis variables 0 ! 3 Left axis minimum 100000000 ! 4 Left axis maximum 0 ! 5 Right axis minimum 10 ! 6 Right axis maximum 1 ! 7 Number of plots per simulation 12 ! 8 X-axis gridpoints 0 ! 9 Shut off Online w/o removing 47 ! 10 Logical Unit for output file 2 ! 11 Output file units 0 ! 12 Output file delimiter INPUTS 4 46,1 ! Type24:Result of integration-1 ->Left axis variable-1 46,2 ! Type24:Result of integration-2 ->Left axis variable-2 46,3 ! Type24:Result of integration-3 ->Left axis variable-3 46,4 ! Type24:Result of integration-4 ->Left axis variable-4 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES Basement_S 1st_S 2nd_S Heating_Demand

121

LABELS 3 "Sensible Load" "Latent Load" "TOTAL_LOAD" *** External files ASSIGN "House_Energy_Demend" 47 *|? What file should the online print to? |1000 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Diverter-2" (Type 11) * UNIT 48 TYPE 11 Diverter-2 *$UNIT_NAME Diverter-2 *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Flow Diverter\Other Fluids\Type11f.tmf *$POSITION 560 786 *$LAYER Water Loop # PARAMETERS 1 2 ! 1 Controlled flow diverter mode INPUTS 3 27,3 ! Hot Water Tank:Temperature to load ->Inlet temperature 27,4 ! Hot Water Tank:Flowrate to load ->Inlet flow rate Ground_Loop ! Heat Pump Control:Ground_Loop ->Control signal *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 20.0 500 .7 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Mixer" (Type 11) * UNIT 49 TYPE 11 Mixer *$UNIT_NAME Mixer *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Flow Mixer\Other Fluids\Type11d.tmf *$POSITION 465 861 *$LAYER Water Loop # PARAMETERS 1 3 ! 1 Controlled flow mixer mode INPUTS 5 44,3 ! GWHR:Cold-side outlet temperature ->Temperature at inlet 1 44,4 ! GWHR:Cold-side flow rate ->Flow rate at inlet 1 51,1 ! Diverter-3:Temperature at outlet 1 ->Temperature at inlet 2 51,2 ! Diverter-3:Flowrate at outlet 1 ->Flow rate at inlet 2 0,0 ! [unconnected] Control signal *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 20.0 100.0 20.0 500 0.5 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "DHW Mixer-2" (Type 11) * UNIT 50 TYPE 11 DHW Mixer-2 *$UNIT_NAME DHW Mixer-2 *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Tee-Piece\Other Fluids\Type11h.tmf *$POSITION 693 669 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 1

122

1 ! 1 Tee piece mode INPUTS 4 48,3 ! Diverter-2:Temperature at outlet 2 ->Temperature at inlet 1 48,4 ! Diverter-2:Flow rate at outlet 2 ->Flow rate at inlet 1 51,3 ! Diverter-3:Temperature at outlet 2 ->Temperature at inlet 2 51,4 ! Diverter-3:Flow rate at outlet 2 ->Flow rate at inlet 2 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 20.0 500 20.0 100.0 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Diverter-3" (Type 11) * UNIT 51 TYPE 11 Diverter-3 *$UNIT_NAME Diverter-3 *$MODEL .\Hydronics\Tempering Valve\Other Fluids\Type11b.tmf *$POSITION 704 744 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 2 4 ! 1 Tempering valve mode 7 ! 2 Nb. of oscillations allowed INPUTS 4 35,1 ! Slab pump:Outlet fluid temperature ->Inlet temperature 35,2 ! Slab pump:Outlet flow rate ->Inlet flow rate 27,3 ! Hot Water Tank:Temperature to load ->Heat source temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Set point temperature *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 22 500 55 40 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Solar Control" (Type 14) * UNIT 52 TYPE 14 Solar Control *$UNIT_NAME Solar Control *$MODEL .\Utility\Forcing Functions\General\Type14h.tmf *$POSITION 45 594 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 0 ! 1 Initial value of time 0 ! 2 Initial value of function 6 ! 3 Time at point-1 0 ! 4 Value at point -1 6 ! 5 Time at point-2 1 ! 6 Value at point -2 17 ! 7 Time at point-3 1 ! 8 Value at point -3 17 ! 9 Time at point-4 0 ! 10 Value at point -4 24 ! 11 Time at point-5 0 ! 12 Value at point -5 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Cooling Sch" (Type 14) *

123

UNIT 53 TYPE 14 Cooling Sch *$UNIT_NAME Cooling Sch *$MODEL .\Utility Library (TESS)\Forcing Functions\Cooling Season (Annual)\Type14l.tmf *$POSITION 576 359 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 0.0 ! 1 Start of the year 0 ! 2 Control signal-1 2982 ! 3 Start of cooling season 0 ! 4 Control signal-2 2982 ! 5 Start of cooling season again 1 ! 6 Control signal-3 6575 ! 7 End of cooling season 1 ! 8 Control signal-4 6575 ! 9 End of cooling season again 0 ! 10 Control signal-5 8760.0 ! 11 End of year 0 ! 12 Control signal-6 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* EQUATIONS " Control" * EQUATIONS 2 Solar_Loop = [52,2]*0.1 pump_sinal = ([52,2] +Fan_signal)*0.5 *$UNIT_NAME Control *$LAYER Main *$POSITION 43 702 *------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Model "Heating Sch-2" (Type 14) * UNIT 57 TYPE 14 Heating Sch-2 *$UNIT_NAME Heating Sch-2 *$MODEL .\Utility Library (TESS)\Forcing Functions\Heating Season (Annual)\Type14k.tmf *$POSITION 64 785 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 0.0 ! 1 Start of the year 1 ! 2 Control signal-1 2880 ! 3 End of heating season 1 ! 4 Control signal-2 2880 ! 5 End of heating season again 0 ! 6 Control signal-3 6552 ! 7 Begin of heating season 0 ! 8 Control signal-4 6552 ! 9 Begin of heating season again 1 ! 10 Control signal-5 8760.0 ! 11 End of year 1 ! 12 Control signal-6 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* EQUATIONS "Total Load"

124

* EQUATIONS 1 Total_Q = [56,17]+[56,18]+[56,19] *$UNIT_NAME Total Load *$LAYER Main *$POSITION 1110 202 *------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Model "Load" (Type 65) * UNIT 60 TYPE 65 Load *$UNIT_NAME Load *$MODEL .\Output\Online Plotter\Online Plotter With File\TRNSYS-Supplied Units\Type65a.tmf *$POSITION 1137 510 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 4 ! 1 Nb. of left-axis variables 0 ! 2 Nb. of right-axis variables -100000 ! 3 Left axis minimum 100000 ! 4 Left axis maximum 0 ! 5 Right axis minimum 10 ! 6 Right axis maximum 1 ! 7 Number of plots per simulation 12 ! 8 X-axis gridpoints 0 ! 9 Shut off Online w/o removing 50 ! 10 Logical Unit for output file 2 ! 11 Output file units 0 ! 12 Output file delimiter INPUTS 4 56,17 ! Mattamy house: 17- (heating demand) QHEAT 1 ->Left axis variable-1 56,18 ! Mattamy house: 18- (heating demand) QHEAT 2 ->Left axis variable-2 56,19 ! Mattamy house: 19- (heating demand) QHEAT 3 ->Left axis variable-3 0,0 ! [unconnected] Left axis variable-4 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES Basement 1st 2nd Attic LABELS 3 "Sensible Load" "Latent Load" "Load" *** External files ASSIGN "INS_House_Energy_Demend" 50 *|? What file should the online print to? |1000 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Heating Sch-3" (Type 14) * UNIT 54 TYPE 14 Heating Sch-3 *$UNIT_NAME Heating Sch-3 *$MODEL .\Utility Library (TESS)\Forcing Functions\Heating Season (Annual)\Type14k.tmf *$POSITION 1014 807 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12

125

0.0 ! 1 Start of the year 1 ! 2 Control signal-1 2882 ! 3 End of heating season 1 ! 4 Control signal-2 2880 ! 5 End of heating season again 0 ! 6 Control signal-3 3550 ! 7 Begin of heating season 0 ! 8 Control signal-4 6550 ! 9 Begin of heating season again 1 ! 10 Control signal-5 8760.0 ! 11 End of year 1 ! 12 Control signal-6 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Cooling Sch-2" (Type 14) * UNIT 59 TYPE 14 Cooling Sch-2 *$UNIT_NAME Cooling Sch-2 *$MODEL .\Utility Library (TESS)\Forcing Functions\Cooling Season (Annual)\Type14l.tmf *$POSITION 907 807 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 0.0 ! 1 Start of the year 0 ! 2 Control signal-1 2982 ! 3 Start of cooling season 0 ! 4 Control signal-2 2982 ! 5 Start of cooling season again 1 ! 6 Control signal-3 6575 ! 7 End of cooling season 1 ! 8 Control signal-4 6575 ! 9 End of cooling season again 0 ! 10 Control signal-5 8760.0 ! 11 End of year 0 ! 12 Control signal-6 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "HOUSE_TEMP" (Type 65) * UNIT 62 TYPE 65 HOUSE_TEMP *$UNIT_NAME HOUSE_TEMP *$MODEL .\Output\Online Plotter\Online Plotter With File\TRNSYS-Supplied Units\Type65a.tmf *$POSITION 1128 649 *$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 12 4 ! 1 Nb. of left-axis variables 0 ! 2 Nb. of right-axis variables -20 ! 3 Left axis minimum 50 ! 4 Left axis maximum 0 ! 5 Right axis minimum 100 ! 6 Right axis maximum 1 ! 7 Number of plots per simulation 12 ! 8 X-axis gridpoints 0 ! 9 Shut off Online w/o removing 52 ! 10 Logical Unit for output file

126

2 ! 11 Output file units 0 ! 12 Output file delimiter INPUTS 4 56,1 ! Mattamy house: 1- (air temperature of zone) 56,2 ! Mattamy house: 2- (air temperature of zone) 56,3 ! Mattamy house: 3- (air temperature of zone) 56,4 ! Mattamy house: 4- (air temperature of zone) *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES Basement 1st 2nd Attic LABELS 3 "HOUSE_TEMP" "" "HOUSE_TEMP" *** External files ASSIGN "test" 52 *|? What file should the online print to? |1000 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "HRV" (Type 667) *

TAIR TAIR TAIR TAIR

1 ->Left axis variable-1 2 ->Left axis variable-2 3 ->Left axis variable-3 4 ->Left axis variable-4

UNIT 64 TYPE 667 HRV *$UNIT_NAME HRV *$MODEL .\HVAC Library (TESS)\Heat Exchangers\Air-to-Air\Air-to-Air Heat Exchanger\Sensible and Latent\Relative Humidity Inputs\Type667b.tmf *$POSITION 976 93 *$LAYER Main # *$# AIR-TO-AIR HEAT RECOVERY PARAMETERS 2 2 ! 1 Humidity mode 395.99999 ! 2 Rated power INPUTS 15 56,3 ! Mattamy house: 3- (air temperature of zone) TAIR 3 ->Exhaust air temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Not used 56,11 ! Mattamy house: 11- (relative humidity of zone...) RELHUM 3 ->Exhaust air %RH 0,0 ! [unconnected] Exhaust air flow rate 0,0 ! [unconnected] Exhaust air pressure 0,0 ! [unconnected] Exhaust air pressure drop 109,1 ! Weather data:Ambient temperature ->Fresh air temperature 0,0 ! [unconnected] Not used 109,2 ! Weather data:relative humidity ->Fresh air %RH 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fresh air flow rate 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fresh air pressure 0,0 ! [unconnected] Fresh air pressure drop 0,0 ! [unconnected] Sensible effectiveness 0,0 ! [unconnected] Latent effectiveness 0,0 ! [unconnected] On/Off Control Signal *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 23 0.005 60.0 311.040008 1.0 0.000246 20.0 0.005 50.0 311.040008 1.0 0.000246 0.67 0.3 1.0 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------* Model "Type24-2" (Type 24) UNIT 61 TYPE 24 Type24-2 *$UNIT_NAME Type24-2 *$MODEL .\Utility\Integrators\Quantity Integrator\Type24.tmf *$POSITION 371 389

127

*$LAYER Main # PARAMETERS 2 8760 ! 1 Integration period 1 ! 2 Relative or absolute start time INPUTS 6 14,16 ! Type505b:Heat pump power ->Input to be integrated-1 14,19 ! Type505b:Auxiliary heater power ->Input to be integrated-2 14,11 ! Type505b:Sensible heat transfer to air ->Input to be integrated-3 14,12 ! Type505b:Latent heat transfer to air ->Input to be integrated-4 14,13 ! Type505b:Heat transfer to water ->Input to be integrated-5 14,14 ! Type505b:Heat transfer to DHW stream ->Input to be integrated-6 *** INITIAL INPUT VALUES 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 *-----------------------------------------------------------------------------END

128

Appendix - D
Heat Pump Performance Data

129

Specification Data - AT060
PERFORMANCE DATA-FORCED AIR
WATER LOOP
FORCED AIR COOLING CAPACITY FORCED AIR HEATING CAPACITY COP

GROUND WATER
FORCED AIR COOLING CAPACITY EER FORCED AIR HEATING CAPACITY COP

GROUND LOOP
FORCED AIR COOLING CAPACITY EER FORCED AIR HEATING CAPACITY COP

EER

54,200

14.1

69,700

4.5

62,400

19.1

65,500

4.8

57,800

14.8

49,500

3.3

PERFORMANCE DATA-HYDRONIC
WATER LOOP
HEATING CAPACITY COP

GROUND WATER
HEATING CAPACITY COP

GROUND LOOP
HEATING CAPACITY COP

72,000

4.6

68,200

4.9

52,200

3.4

BLOWER PERFORMANCE
AVAILABLE STATIC PRESSURE (WITH WET EVAPORATOR) BLOWER SPEED HIGH MEDIUM LOW 0.05 2,400 0.1 2,350 0.15 2,320 2,100 0.2 2,300 2,050 0.25 2,280 2,000 0.3 2,200 1,950 0.35 2,165 1,900 -

130

Specification Data - AT060
ELECTRICAL SPECIFICATIONS
MODEL AT060 208-230/60/1 208-230/60/3 COMPRESSOR
MCC RLA LRA

BLOWER
FLA HP

LOOP PUMP
FLA HP

DHW PUMP 0.4 0.4

LOOP PUMP 2 2

MIN AMPS 34 34

MAX FUSE 60 50

38 38

23 19.6

145 123

5.4 5.4

3/4 3/4

1.75 1.75

1/6 1/6

HYDRONIC PRESSURE DROP
SIZE FLOW (GPM) 8 AT060 11 15 18 -1oC/30oF
3.0 4.6 6.9 8.8

10OC/50OF
2.8 4.3 6.4 8.2

21OC/70OF
2.6 4.0 6.0 7.6

32OC/90OF
2.4 3.7 5.5 7.1

MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS
EVAPORATOR
SQ. IN. ROWS DEEP TUBE SIZE FINS PER/IN

660 BLOWER SIZE 9x7

3
NET 135 Kg 300 lbs

5/16 WEIGHT
SHIP 147 Kg 324 lbs

14 REFRIGERANT
R-410A

131

Specification Data - AT060
FORCED AIR COOLING
SOURCE TEMP
ENTER AIR 25C/77F TOTAL CAPACITY BTUH 63,000 75,400 83,000 62,000 74,000 81,500 61,500 73,000 79,000 60,500 71,500 76,000 SENSIBLE CAPACITY HUMIDITY 50% 53,550 64,090 70,550 52,700 62,900 69,275 52,275 62,050 67,150 51,425 60,775 64,600 60% 47,250 56,550 62,250 46,500 55,500 61,125 46,152 54,750 59,250 45,375 53,625 57,000 70% 40,950 49,010 53,950 40,300 48,100 52,975 39,975 47,450 51,350 39,325 46,475 49,400 3,280 3,240 3,230 3,550 3,510 3,500 3,830 3,790 3,780 4,130 4,090 4,080 14.8 17.9 19.8 13.7 16.5 18.2 12.8 15.3 16.6 11.9 14.1 15.0 INPUT WATTS EER

10C/50F

30C/86F 35C/95F 25C/77F

15C/59F

30C/86F 35C/95F 25C/77F

20C/68F

30C/86F 35C/95F 25C/77F

25C/77F

30C/86F 35C/95F

FORCED AIR HEATING
BASED ON 230 VOLT SOURCE TEMP
15C/59F ENTER AIR 15C/59F 18C/64F 21C/70F 15C/59F 10C/50F 18C/64F 21C/70F 15C/59F 5C/41F 18C/64F 21C/70F 15C/59F 0C/32F 18C/64F 21C/70F HEAT OF ABSORBTION 65,500 63,500 61,000 57,500 56,000 54,000 50,500 49,000 47,300 43,900 42,500 41,100

INCLUDING FAN & FLOW CENTER
TOTAL CAPACITY BTUH 72,946 71,479 69,574 64,721 63,733 62,287 57,474 56,487 55,341 50,669 49,762 4,895 INPUT WATTS 3,630 3,890 4,180 3,520 3,770 4,040 3,400 3,650 3,920 3,300 3,540 3,800 COP 4.6 4.3 3.9 4.2 3.9 3.6 3.8 3.6 3.3 3.5 3.2 3.0

132

Specification Data - AT060
HYDRONIC HEATING
SOURCE TEMP
ENTER HYDRONIC 25C/77F 15C/59F 30C/86F 35C/95F 40C/104F 25C/77F 10C/50F 30C/86F 35C/95F 40C/104F 25C/77F 5C/41F 30C/86F 35C/95F 40C/104F 25C/77F 0C/32F 30C/86F 35C/95F 40C/104F HEAT OF ABSORBTION 70,000 65,500 61,500 57,000 60,000 56,500 53,000 49,400 51,500 48,500 45,500 42,400 43,500 41,400 38,500 35,900 TOTAL CAPACITY BTUH 77,712.8 74,217.9 71,284.6 67,974.4 67,466.7 64,889.7 62,415.4 59,964.1 58,700 56,582.1 54,566.7 52,574.4 50,433.3 49,194.9 47,217.9 45,684.6 INPUT WATTS 3,760 4,250 4,770 5,350 3,640 4,090 4,590 5,150 3,510 3,940 4,420 4,960 3,380 3,800 4,250 4,770 COP 4.8 4.2 3.6 3.1 4.3 3.8 3.3 2.9 3.8 3.4 3.0 2.6 3.4 3.0 2.6 2.3

133

