Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2012

Taking Youth Engagement To The Next Generation: Lessons From Best Youth Engagement Practices Toward Food Sustainability
Daniel Hoang
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Urban, Community and Regional Planning Commons Recommended Citation
Hoang, Daniel, "Taking Youth Engagement To The Next Generation: Lessons From Best Youth Engagement Practices Toward Food Sustainability" (2012). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1413.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

  

     

   TAKING  YOUTH  ENGAGEMENT  TO  THE  NEXT   GENERATION:     
Lessons  from  Best  Youth  Engagement  Practices  toward   Food  Sustainability  
     

By   Daniel  Hoang  
Bachelor  of  Arts  Honours,  York  University  (2010)         A  Major  Research  Paper   presented  to  Ryerson  University      in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of        Master  of  Planning     in     Urban  Development               Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada  2012  

     
©  Daniel  Hoang  2012  

  

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION      I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  major  research  paper.     This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  major  research  paper,  including  any  required   final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.        I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  major  research  paper  to   other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.  I   further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  major  research     paper  by  photocopying  or  by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the   request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly   research.  I  understand  that  my  major  research  paper  may  be  made   electronically  available  to  the  public.                                                                             
ii

TAKING  YOUTH  ENGAGEMENT  TO  THE  NEXT   GENERATION:   Lessons  from  Best  Youth  Engagement  Practices  toward  Food   Sustainability  
  
      Master  of  Planning     in     Urban  Development   Ryerson  University            ABSTRACT      Food  is  one  of  life's  most  basic  necessities.  Yet  the  problems  of  our  food  system  are   becoming  increasingly  worse:  global  food  security  is  in  jeopardy,  health  related   diseases  are  epidemic,  and  generations  are  increasingly  disconnected  from  their   food.  The  youth  population,  in  particular,  is  largely  missing  from  the  food   engagement  and  decision-making  process.  Yet  it  is  this  group  that  will  inherit  the   problems  of  the  food  system,  and  constitute  the  next  generation  of  eaters,  policy- makers,  and  planners.  This  paper  aims  to  fill  this  gap  by  examining  ways  to  improve   youth  engagement  in  food  sustainability  by  making  it  more  widespread,  meaningful   and  effective.  Using  a  scan  and  analysis  of  best  practice  research,  this  paper  offers   recommendations  ­  including  cases,  tools,  principles  and  techniques  ­  for   stakeholders  (such  as  NGOs,  local  governments  and  municipal  planners)  to  improve   their  youth  engagement  strategies  in  food  sustainability.    

©  Daniel  Hoang  2012  

  

Key  words:  youth  engagement;  food  sustainability;  best  practices   iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS     
The  completion  of  this  Major  Research  Paper  would  not  be  possible  without  the  help   of  several  people.      First,  I  would  like  to  offer  my  sincerest  gratitude  to  my  supervisor,  Dr.  Pamela   Robinson,  who  has  supported  me  throughout  the  MRP  writing  process.  Her  patience   and  trust  gave  me  the  room  to  write  and  work  freely  in  my  own  way,  but  she  was   there  for  me  whenever  I  needed  her  every  step  of  the  way.  In  the  demanding  last   few  weeks  of  the  MRP,  it  was  her  assistance,  wise  words  and  late  night  email   exchanges  that  really  helped  me  get  through.  One  simply  could  not  ask  for  a  better   supervisor.  Thank  you  Pamela  ­  you  are  an  inspiration.        Thank  you  to  my  amazing  fellow  classmates  ­  the  Ryerson  Master  of  Planning  Class   of  2012!  We  laughed  together,  we  pulled  all-nighters  in  the  Bond  Building  together,   we  cried  together,  and  we  celebrated  together  (sometimes  a  little  TOO  hard).  I  could   not  have  asked  for  a  better  group  of  people  to  spend  the  past  two  years  of  this   program  with.  I  have  made  life  long  friends.  A  special  thanks  in  particular  goes  to   Lacey  Williams,  Lily  D'Souza  and  Gavin  Duffus.        Above  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  my  parents  and  my  sisters.  To  my  mom  and  dad:   Thank  you  for  your  unconditional  love  and  support.  To  my  older  sisters,  Annie  and   Helen:  You  are  my  rocks.    

                                                        
iv

FOREWORD     
"The  joys  of  the  table  belong  equally  to  all  ages,  conditions,  countries  and  times;  they   mix  with  all  other  pleasures,  and  remain  the  last  to  console  us  for  their  loss."     -  Jean  Anthelme  Brillat-Savarin      Like  love,  dance,  math  and  music,  food  is  a  universal  language.  It  has  the  power  to   crosscut  boundaries,  cultures,  religion,  and  races.  It  has  the  power  to  unite  us.        However,  although  we  all  enjoy  the  wonders  of  eating  and  drinking,  we  do  not  all   experience  food  the  same  way.  Unfortunately,  there  are  billions  of  people  around   the  world  who  are  struggling  to  access  food,  afford  food,  or  find  the  nutritious  and   healthy  foods  that  our  bodies  require.        Food,  as  something  that  is  so  pure,  fundamental  and  intimate  to  humans,  is  being   threatened  by  the  problems  that  plague  the  food  system  ­  including  environmental   degradation,  health  concerns,  and  the  centralization  of  global  food  supply.  We,  as   humans,  are  becoming  increasingly  disconnected  from  our  food  source.        It  is  these  two  main  challenges  of  the  food  system  that  guided  me  to  my  research   topic.  Where  they  meet  is  at  the  intersection  of  food  sustainability  and  youth  (the   current  and  future  leaders  of  tomorrow,  who  are,  paradoxically,  becoming   increasingly  disconnected  from  food).  It  is  here  that  this  paper  emerges.        When  we  had  to  choose  Major  Research  Paper  topics  for  the  Ryerson  Master  of   Planning  program,  I  knew  I  wanted  to  do  food.  And  my  experiences,  both  personally   and  academically,  have  taught  me  that  planners  can  do  more  than  just  plan   neighbourhoods,  or  develop  parcels  of  land.  The  world  is  our  oyster  ­  we  have  the   potential  to  change  the  world  around  us,  and  we  have  a  responsibility  and   obligation  to  improve  the  quality  of  people's  lives,  and  to  make  this  world  a  more   liveable  place.  With  this  said,  my  MRP  represents  my  passion  for  food  and  food   justice,  and  my  hope  that  I  am  able  to  contribute  to  making  a  difference.    

  

                             
v

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  
   Author's  Declaration..........................................................................ii   Abstract..............................................................................................iii   Acknowledgements...........................................................................iv   Foreword.............................................................................................v   List  of  Tables......................................................................................vii      1.0  INTRODUCTION..........................................................................1   1.1  Research  Question......................................................................4   1.2  Audience.....................................................................................6   1.3  What  is  a  food  system?  ..............................................................  6   1.4  The  Current  Food  System...........................................................8      2.0  METHODOLOGY........................................................................12      3.0  UNDERSTANDING  THE  YOUTH.................................................17   3.1  Who  are  Youth?  ........................................................................17   3.2  Why  Focus  on  Youth?  ...............................................................23      4.0  REVIEWING  BEST  PRACTICES  AND  RESEARCH..........................28   4.1  Assessing  Youth  Food  Engagement  Programs  in  Ontario.........28   4.2  Food  Democracy.......................................................................29   4.3  Traditional  Youth  Model  vs.  Youth  Engagement  Model.............32   4.4  Fertile  Ground:  Creating  the  Spaces  for  Engagement  to  Occur  34   4.5  Setting  the  Stage.................................................................................38         5.0  BEST  PRACTICES................................................................................41   5.1  Cases......................................................................................................41     5.2  Principles  &  Tools..............................................................................53      6.0  RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................58      7.0  CONCLUSION.....................................................................................67   REFERENCES............................................................................................70  
vi

  

List  of  Tables  
  

Table  1:  The  Traditional  Youth-Service  Model  vs.  The  Youth   Engagement  Model.........................................................................Page  33  
        

vii

   "The  way  to  a  city's  heart  is  through  its  stomach"  ­  Wayne  Roberts     

1.0  Introduction  
  

Urban  planning,  as  a  profession,  lays  claim  to  being  a  comprehensive,  future-

oriented  and  public-driven  profession  that  strives  to  enhance  the  livability  of  our   cities,  and  the  quality  of  our  lives.  When  we  think  about  terms  like  "livability"  and   "the  quality  of  our  lives",  there  is  nothing  that  impacts  these  more  than  the   fundamental,  most  basic  necessities  of  life  ­  the  trifecta  of  life's  essentials:  food,   water  and  shelter.  Planners  have  been  involved  in  efforts  to  improve  water  through   municipal  infrastructure  projects  such  as  sewage,  waste  and  resource  management,   and  they  have  planned  our  water  systems  and  networks.  They  have  also  been   heavily  involved  in  shelter,  developing  our  human  settlements,  providing  housing   and  planning  neighborhoods  and  communities.  But  when  it  comes  to  food,  urban   planners  have  been  less  focused  on  this  third  life  essential.  For  centuries,  the   profession  has  primarily  been  concerned  with  the  planning  of  community  systems   such  as  housing,  transportation,  road  networks,  and  zoning  and  land  use,  while  the   food  system  has  been  notably  absent  in  most  planning  practice,  research  and   education  (Pothukuchi  &  Kaufman,  2000).   The  good  news,  however,  is  that  things  are  starting  to  change.  In  the  last   decade,  food  systems  and  food  sustainability  have  become  a  more  central  concern   for  planners  in  urban  municipalities.  And,  due  in  large  part  to  global  and  local   pressures  from  the  realities  of  food  production,  food  sustainability  has  begun  to   emerge  as  part  of  a  planner's  scope  of  practice.  In  fact,  in  February  2001,  the  City  of   Toronto  became  the  first  Canadian  municipality  to  develop  a  comprehensive,  multi- 1

sectoral  food  security  plan,  which  identified  the  municipality's  role  in  the  local  food   economy  (Wekerle,  2002).  This  set  the  stage  for  the  creation  of  a  Toronto  Food   Charter  (approved  in  2001)  and  additions  to  the  city's  2002  Official  Plan  that   acknowledged  and  supported  the  role  of  urban  agriculture  and  sustainable  food   practices.  Thus,  there  is  no  doubt  that  positive  change  has  occurred,  obstacles  are   being  overcome,  and  important  strides  are  being  made  in  the  area  of  food   sustainability  and  urban  planning  in  Toronto.        The  City  of  Toronto's  progress  is  one  step  toward  more  robust  efforts  to   improve  the  food  system,  food  sustainability  and  security,  and  to  address  food   related  issues  in  the  city.  We  must,  however,  not  view  these  achievements  as  final   successes.  After  all,  a  planner's  practice  involves  a  continuous  process  of  constant   evaluation  and  reflection.  Forester's  (1999)  Deliberative  Practitioner  shows  us  that   it  is  through  collective  deliberation,  learning,  critique  and  critical  reflection  that  the   process  of  community  change  and  transformation  occurs.  The  reality  is  that   significant  progress  still  needs  to  be  made  to  improve  the  food  system  and  the   planner's  relationship  and  role  within  this.  There  are  still  improvements  that  must   be  made  in  order  to  ensure  the  long-term  sustainability  of  food  and  food  security   within  Toronto.        From  a  planning  perspective,  the  search  for  local  solutions  to  food   sustainability  have  principally  taken  the  form  of  strategies  related  to  land  use  ­  such   as  community  gardens,  green  roofs,  urban  agriculture  and  greenbelts,  and  there   2

have  been  more  innovative  and  `unconventional'  ideas,  like  vertical  farming  and   growing  food  in  hydro  corridors.  These  proposed  solutions  contribute  to  the  access   and  security  of  food,  and  they  enrich  our  understanding  of  the  food  system  and  its   many  issues.  But  these  `physical'  land  use  solutions  are  just  one  part  of  the  food   sustainability  picture.  Planning  must  set  its  sights  beyond  land  use  practice  because   a  just  food  system  not  only  ensures  access  to  healthy  food  for  all,  but  it  also  provides   access  to  information  about  food  ­  how  to  grow  it,  prepare  it,  how  we  can  play  a  role   in  it  ­  and  the  importance  of  giving  power  to  the  collective  and  individual  choices  we   make  about  food.     Physical  land  use  solutions  are  important,  but  so  too  are  the  community- based  and  engaged  citizenship  pieces  around  this.  This  is  not  to  say  that  one  is  more   important  than  the  other,  but  rather,  that  they  are  both  key  pieces  to  the  future  of   urban  food  sustainability.  Importantly,  sustainable  development  can  be  understood   as  both  a  product  and  a  process.  As  Robinson  (2009)  reiterates,  we  can  think  of   sustainability  as  two  separate,  yet  connected  "generations".  The  first-generation   views  sustainability  as  "an  additive  approach  whereby  sustainability  is  expressed  as   the  sum  of  social,  economic  and  environmental  factors  in  decision-making,  and   sustainability  is  the  end-state  or  goal"  (pg.  162).  This  approach  views  sustainability   as  a  product.  The  second-generation  approach  emphasizes  "the  process  of  working   toward  sustainability  with  a  focus  on  decision-making  and  stakeholder  engagement"   (pg.162).  Public  engagement  in  food  sustainability  represents  this  second  approach   to  sustainability,  which  views  it  as  a  process.  This  process-oriented  approach  is   important  because  it  emphasizes  the  importance  of  decision-making,  and  the  need   3

to  transform  governance  to  adequately  allow  for  new  forms  of  decision-making  to   occur  in  order  to  create  sustainable  change  (Robinson,  2009).     This  process-oriented  approach  in  food  sustainability  planning,  however,  is   largely  missing  in  current  planning  efforts  to  advance  food  related  sustainable   development.  The  reality  is  that  there  is  a  gap  in  the  research  that  exists  around  the   engagement  of  individuals  in  food  planning,  particularly  that  of  the  youth   population.  While  there  has  been  more  discourse  and  effort  around  food  planning   matters  recently,  little  research  has  been  conducted  around  engaging/situating  the   youth  population  within  these  discussions  (Dale,  2010).      1.1  Research  Question   Youth  as  one  cohort  of  our  population  represents  an  important  and  key   group  in  the  development  and  improvement  of  the  current  food  planning  system.   Yet,  with  the  current  lack  of  attention  paid  to  this  youth  group,  a  large  gap  exists   around  understanding  the  best  practices  for  mobilizing  and  engaging  this  group  in   food  sustainability  practices.  Consequently,  the  central  question  that  will  be   examined  and  explored  in  this  research  paper  is:      How  do  you  make  youth  engagement  in  food  sustainability  planning  more   widespread,  meaningful  and  effective?      This  question,  therefore,  is  threefold.  Making  youth  engagement  more  widespread  is   important  for  the  purposes  of  scale.  It  refers  to  creating  more  opportunities  for   4

youth  to  become  engaged,  increasing  the  numbers  of  engaged  youth,  and  ultimately   doing  so  to  build  the  capacity  and  propensity  for  positive  change  to  occur.    As  the   old  saying  goes,  "there  is  strength  in  numbers".  The  term  `meaningful'  can  be   understood  as  possessing  useful  qualities,  being  significant  and  important  to  those   involved,  and  above  all,  serving  a  real  purpose.  As  Jennings  et  al.  (2008)  echo,  for   meaningful  engagement  to  occur,  "youth  need  to  engage  in  activities  relevant  to   their  own  lives,  ones  that  excite  and  challenge  them  and  count  as  real."  And  Kim  et   al.  (1998)  stress  the  notion  that  engagement  activities  need  to  promote  the   underlying  competence  and  intrinsic  motivations  of  youth,  so  that  they  can  test  and   master  their  own  interests,  develop  skills  and  gain  confidence.  The  essence  of   meaningful  engagement  is  captured  nicely  by  Checkoway  &  Guttierez  (2006)  who   write:   "Youth  participation  is  about  real  influence  of  young  people  in   institutions  and  decisions,  not  about  their  presence  as  human  subjects  or   service  recipients.  Although  participation  studies  often  assess  activities   in  terms  of  their  scope  ­  such  as  their  number,  frequency,  and  duration  ­   quality  is  their  most  significant  measure.  Just  because  a  number  of  young   people  attend  a  number  of  meetings  and  speak  a  number  of  times,  is  no   measure  of  their  effect.  Quality  participation  shows  some  effect  on   outcomes,  including  its  effect  on  community  change"  (pg.  2).        This  brings  us  to  the  third  aspect  of  this  paper's  research  question:  efficacy.   `Effective'  engagement  can  be  understood  in  its  ability  to  create  positive  change,   make  improvements  upon  the  current  food  system,  and  ultimately,  create  successful   results         5

1.2  Audience      This  paper  has  research  and  practice-oriented  aspirations.  Not  only  will  it   address  the  research  question:  How  do  you  make  youth  engagement  in  food   sustainability  more  widespread,  meaningful  and  effective?  But  it  is  intended  to  also   provide  a  tool  that  can  be  used  by  the  multiple  participants  and  organizations  in   food  systems  planning  to  improve  their  own  youth  engagement  strategies.  This   range  includes  (but  is  not  limited  to)  NGOs,  communities,  food  organizations,   municipalities,  charities  and  other  relevant  stakeholders  with  vested  interests  in   improving  food  sustainability  through  an  engaged  and  active  youth  population.        1.3  What  is  a  Food  System?      A  food  system,  as  the  name  suggests,  is  an  interconnected  network  that   involves  the  processes,  practices  and  places  that  covers  all  aspects  of  food.  It  is   usually  characterized  by  statements  such  as  "from  field  to  table"  or  "from  land  to   mouth"  to  involve  all  of  the  processes  and  activities  that  occur  between  point  A;   when  food  is  grown  or  produced  in  its  most  raw  form,  to  point  B;  when  it  is  on  our   plates.  As  such,  a  `food  system'  is  a  highly  integrated  web  that  "includes  everything   from  farm  input  suppliers  to  retail  outlets,  from  farmers  to  consumers"  (Kneen,   1993:11).    A  food  system,  therefore,  is  the  complex  set  of  activities  whose  purpose  is   to  provide  food  for  sustenance  and  nutrients  for  maintaining  our  health  and   livelihood  to  humans,  for  consumption.       

6

A  food  system  generally  has  six  stages  or  components.  They  are  (City  of  Vancouver,   2009):      1) Food  Production  -  the  farming  and  gardening  practices  that  produce  the  raw   food  products,  such  as  the  fruit  and  vegetables,  grains,  meat  and  dairy   products,  that  form  the  basis  of  our  diet.   2) Food  Processing  -  transforming  the  food  from  its  raw  state,  into  something   that  is  eaten.  This  can  be  as  simple  as  peeling  a  cucumber,  or  as  complicated   as  slaughtering  cows,  grounding  their  meat,  adding  preservatives  and   flavouring,  slicing  them  into  neat  patties,  and  packaging  them  into  boxes  of   hamburgers.     3) Food  Distribution  ­this  involves  the  different  distribution  channels  and   venues  that  move  food  (in  its  many  forms)  throughout  the  system.  Moving   seeds  to  a  farm,  or  a  bag  of  carrots  to  the  grocery  store  is  an  example  of  this.   4) Food  Access  ­  refers  to  people's  ability  to  obtain  food  from  sellers,  and  the   action  of  buying  food  from  grocery  stores,  markets,  restaurants,  etc.   5) Food  Consumption  ­  when  the  food  is  eaten     6) Waste  Management  ­  dealing  with  the  material  remains  of  food  after   consumption,  through  disposal,  composting  and  recycling.        These  6  stages  describe  the  general  components  of  a  food  system,  however,  it  is   important  to  note  that  there  are  multiple  food  systems  that  exist  (nested  spatial   hierarchies).  A  food  system  can  exist  globally  and  involve  world  markets,   7

international  trade  and  corporate  food  production.  This  type  of  food  system  is  the   current  overarching  and  dominant  system  of  food  production  that  reflects  the   globalized  nature  of  today's  food.  But  other  systems  may  be  more  localized,  such  as   community  food  systems,  which  involve  local  or  regional  agriculture,  community   farms  and  local  food  production  and  distribution.  These  localized  systems  are  often   more  sustainable,  environmentally  friendly,  and  fostering  of  ethical  imperatives.           1.4  The  State  of  the  Current  Food  System   The  perils  of  the  overarching  food  system  are  not  new,  per  se,  nor  are  they   relatively  unknown  facts  of  reality.  The  issues  of  the  food  system  have  been  widely   highlighted  in  the  media  ­  look,  for  example,  to  recent  award  winning   documentaries  such  as  The  Future  of  Food  (2004),  Our  Daily  Bread  (2005)  and  Food   Inc.  (2008),  bestselling  books  like  The  100-Mile  Diet  (2007)  and  In  Defense  of  Food   (2008),  and  Emmy  Award  winning  television  programs  like  Jamie  Oliver's  Food   Revolution.  Prevalent  issues  such  as  soaring  obesity  rates,  unhealthy  eating  habits,   lack  of  food  knowledge,  environmental  degradation  and  unsustainable  farming   practices  are  just  some  of  the  issues  explored  in  these  mediums.  Additionally,   government  campaigns  have  been  launched  to  provide  food  education  and  healthier   food  to  the  public  and  in  schools,  and  there  has  been  a  recent  "going  green"   movement  and  a  very  visible  organic  food  revolution.     The  United  Nations  Environment  Programme  (UNEP)  recently  released  a   study  (2010)  which  assessed  the  impacts  of  the  global  food  system.  The  landmark   study  produced  by  the  International  Panel  on  Sustainable  Resource  Management,  a   8

body  set  up  to  provide  independent  and  scientifically  driven  advice  to  the  UN,   highlights  "the  inefficiency  of  our  food  production  system",  its  "far  reaching   environmental  impacts"  and  its  "unsustainable  production,  consumption  and   material  usage"  (UNEP,  2010).  According  to  the  study,  38%  of  the  world's  total  land   area  is  used  for  agriculture,  yet  it  is  responsible  for  over  70%  of  global  freshwater   consumption.  The  global  agricultural  system  and  food  consumption  are  "two  of  the   most  important  drivers  of  environmental  pressures,  especially  habitat  change,   climate  change,  fish  depletion,  water  use  and  toxic  emissions"  (UNEP,  2010).   Industrial  farming  practices,  especially  of  livestock  and  meat  production,  were   flagged  in  the  study  as  the  most  unsustainable  food  practices.  50%  of  the  world's   crops  are  used  to  feed  animals,  rather  than  people,  and  the  majority  of  meat  for   global  consumption  is  produced  through  factory  farming  operations  (UNEP,  2010).   These  operations  require  intensive  resource  consumption,  they  significantly   contribute  to  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  require  the  destruction  of  rain  forests,  the   use  of  pesticides  and  agrochemicals,  and  the  destruction  of  biodiversity  through   using  monoculture  of  single  adopted  breeds  in  livestock  and  agricultural  production,   resulting  in  loss  resiliency  in  the  agricultural  system  (UNEP,  2010).  These  are  just   some  of  the  unsustainable  outcomes  of  the  global  food  system  highlighted  in  the   report,  which  merely  scratch  the  surface  of  unsustainable  food  practices.  There  are   also  considerable  ethical,  health  and  labour  issues  that  result  from  the  current   practices  of  the  global  food  system.     What  it  is  important  to  make  note  of  here,  though,  is  that  this  paper   acknowledges  and  understands  that  global  food  systems  of  agricultural  and  farming   9

practices  are  things  that  have  to  occur.  Resources  ultimately  have  to  be  used,  food   must  be  produced,  and  food  must  meet  the  demands  of  our  growing  world.  Simply   put,  we  as  humans  must  eat  to  stay  alive,  and  so  long  as  we  are  on  this  earth,   farming  and  food  production  are  not  only  inevitable,  but  necessary  as  well.  The   intentions  of  highlighting  the  unsustainable  agricultural  and  farming  practices  of  the   global  food  system  in  this  paper  is  not  to  advocate  that  everybody  should  stop   eating  meat,  adopt  a  vegan  lifestyle,  or  only  eat  organically.  To  do  so  would  ignore   the  cultural  preferences/norms  of  societies  around  the  world,  and  the  class   relations  that  complicate  and  diversify  our  relationships  with  food.  After  all,  food  is   a  universal  language,  but  it  is  experienced  differently  by  all  ­  we  cannot  assume  that   the  world  is  equal  and  that  everyone  has  the  same  financial  means  and  access  to   food,  nor  is  it  realistic  to  say  that  one's  cultural  mores  should  be  adopted  by  others.   Rather,  the  intention  of  highlighting  the  unsustainable  practices  of  the  global  food   system  is  to  illustrate  that  things  can  be  done  better.  There  is  room  in  the  food   picture  for  more  sustainable,  environmental  and  socially  conscious  practices.     The  overarching  food  system  is  highly  energy  and  capital-intensive,  globally   integrated,  and  increasingly  economically  consolidated.  Unfortunately,  it  has   resulted  in  environmental  degradation,  health  epidemics,  and  community  residents   who  do  not  have  access  to  an  adequate,  nutritious  food  supply.  It  has  also  led  to  the   disintegration  of  the  social  and  spiritual  fabric  ­  critical  connections  ­  that  are  part   of  a  community's  food  system.  People  have  become  disconnected  from  the  sources   of  their  sustenance  ­  the  land,  the  people  who  grow  and  harvest  their  food,  and  from   the  taste  and  quality  of  the  food  itself.  With  the  lack  of  food  knowledge,  many   10

consumers  are  passive  recipients  in  this  rather  homogenous  global  food  system  of   nutrient  distribution.  For  these  and  the  other  reasons  mentioned  in  this  section,  the   long-term  sustainability  of  the  current  food  system  is  in  question.  

                                                                                                     
11

2.0  Methodology  
   To  address  the  research  question  of  this  paper:  How  do  you  make  youth   engagement  in  food  sustainability  more  widespread,  meaningful  and  effective?  a   specific  methodology  has  been  selected.  The  following  section  explains  the  rationale   for  this  methodology,  how  it  will  be  used  and  understood  for  the  purposes  of  this   paper,  and  its  limitations.     One  of  the  best  ways  of  gaining  knowledge,  expertise  or  skills  is  to  learn  from   the  experiences  of  others.  Their  experiences,  successes,  failures,  trials  and   tribulations,  can  teach  us  valuable  lessons  that  contribute  to  our  understanding  and   improvement  of  how  to  do  things  better.  The  applied  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to   make  youth  engagement  in  food  sustainability  more  widespread,  meaningful  and   effective.  To  accomplish  this  task,  the  method  being  used  is  a  review  of  secondary   literature  focusing  on  best  practices.  This  approach  involves  identifying,   communicating  and  facilitating  the  transfer  of  practices  that  seem  to  work   successfully  somewhere  else,  to  your  own  organization  or  for  your  own  purposes   (Vesely,  2011).  Identifying  these  lessons  is  known  as  "best  practice  research".     Following  a  scan  for  best  practices,  the  information  gathered  will  be   analyzed,  disseminated,  and  presented  as  "lessons"  that  communities  and   organizations  can  learn  from  in  order  to  improve  the  engagement  of  youth  within   the  food  system.  Naturally,  this  set  of  practices  and  principles  will  then  form  the   basis  for  recommendations  for  these  interest  groups  moving  forward.  Best  practice   research  (BPR)  has  been  selected  as  the  method  for  this  paper  because  "the  primary   goal  of  BPR  is  the  selective  observation  of  a  set  of  exemplars  across  different   12

contexts  in  order  to  derive  more  generalizable  principles  and  theories  of   management"  (Vesely,  2011:99).  This  falls  in  line  with  the  intended  objectives  of   this  paper,  and  enables  a  rigorous  means  through  which  this  paper's  research   question  can  be  effectively  explored  and  addressed.     To  conduct  "best  practice  research"  and  identify  the  potential  best  practices   that  will  inform  this  paper,  criteria  must  be  established  to  distinguish  what  it  is  that   actually  constitutes  a  `best  practice'  example.  The  use  of  best  practice  research  is   usually  found  in  public  and  private  organizations  and  businesses,  and  it  is  often   used  and  understood  in  the  `business  sense'  for  the  purposes  of  management,   corporate  operations,  business  procedures  and  the  development  of  policies.  Many   definitions  of  `best  practices'  that  exist,  therefore,  reflect  this  business-like,   corporate  perspective.  For  example,  the  Encyclopedia  of  Management  (2009)   defines  it  as:  "in  a  general  sense,  the  term  best  practice  refers  to  the  most  efficient   way  of  doing  something.  The  fastest  method  that  uses  the  least  resources  (including   labor  and  parts)  to  create  the  highest  quality  output  is  the  "best  practice".  Best   practices  are  therefore  largely  based  upon  making  the  operations  of  a  business   more  efficient,  cheaper,  or  less-labour  intensive.     For  the  purposes  of  this  paper,  however,  the  intention  is  not  to  understand   youth  engagement  and  food  sustainability  in  this  light.  It  is  not  about  cutting   organizational  costs  or  using  less  labour  resources,  per  se,  but  rather,  about   improving  the  overall  impact  of  youth  engagement  in  food.  That  is,  the  scope,   meaningfulness  and  efficacy  of  the  process.  The  objectives  and  subject  matter  of  this   paper  therefore  calls  for  a  different  definition  of  best  practice  ­  one  that  is  better   13

suited  to  the  intentions  of  this  study.    A  more  fitting  definition,  provided  by  the  UN- Habitat  (n.d.)  is:  "best  Practices  are  actions  that  have  made  a  lasting  contribution  to   improving  the  quality  of  life  and  the  sustainability  of  cities  and  communities."     Building  on  this  definition,  the  criteria  for  which  best  practices  have  been   selected  to  inform  this  paper  are  as  follows:        Firstly,  several  interrelated  terms  are  used  in  literature  to  refer  to  best   practices,  including  "good  practice"  and  "smart  practices"  (Vesely,  2011).  The  use  of   the  word  `best'  can  be  controversial  due  to  the  contextual  and  relative  nature  of  the   term.  As  such,  this  paper  uses  `best  practices'  synonymously  with  `good  practice'   and  `smart  practice'.  The  choice  to  use  the  term  `best  practices'  is  for  the  sake  of   consistency  both  within  this  paper,  and  with  the  broader  literature  that  exists.  Thus,   a  selected  `best'  practice  may  not  necessarily  be  the  `best'  in  its  most  literal  sense,   but  it  has  generated  some  type  of  useful  function  that  can  generate  learning  (i.e.  it   can  be  `good').     Secondly,  this  paper  is  situated  within  the  larger  framework  of  sustainability.   Sustainability  can  be  understood  as  both  a  product  and  a  process  (as  discussed   previously).  Thus,  the  best  practices  selected  must  demonstrate  a  successful   product  (in  the  end)  and/or  a  process  of  getting  youth  engaged  in  food.  The  product   and/or  process  is  determined  to  be  successful  when  it  has  proven  to  create  positive   change  or  the  intended  desire  outcome  of  the  practitioner,  in  real  world  practice.       Finally,  this  paper  is  about  learning  new  things,  and  gaining  new  insights  and   knowledge  around  how  to  better  engage  youth  in  food  sustainability.  As  such,   14

innovation  and  new  ideas  are  highly  valued  as  a  criterion  in  this  paper's  selection  of   best  practices.  For,  pushing  youth  engagement  further  requires  progressive   approaches,  practices  and  perspectives.  A  best  practice  is  determined  to  be  new  and   innovative  when  it  is  a  `pioneer'  ­  it  is  unique,  the  first  and  only  of  its  kind  existing,   or  it  responds  to  a  specific  current  emerging  issue  in  the  food  system.        In  sum,  the  following  constitutes  the  criteria  for  which  best  practices  are   defined/included  in  this  paper:   · It  is  a  `best',  `good'  or  `smart'  practice,  where  value  can  be  derived  for  the   purposes  of  this  paper   · It  is  an  exemplary  product  or  process,  proven  to  be  successful  in  the  real   world   · It  is  a  new/innovative  idea    

      Limitations      One  of  the  limitations  of  the  method  being  employed  in  this  paper  is  that  best   practice  research  is  used  as  the  sole  methodology.  When  considering  that  this  paper   explores  meaningful  youth  engagement,  it  makes  sense  that  interviews  or  surveys   be  used  as  a  method,  to  actually  talk  to  those  involved  in  the  project  and  gather  the   extent  of  `meaningfulness'  experienced  by  these  first-hand  participants.  This   limitation  is  acknowledged.  However,  the  demands  of  administering  interviews  with   organizers  and  youth  from  around  the  world  go  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper.   Thus,  interviews  are  a  logical  next  step  to  this  study  ­  to  garner  more  detail  and  gain   15

a  deeper  understanding  of  the  best  practices  highlighted  in  this  paper.  As  such,  the   meaningfulness  of  best  practices  will  largely  be  assessed  by  the  author  of  this  paper:   a  male,  ethnic  minority,  graduate  urban  planning  student  in  Canada's  largest  urban   region,  who  is  part  of  the  youth  population  himself.        With  this,  there  can  be  the  potential  for  personal  bias.  My  background  as  a  

researcher  can  influence  the  best  practice  selection  process,  by  choosing  cases  that   appeal  to  my  preferences/suit  my  interests.  This  can  be  both  positive  ­  as  an  ethnic   minority,  for  example,  the  inclusion  of  diversity  is  a  factor  that  is  important  to  me.   However,  other  factors  may  be  overlooked,  such  as  a  female's  experience  with  the   food  system.  To  control  for  these  potential  biases,  the  methodology  is  applied   through  the  lens  of  broad  youth  appeal.  That  is,  that  these  practices  are  chosen   because  they  aim  to  benefit  all  youth.  I  do  not  seek  to  improve  youth  engagement  for   my  purposes,  or  to  solely  better  engage  myself  as  a  youth  in  food  sustainability   practices.  But  rather,  my  hope  as  a  researcher  is  to  improve  youth  engagement  in   food  sustainability  at  large,  and  contribute  to  the  development  of  food  youth   engagement  for  the  purposes  of  more  economically,  socially  and  environmental   sustainable  cities.    At  the  crux  of  this  lens  is  the  concept  of  equity,  and  fairness  for   all.                    16

3.0  Understanding  the  Youth  
3.1  Who  Are  Youth?      In  the  process  of  discussing  youth,  it  is  important  to  acknowledge  that  not  

one  set  definition  exists,  and  that  `youth'  is  a  fluid  term.  Like  most  social  terms,   there  are  multiple  perspectives  on  how  to  best  define  it.  The  concept  of  `youth'  has   been  viewed  historically  in  a  number  of  different  ways,  including  as  a  state  of  mind,   a  legal  age,  a  developmental  stage,  or  a  cultural  phenomenon.  The  Toronto  Youth   Food  Policy  Council,  for  example,  defines  `youth'  as  those  under  the  age  of  30.  The   Toronto  Youth  Cabinet  defines  it  as  13-24,  and  the  United  Nations  defines  it  as  those   between  the  ages  of  15-24.  For  the  purposes  of  this  study,  the  term  `youth'  will  refer   to  people  between  the  ages  of  15  to  30.  This  choice  is  intended  to  capture  the   diversity  of  perspectives  and  backgrounds  of  young  people  ­  teenagers  in  high   school,  those  in  university,  recent  graduates,  and  those  who  are  old  enough  to  vote   and  sit  on  boards  and  committees.  This  broad  definition  of  `youth'  reflects  the   dynamic,  energetic  and  forceful  nature  of  this  group.  It  is  important  to  understand   though,  that  although  these  young  people  are  categorized  under  the  term  `youth',   they  are  by  no  means  a  unitary  or  homogenous  group.  They  come  from  different   cultures,  educational  backgrounds,  classes,  and  experiences.  Understanding  the   diversity  of  this  group  is  key  to  understanding  how  to  make  their  engagement  in   food  planning  more  meaningful  and  effective.        The  youth  do  by  nature,  however,  also  share  commonalities.  They  are  in   essence  a  group  that  exists  in  transition.  Whether  it  be  from  high  school  to   17

university,  living  on  their  own  for  the  first  time,  or  starting  their  careers,  they  are  at   the  cusp  of  adulthood  and  attaining  the  necessary  supports,  skills  or  developmental   abilities  moving  forward  is  crucial.  In  an  article  written  by  Dr.  Wendy  Wills  entitled   "Food  and  Eating  Practices  During  the  Transition  from  Secondary  School  to  New   Social  Contexts",  a  study  of  young  people  studying  at  a  college  in  South  East  England   was  conducted  to  explore  the  role  of  new  spaces  and  places  and  their  impact  on   youth  people's  eating  habits,  routines  and  knowledge  of  food.  The  results  of  her   study  found  that  the  transient  nature  of  youth  between  different  and  new  social   contexts  resulted  in  the  re-negotiation  of  food  and  eating  practices.  The  practices   learned  at  the  parental  home  during  the  early  part  of  a  young  person's  life  still   served  as  a  significant  pillar  of  everyday  food  practices  in  new  social  contexts.   However,  being  in  new  social  contexts  also  resulted  in  more  experimental   behaviours,  exploration,  trial  and  personal  discovery  which  all  come  with  "an   increase  in  personal  agency,  thereby  creating  more  inidividualised  routes  and   tributaries  on  the  way  to  `adult  living"  (Wills,  2005:98).    Thus,  Dr.  Wills  asserts  that   the  youth  period  of  one's  life  is  a  crucial  time  for  developing  and  learning  new  life- long  food  skills.  It  is  the  time  when  young  people  question  who  they  are,  and  go   through  a  period  of  trying  out  different  behaviours  to  see  what  `fits'  in  terms  of  their   established  and  also  evolving  values.  This  study  shows  that  food  and  eating   practices  are  not  ordinary,  mundane  events  in  young  people's  lives,  but  rather,  an   important  part  of  dealing  with  the  transition  to  new  social  contexts.         

18

This  transitional  period  in  one's  life  has  also  created  a  demographic  that  is   largely  disconnected  from  the  overarching  food  system.  Thus,  the  youth  group  can   also  be  defined  as  one  that  is  increasingly  distanced  from  civic  engagement,   community  and  the  full  potential  of  their  autonomy  in  local  matters.  As  Zeldin  et.  al   (2006)  echo,  "youth  have  gradually  lost  access  to  many  of  soceity's  roles  and  social   networks....youths'  dominant  roles  have  become  limited  to  those  of  student,  style   setter,  and  consumer  (pg.  3).     A  recent  study  published  by  San  Diego  State  University  on  March  5,  2012   found  that  the  Millennial  Generation  (those  born  between  the  years  1982  to  2000,   thus  aged  12  to  30)  are  more  civically  and  politically  disengaged  than  Generation  X   and  the  baby  boomers  before  them,  when  they  were  the  same  age  (in  the  study  Gen   X  was  defined  as  being  born  between  1962  and  1981  and  baby  boomers  were  born   1946  to  1961.).  Three  psychologists  at  San  Diego  State  University  analyzed  two   databases  of  9  million  U.S.  high  school  seniors  or  students  entering  college,  dating   back  to  the  1960s.  The  students  were  asked  about  life  goals,  concern  for  others  and   civic  involvement.  Some  of  the  results  of  this  study  were  that  45  per  cent  of  boomer   students  said  being  wealthy  was  very  important  to  them  ­  a  number  that  rose  to  70   per  cent  for  Gen  X  and  75  per  cent  for  Millennials.  And  on  a  question  about  staying   up  to  date  with  politics,  the  numbers  fell  from  50  per  cent  for  boomers,  to  39  per   cent  for  Gen  X  and  35  per  cent  for  Millennials  (Twenge  et  al.,  2012).  The  greatest   declines  that  were  revealed  in  this  study,  however,  were  in  the  area  of  civic   engagement  and  community.  Millennials  reported  thinking  about  social  problems   less,  having  less  interest  in  government,  making  less  effort  to  conserve  energy,  and   19

being  less  interested  in  taking  "green"  actions  to  protect  the  environment  (Twenge   et  al.,  2012).  Millenials  were  also  less  likely  than  Boomers  and  Gen-X  to  participate   in  the  political  process  through  voting,  writing  to  a  public  official,  participating  in   demonstrations  or  boycotts,  or  giving  money  to  a  political  cause.  The  decline  in   wanting  to  take  action  to  help  the  environment  was  also  particularly  steep  ­  three   times  as  many  Millenials  than  boomers  said  they  made  no  personal  effort  at  all  to   help  the  environment.  With  these  results,  the  researchers  conclude  that  the  trend   among  the  Millennial  Generation,  the  current  youth  of  our  population,  is  towards   more  extrinsic  values,  such  as  materialism,  fame  and  image,  and  less  towards   intrinsic  values,  such  as  group  affiliation,  community  and  political  engagement   (Twenge  et  al.,  2012).     It  is  important  to  note  a  few  important  points  here.  Firstly,  this  study  is  not   an  attack  nor  criticism  of  the  Millennials.  The  researchers  acknowledge  that  social   behaviours  and  values  are  largely  reflective  of  the  dominant  culture,  and  that  this  is   exhibited  in  young  people  the  strongest.  As  they  themselves  write,  "generational   differences  are  cultural  differences:  As  cultures  change,  their  youngest  members  are   socialized  with  new  and  different  values.  Children  growing  up  in  the  1950s  were   exposed  to  a  fundamentally  different  culture  than  children  growing  up  in  the  1990s,   for  example.  Thus  birth  cohorts--  commonly  referred  to  as  generations--are   shaped  by  the  larger  sociocultural  environment  of  different  time  periods  (Twenge  et   al.,  2012:1).     Secondly,  this  study  is  American  and  was  conducted  among  American  youth.   Thus,  the  question  needs  to  be  asked  of  whether  these  trends  and  results  can  be   20

applied  to  Canadian  Millennials  as  well.  The  answer  to  this,  simply,  is  yes.  For   starters,  it  can  be  argued  that  despite  some  differences,  Canadian  and  American   culture  is  very  similar  in  many  ways.  We  share  the  same  North  American  culture,   and  we  get  the  same  movies,  television  programs,  music,  websites,  and  public   figures  and  role  models  that  dominate  our  media  and  social  world.  These,   undoubtedly,  are  some  of  the  greatest  influences  on  the  youth  of  today.  And  as   Twenge  et  al.  highlight,  youth  values  and  behaviours  are  reflective  of  this  pervasive   culture.     Furthermore,  similar  research,  although  less  extensive  in  scale,  has  been   conducted  in  the  Canadian  context,  and  the  results  are  generally  the  same.  In  2010   for  example,  Paul  Howe  released  his  book  entitled  Citizens  Adrift:  The  Democratic   Disengagement  of  Youth  Canadians,  which  highlights  the  civic,  political  and   community  disengagement  of  today's  youth  population  in  Canada,  in  areas  such  as   voter  turnout,  apathy,  participation  and  volunteerism  (Howe,  2010).  The  Canadian   government  has  also  taken  notice  of  the  lack  of  youth  engagement,  particularly  in   political  matters.  They  have  launched  campaigns  targeted  at  getting  youth  involved,   volunteering,  or  voting  in  elections.  Several  governmental  studies  also  highlight  the   trend  of  disengagement  among  today's  youth.  An  example  is  the  federal   government's  Policy  Research  Initiative,  which  conducted  a  study  in  2005  entitled   Social  Capital  in  Action:  Thematic  Policy  Studies  examining  youth  civic  engagement   in  Canada.  The  results  from  this  study  found  that  "young  Canadians  today  are  less   engaged  than  their  parents  and  grandparents  at  a  similar  life  stage"  (Canadian   Policy  Research  Initiative,  2005:82).  And  this  has  transpired  in  areas  such  as  voting,   21

membership  in  political  parties,  political  knowledge,  political  interest,  volunteering   and  generalized  trust  among  Canadian  youth.  Thus,  these  reports  echo  the  results  of   the  comprehensive  study  conducted  by  Twenge  et  al.,  revealing  the  same  underlying   point:  That  today's  youth  are  largely  disengaged  from  community,  political  and  civic   life.     The  next  question  that  must  be  asked,  then,  is  to  what  extent  have  these   trends  influence  or  manifest  in  the  area  of  food  engagement?  Firstly,  it  must  be   made  clear  that  the  areas  of  youth  disengagement  mentioned  above,  such  as  voting,   political  interest,  and  political  knowledge  are  all  areas  that  ultimately  impact  food.   Although  these  connections  may  not  be  seen  as  immediate  or  directly  related  to   food  at  first  glance,  food  is  highly  politicized  and  should  not  be  understood  as   something  separate  from  community  or  politics.  Who  a  young  person  votes  for,  for   example,  may  influence  who  is  elected,  and  different  leaders  and  political  parties   have  very  different  ideas  and  values  about  food  sustainability.  Their  vote,  therefore,   may  determine  the  decisions  that  are  made  about  food,  and  the  policies  that  are   implemented  by  who  is  elected  ­  all  things  that  influence  the  future  of  food   sustainability.  Thus,  although  areas  such  as  political  knowledge  and  political   interest  may  seem  very  general,  they  ultimately  have  implications  for  the  real  world.   Youth  disengagement  in  these  areas,  therefore,  has  very  concrete  impacts  on  food.     Furthermore,  studies  about  youth  and  their  relationship  with  the  food   system  show  that  the  general  trend  of  disengagement  permeates  to  the  realm  of   food  as  well.  In  2011,  a  survey  conducted  by  Farmers  Feed  Cities,  a  not-for-profit   organization  based  in  Guelph,  Ontario,  revealed  that  only  41  percent  of  the  18-34   22

age  group  claimed  to  be  aware  of  where  there  food  comes  from  (much  lower  than   older  cohorts)  (Baynton,  2011).  This  is  a  staggering  amount.  It  means  that  almost   60%  of  the  youth  demographic  has  no  idea  of  the  origin  and  source  of  their  food  ­   the  things  that  they  put  into  their  bodies  and  consume,  every  single  day.  The  survey   also  highlighted  that  overall  the  youth  age  group  is  more  unattached  to  the  farm   than  previous  generations.  Undoubtedly,  these  results  illustrate  the  disconnect  and   disengagement  among  the  youth  population  in  the  food  system.        3.2  Why  Focus  on  Youth?      The  youth  are  disconnected  from  the  food  system  in  many  ways  such  as  the   knowledge  of  where  food  comes  from,  and  the  health  and  environmental  impacts  of   their  food  choices  (Wolynsky,  2010).  This  disconnect  is  one  that  is  concerning  and   deserves  much  attention.  According  to  Statistics  Canada  research  from  2006,  33   percent  of  youth  in  Ontario  are  overweight,  and  the  rates  of  obesity  among  this   group  have  nearly  tripled  since  25  years  ago  (Wolynsky,  2010).  In  addition  to  the   staggering  statistics  mentioned  the  previous  section,  over  50  percent  of  youth  in   Canada  do  not  know  the  Canada  Food  Guide  (Wolynsky,  2010).  Perhaps  most   jarring,  however,  is  the  fact  that  the  young  people  of  today,  for  the  first  time  in  more   than  a  century,  are  more  likely  to  live  shorter  lives  than  their  parents.  This  is  due  in   large  part  to  obesity  and  chronic  disease  caused  by  their  food  consumption  habits   and  lack  of  food  knowledge  (Public  Health  Agency  of  Canada,  2011).    It  goes  without   saying  that  food  is  inherently  connected  to  our  individual  health  and  well-being.  The   23

alarming  rate  of  these  health  statistics  among  the  youth  population  reveal  that,   clearly,  the  inadequacies  of  the  food  system  need  to  be  addressed,  and  approaches   must  be  taken  to  deal  with  these  issues.  Engaging  youth  in  our  food  system  by   situating  them  squarely  within  these  solutions  and  decision-making  processes,   provides  a  means  to  achieve  this.     Beyond  just  these  important  health  concerns,  youth  engagement  is  also   necessary.  For,  public  participation  pieces  and  ethics  of  inclusivity  are  rooted  in   planning  documents  and  codes  of  practices.  The  Canadian  Institute  of  Planners,  for   example,  has  a  strict  professional  code  of  practice  that  forms  the  basis  of  planning   practice  for  all  of  its  members.  In  Ontario,  these  codes  are  enforceable  through  the   disciplinary  provisions  of  the  OPPI  By-law  1-86  (OPPI,  2009).  One  of  the  codes  of   practice  state:        "Members  have  a  primary  responsibility  to  define  and  serve  the   interests  of  the  public.  This  requires  the  use  of  theories  and  techniques   of  planning  that  inform  a  structure  debate,  facilitate  communication,  and   foster  understanding.  Accordingly,  a  Member  shall:     1.1  practice  in  a  manner  that  respects  the  diversity,  needs,  values  and   aspirations  of  the  public  and  encourages  discussion  on  these  matters;     1.4  identify  and  promote  opportunities  for  meaningful  participation  in  the   planning  process  to  all  interested  parties."     

24

These  codified  public  participation  practices  are  quite  broad,  however,  and   the  engagement  of  the  public  in  planning  matters  is  viewed  as  a  high-level  and   macroscopic  practice.  The  extent  to  which  these  broad-based  participation  pieces   have  actually  permeated  the  food  system  in  a  meaningful  and  effective  way  for   youth,  though,  is  questionable.  When  dealing  with  a  specific  demographic  group   (youth)  with  unique  characteristics,  needs  and  experiences,  participation  and  public   engagement  has  to  be  more  than  just  a  broad-based  practice.  It  has  to  be  precise,  it   has  to  be  meaningful,  and  it  requires  specific  strategies  in  order  to  successfully   mobilize  and  engage  this  group  of  people.        Focusing  on  the  youth  is  also  valuable.  Engaging  them  in  decision-making   and  the  planning  of  food  systems  is  not  something  that  should  be  done  because  it  is   considered  the  right  thing  to  do,  or  because  the  codes  of  practice  say  we  should.  To   do  so  would  perpetuate  the  tokenistic  public  participation  and  consultation   processes  that  often  occur  in  the  urban  planners'  attempts  to  engage  the  public  in   planning  affairs.  Rather,  the  youth  should  be  engaged  because  their  influence  is   important,  and  because  what  they  have  to  offer  is  of  value,  usefulness  and  worth.   The  youth  group  encompasses  a  demographic  that  possesses  dynamism,   audaciousness,  a  daring  spirit,  and  they  can  provide  fresh  and  creative  ideas  and   perspectives  to  the  table.     Creating  meaningful  and  effective  engagement  with  the  youth  demographic   is  one  that  is  mutually  beneficial.  Advocates  and  researchers  of  youth  point  to  the   developmental  benefits  of  youth  involvement  in  decision-making  and  public   25

engagement.  Youth  participation  has  been  linked  to  greater  organizational   sustainability  and  effectiveness  and,  on  a  macro  level,  national  democratic,  social   and  economic  development  (O'Donoghue  et.  al,  2003).  Furthermore,  including  youth   in  decision-making  processes  and  the  planning  of  our  food  system  is  one  that   creates  equity  ­  a  major  component  of  sustainable  development.  The  Brundtland   Commission,  which  played  a  prominent  part  in  popularizing  the  notion  of   sustainable  development  defined  the  term  as:  "development  that  meets  the  needs  of   the  present  without  compromising  the  ability  of  future  generations  to  meet  their   own  needs"  (United  Nations,  1987).  This  definition,  which  has  since  been  adopted   globally  and  endorsed  by  the  United  Nations,  embodies  the  notion  of  equity  at  its   core.  In  essence,  equity  implies  the  need  for  fairness  and  the  entitlement  of   everybody  to  the  same  quality,  treatment,  access  and  distributive  gains.  Currently,   the  lack  of  engagement  and  attention  given  to  youth  within  the  food  system  does  not   reflect  this  fundamental  principle.  Furthermore,  the  idea  behind  not  reducing  the   ability  of  future  generations  to  meet  their  needs  embodies  the  notion  of   intergenerational  equity.  This  ethical  principle  is  central  to  sustainable  development,   and  implies  that  we  inherit  the  Earth's  resources  from  previous  generations  and   have  an  obligation  to  pass  it  on  in  reasonable  condition  to  future  generations.  This   includes  current  youth  and  children,  as  well  as  those  in  future  generations.          Engaging  youth  in  food  is  also  important  because  Ontario's  farmers  are  aging.   The  mean  age  of  farm  operators  in  Ontario  was  53  in  2006,  three  years  older  than  a   decade  earlier  (Seccombe,  2007).  From  1996  to  2006,  young  farm  operators  in   26

Ontario  declined  by  49%.  By  2006,  only  9%  (7,070)  were  under  35  years  of  age   (Seccombe,  2007).  And,  while  the  1996  cohort  aged,  new  entrants  were  not  taking   their  place.  The  children  of  Ontario's  farmers  are  evidently  looking  elsewhere  for   their  career  choices.  While  retaining  their  inheritance  rights,  most  decline  to  take   over  the  management  of  the  family  farm  as  their  parents  approach  retirement.  This   has  to  do  with  many  factors,  including  the  disconnect  of  young  people  from  the  food   system  and  the  decline  in  net  incomes  of  small-scale  farming  as  an  occupation.  The   question  then,  is  where  the  next  generation  of  Ontario's  farmers  will  come  from?  If   the  present  trend  persists,  retaining  new  generations  of  farmers  will  become  a   major  issue,  and  we  will  soon  lose  the  capacity  to  grow  most  of  the  food  we  eat  in   Ontario.        The  youth  demographic  also  constitutes  the  next  generation  of  eaters,  policy-

makers  and  politicians.  The  youth  have  a  unique  concern  for  food  security  and   sustainable  integrity,  as  they  will  inherit  the  systemic  problems  of  environmental   degradation  and  food  insecurity.  But  this  also  means  that  finding  the  solutions  to   these  problems  will  lie  in  their  hands  as  well.  For  the  purposes  of  the  planning   practice,  therefore,  the  youth  must  be  better  understood  and  integrated  in  order  to   ensure  that  food  sustainability  issues  can  be  better  addressed  as  we  move  forward.   Investing  in  youth,  therefore,  means  investing  in  the  future.             

  
27

4.0  Reviewing  Best  Practice  and  Research  
4.1  Assessing  Youth  Food  Engagement  Programs  in  Ontario   The  City  of  Sudbury,  following  studies  within  the  last  six  years  that  show  that   the  youth  of  Northern  Ontario  and  Greater  Sudbury  are  unhealthier  and  less  food- knowledgeable  than  the  rest  of  Ontario's  youth,  undertook  a  review  of  youth-based   food  sustainability  programs  in  Ontario  (Wolynsky,  2010).  In  partnership  with  The   Foodshed  Project,  they  aimed  to  see  how  these  programs  could  potentially  be   adapted  to  Sudbury's  youth  population.  The  result  was  one  of  the  first   comprehensive  reports  that  reviewed  the  extent  of  Ontario  youth  engagement   programs  in  food  sustainability  entitled  "Youth  Engagement  in  Food  Sustainability:  A   Review  of  Programs  offered  in  Ontario"  (2010).  In  the  report's  assessment  of  youth- based  food  programs,  the  report  lists  organizations  (such  as  Green  Venture,  Just   Food,  The  STOP,  Roots  to  Harvest,  etc.)  and  the  types  of  programs  and  initiatives   that  they  offer.  These  include  such  things  as  community  gardens,  community   kitchens,  community  workshops,  school  field  trips  and  school  salad  bars.  The  results   of  the  study  found  that  there  are  many  attempts  being  made  by  organizations   throughout  Ontario  to  address  the  disconnect  between  youth  and  the  food  system.   These  attempts  include  hands-on  programs,  gardening  and  cooking  programs,  and   internships  among  others.     This  report  is  an  important  preliminary  piece  that  has  been  undertaken,  and   it  sets  the  foundation  for  more  rigorous  research  around  this  topic.  What  could  be   built  upon  is  the  report's  lack  of  criticism  of  the  youth-based  programs  offered  by   the  organizations.  One  organization  may  offer  a  wide  array  of  programs  and  youth   28

initiatives,  but  does  this  necessarily  mean  that  these  programs  are  meaningful  to   youth?  And  to  what  extent  are  they  effective  in  accomplishing  positive  results?  Is  a   salad  bar,  for  example,  really  a  meaningful  and  effective  way  of  engaging  youth  in   food  sustainability?  Thus,  my  paper  is  intended  to  take  this  preliminary  work  to  the   next  step  ­  to  explore  way  in  which  meaningful  and  effective  youth  engagement  can   occur  in  food  sustainability.        4.2  Food  Democracy   The  term  "food  democracy'  was  developed  by  Tim  Lang,  a  professor  at  the   City  University  in  London,  in  the  mid-1990s  as  a  response  to  the  increasing   corporate  control  and  lack  of  consumer  participation  in  the  food  system  (Fisher,   2010).  Food  democracy  is  based  on  the  principle  that  citizens  can  and  should  be   actively  participating  in  shaping  the  food  system,  rather  than  remaining  passive   spectators  on  the  sidelines.  In  other  words,  food  democracy  is  about  citizens  having   the  power  to  determine  food  policies  and  practices  locally,  regionally,  nationally  and   globally.  Food  democracy  asserts  that  it  is  a  right  and  responsibility  of  citizens  to   participate  in  decisions  concerning  their  food  system.  These  beliefs  challenge  the   corporate  structure  and  allow  for  bottom-up  control  of  the  food  system,   transforming  individuals  from  "passive  consumers  into  active,  educated  citizens"   (Fisher,  2010).  The  goal  of  food  democracy  is  to  ensure  all  citizens  have  access  to   affordable,  healthy  and  culturally  appropriate  foods.  Food  democracy,  therefore,   emphasizes  social  justice  in  the  food  system,  and  food  is  viewed  as  central  to  the   democratic  process.       29

This  concept  of  food  democracy  places  citizens  in  the  midst  of  the   discussions  and  planning  decisions  made  about  food.  As  such,  this  notion  serves  as  a   valuable  framework  and  theoretical  basis  in  which  to  understand  this  paper  moving   forward.  Food  democracy  is  more  than  just  an  ideology,  it  is  ultimately  about   decentralizing  power  and  giving  groups  a  real  voice  in  shaping  the  food  system.   Thus,  it  has  practical  utility  with  respect  to  collective  action  and  the  mobilization   and  participation  of  public  interest  groups  in  food  sustainability.        Neva  Hassanein  (2003)  makes  a  very  compelling  case  for  the  use  of  food  

democracy  to  better  understand  citizen  engagement  in  food  sustainability.  When   the  term  "sustainability"  first  emerged  in  public  discourse,  it  was  a  concept  that  was   contested  and  there  were  many  ways  in  which  it  was  defined.  Although  the  term  has   eluded  a  consensus  on  its  definition,  "sustainability"  is  popularly  regarded  as   encompassing  social,  economic  and  environmental  imperatives,  in  addition  to  some   component  of  equity  (as  discussed  previously).  Allen  et.  al  (1991)  provide  a   common  definition  of  sustainability:  "one  that  equitably  balances  concerns  for   environmental  soundness,  economic  viability,  and  social  justice  among  all  sectors  of   society  "  (p.37).  Definitions  like  these  are  useful  because  they  embrace  the  range  of   interests  that  should  be  included  in  any  vision  for  sustainability.  But  it  is  difficult  to   apply  this,  or  any  definition,  as  a  practical  guide  for  action.  What  does  it  really  mean   in  practice  to  equitably  balance  concerns  for  environmental  soundness,  economic   viability  and  social  justice  among  all  sectors  of  society?  How  should  each  dimension   be  evaluated  in  relation  to  the  others?  For  example,  how  should  society  weigh  the   protection  of  water  quality  from  agricultural  runoff  against  the  possibility  that   30

additional  regulation  of  farming  practices  might  make  it  even  more  difficult  for   small  agricultural  producers  to  operate  in  an  economically  viable  manner?  And   perhaps  most  importantly,  who  gets  to  decide  where  the  "equitable  balance"  lies?   Definitions  of  sustainability,  therefore,  cannot  fully  anticipate  responses  to  these   kinds  of  questions  because  at  their  core,  these  matters  are  about  conflicts  over   values.        This  is  where  food  democracy  steps  in.  Hassanein  (2003)  writes:     "Because  the  conflict  is  about  values,  sustainability  must  be  socially  and   politically  defined.  Furthermore,  solutions  to  the  ecological,  social,  and   economic  problems  associated  with  the  excesses  of  industrialized,   corporate  dominated,  and  globalized  agriculture  cannot  all  be  prescribed   in  advance.  Natural  and  social  systems  are  neither  static  nor  predictable.   Because  decision-making  is  usually  shrouded  in  uncertainty,  society  must   assume  and  plan  for  the  reality  that  the  agro-food  system  is  temporally   and  geographically  variable,  that  we  cannot  have  complete  knowledge  in   advance  of  the  consequences  of  the  choices  that  are  made,  and  that   notions  of  what  is  sustainable  will  evolve  over  time.  Selecting  sustainable   solutions  from  various  options  means  making  choices  that  affect  everyone,   and  in  that  context,  conflict  is  inevitable.  Politics  is  the  arena  in  which  we   deal  with  disagreements  over  values.  Such  conflict  is  not  something  to  shy   away  from;  conflict  leads  to  change...  Change  means  movement.  Movement   means  friction.  Only  in  the  frictionless  vacuum  of  a  nonexistent  abstract   world  can  movement  or  change  occur  without  that  abrasive  friction  of   conflict.  The  best  hope  for  finding  workable  solutions  to  conflicts  about  the   character  and  direction  of  the  agro-food  system  is  through  the  active   participation  of  the  citizenry  (in  the  broad,  denizen  sense  of  the  word)  and   political  engagement  to  work  out  our  differences"  (pg.  79).        Thus,  if  solutions  to  problems  in  the  food  system  depend  in  a  very  fundamental  way   on  participation,  the  concept  of  food  democracy  serves  as  a  constructive  method  for   political  practice,  because  participation  is  a  key  feature  of  democracy.  To  speak  of   the  pressure  to  democratize  the  food  system  is  to  recognize  that  there  are  spaces  of   resistance  and  creativity  in  which  people  themselves  attempt  to  govern  and  shape   31

their  relationships  with  food  and  agriculture  (Hassanein,  2003).  And  so,  the   practical  utility  of  food  democracy,  in  its  call  for  participation,  provides  the  means   through  which  we  can  begin  to  solve  the  complex  nature  of  food  sustainability.        4.3  The  Youth-Service  Model  vs.  The  Youth  Engagement  Model      Traditionally,  attempts  at  engaging  youth  have  been  based  on  the  youth- service  model  (Checkoway  &  Gutierrez,  2006).  This  model  views  the  youth   population  as  passive  and/or  helpless  `clients'  in  need  of  some  type  of  outside   intervention.  Thus,  the  youth  is  seen  as  a  group  with  problems  that  need  to  be  fixed,   and  as  dependents  that  need  to  be  taken  care  of.  This  view  is  consistent  with  the   images  of  `youth  as  problems'  that  often  permeates  popular  media,  professional   practice  and  even  social  science.  For  example,  the  youth  is  often  portrayed  as   perpetrators  of  crime,  drug  users,  school  dropouts,  sexually  promiscuous,  vandals,   inarticulate,  irresponsible,  and  apathetic.  With  these  images  in  mind,  it  is  not   surprising  that  adults  primarily  think  of  young  people  as  societal  problems,  rather   than  as  agents  of  real  change  in  our  communities  (Checkoway  &  Gutierrez,  2006).   This  view,  by  nature,  is  reflected  in  the  policies  and  engagement  strategies  that  exist   around  dealing  with  the  youth  population.  In  these  attempts,  youth  are  treated   solely  as  the  recipients  of  initiatives,  rather  than  as  actors  in  influencing  the   initiatives  themselves.    The  traditional  youth-service  model  can  therefore  be   understood  as  working  for  youth.     An  important  first  step  towards  creating  more  meaningful  and  effective   engagement  for  youth  in  food  sustainability  is  to  adopt  a  new  perception,  or  attitude,   32

towards  working  with  the  youth  population  and  of  the  youth  population  in  general.   We  must  move  beyond  the  traditional  model,  towards  one  of  meaningful  and   effective  youth  engagement.  Instead  of  viewing  youth  as  `problems'  this  alternative   model  views  young  people  as  competent  citizens  and  community  assets,  with  a  right   to  actively  participate  in  the  decisions  that  affect  their  communities  and  their  future.   Rather  than  adults  solving  youth  issues  from  the  top  down,  the  process  of   engagement  becomes  one  that  is  mutually  inclusive  ­  accepting  and  respecting  the   perspectives  of  the  diverse  youth  group,  and  working  with  them  to  create  change   from  the  bottom  up.  The  engagement  model  can  be  understood  as  working  with   youth.  The  following  chart  (adapted  from  Rempel,  2011)  contrasts  the  two  different   approaches  to  dealing  with  youth  engagement:        Traditional  Youth-Service  Model   Youth  Engagement  Model   Preventing  and  responding  to  problems   Nurturing  youth  assets  and  positive      development         Young  people  as  passive  citizens,  in  need   Young  people  as  active  community   of  outside  intervention   members  with  the  wisdom,  skills  and      expertise  to  contribute  to  solutions   Short-term  one-off  projects,  programs,      and  services   An  ongoing  process  of  empowerment,      capacity  building  and  action   Professionals  as  experts  who  `work  for'      young  people,  their  families  and   Professionals  as  facilitators  and   communities   professionals  who  `work  with'  youth   Table  1:  The  Traditional  Youth-Service  Model  vs.  The  Youth  Engagement  Model      To  bridge  the  gap  between  this  distinction  of  broad  youth  engagement   strategies  to  those  specific  to  food,  research  indicates  that  the  traditional  model  of   youth  servicing  also  occurs  within  the  realm  of  food.  One  of  the  problems  of  the  food  

33

system  that  is  most  evident  in  youth  is  the  rise  in  unhealthy  eating  practices,  obesity   rates,  diabetes  and  other  health  related  issues.  In  many  reports  that  highlight  these   conditions,  they  often  adopt  the  youth  service  model  in  their  depiction  of  the  youth   population.  For  example,  they  speak  of  the  poor  choices  of  young  people,  lack  of   physical  activity  (sedentary  lifestyles)  and  junk  food  binging.  And  as  a  result,   solutions  to  address  these  problems  involve  adult  intervention  ­  such  as  stepping  in   to  give  youth  healthier  options.  But  while  it  may  be  true  that  greater  forces/players   need  to  be  involved  in  solving  these  health  issues  and  a  degree  of  outside   intervention  is  needed,  little  is  actually  said  about  working  with  the  youth   themselves,  to  create  change.    The  youth  are  largely  viewed  as  victims  of  their  lack   of  food  knowledge  and  unhealthy  eating  practices,  rather  than  as  agents  of  change.     Furthermore,  opportunities  to  work  with  youth  to  create  this  change  are   simply  not  as  prevalent  as  they  should  be.  As  citizens  of  the  state,  youth  often  find   the  institutional  framework  for  public  participation,  communication,  and  decision- making  inadequate,  unwelcoming  and  unsatisfying  (Botelho,  1999).  The  truth  is  that   opportunities  for  youth  in  Canada  to  become  engaged  in  food  can  be  hard  to  come   by,  or  the  opportunities  that  do  exist  remain  largely  unknown  among  the  youth   population.        4.4  Fertile  Ground:  Creating  the  Spaces  for  Engagement  to  Occur   Gail  Feenstra  is  a  food  systems  analyst  for  the  University  of  California's   Sustainable  Agriculture  Research  &  Education  Program.  During  her  many  years  of   experience  at  this  position,  she  has  come  across  thousands  of  food  system  projects;   34

funding  them,  developing  them,  and  watching  them  grow,  or  in  some  cases,  fail.    But   these  observations  led  her  to  an  important  point  of  exploration:  what  does  it  take  to   create  and  sustain  a  successful,  sustainable  food  system  project?  In  her  study  entitled   "Creating  space  for  sustainable  food  systems:  Lessons  from  the  field"  she  aims  to   answer  this  question,  through  an  analysis  of  food  programs  in  California  and  in- depth  interviews  with  key  food  system  practitioners.  Her  results  found  that  people   had  to  "create  space"  for  the  germination  of  these  projects  in  their  communities,  and   protect  space  for  their  continuation.  There  are  four  types  of  spaces  that  must  be   carved  out,  for  the  sustained  success  of  community  food  initiatives  (Feenstra,  2002):      Social  space   From  their  inception,  the  successful  food  systems  projects  identified  by   Feenstra  encouraged  communities  to  create  new  social  spaces.  This  could  include   actual  physical  places,  like  new  farmers'  markets  or  community  gardens,  where  rich   social  interactions  took  place.  But  more  often,  it  meant  the  multiple  opportunities   these  projects  created  for  diverse  people  in  communities  to  come  together  to  talk,   listen  to  each  other's  concerns  and  views,  plan  together,  problem-solve,  question,   learn,  and  get  to  know  and  trust  one  another  in  the  context  of  a  common  purpose  or   vision.  This,  as  Feenstra  (2002)  describes,  "is  where  democratic  theory  and  practice   come  together,  and  regular  citizens  and  residents  have  the  opportunity  to   participate  in  their  food  systems  in  new  ways".  This  occurs  in  the  context  of  such   mediums  as  food  policy  councils,  grassroots  organizations  devoted  to  improving   community  food  security,  and  farm-to-school  committees.        35

Political  space      Closely  related  to  social  space  is  political  space.  Every  community  food  

systems  project  that  Feenstra  assessed  spoke  of  their  involvement  in  policymaking   at  some  level  ­  from  the  school  district  or  local  institution  of  higher  education,  to   city,  county,  or  state  government.  This  kind  of  space  almost  needs  to  be  carved.   Carving  out  political  spaces  allows  for  the  project  to  do  things  like  craft  a  local   school  food  policy,  add  a  local  food  component  to  the  city's  or  county's  General  Plan,   or  put  ballot  measures  on  a  local  ballot  to  preserve  open  space  and  farmland   (Feenstra,  2002).  One  important  element  of  creating  political  spaces  is  that  it  can   help  food  system  pilot  projects  or  models  institutionalize  their  efforts  within  a   community.  This  stabilizes  the  activities  and  allows  them  to  mature  in  place.  To   convince  policymakers,  there  are  two  things  that  Feenstra  (2002)  found  to  be  most   convincing.  First,  are  compelling  narratives  (stories)  and  second,  is  solid  data  that   show  the  impacts  of  a  new  initiative.  So,  both  qualitative  and  quantitative   information  is  needed  to  carve  the  political  spaces  that  allow  food  projects  to   sustain  and  flourish.        Intellectual  Space      Intellectual  space  includes  several  related  elements:  articulating  the  vision  of  a  

sustainable  food  system  and  then  conceptualizing  a  community  food  system   initiative  within  the  local  context.  It  also  involves  reflecting  on  progress  and  future   plans  with  local  residents.  Successful  projects  all  included  at  least  one  person  who   had  a  clear  vision  and  could  share  the  "big  picture"  with  the  rest.  The  other  part  of   36

intellectual  space  has  to  do  with  reflection  and  evaluation.        Economic  Space   Most  of  the  projects  that  Feenstra  worked  with  included  some  connection   with  the  local  economy  ­  whether  it  was  an  attempt  to  find  ways  to  recirculate  local   financial  capital  within  a  region,  examine  employment  opportunities  for  youth,  or   look  at  sharing  land  costs  and  stewardship.  Furthermore,  all  of  the  projects  also   relied  on  external  funding,  which  was  absolutely  necessary  to  really  allow  them  to   get  off  the  ground.  Once  a  project  has  started  and  been  in  existence  for  a  while,  the   next  challenge  is  keeping  it  going  ­  the  maintenance  phase.  There  seems  to  be  a   vulnerable  time  between  start-up  and  stability,  between  initiation  and   institutionalization,  in  which  the  project  needs  particular  nurturing.  Continued   funding  is  very  helpful  at  this  stage  of  project  development.      Gail  Feenstra's  findings  about  the  types  of  spaces  that  need  to  be  created  to   ensure  that  food  projects  are  successful  does  not  speak  specifically  about  youth,  but   it  has  been  included  in  this  paper  for  one  very  important  reason.  In  order  to   improve  youth  engagement,  there  must  be  a  starting  point  ­  an  ultimate  place  in   which  youth  engagement  can  emerge,  develop  or  simply  exist.  Moreover,  this  paper   is  not  just  about  improving  existing  youth  engagement  initiatives,  but  fostering  the   creation  of  new  ones  as  well.    This  is  an  important  part  of  making  youth  engagement   more  widespread.  Establishing  localized  food  projects,  with  the  aim  of  achieving   social-justice  and  environmental  goals,  is  an  important  strategy  for  developing   37

sustainable  urban  food  systems.  As  individuals  and  groups  throughout  the  world  try   to  develop  such  food  systems,  it  is  useful  to  understand  what  makes  these  efforts   successful.  Feenstra's  analysis  provides  this  insight.      4.5  Setting  the  Stage      The  preceding  literature  review  is  intended  to  set  the  stage  for  the  next  

section  of  this  paper:  The  Best  Practices  and  Recommendations.  It  has  attempted  to   do  so  through  covering  the  following  areas,  which  naturally  segue  into  the   forthcoming  sections:      Firstly,  it  provided  an  overview  of  a  comprehensive  report  conducted  by  the  

City  of  Sudbury,  which  reviewed  the  extent  of  youth  engagement  programs  in  food   sustainability  in  Ontario.  This  foundational  report  highlighted  the  fact  that  there  is  a   variety  of  youth  programs  being  offered  in  Ontario,  but  ultimately,  the  extent  to   which  they  can  actually  be  viewed  as  meaningful  and/or  effective  still  remains   undefined.  Thus,  it  sets  the  groundwork  for  more  research  to  be  conducted,  and  for   this  foundational  piece  to  be  pushed  further.    This  section  therefore  provides  the   background  knowledge  of:  (1)  the  types  of  youth  engagement  programs  that  exist  in   Ontario,  and  how  they  can  be  improved.      Knowing  this,  food  democracy  was  discussed  next,  as  a  practical  framework  

in  which  to  understand  the  context  of  this  paper.  Importantly,  it  also  provides  a   rational  approach  to  address  the  complex  and  conflictual  nature  of  sustainability   issues,  specifically  that  of  food.  Food  democracy  asserts  that  it  is  ultimately  through   civic  participation  and  democratic  decision-making  these  issues  can  be  adequately   38

and  justly  addressed.  This  section  therefore  provides:  (2)  the  constructive  method  to   be  used  to  address  the  issues  of  youth  engagement  in  food  sustainability.   The  third  section  discusses  the  traditional  youth  servicing  model,  in  contrast   to  the  youth  engagement  model.  The  latter  calls  for  a  new  attitude  and  approach  to   dealing  with  the  youth  segment  of  the  population.  Rather  than  address  youth  as   problematic  and  in  need  of  outside  intervention,  the  youth  engagement  model   works  with  youth  and  treats  them  as  competent  citizens  and  community  assets,   with  a  right  to  actively  participate  in  the  decisions  that  affect  their  communities  and   their  future.  As  such,  this  section  highlights:  (3)  The  important  shift  from  the  youth   servicing  model  to  the  youth  engagement  model  that  must  occur  as  a  first  step,  to   ensure  that  youth  engagement  in  food  sustainability  is  meaningful  and  effective.      With  this,  Gail  Feenstra  then  provides  us  with  an  overview  of  the  types  of  

spaces  that  must  be  created  to  allow  for  the  sustained  success  of  food  projects.  After   all,  to  improve  youth  engagement,  there  must  be  a  foundation  in  which  the  process   of  meaningfully  and  effectively  engaging  youth  can  emerge,  flourish  and  exist.   Consequently,  this  section  was  included  to  provide  a  valuable  understanding  of   what  it  takes  when  communities  start  food  projects/programs  to  become  successful.   This  section  provides:  (4)  what  it  takes  to  create  and  sustain  a  successful,  sustainable   food  system  project.         In  sum,  the  literature  section  sets  the  stage  for  the  next  section  of  this  paper  

through  addressing  the  following  flow  of  notions:    

39

(1) Firstly,  the  types  of  youth  engagement  programs  in  Ontario  are  identified,  as   well  as  how  they  can  be  improved   (2) The  concept  of  food  democracy  is  then  introduced  to  as  the  way  to  address   these  improvements   (3) Next,  the  youth  engagement  model  is  explained.  This  model  helps  to  achieve   food  democracy  by  making  youth  part  of  the  decision-making  and   participatory  process.  This  is  the  approach  that  must  be  adopted  by  adults,   policy-makers  and  organizers  in  order  to  make  youth  engagement  in  food  more   meaningful  and  effective.   (4)   Once  the  youth  engagement  model  is  adopted  as  both  an  approach  and   mindset,  certain  "spaces"  must  be  created  to  ensure  that  these  youth  food   projects/programs  germinate,  came  sustain  themselves,  and  are  ultimately   successful.     What  is  next  then,  is  how  to  bring  the  youth  into  the  picture.  And,  how  their   involvement  within  this  picture  can  be  improved  by  making  their  engagement   more  widespread,  meaningful  and  effective.  This  is  (5)  what  the  best  practices   and  recommendations  will  teach  us.                       40

5.0  Best  Practices  
The  methodology  used  in  this  paper  is  a  scan  of    best  practice  research.  The   process  of  scanning  for  `best  practices'  is  guided  by  the  criteria  established  for   defining  what  it  is  that  constitutes  a  `best  practice'  example,  as  outlined  in  the   methodology  section  of  this  paper.  This  criterion  was  created  to  define  `best   practices'  in  a  way  that  suits  the  needs  and  objectives  of  this  paper.  To  reiterate,  a   `best  practice'  is:     · A  `best',  `good'  or  `smart'  practice,  where  value  can  be  derived  for  the   purposes  of  this  paper   · · An  exemplary  product  or  process,  proven  to  be  successful  in  the  real  world   It  is  a  new/innovative  idea    

Using  this  methodology,  the  scan  for  best  practices  yielded  two  general  types  of   practices,  which  can  be  distinctly  categorized  as:  Cases  and  Principles/Tools.       

5.1  Cases  
The  Food  Project,  Boston,  Massachusetts,  USA         The  Food  Project  is  a  youth  food  engagement  success  story  that  has  been   nationally  recognized  in  the  United  States  as  a  best  practice.  There  are  many   valuable  lessons  that  can  be  derived  from  this  case.  The  Food  Project  (TFP)  began  in   Lincoln,  Massachusetts  in  1991,  with  Ward  Cheney,  who  wanted  to  bring  together   people  of  diverse  backgrounds  ­  particularly  youth  ­  to  grow  and  distribute  food  to   Boston's  hungry  and,  in  the  process,  "practice  care  for  land  and  community"   41

(Tolman  &  Pittman,  2001).  His  goal  was  to  balance  values  and  beliefs  (such  as  care,   reverence  and  usefulness)  with  important  resources  (land,  people  of  diverse   backgrounds)  and  needed  products  (innovative  education,  food  for  others  and   ourselves,  and  an  active,  responsible,  informed  citizenry).  To  make  his  vision  come   to  life,  he  hired  two  interns:  Pat  Gray,  a  veteran  of  local  politics  and  Greg  Gale,  a  then   Harvard  Divinity  Student  who  had  worked  with  teens.  When  the  project  began,  Gale   and  Gray  began  recruiting  young  people  from  inner  city  neighbourhoods  and   surrounding  suburbs.  The  goal  of  the  Food  Project's  program  was  to  employ  these   youth  on  farms  in  Lincoln  and  Roxbury  (Boston  suburbs)  during  the  summer  period   to  grow  food  and  learn  about  farming  and  agricultural  practices.  The  youth  were   offered  training  and  attended  regular  workshops  to  discuss  community  building,   urban  improvement,  sustainable  agriculture,  and  a  wide  variety  of  other  related   topics.  Youth  participants  are  grouped  into  crews  of  10  Crew  Workers  and  are  led   by  a  Crew  Leader.  The  Crew  Leader  is  usually  slightly  older,  around  college  age,  and   usually  has  had  prior  experience  in  the  Food  Project  (Tolman  &  Pittman,  2001).   Each  crew  also  has  an  Assistant  Crew  Leader  who  helps  lead  the  crew  and  is   typically  a  returning  Crew  Worker.  Each  site  has  a  Site  Supervisor  that  oversees  the   function  of  the  farm  and  manages  the  Crew  Leaders.  There  are  also  several  Growers   who  are  knowledgeable  in  aspects  of  agriculture  and  organic  farming  and  who   advise  and  help  maintain  the  lots.        The  crops  that  are  planted  and  harvested  by  these  youth  are  donated  to  food  

banks  and  homeless  shelters,  and  what  remains  is  sold  in  Farmer's  Markets  and   Community  supported  agriculture  networks.  As  the  project  became  larger,  it   42

attracted  more  media  attention  and  funding,  and  the  youth-led  crews  began  to   reclaim  land  on  abandoned  lots  throughout  Boston,  such  as  a  half-acre  former  auto   dumpsite,  and  underutilized  plots  throughout  the  downtown  core  (Tolman  &   Pittman,  2001).  The  Food  Project,  at  its  core,  is  also  about  bridging  community  and   race.  This  was  its  starting  place:  youths  and  adults  of  diverse  backgrounds  working   side  by  side,  moving  from  suburb  to  city  and  back.  Because  of  this,  the  project  was   placed  among  former  President  Clinton's  list  of  a  hundred  "promising  practices"   recognized  by  his  Initiative  on  Race  (Tolman  &  Pittman,  2001).   In  1998,  the  Kellogg  Foundation  recognized  the  project's  positive  community   impacts  and  provided  the  TFP  with  a  five-year  $615,000  grant  (Tolman  &  Pittman,   2001).  It  has  since  exploded  with  new  programs  and  possibilities,  along  with  more   than  doubling  its  conservation  acreage.  In  2001,  the  organization  had  a  budget  of   $1.7  million,  and  it  grew  more  than  150,000  pounds  of  organic  produce  each  year   (50  kinds  of  vegetables  alone),  with  more  than  half  going  to  food  pantries  and   shelters  (Tolman  &  Pittman,  2001).  The  Food  Project  has  blossomed  from  a  small   pilot  project  ten  years  ago  to  a  nationally  recognized  program.  Year  round,  young   people  and  adult  partners  join  The  Food  Project's  quest  to  create  a  sustainable   metropolitan  food  system,  to  bridge  communities  traditionally  divided  by  race,  class   and  physical  distance,  and  to  address  critical  environmental  and  social  issues.        Lessons  Learned:   One  best  practice  that  can  be  learned  from  The  Food  Project  is  its  approach   to  dealing  with  diversity,  and  the  sensitive  issues  of  race  and  class  difference.     43

Bridging  the  divide  between  these  socioeconomic  factors  was  a  core  value  and  goal   of  the  Food  Project.  As  previously  mentioned  in  this  paper,  although  the  `youth'  is   categorized  under  this  singular  term,  they  are  by  no  means  a  homogenous  group.   Class  and  race  can  play  a  role  among  a  young  person's  ability  to  access  food,  their   food  security,  and  the  ability  to  partake  in  local  food  matters.  For  example,  Canadian   reports  reveal  that  food  insecurity  is  largely  racialized  ­  the  population  that  is  most   affected  by  food  insecurity  in  Canada  are  immigrants,  Aboriginals  and  people  of   colour  (SRCHC,  2008).    Food,  however,  should  never  be  a  privilege  for  certain   groups,  but  rather,  a  basic  human  right  for  all.     In  understanding  the  complexity  and  diverse  backgrounds  of  youth,  The   Food  Project  actively  and  purposely  targeted  and  sought  youth  from  a  variety  of   neighbourhoods  and  communities  around  the  Boston  area.  This  includes  the  lower   income  inner  neighbourhoods  of  Dorchester,  and  the  affluent  suburbs  of  Lincoln,   Massachusetts.  This  bridged  the  social  divides  between  youth  ­  along  the  lines  of  the   urban-suburban  divide,  class,  race,  and  age  as  adults  and  youth  worked  together,   side-by-side,  as  they  find  common  ground  through  meaningful  community  building,   food  sustainability  and  agricultural  education  and  training.  Addressing   diversity/difference  need  not  be  divisive.  Instead,  working  together  and  sharing   experiences  "creates  a  space  for  solidarity  across  lines  of  difference--a  space  in   which  identities  do  not  dissolve,  but  instead  change"  (Jakobsen,  1998).  Moreover,   the  active  targeting  of  specific  youth  groups  (low  income,  new  immigrants,  etc.),  as   seen  in  the  case  of  The  Food  Project,  enables  organizers  to  bring  some  of  the  most   disenfranchised,  disconnected  and  marginalized  youth  into  the  engagement  process.   44

This  provides  these  youth  with  an  opportunity  to  become  involved  in  the  food   system,  in  ways/opportunities  that  they  may  not  have  been  given  the  chance  to  do   otherwise.       Another  exemplary  practice  that  can  be  learned  from  this  case  is  the  `train   the  trainer'  approach.  The  program  is  structured  so  that  participants  are  grouped   into  crews  of  10  crew  workers.  This  group  is  then  lead  by  a  Crew  Leader.  The  Crew   Leader  is  usually  slightly  older,  around  college  age,  and  usually  has  had  prior   experience  in  the  Food  Project.  Each  crew  also  has  an  Assistant  Crew  Leader  who   helps  lead  the  crew  and  is  typically  a  returning  crew  worker.  This  structure  means   that  there  is  different  expertise  to  acquire,  and  different  positions  that  youth  can   become  involved  as.  Youth  participants  who  begin  as  crew  workers  can  return  in   following  terms/years  in  new  roles.  This  phasing  technique  means  that  members   stay  active  within  the  groups  and  its  functions  for  over  a  long  period  of  time,  rather   than  just  a  short  one-time  term.  It  also  means  that  new  youth  are  being  coached  and   guided  by  other  youth  members  ­  this  keeps  the  organization  youth  driven  and   creates  leadership  and  mentoring  experiences  for  youth  leaders.   Finally,  the  Food  Project  demonstrates  how  the  efforts  of  a  sustainable  food   organization  can  be  made  meaningful  and  effective  through  connecting  with  the   broader  community/city  rather  than  keeping  the  operations  and  efforts  of  the   organization  internal.  The  food  grown  and  produced  by  the  youth  in  various   reclaimed  gardens/land  around  the  Boston  area  is  donated  to  food  banks,  homeless   shelters,  and  low  cost  farmer's  markets.  In  2001,  for  example,  more  than  73,000   pounds  of  locally  produced,  organic  fruits  and  vegetables  were  harvested  in  the   45

summer  ­  with  the  majority  distributed  to  the  city's  poor  through  food  banks  and   shelters  (Tolman  &  Pittman,  2001).  The  evidence  of  impact  on  the  community,   therefore,  is  broad  and  deep.  For  youth,  this  is  very  important.  Having  goals  and   tangible  results  means  that  the  youth  can  see  the  outcome  of  their  own  efforts.   Seeing  the  thousands  of  pounds  of  produce  being  harvested  and  the  food  going  to   help  those  who  desperately  need  it,  for  example,  means  that  a  youth  can  tangibly  see   that  his/her  efforts,  time  and  commitment  was  put  to  good  use.  There  is  perhaps   nothing  more  frustrating  for  a  youth  who  wants  to  be  involved  to  feel  like  their   efforts  were  futile  and  do  not  amount  to  any  results/benefit/use.        This  broader  connection/benefit  to  the  wider  city  also  gives  visibility  to  the  

efforts  of  the  organization.  Connecting  with  the  city  means  that  public  attention  can   be  gained,  awareness  is  raised,  and  importantly,  it  shows  to  others  that  the  youth   can  and  do  make  a  difference  within  the  community.  This  is  crucial  to  changing   perceptions  around  youth,  and  raising  education  and  awareness  for  the  values  of  the   organization  (sustainable  food,  youth  engagement,  etc.).  This  is  not  to  say  that   individual  contributions  towards  food  sustainability  that  go  unnoticed  are  not   important  or  valued,  but  public  attention  is  important  for  the  status  of  the   organization.  If  you  look  at  the  case  of  The  Food  Project,  it  was  this  public  attention   that  made  this  small  pilot  program  20  years  ago  blossom  into  a  nationally   recognized  program.              46

GrowFood.org:  A  food  system  for  the  21st  century,  USA  &  Global      In  2001,  a  20  year  old  named  Ethan  Schaffer  founded  GrowFood.org,  a  

nonprofit  organization  that  aims  to  connect  young  people  with  organic  farmers,   urban  gardeners,  green  builders,  renewable  energy  experts,  policy  crafters,  and   organizations  that  practice  sustainable  farming  (WorldChanging  Team,  2009).  The   premise  behind  this  idea  was  simple  ­opportunities  for  youth  exist  and  there  are   employers,  farmers  and  those  in  agricultural  businesses  out  there  who  are  looking   for  the  assistance  and  skills  of  young  people.  Similarly,  there  are  youth  that  are   itching  to  become  involved  and  gain  knowledge  of  the  agricultural/farming  sector.   However,  these  youth  do  not  necessarily  know  where  to  turn  to  or  how  to  find  these   opportunities  that  exist.  Thus,  there  is  a  missed  connection  that  exists  here,  and  the   demand/interest  of  youth  is  not  being  captured  and  capitalized  on.        To  address  these  missed  opportunities,  Ethan  Schaffer  created  GrowFood.org  

which  is  a  website  that  gathers  a  list  of  sustainable  projects  and  organizations  from   around  the  world,  and  displays  these  opportunities,  job  postings,  internships,   volunteer  opportunities  and  cultural/knowledge  sharing  experiences  for  youth.  It   functions  like  a  matchmaking  site,  connecting  youth  with  opportunities  to  become   engaged  in  sustainable  food  practices.  As  the  website  states,  "the  mission  of   GrowFood.org  is  to  train  a  new  generation  of  sustainable  farmers  and  to  reconnect   people  with  farms"  (GrowFood.org,  2012).  Since  its  inception  in  2001,  the  site  has   grown  to  become  an  online  hub  within  the  youth  food  community  ­  the  site   currently  has  more  than  25,000  registered  members  alone  from  all  50  states   (GrowFood.org,  2012),  and  the  site  serves  the  global  youth  community  as  well.  21   47

Latin  American  countries  now  use  the  site  to  find  organic  farms  and  urban  gardens   to  work  and  learn  on,  and  to  build  coalitions,  pool  resources,  and  launch  new   sustainable  enterprises  (WorldChanging  Team,  2009).  There  are  opportunities  in   Africa,  Asia,  Europe  and  Australia.        For  his  efforts  in  creating  this  new  and  innovative  way  of  connecting  youth  to  

sustainable  farming  practices,  Schaffer  was  the  recipient  of  the  2002  Brower  Youth   Award.  This  annual  award  is  presented  by  the  Earth  Island  Institute  to  youth  under   the  age  of  23  who  have  contributed  to  the  progression  of  environmental  and  social   justice.        Lessons  Learned:     Ethan  Schaffer's  GrowFood.org  provides  an  exemplary  best  practice  for  how   to  improve  the  engagement  of  youth.  What  this  case  does  exceptionally  well  is   increase  the  scope  of  youth  engagement  in  food  sustainability  (i.e.  making  it  more   widespread).  By  providing  opportunities  to  youth  through  the  use  of  the  Internet,   websites  and  social  media  platforms,  it  provides  the  potential  to  reach  a  whole  new   generation  and  `market'  of  youth.  After  all,  many  studies  have  shown  that  Canadian   youth  spend  a  large  proportion  of  their  time  on  the  internet  (IAB,  2009)  and  that   this  mode  of  media  now  has  more  `reach'  within  the  youth  demographic  than   television,  radio  and  magazines  (IAB,  2009).    In  fact,  in  2009,  98%  of  those  between   the  ages  of  16  and  24  went  online  (CBC  News,  2010)  a  rate  significantly  higher   compared  to  older  Canadians.    

48

By  creating  an  online,  one-stop  hub  for  youth,  GrowFood.org  has  managed  to   capitalize  on  this  online  trend,  and  have  filled  a  large  gap  within  the  domain  of   youth  food  engagement.  It  is  innovative  because  it  is  the  first  example  of  its  kind  to   exist  ­  that  is,  there  are  no  other  global  youth  engagement  online  hubs  that  list  and   match  make  users  to  sustainable  food  opportunities.  They  have  made  finding   opportunities  to  get  engaged  and  involved  with  sustainable  food  easy  and   convenient  for  youth.  This  has  created  a  whole  new  way  of  reaching  thousands  of   eager  youth,  and  has  created  an  avenue  that  significantly  and  directly  increases  the   capacity  for  change  globally.        The  Ghana  Institute  of  Horticulturalists  (GhIH)  Project      In  the  West  African  nation  of  Ghana,  the  youth  (aged  15  to  35),  who  comprise  

of  the  main  active  working  force,  constitutes  more  than  30%  of  the  total  Ghanaian   population  (Abubakari  et  al.,  2012).  As  Ghana  becomes  more  industrialized  and   developed,  the  agricultural  opportunities  in  the  country  are  diminishing,  as   hundreds  of  acres  of  land  are  being  bought/owned  by  large-scale  companies  and   businesses  (Abubakari  et  al.,  2012).  As  a  result,  the  rural  youth  either  have  to   contend  with  the  existing  opportunities  in  subsistence  production  or  migrate  to   urban  centres  in  search  of  alternative  employment  opportunities  (Abubakari  et  al.,   2012).  The  problem,  however,  is  that  much  of  this  youth  is  largely  under-equipped   for  these  other  employment  opportunities,  and  for  changing  employment  in  the  food   sector  as  well.  They  lack  the  education,  training  and  skills  needed  to  partake  in  these   industrialized  agribusinesses,  and  it  is  the  small  percentage  of  youth  with  degrees,   49

certificates  and  diplomas  who  are  attaining  jobs  within  these  agribusinesses   (Abubakari  et  al.,  2012).  As  such,  there  is  a  decline  in  the  youth  human  resource   base  required  by  Ghana's  food  sector,  where  it  has  been  difficult  to  keep  up  with  its   increasingly  industrialized  and  rapidly  changing  pace.        To  address  this  gap,  the  Ghana  Institute  of  Horticulturalists  developed  a  

youth-specific  program  to  better  prepare  generations  of  youth  for  the  changing  food   sector,  while  also  focusing  on  sustainable  and  local  agriculture.  It  not  only  aimed  to   provide  training  for  youth  to  become  employed  in  large-scale  industrial  farming   practices,  but  it  also  focused  on  improving  relationships  to  local  food  and   community-based  forms  of  agriculture.  The  goal  of  this  program  was  to  ultimately   build  capacity  to  increase  the  potential  of  youth  for  employment  in  the  agrifood   sector.          The  project  began  by  partnering  with  Post-Secondary  institutions  offering  

horticultural  studies,  and  horticultural  and  agricultural  professional  networks  and   institutes  within  Ghana.  Next,  they  targeted  youth  in  the  Upper  West  Region  of   Ghana.  The  project  is  largely  an  exchange  program,  where  knowledge  and  practical   skills  are  shared  between  the  rural  youth  of  Ghana  and  professionals   studying/working  within  the  field  of  sustainable  agriculture.  The  students  enrolled   in  a  post-secondary  institution  studying  horticultural  studies  for  example,  would   apply  their  education/acquired  skills  in  farms  in  the  Upper  West  Region  of  Africa   (whether  it  be  community  farms,  or  a  young  person's  family  farm)  (Abubakari  et  al.,   2012).  This  creates  a  two-way  benefit.  The  students  (who  are  youth  themselves)  are   able  to  apply  their  knowledge  and  skills  in  the  real  world.  This  can  include  using   50

new  planting  strategies,  trying  new  plant  resistance  techniques,  or  testing  farming   technologies.  In  this  process,  the  rural  youth  participants  are  able  to  acquire   practical  skills  and  learn  new,  more  modernized  farming  practices  and  techniques.        A  study  exploring  the  impact/result  of  this  project  found  that  availability  of  

fresh  vegetables  increased  from  5  months  to  9  months  in  project  communities   (Abubakari  et  al.,  2012).  At  least  53%  of  the  farmers  reported  increases  in   purchasing  power  as  a  result  of  increasing  productivity  and  income.  More  youth   farmers  have  recognized  vegetable  production  as  a  critical  livelihood  support   system,  and  the  rural-urban  migration  was  reported  to  have  substantially  decreased   (11%  decrease  in  2006  and  20%  decrease  in  2010)  over  the  five  years  of  the  project,   and  appears  to  be  evidence  of  the  higher  income  generated  by  the  training  and  new   skills  acquired  by  young  rural  farmers  (Abubakari  et  al.,  2012).      The  GhIH  Project  also  partnered  with  professional  networks,  affiliations  and  

institutes  in  the  field.  The  purpose  of  this  was  to  forge  a  connection  between  the   rural  youth  partaking  in  the  project,  and  employment  opportunities.  This  was  a   main  goal  of  the  GhIH  project.  Agricultural  businesses  and  employers,  through  the   program  and  its  partnership  with  the  Ghana  Horticultural  Institute,  actively  sought   youth  participants  from  the  program  in  filling  employment  positions  (Abubakari,  et   al.,  2012).  Additionally,  these  networks  provided  training  courses,  professional  and   communication  exchanges,  and  opportunities  to  attend  sustainable  food   conferences.             51

Lessons  Learned:      The  first  major  lesson  that  can  be  learned  for  the  GhiH  project  is  its  

establishment  of  partnerships  with  other  key  institutions/organizations.  In   establishing  these  connections,  the  project  was  able  to  leverage  more  resources,   expertise  and  training  opportunities  for  youth  participants.  This  enabled  a  creative   opportunity  to  connect  post-secondary  youth  studying  horticulture  with  rural  youth,   allowing  them  to  apply  practical  knowledge  of  sustainable  farming  while  teaching   new  skills  to  others  (two-way  benefit).        Another  important  lesson  from  the  GhiH  project  is  its  intention  and  ability  to  

bridge  the  program  into  real  careers  in  the  sustainable  food  sector  for  young  people.   This  forges  a  connection  to  a  life  path  in  food  sustainability,  transitioning  a  youth's   engagement  in  a  food  program/organization,  into  a  career  in  the  sustainable  food   industry.      This  has  great  implications  for  improving  youth  engagement,  its   meaningfulness  and  efficacy.  After  all,  how  can  youth  be  more  engaged  in  food   sustainability  than  having  a  career  in  the  field?  This  places  them  squarely  in  the  food   sustainability  picture,  and  consequently,  gives  them  the  most  ability  engage  with   our  food  system  and  create  the  change  that  they  wish  to  see.                                    52

5.2  Tools  &  Principles  

      Youth  Food  Councils      Using  a  scan  for  best  practice  research,  one  new  and  favoured  response  to   encouraging  youth  engagement  at  a  local  level  is  setting  up  youth  food  councils  and   youth  food  policy  councils.  A  food  policy  council  (FPC)  is  "a  way  to  address  the  food   system  as  a  whole,  often  bringing  the  weight  of  local,  county  or  state  government   behind  grassroots  initiatives.    FPCs  work  across  sectors,  engaging  with  government   policy  and  programs,  grassroots/non-profit  projects,  local  business  and  food   workers.    Instead  of  many  advocates  working  on  the  isolated  symptoms  of  a  failing   food  system,  FPCs  attempt  to  establish  platforms  for  coordinated  action  at  the  local   level"  (Harper  et  al.,  2009:2).  A  youth  policy  council  is  one  in  which  the  committee   and  board  members  are  comprised  of  youth,  as  a  means  to  involve  youth   perspectives  and  incorporate  their  voices  in  food  issues/debates.  An  example  of  this   is  Toronto's  Youth  Food  Policy  Council.     Youth  Food  Policy  Councils  demonstrate  an  exemplary  process  of  bringing   youth  into  the  engagement  picture,  by  directly  situating  youth  within  the  decision- making  process  regarding  matters  that  relate  to  food  and  food  sustainability.  In  the   example  of  Toronto's  YFPC,  they  reserve  the  rights  to  two  permanent  youth  seats  on   the  broader  Toronto  Food  Policy  Council  (Toronto  Youth  Food  Policy  Council,   2011).       In  an  article  by  Hugh  Matthews  (2001)  he  evaluates  the  efficacy  of  such   councils.  In  his  assessment,  which  involved  interviews,  surveys  and  examining  

53

council  structures,  he  finds  that  there  are  many  valuable  benefits  that  councils   provide.  These  include  developing  a  sense  of  self-worth  for  youth,  the  acquisition  of   new  skills,  and  a  better  understanding  of  local  issues  (Matthews,  2001).   Furthermore,  councils  provided  youth  with  an  opportunity  to  have  focused   discussions  -  for  and  by  young  people  ­  on  issues  that  have  direct  bearing  on  their   day-to-day  lives  (Matthews,  2001).  These  benefits,  however,  become  hindered  and   dampened  without  a  clear  and  strong  sense  of  purpose.  "There  is  a  danger  that   adult-dominated  organization,  like  a  local  authority,  may  turn  to  a  youth  council  as  a   political  sop  or  as  a  means  of  fulfilling  another  performance  indicator,  without   sufficiently  thinking  through  roles  and  responsibilities"  (Matthews,  2001:309).   Youth  councils  therefore  need  to  be  set  up  and  operating  with  meaningful  youth   engagement  at  its  core.  That  is,  "young  people  require  structures  and  methods  that   are  appropriate  to  them  and  which  are  sufficiently  responsive  to  provide  a  sense  of   control  and  ownership"  (Matthews,  2001:316).     In  failing  to  do  this,  youth  councils  can  result  in  disempowerment,  tokenism,   and  meaningless  `engagement'  that  fails  to  consider,  acknowledge,  and  reflect  the   views,  opinions  and  needs  of  the  youth  involved.  Thus,  youth  food  councils  and   policy  councils  are  a  great  way  of  to  directly  engage  youth  and  provide  them  with  a   process  and  forum  to  create  and  influence  change  towards  greater  food   sustainability.  But  to  ultimately  ensure  their  efficacy,  it  must  enable  and  accept  the   real  influence  of  young  people,  not  just  their  mere  presence.                 54

Youth-Adult  Partnerships      Another  identified  best  tool/principle  for  engaging  youth  in  food  is  youth- adult  partnerships.  These  are  "when  young  people  and  adults  become  engaged   together  in  their  communities;  they  are  relationships  between  youth  and  adults   where  there  is  mutuality  in  teaching,  learning,  and  action"  (Zeldin  et  al.,  2001).  In   the  pathways  to  creating  meaningful  and  effective  youth  engagement,  this  can  rarely   be  achieved  with  youth  working  entirely  alone.  There  needs  to  be  adults  involved  in   the  process,  to  work  with  youth.  Adults  provide  ongoing  guidance,  support  and   expertise.  In  fact,  research  indicates  that  youth  want  and  expect  certain  types  of   support  (Camino  &  Zledin,  2002).  These  include  coaching,  dialoging,  and   connections  to  institutional  resources  and  community  leaders.  Many  skills  are  best   learned  by  youth  from  consistent  and  direct  contact  with  adults.  Leadership,  for   example,  is  not  a  skill,  per  se.  It  is  rather  a  complex  set  of  skills,  behaviors,  actions,   and  attitudes.  And  this  is  best  developed  through  apprenticeship  and  experiential- type  learning  processes,  which  necessitate  close  partnership  between  novices  and   older  hands  (Camino  &  Zeldin,  2002).  Furthermore,  youth­adult  partnerships  are   critical  to  the  efficacy  of  youth  engagement  because  they  have  the  potential  to   engage  a  full  range  of  human  capital  (adults  in  different/important  roles,  from   different  sectors,  with  different  resources  and  access  to  networks).  The  youth-adult   partnership  tool  is  especially  important  for  the  purposes  and  perpetuation  of   intergenerational  equity.                 55

The  Equal  Distribution  of  Power      To  enable  real  influence  by  young  people,  the  equal  (or  fair)  distribution  of   power  is  necessary.  Youth  participation  can  be  plagued  and  perverted  by  the   imbalance  of  responsibility  and  decision-making  power  within  organizations.  For   example,  adults  may  frequently  attempt  to  steer  the  agenda  and  process  towards   their  own  interests  (Matthews,  2001).  Or,  there  may  be  a  high  adult  to  youth  ratio,   which  can  result  in  the  diminishment  of  the  youth  voice,  and  the   subjugation/isolation  of  the  disproportionate  youth  at  the  table.  There  is  a  common   myth  that  youth  participation  means  that  adults  must  relinquish  their   responsibilities/powers  (O'Donoghue  et  al.,  2002).  However,  this  is  simply  not  the   case.  Youth  participation  is  about  sharing  power,  evolving  roles,  and  undertaking   new  tasks  (as  guides,  role  models  and  mentors  for  example),  not  surrendering  them.     This  principle  has  major  implications  for  the  concept  of  food  democracy.   After  all,  food  democracy  is  about  fairness  and  the  decentralization  of  power.  And  it   is  about  making  food  discussions  and  decision-making  more  representative  of  all.   The  re-distribution  of  equal  power  among  youth,  therefore,  provides  a  mechanism   towards  achieving  this.        Time  and  Space  to  Develop  Youth      Having  youth  who  are  eager  and  wanting  to  be  engaged  in  food  sustainability  

does  not  necessarily  mean  that  they  are  prepared/equipped  to  do  so.  This  is  not  to   say  that  youth  are  not  capable  of  participating  and  taking  on  important   responsibilities.  But,  just  as  adults  need  support  and  training,  authentic  youth   56

engagement  requires  that  people  be  given  the  time  and  space  to  develop  the  skills   they  need  to  participate  effectively  (O'Donoghue,  2002).  This  does  not  mean  that   youth  need  to  learn  now  and  participate  later,  but  rather  that  they  have  ongoing   training  and  support  during  the  participation  process.  For  example,  a  youth   initiative  may  require  an  evaluation  of  the  program,  but  research  methods,  data   analysis  and  collection  may  not  be  skills  that  youth  readily  possess.  Thus,  they  need   to  ultimately  be  trained,  and  learning  opportunities  have  to  be  made  available  to   youth,  in  order  for  them  to  develop  the  necessary  skills  to  become  effective   members.        The  preceding  best  practices,  tools  and  principles  have  been  identified  using  the   criteria  and  methodology  developed  for  this  paper.  They  are  all  examples  of  a   best/good/smart  practice  in  food  engagement,  as  identified  by  literature  and  the   objectives  of  this  paper.  They  all  have  valuable  lessons  that  can  extracted  and   applied,  to  answer  the  research  question  of:  how  do  you  make  youth  engagement  in   food  sustainability  more  widespread,  meaningful  and  effective?  They  are  exemplary   products  (such  as  an  online  hub)  or  processes  (such  as  recruiting  diverse  youth)   that  have  been  proven  to  be  successful  in  the  real  world.  Finally,  they  are  also  new   and  innovative  ideas,  in  that  they  are  unique  (The  Food  Project),  the  only  of  its  kind   (GrowFood.org),  address  current  needs/changing  food  patterns  (GhIH  Project),  or   are  recently  emerging  as  a  response  to  food  system  issues  (Youth  Food  Policy   Councils).    Based  on  the  selection  of  these  best  practices,  recommendations  have   been  developed.        57

6.0  Recommendations  

   Based  on  best  practice  research,  and  the  analysis  of  cases  and  principles/tools  for   engaging  youth  in  food  sustainability,  the  following  recommendations  have  been   derived:        1)  Youth  are  diverse.    They  come  from  various  backgrounds,  classes,  races,  and  they   experience  food  and  access  to  food  differently.  To  address  these  diverse   perspectives,  stakeholders  who  are  trying  to  engage  youth  in  food  sustainability   (such  as  NGOs,  local  governments,  businesses  and  municipal  planners)  should   target  specific  groups.  As  The  Food  Project  demonstrates,  actively  going  into   neighbourhoods  and  communities  to  recruit  diverse  representation  helps  to  bridge   the  gaps  and  social  differences  that  divide  the  youth  population.  Targeting  specific   groups  is  especially  valuable  to  engage  those  who  are  traditionally   marginalized/disconnected  from  the  food  system.  In  actively  targeting  these  youth   populations,  you  are  able  to  involve  some  of  the  most  unheard  youth  voices  in  the   food  engagement  process.  And  remember,  dealing  with  difference  need  not  be   divisive.  The  Food  Project  shows  that  diverse  groups,  working  side  by  side,  helps  to   create  new  perceptions,  identities  and  enriched  learning  experiences.        For  Organizations,  Communities  and  Urban  Planners:     · Specifically  target  the  youth  groups  that  you  wish  to  engage  ­  such  as   immigrants,  youth  from  low-income  families,  rural  youth,  etc.    

58

·

Do  not  be  afraid  to  actively  recruit  youth  by  going  into  certain   neighbourhoods,  and  targeting  communities  within  the  city,  For  example,   seek  out  youth  participants  in  high  schools  located  within  a  priority   neighbourhood.    

·

Bring  marginalized/disenfranchised  youth  groups  into  the  picture.  You  have   an  opportunity  here  to  make  their  silent  voices  heard.    

·

For  organizations  and  communities,  ensure  that  there  is  a  diverse   representation  of  youth  working  together,  side-by-side  in  your   projects/programs/board  and  committees.    

·

For  urban  planners,  make  sure  that  there  are  diverse  youth  participants  that   are  partaking  in  the  public  participation  and  consultation  processes.   Consider  using  interactive  and  engaging  ways  to  present  information  to   youth  and  to  gather  their  input  at  these  meetings.  For  example,  have  a  youth   member  of  the  community,  who  is  engaged  in  the  food  planning  issue  at   hand,  give  a  presentation  at  the  meetings,  or  have  them  share  their   experiences.  

   2)  Make  the  engagement/interactions  with  youth  specific  to  their   preferences*.  It  is  much  easier  to  get  youth  involved  if  the  methods  to  do  so   capitalize  on  the  trends  and  patterns  of  youth  behavior.  An  example  of  this  is  using   the  internet  and  social  media  to  connect  youth,  as  the  GrowFood.org  case  effectively   illustrates.  Taking  youth  engagement  online  helps  to  reach  a  broader  youth  base,  as   it  is  where  this  demographic  is  spending  most  of  their  time.  Using  these  new   59

platforms  now  will  help  to  keep  youth  engaged  in  the  future,  as  they  age.  A  study   finds  that  Canadians  carry  their  media  habits  with  them  as  they  age.  High  levels  of   Internet  usage  exhibited  by  18-  to  24-year-olds  today,  therefore,  will  become  high   levels  of  usage  for  the  entire  25-  to  34-year-old  age  group  eight  years  from  now  (IAB,   2009).        For  Organizations  and  Communities:     · Make  use  of  the  Internet  as  a  resource  ­  create  a  website  for  your  initiative,   advertise  online,  and  make  connections  to/on  popular  youth  websites.     · Use  Facebook,  Twitter,  YouTube  and  other  new  and  emerging  social  media   platforms  to  engage  youth   · Capitalize  on  youth  use  trends  and  popular  means  of  youth  communication.   For  example,  smart  phones  and  mobile  applications  are  very  popular  among   youth.  Consider  creating  an  app  for  your  food  initiative  or  organization.  This   is  an  easy  way  to  keep  youth  connected,  to  send  them  notifications,  and  to   keep  them  up-to-date  with  the  initiative/organization.     · For  urban  planners,  expand  how  public  meetings  and  consultations  are  made   known  to  the  public  beyond  just  traditional  means  ­  use  social  media,  make   YouTube  videos,  and  create  Facebook  events.     · For  youth  who  may  be  unable  to  physically  attend  public  meetings,  find   online  ways  to  engage  them  ­  interactive  surveys,  for  example,  can  easily  be   administered  online.  And  Twitter  is  becoming  an  increasingly  popular  way  to  

60

reach  broad  audiences  by  tweeting  questions  and  issues,  and  immediately   receiving  the  public's  responses  (reply  tweets).      *  It  is  recognized  that  digital  techniques  such  as  social  media  and  mobile  apps  can   privilege  specific  groups  within  the  youth  population  ­  mainly  those  who  have  the   economic  means  to  possess  and  access  computers  and  smart  phones,  and  those  who   have  internet  access  readily  available  to  them.  Additionally,  Graddol  (2001)  notes   that  the  online  world  is  overwhelmingly  dominated  by  the  English  language.  As  such,   social  media  engagement  strategies  privilege  English-speaking  users  who  are   conversant  in  the  English  language.  These  issues  speak  to  the  need  to  bring  diverse,   less  privileged  youth  into  the  engagement  process.  As  recommendation  #1   emphasizes:  actively  target  diverse  and  specific  youth  groups,  especially  those  are   traditionally  marginalized/disconnected  from  the  food  system.      3)  Create  an  online  youth  hub  that  connects  young  users  to  local  sustainable   farming  opportunities  for  a  neighbourhood,  city  or  a  region.  In  Toronto,  for   example,  there  are  many  youth  food  organizations  and  programs  within  the  city.  But   many  youth  are  not  aware  of  these  opportunities.  Creating  an  online   hub/community  where  these  opportunities  are  listed  in  a  similar  fashion  to   GrowFood.org,  can  easily  be  created  to  suit  localized  contexts  and  needs.              61

For  Cities/Communities  and  Organizations:   · Consider  creating  an  online  one-stop  shop  similar  to  GrowFood.org  for  eager   and/or  unaware  youth  who  want  to  get  involved.  The  City  of  Toronto,  for   example,  can  create  a  hub  that  lists  all  the  sustainable  food  organizations   within  the  city  and  their  youth  opportunities,  farms  that  are  looking  for   youth  assistance,  internships  in  Toronto,  etc.        For  Urban  Planners:   · Urban  planners  can  make  use  of  these  online  hubs  by  posting  youth  career   and  volunteer  opportunities  in  food  sustainability  available  within  their   workplaces     · Planners  can  also  post  upcoming  food  planning  events,  conferences,   workshops  and  speakers'  series  on  this  online  community  to  get  youth  to   attend     · Utilize  this  online  resource  to  match  community  space  with  access  in  areas  of   need.        4)  Utilize  a  `train  the  trainer'  approach.  Have  youth  who  have  experience  in  a   food  organization  or  its  projects/programs  come  back  to  train  new  participants.   This  helps  keep  the  initiative  youth-driven  and  led.  It  also  provides  the  development   of  mentoring  and  leadership  skills.           62

For  Organizations,  Communities  and  those  running  youth  engagement  initiatives:   · Consider  creating  multiple  roles  for  youth.  This  allows  youth  members  to   become  involved  in  different  ways,  rather  than  just  a  `youth'  member.     · This  also  allows  for  phasing,  where  youth  can  move  between  different  roles   and  responsibilities.  This  keeps  a  youth  engaged  food  sustainability   programs/organizations  for  longer  periods  of  time.      5)  Make  the  connection  to  a  life  path  in  food  sustainability  for  youth.  Strive  to   bridge  youth  engagement  opportunities  in  the  organizations,  to  long-term  careers   and  jobs  within  the  sustainable  food/farming  industry.        For  Organizations  and  Communities:  This  can  be  achieved  through  partnering  with   agricultural  networks,  businesses  and  professional  institutes  (as  the  GhIH  Project   illustrates)  where  careers  and  opportunities  for  youth  to  stay  involved  in  food   sustainability  beyond  the  activities  of  organizations,  are  readily  available.        For  Employers,  Farmers,  Professional  Food  Institutes  and  Sustainable  Food   Businesses:  Provide  resources  and  opportunities  to  youth  in  sustainable  food   organizations  and  initiatives.  Look  to  these  organizations  to  recruit  young   employees  and  to  fill  available  positions  within  your  businesses.  You  as  a  potential   employer  have  the  ability  to  capitalize  on  eager,  engaged  and  interested  youth  ­   who  would  value  and  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  work  in  a  field  that  they  feel   passionately  about.   63

6)  Setting  up  Youth  Food  Councils  can  serve  as  an  effective  and  meaningful  way  of   engaging  youth  in  the  sustainable  food  decision-making  process.        For  Government  Bodies,  Advisory  Committees  and  Sustainable  Food  Businesses:   This  is  an  ideal  tool  to  get  youth  directly  involved  in  their  operations,  and  to  include   the  youth  voice  in  big  decisions  that  impact  the  sustainability  of  food,  such  as  policy   making,  by-laws  and  food  standards.  However,  to  be  effective  and  meaningful  for   youth,  it  must  have  structures  and  methods  in  place  that  ensure  sufficient   responsiveness  to  their  concerns,  and  that  their  voices  are  adequately  heard.  For   example,  structure  the  council  so  that  youth  have  voting  power,  veto  rights,   establish  quorums,  or  give  leadership  and  senior  positions  to  youth.        For  All  Stakeholders  Involved  in  Youth  Engagement:     · 7)  Connect  with  the  broader  community/city.  This  helps  to  raise  the   profile  of  your  organization/youth  engagement  and  create  public  awareness   of  your  values  and  youth  efforts.  This  exposure  can  result  in  more  youth   participants,  and  attention  from  officials  (as  with  the  case  of  The  Food   Project).  With  this  often  comes  more  funding,  organizational  growth,   partnership  opportunities  and  mass  appeal/promotion.     · 8)  Create  partnerships  and  collaborations  with  relevant  institutions   and  professional  networks.    This  leverages  more  resources,  expertise  and   opportunities  for  youth.  In  addition,  it  creates  the  potential  for  creative   engagement  strategies  and  learning  opportunities.     64

·

9)  Have  goals  and  tangible  outcomes  to  strive  for.  This  allows  youth  to   see  the  results  of  their  efforts.  To  be  meaningful,  youth  participants  must   have  a  sense  that  their  involvement  in  actually  creating  a  difference,  and   benefitting  others  as  well  as  themselves.  These  goals  can  be  to  produce  a   certain  weight  of  produce  yearly,  or  to  donate  a  certain  amount  of  boxes  of   food  to  shelters.  These  can  be  accomplished  by  having  metrics/measures  of   progress/success  with  youth-specific  focus.    

·

10)  Create  Youth-Adult  partnerships.  Youth  need  adult  support  and   expertise,  and  it  should  be  a  mutually  beneficial  experience  for  both  groups.   Working  with  adults  also  gives  youth  more  human  capital  and  capacity  to   generate  positive  change.    

·

10)  Ensure  that  power  is  shared  equally  among  youth  and  adults.  See   youth  as  equal  partners  in  engagement  and  decision-making  processes.    

·

11)  Anticipate  and  dedicate  time  for  the  maturation  of  youth  skills.   Young  people  need  to  be  given  the  time  and  space  to  develop  the  skills  they   need  to  participate  effectively,  just  like  adults  do.  Provide  ongoing  training,   education  and  support  during  the  participation  process.    

·

12)  Educate  planners  more  about  youth.  This  demographic  deserves  more   attention  and  awareness  about  the  role  that  they  can  play  in  the  planning   process,  how  planners  can  benefit  from  engaging  with  youth,  and  the   potential  that  the  youth  possess  to  create  positive  community  change  (in  the   area  of  food,  and  more  broadly).  Use  different  planning  forums  to  teach   planners  about  youth,    such  as  conferences,  workshops,  speaker  sessions  and   65

symposiums.  Similarly,  planning  schools  should  include  more  focus  on  the   youth  (and  their  engagement)  in  their  education,  curriculum  and  classes  to   instill  these  lessons  in  the  new  generations  of  up  and  coming  planners.                                                                       66

7.0  Conclusion  
   The  objective  of  this  paper  was  to  utilize  a  best  practice  review  to  address  

the  issue  of  youth  engagement  in  food  sustainability.  Although  the  planning   profession  has  begun  to  pay  more  attention  to  food  issues,  little  research  has  been   conducted  around  engaging/situating  the  youth  population  within  these   discussions.  The  youth  represents  a  key  group  in  the  development  and   improvement  of  the  current  food  planning  system.  Yet,  with  the  current  lack  of   attention  paid  to  this  segment  of  the  population,  a  large  gap  exists  around   understanding  the  best  practices  for  mobilizing  and  engaging  youth  in  food   sustainability  practices.  Consequently,  this  paper  aimed  to  address  the  central   question  of:  how  to  make  youth  engagement  in  food  sustainability  more  widespread,   meaningful  and  effective?        Through  the  exploration  of  this  question,  this  paper  found  that  the  youth  are  

disengaged  from  food  in  many  ways.  They  are  unaware  of  where  it  comes  from,  the   practices  of  farming  and  agriculture,  and  the  health  and  environmental  impacts  of   their  food  choices.  But  this  does  not  define  the  youth  population.  The  youth  possess   an  incredible  untapped  capacity  and  propensity  to  influence  the  food  system  and   drive  positive  change  in  their  communities.  But  unleashing  this  potential  takes  the   thoughtful  and  attentive  efforts  on  the  part  of  those  involved  ­  organizations,  NGOs,   communities,  local  governments,  businesses  and  planners.  Strategies  and   approaches  to  engagement  must  be  youth-specific,  capitalize  on  their  behaviours,   and  reflect  their  needs,  desires  and  unique  perspectives.  The  diversity  of  the  youth   population  is  a  key  piece  to  this  puzzle.  Youth  diversity  should  not  only  be   67

acknowledged,  but  also  adequately  addressed  ­  for  it  is  in  capturing  the  full   spectrum  of  the  youth  voice  that  they  are  heard  loudest.  The  solutions  to  problems   in  the  food  system  depend  in  a  very  fundamental  way  on  participation,  since   participation  is  a  key  feature  of  democracy.  And  democracy,  in  the  end,  is  about  the   decentralization  of  power  and  allowing  all  groups  to  influence  and  shape  the  issues   that  affect  their  lives.  Creating  meaningful  and  effective  youth  engagement  in  food  is   therefore  ultimately  about  giving  youth  the  power,  opportunities  and  tools  to  create   change.     This  paper  therefore  provides  an  early  first  start  at  looking  at  issues  of  food   sustainability  and  security  through  the  lens  of  youth  and  youth  engagement.  The   City  of  Sudbury  conducted  one  of  the  only  early  examples  that  attempted  to  review   the  extent  of  youth  engagement  programs  in  Ontario.  My  paper  builds  upon  this   foundational  piece  and  attempts  to  fill  a  gap  within  research  by  not  only  reviewing   youth  engagement  in  food,  but  the  actual  scope,  meaningfulness  and  efficacy  of  this   youth  engagement.       This  exploration  is  important  and  timely.  We  are  living  in  a  world  where  the   implications  of  our  problematic  food  system  are  becoming  progressively  worse.   Global  food  security  is  in  jeopardy,  generations  are  increasingly  disconnected  from   their  food,  health  related  diseases  are  epidemic  and  the  quality  and  longevity  of  our   lives  are  suffering.  Squarely  placing  youth  within  this  context  is  crucial  and   necessary.  They  constitute  the  next  generation  of  eaters,  policy-makers  and  adult   inhabitants  of  this  earth.  They  have  a  unique  and  vested  interest  in  food,  as  they  will   inherit  the  systemic  problems  of  the  food  system.  The  development  and   68

improvement  of  these  food  concerns  will  ultimately,  one  day  lie  in  their  hands.  And   so,  it  is  up  to  us  today  ­  now  ­  to  improve  the  ways  in  which  we  engage  this  group,   and  mobilize  them  as  effective,  active,  and  well-equipped  agents  of  change.        Planners,  and  the  urban  planning  profession  at  large,  must  shift  their  

practices  to  reflect  these  objectives.  As  a  profession  that  is  directly  responsible  for   the  shaping  of  our  physical  and  natural  worlds,  it  holds  an  opportunity  and   obligation  to  improve  food  sustainability  by  better  engaging  with  youth.  By  adopting   the  recommendations  and  central  themes  provided  in  this  paper,  a  platform  is   provided  to  begin  to  make  these  improvements.  The  engagement  of  youth  in  food   sustainability  is  complex,  complicated,  multi-faceted  and  at  times,  conflictual.   However,  good  planning  is  about  pushing  the  envelope.  It  is  new  ways  of  doing   practice  and  these  spaces  of  resistance  and  creativity  that  carve  out  new   opportunities  and  avenues  for  change.                                                              69

References  

   Allen,  P.  &  D.  Van  Dusen,  L.  Lundy,  S.  Gliessman.  (1991).  "Integrating  social,   environmental,  and  economic  issues  in  sustainable  agriculture."  American   Journal  of  Alternative  Agriculture,  Vol.  6(1),  pp.  34-39.      Abubakari,  A.H.,  McDonald,  M.R.,  Ceplis,  D.,  Mahunu,  K.G.,  Owen,  J.,  Idun,  I.A.,  Kumah,   P.,  Pritchard,  M.,  Nyarko,  G.  &  Appiah,  F.  (2012).  "Fostering  Sustainable   Engagement  of  the  Youth  in  the  Agro-Food  Sector:  Opportunities  and  Challenges   for  Youth  Employment  in  Ghana."  Paper  prepared  for  the  conference  Young   People,  Farming  and  Food,  19-21  March  2012,  Accra,  Ghana      Baynton,  R.  (2011).  "Survey  Shows  Young  People  Disconnected  From  Food  Source."   Blackburn  Agri-Media.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.agri- media.ca/2011/10/05/survey-shows-young-people-disconnected-from-food- source/      Beder,  Sharon.  (2000).  "Costing  the  Earth:  Equity,  Sustainable  Development  and   Environmental  Economics",  New  Zealand  Journal  of  Environmental  Law,  Vol   4(6),  2000,  pp.  227-243.      Botelho,  Z.  (1999).  "Youth,  Urban  Governance,  and  Sustainable  Food  Systems:  The   Cases  of  Hamilton  and  Victoria,  Canada"  in  For  Hunger  Proof  Cities:  Sustainable   Urban  Food  Systems.  International  Development  Research  Centre  Publishing:   Ottawa.      Camino,  L.  &  Zeldin,  S.  (2002).  "From  Periphery  to  Center:  Pathways  for  Youth  Civic   Engagement  in  the  Day-To-Day  Life  of  Communities".  Applied  Developmental   Science,  Vol  6(4),  pp.  213-220.      CBC  News.  (2010).  "More  Canadians  surfing  the  net."  CBC  News  Online.  Retrieved   from:  http://www.cbc.ca/news/story/2010/05/10/con-internet-users.html      Checkoway,  B.  &  Gutierrez,  L.M.  (2006).  "Youth  Participation  and  Community   Change."  Journal  of  Community  Practice,  Vol.  14(1/2).      City  of  Vancouver.  (2011).  "The  Food  System  -  Greater  than  the  Sum  of  its  Parts",   Community  Services  Social  Planning  Department.  Retrieved  from:   http://vancouver.ca/commsvcs/socialplanning/initiatives/foodpolicy/system s/index.htm      Dale,  Ann.  (2010).  "Urban  Sustainability:  Youth--The  Missing  Solution?",  Community   Research  Connections,    e-Dialogue  Series  on  Urban  Sustainability:.  Retrieved   from:  http://www.crcresearch.org/files- crcresearch_v2/Youth%20the%20missing%20solution%20transcript.pd   70

Daily  Bread  Food  Bank.  (2008).  "Whose  Hungry:  2008  Profile  of  Hunger  in  the  GTA"   Encyclopedia  of  Management.  (2009).  "Best  Practices"   Fisher,  A.  (2010).  "What  is  Food  Democracy?"  Food  First  Institute  for  Food  &   Development  Policy.  R  Forester,  J.  (1999).  The  deliberative  practitioner:   Encouraging  participatory  planning  processes.  Cambridge,  Mass:  MIT  Press.      Graddol,  D.  (2001).  "Applied  linguistics  for  the  21st  century"  The  AILA  Review  14.   Retrieved  from:  http://edocs.ub.uni- frankfurt.de/volltexte/2005/3011/pdf/Aila14.pdf#page=55      GrowFood.org.  (2012)  "About  Us".  Retrieved  from:   http://www.growfood.org/about      Hassanein,  N.  (2003).  "Practicing  food  democracy:  a  pragmatic  politics  of   transformation."  Journal  of  Rural  Studies,  Vol  19,  p.  77-86.      Harper,  A.,  Sttauck,  A.,  Holt-Gimenez,  E.,  Alkon,  A.  &  Lambrick,  F.  "Food  Policy   Councils:  Lessons  Learned".  Food  First  Institute  for  Food  and  Development   Policy.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.foodfirst.org/sites/www.foodfirst.org/files/pdf/Food%20Policy %20Councils%20Report%20small.pdf      Healthy  Canadians.  "Childhood  Obesity."  Government  of  Canada.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.healthycanadians.gc.ca/init/kids-enfants/obesit/index-eng.php      Howe,  P.  (2010).  "Citizens  AdriftThe  Democratic  Disengagement  of  Young   Canadians."  UBC  Press:  Vancouver.      Interactive  Advertising  Bureau  (IAB).  (2009).  "  Canadian  Media  Usage  Trends  study"      Jakobsen,  J  R.  (1998)  Working  Alliances  and  the  Politics  of  Difference:  Diversity  and   Feminist  Ethics.  Bloomington:  Indiana  University  Press.      Jennings,  L.B.,  Parra-Medina,  D.,  Hilfinger  Messias,  D.K.,  McLoughlin,  K.  (2006).   "Toward  a  Critical  Social  Theory  of  Youth  Empowerment."  Journal  of   Community  Practice,  Vol.  14(1/2),  pp.  31-55.      Kim,  S.,  Crutchfield,  C.,  Williams,  C.,  &  Hepler,  N.  (1998).  "Toward  a  new  paradigm  in   substance  abuse  and  other  problem  behavior  prevention  for  youth:  Youth   development  and  empowerment  approach".  Journal  of  Drug  Education,  2Vol.   8(1),  pp.  1-17.      Kneen,  B.  (1993).  "From  Land  to  Mouth".  University  of  Toronto  Press:  Toronto.     71

Matthews,  H.  (2001).  "Citizenship,  Youth  Councils  and  Young  People's   Participation."  Journal  of  Youth  Studies,  Vol.  4(3).      O'Donoghue,  J.,  Kirshner,  B.  &  McLaughlin,  M.W.  (2003).  Moving  youth  participation   forward.  New  Directions  for  Youth  Development:  Theory,  Practice  and  Research,   No.  96.  San  Francisco:  Jossey-Bass  (Wiley  Periodicals,  Inc.)      Ontario  Professional  Planners  Institute.  (2009).  "Professional  Code  of  Practice".      Policy  Research  Initiative.  (2005).  "Social  Capital  in  ActionThematic  Policy  Studies",   Government  of  Canada.      Pothukuchi,  K.  &  Kaufman,  J.  (2000).  "The  Food  System:  A  Stranger  to  the  Planning   Field."  Journal  of  the  American  Planning  Association,  Vol  66(2),  Spring.      Public  Health  Agency  of  Canada.  (2011).  "Curbing  Childhood  Obesity:  A  Federal,   Provincial  and  Territorial  Framework  for  Action  to  Promote  Healthy  Weights",   Government  of  Canada.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/hp-ps/hl- mvs/framework-cadre/index-eng.php      Rempel,  B.  (2011).  "Recommendations  for  Starting  and  Sustaining  a  Youth   Engagement  Initiative."  Ontario  Public  Health  Association.      Robinson,  P.  (2009).  "Urban  Sustainability  in  Canada:  The  global-local  connection."   In  C.D.  Gore  &  P.J.  Stoett  (Eds.)  Environmental  challenges  and  opportunities:   Local-global  perspectives  on  Canadian  issues  (pp.159-181).  Toronto:  Emond   Montgomery.        Seccombe,  W.  (2007).  "A  Home-Grown  Strategy  for  Ontario  Agriculture."  Toronto   Food  Policy  Council.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.toronto.ca/health/tfpc/pdf/omafra_policy_shift.pdf      South  Riverdale  Community  Health  Centre  (SRCHC).  (2008).  "Food  Insecurity  and   Diet:  Understanding  the  Link  to  Chronic  Disease."  Food  Security  Network   Presentation.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.srchc.ca/downloads/FoodSecurityNetworkPresentationatAOHC. pdf      Tolman,  J.,  &  Pittman,  K.,  B.  Cervone,  K.  Cushman,  L.  Rowley,  S.  Kinkade,  J.  Phillips,  &   S.  Duque.  (2001).  "Youth  Acts,  Community  Impacts:  Stories  of  Youth   Engagement  with  Real  Results".  Community  &  Youth  Development  Series,  Vol  7.   Takoma  Park,  MD:  The  Forum  for  Youth  Investment,  International  Youth   Foundation.      Toronto  Youth  Food  Policy  Council.  (2011).  "About",  Retrieved  from:   http://tyfpc.ca/about/   72

   Twenge,  J.M.,  Campbell,  K.  &  Freeman,  E.  (2012).  "Generational  Differences  in  Young   Adults'  Life  Goals,Concern  for  Others,  and  Civic  Orientation,  1966­2009."   Journal  of  Personality  and  Social  Psychology,  Advance  online  publication.  doi:   10.1037/a0027408.      UN-Habitat.  (n.d.)  "Best  Practices  and  Local  Leadership  Programme."  Retrieved   from:   http://www.unhabitat.org/content.asp?cid=374&catid=34&typeid=24&subM enuId=0      United  Nations.  (1987).  "Our  Common  Future",  United  Nations  World  Commission  on   Environment  and  Development.  Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press.      United  Nations  Environment  Programme.  (2010).  "Assessing  the  Environmental   Impacts  of  Consumption  and  Production:  Priority  Products  and  Materials".   United  Nations.      Vesely,  Arnost.  (2011).  "Theory  and  Methodology  of  Best  Practice  Research:  A   Critical  Review  of  the  Current  State."  Central  European  Journal  of  Public  Policy,   Vol.  5(2),  pp.  98-117.      Wekerle,  G.  (2002).  "Toronto's  Official  Plan  from  the  Perspective  of  Community   Gardening  and  Urban  Agriculture."  Ontario  Planning  Journal,  July/August  2002   Vol.  17:  4.      Wills,    W.  (2005).  "Food  and  Eating  Practices  During  the  Transition  from  Secondary   School  to  New  Social  Contexts."  Journal  of  Youth  Studies,  Vol.  8(1),  pp.  17:  4.      Wolynsky,  N.  (2010).  "Youth  Engagement  in  Food  Sustainability:  A  Review  of   Programs  offered  in  Ontario",  The  Food  Shed  Project  &  Social  Planning  Council   of  Sudbury,  January.      WorldChanging.  (2009).  "Growfood.org:  Networking  a  21st  Century  Food  System".   Retrieved  from:  http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/010090.html      Zeldin,  S.,  McDaniel,  A.,  Topitzes,  D.,  &  Lorens,  M.B.  (2001).  "Bringing  young  people   to  the  table:  Effects  on  adults  and  youth  organizations,"  CYD  Journal,  Vol  2(2),   p.  20-27.       

73


