A FINDING AID FOR 25 YEARS OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE KODAK ADVERTISING COLLECTION, GEORGE EASTMAN ARCHIVES AND STUDY CENTER

by Sarah Fay, BFA, Ryerson University, 2007.

A Thesis Project Presented to Ryerson University and George Eastman House

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Masters of Arts in the program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2010 © Sarah Fay 2010

Author's Declaration: I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Sarah Fay I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Sarah Fay

ii

Abstract: This project is a finding aid for twenty-five years of Kodak Advertisements, which encompasses a written description of the project, an analysis of the results, and the finding aid itself. The finding aid presents an index of each advertisement published between the years of 1900 to 1925 from the Kodak Advertising Collection binders at the George Eastman Study Centre in the George Eastman House Museum of Photography and Film in Rochester, New York. The finding aid pays particular attention to imagebased advertisements, slotting them into one of seven categories: women, children, family, farmers, travel and outdoors, labor, and soldiers.

iii

Acknowledgements: I would like to thank Kathy Connor, Curator of the George Eastman Legacy Collection for helping me with this project, as well as for her insight into the Kodak Advertising Collection. Additionally, I would like to thank Dan Bish and Jesse Peers, Archivists at the George Eastman Study Centre, for their help and for pulling many, many binders of ads out for me. My thanks are also heartily extended to my thesis advisor, Elspeth Brown for her support and guidance, as well as her helpful feedback. Thank you also, to my second reader, Bob Burley for giving my thesis its finishing touches. I would also like to thank Alison Nordstrom for her advice and support while working on this thesis. To my sister Cheryl Fay, my boyfriend Dave Taglialatela, and my roommate and friend D'Arcy White I bestow the deepest thanks for your support and encouragement throughout my education. I truly could not have done this without you. And finally, I would like to thank my parents, Michelle and Frank Fay who have helped me so much, in grad school and always, and have never hesitated to drive down to Rochester for their daughter.

iv

I would like to dedicate this thesis to my sister and best friend, Cheryl Fay.

v

Table of Contents: Introduction An Overview of Kodak and the Kodak Advertising Collection Literature Survey Methodology Analysis: Overview Advertising and the Media in America During WWI Analysis of Ads WWI in Memory Conclusion Bibliography 25 26 30 34 39 41 1 3 12 21

vi

List of Illustrations: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. The seven categories in the finding aid Snap-shots From Home. The Kodak Letter. Take a Kodak with you. Snap-Shots from Home. All out-doors invites your Kodak. The Kodak on the Farm. Kodak on the Job. Get it with a Brownie. Keep a Kodak Story of the Children. A New Kodak. 25 30 25 44 44 44 44 45 45 45 45

vii

List of Appendices: Appendix A: Kodak Advertisement Examples Appendix B: Finding Aid 44 46

viii

Introduction This thesis is a practical project-- a finding aid for twenty-five years of Kodak Advertisements, which will encompass a written description of the project, an analysis of the results, and the finding aid itself. I have compiled an index of each advertisement published between the years of 1900 to 1925 from the Kodak Advertising Collection binders at the George Eastman Study Centre (GESC) in the George Eastman House Museum of Photography and Film (GEH) in Rochester, New York. The Library of Congress defines a finding aid as: "A description of an archival collection, usually containing a history of the person or organization that produced the collection and an inventory of its contents." 1 With this in mind, I will begin the first section by giving an overview of the Kodak Advertising Collection, tracing its mysterious provenance, and describing how it came to be at the GEH. I will discuss relevant sources of information in the literature review and then describe my methodology. The second part of the paper will be the analysis, including a description of inherent categories discovered within the advertisements, and a more detailed study of one of the themes (soldiers). The Kodak Advertising Collection is a much-used asset at the George Eastman House and it is my goal that the finding aid that I have assembled will assist researchers in the future. At present, the advertisements are only searchable at the binder level. With the addition of this finding aid to the

1. Library of Congress, "Finding Aids and Guides" Rare Book and Special Collections Reading Room, http://www.loc.gov/rr/rarebook/findaid/findaid.html (accessed May 29, 2010).

1

study center, the advertisements for this twenty-five year period will be searchable individually. This collection is important to the museum and its history and by assembling this finding aid I have helped to improve access to it. In addition, I hope that my written analysis will enable people to gain a greater understanding of the Kodak material from the beginning of the twentieth century. This project was completed in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Masters of Arts in the program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management.

2

An Overview of Kodak and the Kodak Advertising Collection George Eastman, founder of the Eastman Kodak company was a self made man. Unhappy with the large photographic outfits of the time, Eastman set out to create an easier way to take photographs. This led to the invention of the Kodak camera in 1888. It was lauded as the first camera that could be used by anyone, regardless of his or her skill, age, sex, or economic status. The camera-- a box covered in leather-- was simple to operate. The camera was aimed at the subject, the button was pressed, and a crank was turned to advance to the next photograph. Kodak cameras came pre-loaded with 100 shots. When the user had taken all the photos, he or she simply shipped the camera back to Eastman Kodak where Kodak employees would process and print the images, re-load the camera, and send everything back to the customer. As Kodak put it early on, it was "Photography with the bother left out." 2 This was a time of change for advertising. In the late nineteenth century it was seen as a distasteful obligation companies could use to increase knowledge of their brands. These text-based ads gave way to more visually appealing ads featured in magazines. Advertising became something to be taken seriously, by consumers and companies alike, and as a result the quality and the appeal of the ads shot up. Eastman realized this early on, and so began to use advertisements

2. Rochester, NY, George Eastman House George Eastman Legacy Collection, Kodak Advertising Collection, 1895-1907 5 of 8.

3

to create "a nation of amateur photographers." 3 During the years contained in this finding aid, unlike many other corporations, Kodak did not contract their advertising out to an ad agency. Instead, Eastman invented slogans and ad concepts himself. The ads began as simple illustrations of products with information on their availability. As advertising techniques evolved at the end of the 1890's and the early 1900's, Kodak, led by Eastman and later, advertising director Lewis Bunnell Jones began to use more visually sophisticated means to sell their cameras. Ads no longer featured the camera front and centre. An ever-growing portion of Kodak's monthly ads began to feature people instead. These figures, which were always fashionably dressed, white, middle-class or above men and women, held onto the Kodak as if it was an extension of their fashionable attire. The Kodak became an accessory, part of the lifestyle. The make, model, and technical specifications became less important; what was important was the act of taking photographs. Eastman used his ads to promote photography as a part of life, trying to prevent it as being seen as a passing fad. To do this, he shifted his marketing strategy to include families and children. Ads encouraged parents to photograph children constantly, warning the parents that memories would fade over time, and only a photograph would "keep the story."

3. Elizabeth Brayer, George Eastman : A Biography. (Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press, 2006), 135.

4

Eastman told J. Walter Thompson in the 1880's that "A picture of a pretty girl sells more than a tree or a house." 4 and so, he created the most iconic of Kodak ads: The Kodak Girl. Always fashionable, the Kodak Girl appeared in many ads beginning in 1888 and continuing well into the later 20th century. As Nancy West argues, the Kodak Girl's "youthful image would signify the ease, pleasure, and freedom of snapshot photography."5 By using the Kodak Girl, as well as the later introduced Brownie Boy and a host of other men, women and children, Kodak created a marketing campaign that focused not only on how and when to photograph, but highlighted how simple it was to do. Advertisements continued to additionally laude the newest features in the cameras but these advertisements dwindled as time went on, limited to an announcement when a new model was available. The rest of the time, the people in the ads became the demonstrators and promoters of the Kodaks, eliminating the need for camera focused sales advertisements. What started out as a camera and film company expanded rapidly during the twenty-five year period I surveyed; there are advertisements for a large variety of products. Film and cameras are well represented, but so are chemicals; both for photographic, and general use. The binders from 1920 onwards have more Eastman Organic Chemical ads than they do ads for cameras. In addition to this, there are a multitude of ads for darkroom apparatuses--cutting boards, film tanks, enlargers, rulers, lamps, and much

4. Brayer, 135. 5. Nancy Martha West, Kodak and the Lens of Nostalgia (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 2000), 53.

5

more. Many Kodak publications are featured, advertising to the reader how to take better photographs at home, on the farm, and of the children. X-Ray film features prominently in later years, showing images of teeth, gallstones and other internal maladies all diagnosed with Kodak X-Ray film. Of course, each binder also contains many ads featuring happy men, woman and children outdoors lauding the newest Kodak camera--These are the ads which most often are representative of this time period at Kodak, when in reality the ads selling neither camera nor film number just as high. The Kodak Advertising Collection consists of 708 binders and scrapbooks, put together by the company's ad department over the course of its history. These are made up of several types of binders, as one can assume availability changed over the collection's long history. The binders for the twenty-five year period I surveyed measure 15" wide, 17 ½" high, and 2 ½" deep. Each binder contains between 35 and 50 pages that are slipped into plastic protective sheets. The ads themselves are pasted to black or white paper and are sometimes accompanied by penciled-in notes (most often the date). In some cases there is also a date stamped onto the ad, though this is not consistent. These books were compiled by the Eastman Kodak Company and were donated to the George Eastman House in 2003. The collection covers more than 100 years of advertisements-- both tear sheets and printed ads-- from 1884 to 1988 Before coming to the GEH the ads were stored in Kodak headquarters, located at 343 State St., Rochester

6

NY. They were kept in the basement under the jurisdiction of the Kodak library.6 As Kodak began to downsize their operations in the late 1990's, librarians were laid off or relocated. The last remaining librarian at Kodak headquarters, Ray Curtin, realized that this material was in danger of being lost therefore in 2001 he invited Kathy Connor, who was curator of the Eastman Legacy Collection at the GEH, to look at the collection in order to see if the GEH would be interested in taking it. Although it does not strictly fall within the collection's mission (to collect material related to the life of George Eastman from the years 1854­1932, with the advertising collection extending beyond this date range),7 Kathy agreed to present the material to her acquisition committee. Despite both Kathy and the committee being against the acquisition of the materials, they were brought into the collection in 2003, mostly due to the prompting of the museum's director. If the GEH had not accepted the collection in its entirety, the portion after 1932 would have been sent to the University of Rochester, home to another Kodak archive, but it was thought more appealing to keep the entire collection together.8 It is worth noting that the business archive at University of Rochester is extensive and may be useful for researchers interested in the business side of Kodak. It is home to a substantial number of boxes containing business papers from Eastman Kodak, including boxes of advertising manuscripts, seven that I personally scoured in search of in-

6. Kathy Connor, conversation with the author, 20 May 2010. 7. Ibid. 8. Ibid.

7

house information on the development of the advertisements. Unfortunately, I was unable to find anything relevant to my thesis but the university's archive would still be a valuable source for other Kodak researchers. The material was not considered desirable to the GEH committee at the time because not only did it span further than the years of Eastman's life and thus outside the mission of the collection, but also because it came into the collection unorganized and not catalogued. Kodak promised to pay for the shelving of the collection and the moving expenses incurred in the process though, and so Connor planned a movable shelving system for the ads to be housed on. With this plan in place, the advertisements were packed into hundreds of boxes and sent to the GEH in 2003. The binders that the ads are stored in are perhaps made of materials that are not archival grade. In the 39 binders I surveyed, the ads are pasted to different types of paper slipped into clear binder sheets. The black paper used in some cases is in much better condition than the brittle, white paper used in others. However, black album paper is well known for being acidic and not good for long-term preservation of paper materials. The binders themselves are often overfull, leading to the binder rings opening when being used by a researcher. This poses a higher risk of damage for the ads as, at this point, there is more opportunity to be dropped or mishandled. It is because of these issues that, when the collection was brought into GEH, Kathy Connor had an assessment made for the re-housing of the material. It was estimated that it would cost seventy-five thousand dollars, which is

8

obviously much more money than the museum has to spend.9 This is partially because of the size of the binders-- they are not standard and therefore special housing materials would have to be made for them. With this cost in mind, it is unreasonable to chastise the GEH for how it houses the Kodak Advertising Collection; it was rescued from a basement storage room and moved to a climate-controlled facility, and the binders themselves are adequate protection from the elements. Archivists diligently assist researchers, reducing the improper handling that may occur from an overfull binder. Although there are more effective storage methods, it is a matter of balancing the ideal with the available, and in this case, I believe the collection is being well managed. When the collection was housed at Kodak, before it arrived at the Eastman House, it was inaccessible to almost everybody. Exceptions were sometimes granted to see the material, such as in the case of Nancy Martin West, author of Kodak and the Lens of Nostalgia, and with Warner Brothers when they asked to access it for material for their parks and films. This has changed drastically with its move to the GEH. The Kodak Advertising Collection can now be seen by anybody who asks, which has both pros and cons. It is positive because this is the purpose of a research collection: to be seen. However, each viewing of the binders places strain on them; brittle paper cracks, the binders break, and there is always a risk to the collection itself. For this reason, other methods of viewing the ads are available. For instance, in many cases a researcher will be content with seeing a facsimile

9. Kathy Connor, conversation with the author, 20 May 2010.

9

of the ad, and so binders of photocopies are available at the Study Center for such work. Additionally, the GEH's website has a large number of advertisements available to view online. However, this will not satisfy every researcher and in some cases there is no alternative but to show the original material. When this happens, it is preferable to show the researcher his or her particular request with as little disruption to the rest of the collection as possible. This is where my finding aid will be useful. Since 2003, there have been several finder's tools applied to the Kodak ads in order to make them more accessible. After the collection's acquisition, Kathy Connor hired archivist Deb Hamil, who spent two years creating index sheets for each binder. These sheets, along with an internal HTML database, give basic information about the content of each binder. Overall themes as well as subjects are listed along with any other information that may be unique to a binder. This information focuses on the ads relating to Kodak cameras, as this is the area that the Study Center receives the most requests. To date, no finding aid has been created focusing on individual advertisements in the binders. This is what my project will change. With a finding aid in place that allows a researcher to search for a specific ad before turning to the binders themselves, the collection will be more accessible than ever before while at the same time it will cut down on unnecessary access to the ads. As it is the ultimate goal of the George Eastman Study Center to facilitate research and discovery, this will allow the GESC to help accommodate research requests on many levels while adhering to the preservation and care of the material required by an institution. Both

10

Hamil's finding aid and my own facilitate access to the collection, however Hamil's is only useful at the binder level whereas my own will allow the researcher to view information pertinent to the individual advertisements.

11

Literature Survey Research for my thesis was concentrated on three distinct areas: the history of advertising, and the United States of America from 1900-1925; the history of Kodak and George Eastman; and research on existing finding aids. Of these three areas, the Kodak ads have the least written on them. While the history of Kodak and George Eastman is widely published, the advertisements themselves are not widely discussed in scholarly papers, likely due to the previously discussed unavailability of the collection itself until recently. In my study of American history, I found A History of the American People by Paul Johnson to be a comprehensive look at America's entire history. The years 1900-1925 are covered from many angles, including relevant looks at the rise in wealth over the first ten years of the century and the growing gap between the rich and the poor.10 Additionally, Johnson looks at the growth of daily newspapers from 1850-1910. There were 260 daily papers in 1870 versus the 2,600 in 1910-- the latter which is the peak number of daily newspapers in American history, meaning more of an audience for Kodak's ads.11 Advertising the American Dream­ Making Way for Modernity, 19201940 by Roland Marchand was an excellent modern-day look at early twentieth century ads, even though I am interested in a time period earlier than the book highlights. While Marchand mentions Kodak specifically twice

10. Paul Johnson, A History of the American People, (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1998), 601. 11. Ibid., 593.

12

in his book, both times it is in reference to ads after 1925.12 Nevertheless, Marchand's examples of common advertising tactics are quite relevant to the advertisements in the collection, as they share a number of similarities, for example, the chapter "Visual Cliché" where examples of the a familial unit in advertising is illustrated.13 Jackson Lears's book Fables of Abundance­ A Cultural History of Advertising in America contained interesting ideas about the incorporation of photography into advertising in its chapter "The Persistence and Resurgence of Real Life". Lears mentions the statistic that between 1922 and 1927, advertisements in Ladies Home Journal using photographs increased to twenty-five percent, up from fourteen percent.14 This was an interesting statistic, especially considering that Kodak ads featured a higher number of photographic ads much earlier. However, this is hardly surprising considering the nature of Eastman Kodak. Image Makers by Robert Jackall and Janice M. Hirota examines advertising primarily from the viewpoint of supporting organizations. For example, the chapter on World War I, which I found particularly helpful, wrote about the representation of the war shown to the American people as created by the Committee on Public Information. This committee, founded in 1917 and disbanded in 1919, was created to "sell America's Crusade to the

12. Roland Marchand, Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920-1940 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985), 72, 134. 13. Ibid., 250. 14. Jackson Lears, Fables of Abundance: A Cultural History of Advertising in America (New York: Basic Books, 1994), 324.

13

American Public." 15 During the war years, Kodak primarily focused on marketing their products to families of soldiers. Looking at the ads through the ideas of the Committee on Public Information brings new light onto many of the themes inherent in the advertisements themselves. Photographic Memories by Rob Kroes is an investigation of the photograph, which was helpful in obtaining information on the link between the photograph and memory that I discuss in my analysis of soldier advertisements.16 The Past Within Us by Tessa Morris-Suzuki was similarly helpful, as it discusses the ways in which history is disseminated through all forms of media. Though it emphasizes the history of Asia, the themes and ideas translated well to American history.17 Both Jay Winter's Remembering War and Martha Langford's Suspended Conversations writes about the act of soldiers assembling photographic albums. Langford, approaches this from a photographic perspective, analyzing the albums themselves, while Winter writes about the war itself, speaking of photographs as a byproduct.18 Both texts were very relevant to my exploration of WWI advertisements. The Mustering of Support for World War I by The Ladies Home Journal, by Joanne Karetzky was an interesting read. Speaking about the war from
15. Robert Jackall and Janice Hirota, Image Makers: Advertising, Public Relations, and the Ethos of Advocacy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 13. 16. Rob Kroes, Photographic Memories (Hanover, NH: Dartmouth College Press, 2007). 17. Tessa Morris-Suzuki The past within us : Media, memory, history (London; New York: Verso, 2005). 18. Martha Langford, Suspended conversations : The afterlife of memory in photographic albums (Ithaca: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2001), 67-76; Jay Winter, Remembering war : The great war between memory and history in the twentieth century (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006), 80-102.

14

the home front, Karetzky describes the Ladies Home Journal's transition from a peacetime magazine to a wartime one, including how this affected advertisers and their advertisements.19 In addition to books, I read many journal articles on subjects relevant to my research. Ultimately, the most helpful articles were ones that wove many of the elements in my analysis together. An excellent example of this is Sandy Callister's "Picturing Loss: Family, Photographs and the Great War". This article is an account of WWI from the perspective of New Zealanders. However, the information is also very relevant to the American's view of the war. Callister discusses Kodak's impact on the soldiers, their photographing as a result, and how these patterns shifted if a soldier lived or died in the war.20 The idea of photographing a soldier because he might die is one that I discuss in the analysis section, despite the fact that Kodak ads would never mention death. Alan Trachtenberg's "Through a Glass, Darkly: Photography and Cultural Memory", while primarily an article about a photograph's representation of truth in the digital era, also discusses Civil War photography. I found that Trachtenberg's ideas about Gardner's Sketchbook of the War and its idealized cover image mirrored Kodak's portrayal of WWI.21 Conversely, Dannagal Goldthwaite Young's "Sacrifice, Consumption, and the American Way of Life: Advertising and Domestic Propaganda During
19. Joanne L. Karetzky, The Mustering of Support for World War I by The Ladies' Home Journal (Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press, 1997). 20. Sandy Callister, "Picturing loss: Family, photographs and the Great War" Round Table 96, no. 393 (2007), 663-678. 21. Alan Trachtenberg, "Through a Glass, Darkly: Photography and Cultural Memory" Social Research 75, no. 1 (2008), 125-128.

15

World War II" to be a counterpoint to the Civil War material, looking ahead (so to speak) to WWII and the different advertising strategy used in that time period.22 "The Reframing of Traditional Cultural Values: Consumption and World War I", by Monica Brasted was helpful in my understanding of how advertising was used both before, and during WWI. In particular, it emphasized the emphasis on thrift most corporations worked into their advertisements during the war.23 In my analysis, I speak about how and why Kodak had no such emphasis. Additionally, Susan Zeiger's "She Didn't Raise Her Boy to be a Slacker: Motherhood, Conscription, and the Culture of the First World War" helped in my analysis of the wartime ads. It particularly helped in decoding the portrayal of women in these ads.24 The history of Kodak advertising, as stated, is not something that has been written about at length. The first source I looked at was Nancy Martha West's Kodak and the Lens of Nostalgia, which was published in 2000, three years before the Kodak Advertising Collection came to the GEH. West's book is an excellent overview of the advertisements, offering history, specific examples, analysis of themes, and cultural history. West mentions in her

22. Dannagal Young, "Sacrifice, Consumption, and the American Way of Life: Advertising and Domestic Propaganda during World War II." Communication Review 8, no. 1 (2005), 27-52. 23. Monica Brasted, "The Reframing of Traditional Cultural Values: Consumption and World War I." Advertising & Society Review 5, no. 4 (2004), http://resolver.scholarsportal.info/resolve/15347311/v05i0004/nfp_trotcvcawwi (accessed July 26, 2010). 24. Susan Zeiger, "She Didn't Raise Her Boy to Be a Slacker: Motherhood, Conscription, and the Culture of the First World War". Feminist Studies 22, no. 1 (1996), 7-39, Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed July 26, 2010).

16

introduction eight topics that Kodak carries on "cultural conversations" with. These topics: "travel, automobility, childhood, toys, feminine beauty, family, memory, and World War I"25 are very similar to the categories in which I have organized the advertisements in the finding aid. While West is regarded as the foremost scholar on the Kodak ads, it is important to note that her research was done before the collection moved to the GEH. As such, according to Kathy Connor, curator of the GEH who has helped West with projects since Kodak and the Lens of Nostalgia, it is important to understand that West was not able to see every ad when writing this book, and as such, some of the generalizations that she makes in the book have since been proven inaccurate.26 However, this is not to say that West's book is not a great source of information. It is simply important to consider these more recent developments as well. In addition to West's book, I have read Douglas Collins's The Story of Kodak. This book, published in 1990, gives a good overview of Kodak as a company. Besides a three-page section on the Kodak Girl, there is not much of interest in regards to the Kodak ads themselves contained within it, however it provided a good timeline of Kodak products when needed. Additionally, the George Eastman biography written by Elizabeth Brayer provided all the background on George Eastman himself that was needed. Another vast source of Kodak materials is the department of Special Collections at the University of Rochester's Rush Rees Library. The U of R has

25. West, 3. 26. Kathy Connor, conversation with the author, 20 May 2010.

17

received business papers from Eastman Kodak and I had hoped that some memos regarding ad production from my time period would survive. However, a day spent scouring the boxes provided to me yielded little; it seems that there are no remaining behind-the-scenes memos from this time period. While the archives in the GESC are extensive, it is prudent to mention that they are by no means the only collection of Kodak advertising material. Many other institutions hold impressive collections of Kodak materials as well. For example, Ryerson University holds the Kodak Collection, which was acquired in a similar manner to the GEH's acquisition of the Kodak Advertising Collection: In 2005, when Kodak Canada ceased operations at its Toronto location, arrangements were made for their corporate records, cameras, and the materials from their short-lived Heritage Museum to be transferred to the University.27 This collection includes Kodak Canada's advertising material, which was written about in Keri Lee Kauffman's thesis from 2009 "Kodak Canada: Increasing Access to Advertising Materials in Ryerson University Library's Special Collections".28 Similarly, The British Library holds the Kodak Limited's United Kingdom archives, donated to the Library in 2009.29

27. Ryerson University, Ryerson University Library ­ Special Collections http://www.ryerson.ca/library/collections/special/kodak.html (accessed August 29, 2010). 28. Keri Lee Kauffman, "Kodak Canada: Increasing Access to Advertising Materials in Ryerson University Library's Special Collections" (Masters Thesis, Ryerson University, 2009). 29. The British Library, "You press the button, we do the rest" http://www.bl.uk/news/2009/pressrelease20090318.html (accessed August 29, 2010).

18

National holdings of Kodak collections can also be found in Australia at the Museum Victoria.30 Another significant holding of Kodak Ads is Duke University's "Ellis Collection of Kodakiana", a collection of advertisements from 1886-1923. This collection is particularly relevant because it is from the same time period as this thesis. In addition to physical locations of Kodak materials, there are many online resources that can be consulted by a researcher. Many of the institutions that hold physical collections place materials online for access. The GESC has a large number of advertisements on their website available to the researcher.31 Ryerson Library has placed a number of vintage Kodak publications on the website Archive.org. In fact, a search of Archive.org brings up over 500 mentions of Kodak, and there are many publications, and advertisements available for viewing. Lastly, there are also private collections that are accessible via an online presence. Websites like Kodakgirl.com, and Vintageadbrowser.com can be a vast source of ad material. For example, a search for Kodak on Vintageadbrowser.com produces 1170 ads, in many languages. Finally, in preparation to create this finding aid, I believed it prudent to look at other examples of finding aids. I began with examples created by graduates of this program, looking at theses written by Kristin Dudley, Jennifer Givogue, and Lisa C. Hennessey. Each presented their information in
30. Museum Victoria, Browsing by theme `Kodak Heritage Collection' Museum Victoria http://museumvictoria.com.au/collections/themes/2882/kodakheritage-collection (accessed August 29, 2010). 31. George Eastman House, Kodak Advertising Collection http://www.eastmanhouse.org/features/kodak-advertising/ (accessed August 29, 2010).

19

slightly different ways, giving me many ideas to work with. None of these theses were created for the GESC, though, therefore I asked Kathy Connor to show me finding aids created especially for her material. In addition to these finding aids, I consulted both the Library of Congress's website as well as Duke University Library's, in order to understand their definition of a finding aid, as well as to view their online resources on the subject.

20

Methodology Knowing that I wanted to work with the Kodak advertising collection, I began by browsing the binders of ads, familiarizing myself with the scope and content of the collection as well as how it changed over the decades. The first decision was to choose when, out of the 104-year scope of the archive, I would focus on for the finding aid. Originally, the plan was to work only with the more image-based ads produced by Kodak. For the purposes of this thesis, I am defining image-based ads as the ones in which the focus is on the people in the advertisement and not the products. For example, an ad with a couple walking on the seaside accompanied by the text "Take a Kodak With You" would be an example of an image-based ad, while an ad featuring a photograph of a No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II and featuring a slogan "A New Folding Pocket Kodak" would not.32 Ads such as this began in the early 1890's, however they were not the primary means of advertising Kodak cameras at that time. Ultimately, I decided to work with advertisements between 1900 and 1925. I chose this time period for a number of reasons: it covers both the early days of Kodak and World War I; George Eastman was still alive and thus still partially responsible for advertisements; sources indicate that during this time period Eastman Kodak dealt with the same advertising agency (Seaman Advertising Agency) and in-house advertising director

32. See Appendix A

21

(Lewis Bunnell Jones)33; and lastly because this time period would offer an opportunity to study how Kodak's ads changed from the early text-dominated pieces to the more image-based ads they became known for. As mentioned, this project began as an analysis geared exclusively to the image-based ads produced by Kodak. However, the realization that such an undertaking would also have to include the creation of a finding aid caused reevaluation of the material I was to survey. I understood that such a finding aid would be infinitely more useful if it included each advertisement in the binders, not just the image-based ads. Thus, I made the decision to include everything. The analysis of the image-based ads is still a part of this project however and therefore in the finding aid itself, advertisements are identified in part by their subject-- this subject is either a category prevalent in the image-based ads, or a product. When deciding what format my finding aid would take, I examined existing finder's tools in the GESC as well as The Richard and Ronay Menschel Library . While I understood the simplicity behind finder's tools that were paper based, I very much liked the versatility that a searchable spreadsheet supplied.34 I wanted my data to be searchable in a number of ways and so this seemed to be the ideal format. An Excel spreadsheet is versatile as well as easy to use. Additionally, it makes the process simple to import data into other, more complex database applications at a later time.

33. West, 24. 34. Lisa C. Hennessey, "The Mark A. Freeman Collection of World War II Photographs at George Eastman House" (master's thesis, Ryerson University, 2007).

22

The next challenge was the question of what to index in the ads themselves. I decided that because the image-based ads were more complex and would be further analyzed, I would include additional criteria for those ads specifically. However, I wanted a single spreadsheet that I could streamline for either type of ad (either image-based or product based). The headings I decided on were: Binder, Year, Slogan, Subject(s), Text, Implied Audience, Product, Photo or Illustration, Color or Black and White, Publications, and an additional field for a description and other notes (Description/Notes). Of these eleven sections, four were eliminated for the straightforward product advertisements: Text, Implied Audience, Photo or Illustration, and Color or Black and White. With headings established, I then began indexing the advertisements. In the twenty-five year period there were forty-three binders that were indexed. For the most part, duplicate advertisements were not counted, however this was not always the case. In some circumstances advertisements were identical with the exception of text, or imagery and so those ads would be counted. Indexing the ads took approximately three and a half months. Considering the total contents of the Kodak Advertising Collection is 708 binders, it is easy to see why no finding aid at the individual ad level has been tackled before-- it would take a enormous amount of time to complete. However, Kathy Connor, Curator of the GESC has indicated that with this twenty-five year period complete and able to be used as a template, she would like to solicit volunteers to begin working on the rest of the collection.

23

The layout of the finding aid is formatted to be ever ready and capable of expansion. Being an Excel document, further headings could be added if needed for later ads. It is my hope that Connor achieves this goal, and perhaps future Photographic Preservation and Collections Management students make this finding aid a part of their Institutional Service Hours. While having twenty-five years of the collection indexed makes a difference in the availability of the collection to a researcher, having the entire collection completed would be phenomenal.

24

Analysis Overview In total, the finding aid for the Kodak Advertising Collection consists of 2136 advertisements. Of these, 468 are image-based ads featuring a main subject that is not the product (and is almost always a person or group of people). As stated earlier, the majority of the time these ads are not selling a certain product, but are simply selling photography itself. All 468 ads can be placed into one of seven categories: women, children, family, farmers, travel and outdoors, labor, and soldiers. While an ad may belong to more than one category, and a category may target more than one type of person, every image-based ad counted in the finding aid can be slotted into one. The accompanying chart (fig 1) highlights how many ads feature each category, illustrating the popularity of each. In addition, examples of advertisements for each category can be found at the back of this thesis.

Figure 1. The seven categories in the finding aid.

25

Each of these categories was prevalent in advertisements of the time for many social and cultural reasons. It would be beyond the scope of this thesis to examine each category in depth, so I will choose one category-- soldiers-- and examine the driving factors behind its inclusion in this list, deconstruct two pertinent examples of the advertisements from the collection, and discuss the ways in which Kodak used the image of soldiers and war in their campaigns.

Advertising and the Media in America During WWI

"The war has been won by advertising, as well as by soldiers and munitions,"-- such was the opinion of professional advertiser's magazine Printers Ink after the armistice. 35 This sentiment seemed to be echoed by many, including George Eastman, who called advertisers "Cheerleaders of the Nation."36 Wartime advertisements were influenced in part by the Committee on Public Information, which was formed by Woodrow Wilson at the beginning of the war to positively influence the opinions of Americans regarding the war.37 While this committee oversaw advertising and helped to create American propaganda, it was not responsible for the large-scale bans on many wartime photographs. These were mandated by the American Expeditionary Force, the branch of the military that accompanied journalists

35. Lears, 220. 36. Ibid., 222. 37. Jackall and Hirota, 13.

26

and photographers.38 As West states, "No photos that could affect the morale of the American soldier, the public at home, or the United States relation with the Allied governments were allowed to be taken." 39 These acts of propaganda and censorship combined to create an atmosphere of patriotism in America during the war. Unlike more recent wars, in which gruesome imagery from the front is beamed into ones home daily, contributing to an apathy or pacifist attitude felt by the American people, America in the grip of World War I was not entirely aware of the conditions faced by their men in the war-- or, if they were, they pretended not to be. This perceived image of the war was quite idealized and of course was quite different from the reality of conditions the soldiers faced in Europe. This view of war differs greatly with the American perception of the previous major war. The American Civil War, which took place only fiftytwo years prior to World War I, had been photographed in depth, and while the images were reliant on slow photographic processes, and therefore could not show the action of battle, they nevertheless showed the gruesome aftermath in great detail. Trachtenberg discusses the seminal Civil War photo book Gardner's Photographic Sketchbook of the Civil War in his paper, "Through a Glass, Darkly" He states that: "Gardner directs the reading of the photographs as visual equivalents of victory, of `union,' not simply in the sense of making a record of victory but by demanding in the act of interpretation how victory comes

38. West, 188. 39. Ibid., 189.

27

about." 40 Gardner's photographs show the realities of war, insofar as they include dead bodies, on both sides. While his book was not widely published, the photographs were well known and would have been part of the public consciousness by 1917. However, the public image of World War I was more in line with the cover of Gardner's-- an idyllic scene of a soldier's camp, with men socializing over a campfire, and no death or conflict.41 This scene is similar to the image of war taken up by Kodak, as will be shown in the analysis of individual advertisements. Kodak, along with other advertisers, kept an optimistic tenor to their ads during the war years. Never mentioning death or risk and instead focusing on the separation felt by those left in America allowed Kodak to advertise the ways in which the feeling of separation could be lessened for the soldiers by sending them photographs. Unlike other advertisements of the time, Kodak did not focus on the need for thrift and economy. Many corporations contributed to the wartime effort by encouraging their customers to be thrifty, for example advocating the conservation of food.42 By doing this, these corporations helped the propaganda machine, while making themselves seem favourable to the American people by advertising their support for the war. Conversely, Kodak positioned their products as a form of morale for soldiers, encouraging not only the sending of photographs overseas, but even sending cameras for "the boys," thus urging the consumer to

34. Trachtenberg, 126. 41. Ibid. 42. Brasted.

28

purchase quantities of film, paper, developing chemicals, etc. to keep up with the demand for these morale boosting photographs. Thriftiness was the message of other advertisers, whereas Kodak's message was to encourage patriotism by increasing communication to the soldiers "over there". Kodak was thus able to appear as patriotic as corporations advocating thrift without the economical hit.

29

Analysis of Ads

Pictured above are two examples of Kodak advertisements during the war. These ads feature very different imagery and each will be analyzed in this section. The first advertisement, with the slogan "Snap-Shots from Home" features a group of soldiers gathered outside a tent, looking at photographs. All the men in the ad are smiling, clean cut, and dressed in their uniforms. The image is close cropped, leaving out all details of the camp besides the tent. The text in the ad implores you to "Give cheer to the boys in camp and on shipboard by sending them pictures from home." 43 It goes on to note that "There are likely to be some tedious, homesick days and a little
43. Rochester, NY, George Eastman House George Eastman Legacy Collection, Kodak Advertising Collection, 1914-1916 5 of 5. It should be noted that this binder is mislabeled. It contains ads through 1917.

30

cheer-up in the way of photographs from the home folks and the home doings will do them a lot of good." 44 The image itself is non-photographic in origin. More than any other category in the collection, soldier ads are most often non-photographic in nature. Despite the fact that the image supposedly depicts a war, there is no mention of battle in the ad copy. None of the soldiers in the image have guns or weapons of any kind on them. Additionally, none of the men even have insignia, rank, or identification of any kind on their uniforms. When looking at the advertisement, and ignoring the copy, what this ad resembles most are the ads for the Brownie Camera. Except, of course, in Brownie ads the people are all young boys. This ad concept-- of a group of people looking at photographs is used many times for Brownie Cameras over the twenty-five year period I worked with. By emulating a Brownie ad that the consumer has likely seen before, Kodak is inferring that the men are simply enjoying a day outdoors. This juxtaposition of settings created a sense of peace in the ad that helps to set the viewer's mind at ease. Joanne Karetzky emphasizes that the notion of an exchange of photographs with the troops is not one that was exclusive to Kodak.45 The cover of Ladies Home Journal for November 1918 featured a painting by Harold Brett entitled "His Thanksgiving" in which one soldier shows two others a photograph while they are standing in the trench, wearing helmets

44. Rochester, NY, George Eastman House George Eastman Legacy Collection, Kodak Advertising Collection, 1914-1916 5 of 5. 45. Karetzky, 26.

31

and holding guns.46 However, the photograph the soldier is holding is a studio one, greatly resembling a cabinet card, not the snapshots Kodak would have people making. The sentiment is the same however-- that the soldiers have little to remind them of home without the photographs sent from family. The second advertisement, captioned "The Kodak Letter" features a mother and child writing a letter to a soldier. The star in the window-- still a tradition in military families-- is a powerful symbol that this small family is affected by the war. The mother and child review the photographs as the camera sits on the windowsill. This advertisement greatly resembles many family ads run by Kodak before and after the war. What makes this image different is the presence of the star in the window. Also unlike the first ad, the copy here mentions the war itself. The text reads:
"The Star in the window tells the story-- their soldier is "over there" The morning letter of cheer and hope has been written and with it pictures are going, simple Kodak pictures that tell the home story,-- pictures will bring a cheery smile to his face, a leap of joy to his heart, that will keep bright the fire of courage in his soul as with the home image fresh in mind as he battles for the safety of that home and for the honor of his flag."47

West interprets this ad as creating an idealized image of a father, stating: "The stereotyped image of a state rather than of action transforms the soldier into the idealized father, and the family at home can `remember' him

46. Karetzky, 26. 47. NY, George Eastman House George Eastman Legacy Collection, Kodak Advertising Collection, Amateur Ads 1917-1920 1 of 4.

32

as such rather than as subject to the war's catastrophes." 48 Additionally, according to Susan Zeiger, this ad is demonstrating the "good mother" stereotype49: a woman who is the embodiment of a patriotic American. Zeiger compares this model to the stereotype of a "bad mother": a woman whose pre-disposition is to oppose the war due to motherly instincts, and feels the urge to keep boys close and therefore safe.50 Zieger's notion that "Wartime mass media took on the responsibility of persuading women that public duty was the higher road"51 is evident in this ad. While the woman is not a mother to the soldier in question, she is, nonetheless, a mother and stands to lose greatly from this war. However, the ad depicts her proudly displaying a star, sending photographs overseas to keep spirits high, and effectually doing her part in the war. Both ads, while different in subject matter, relate directly to soldiers. Both create an idealized picture of the war-- the first shows the act of war itself, and the second shows the soldiers fighting it. With these wartime advertisements, Kodak then manages to sell cameras, teach the American public how to photograph and use photography during a war, and to contribute to the American propaganda machine. No small feat for two images and some text. However, what neither advertisement mentions is the real reason that photographs are so important during wartime: a soldier who goes to war stands a good chance of being killed. This was likely at the front of the minds of family members who frantically photographed soldiers as
48. 49. 50. 51. West, 191. Zeiger, 7. Ibid., 5. Ibid.

33

they left their homes for the front, and also a driving reason to send cameras with them overseas, in order to capture their photographs for as long as possible. As Sandy Callister states: "What historians have overlooked is that, without bodies to grieve over, the medium of photography played an integral part in the representation of death and loss both during and after the war. Its role was both unanticipated and multivalent." 52 However, it is not something that would have been overtly stated in advertisements at the time, for many reasons: of censorship, good taste, and because the notion of death is something Kodak does not address.

WWI in Memory

The scope and effect of World War I was so great that it was hard to comprehend. Despite this, Kodak still needed to sell cameras during wartime. Indeed, these cameras had a purpose: not only to capture home life for the soldiers, but also to give to the soldiers so that they in turn could photograph the war. West addresses this in her book, saying that the focus on the collection of war photos and the encouragement of this exchange of photographs both ways between soldier and family contributed to the domestication of the war: "Here war gets collected as a subject for the family album, an episode in the narrative of domestic life, presumably along with the wedding, the baby's first steps, the graduation, and family vacations.

52. Callister, 665.

34

Kodak thus allows the war to be domesticated, in every sense of the word." 53 In creating a space for the war in the family album, and thus the family history, Kodak makes the war itself seem more digestible. It now resides alongside other milestones, and thus is given rank with them. The war cannot be a big, incomprehensible event if it fits neatly into a family album. Thus, the act of photographing the war, in the eyes of Kodak, is a form of treatment-- a means to make the situation make sense. As we will see, album making was a pastime taken up by many soldiers. This quaint Victorian parlor activity became an important act for many involved in the war. The idea of placing these war photographs in context alongside other life events, or, conversely isolating them in their own albums is something explored by others as well. Martha Langford speaks more about photographs from WWI in family albums in her book Suspended Conversations. Langford analyses four WWI era albums: two from soldiers, and two from nurses.54 Like West, Langford comments on the placement of war photos among domestic scenes in the album.55 One of these albums is made by a soldier who died in combat and his album features photographs of friends and family interspersed with photographs of life at the army training camp. The album did not follow him to France, and thus ends when he leaves for the war.56 Langford also chronicles a young woman who was a nurse during the war. Her album was begun at the start of her service and includes not only
53. 54. 55. 56. West, 193-196. Langford, 67-76. Ibid. Ibid.

35

snapshots, but also postcards, and newspaper clippings. At the conclusion of the war, this nurse continues to paste photos into the album of her later peacetime travels in Europe. "The extension of her wartime memoir into the twenties suggests that she viewed the war and its aftermath integrally, as a coming of age"57, Langford states, echoing West's "domestication" of the war. By defining the war as a coming of age experience, this nurse was labeling it, placing it among the other, definable points in her life. The album, with its easy transition, would help trick her memory in later years into thinking the war had been more manageable. Rob Kroes refers to photographs as a mnemonic device. He states that, "Revisiting old photographs, going over the family album is intended to trigger the reservoir of inner images, of memories" 58 Thus, by integrating war images with peace ones, the albummaker assures happy recollections in the future. This idea is echoed in Callister's article. She describes soldier's albums thusly: "Soldierphotographers who did survive the war, and subsequently compiled their own war albums, generally structured their war stories in highly conventional ways. Many of them ended their war albums with photographs of domestic scenes depicting their transition from soldier to civilian. These endings are the stories of survivors. The messages they typically convey are of deliberate acts of closure. They declare affirmatively that, `I am alive; the war is over, I am home again, back with my family, and I am looking forward to a future'."59

57. Langford, 73. 58. Kroes, 2. 59. Callister, 666.

36

These photographs were also highly prized after the war as memories of loved ones who died. In her article, Callister writes on the fact that soldier's bodies did not return home. Oftentimes, the only part of a soldier the family would have left was his photograph. "During this war," she wrote, "Kodak did more than help reinforce the family's centrality to society and more than create new consumer needs and markets. It helped construct and preserve the family as a photographic memory and as a social unit. In too many instances photographs were the last visible traces a solider had of his family and his family of him."60 This association of photograph to memory, simplistically pitched to customers through advertisements during the war encompassed so much of the hopes and fears of soldiers and their families. Families desired photographs of their boys "over there" both to reassure themselves that the boys were alive and well, and to act as a surrogate if the worst should happen and the soldier die in the war. Conversely, soldiers craved photographs of their families to add to their albums and remind them of home. As Callister put it: "Kodak was ideally placed to grow both the soldier and the domestic market."61 For soldiers who survived, the Kodak advertisements during the war must have seemed like a parody of the war itself. The idealized version of war portrayed in the ads would have contrasted greatly with their assembled photo albums, which were assumedly not solely the merry images of camp that Kodak predicted. However, as Tessa Morris-Suzuki notes in her book The Past Within Us: "It is only when we look at our own face in the fading
60. Callister, 665. 61. Ibid.

37

photograph that we understand how much we, and the world we live in, has altered with the passing of the years. The photograph album historicizes memory." Regardless if the photographs were pasted in a war album, or a family album beside a wedding, if the soldier lived or died-- the Kodak ads contributed to the propaganda and patriotism of wartime in America, and influenced many soldiers and families to send loved ones a photo. While one of the smallest categories in this period of Kodak advertisements, soldiers are one of the most unique. Created out necessity, this category completely overtook Kodak's advertising during the war years. The unique take on war, both at home and abroad, and its affect on American morale makes the wartime ads of Kodak a very interesting case study.

38

Conclusion The Kodak Advertising Collection is an important part of the George Eastman Study Center at the GEH. The 708 binders cover the history of the Eastman Kodak Company, until the 1980's making the collection integral to the study of Kodak advertisements. Current finding aids, while effective in narrowing down a search for advertisements within the collection, do not extend to the single ad level. With my creation of this finding aid, (focusing on the individual advertisements and recording relevant information such as slogans, subjects, target audience, years, and text), a new level of accessibility has been given to the years covered in this project. The ads referenced in this project are an excellent window into what was happening both with Kodak and in the world at that time. We see children engaging with their surroundings as never before with the Brownie Camera, women dominating the scene with confidence and class holding the first movie camera for public use, and soldiers leaving for war with the Kodak Autographic Camera under their arm or their happy reunions with loved ones made possible through pictures taken with this Kodak. In the twenty-five year period this project covers, Kodak is there to evolve and succeed along with the people of the day, making their lives easier and more meaningful. It is the goal of this finding aid to make these ads more accessible because they still have plenty to offer us. They are an example of how Kodak firmly shaped the way we take photographs today, they allow us to smile at the notion of needing a reminder to bring a camera along on a vacation, and

39

they give us a glimpse of nineteenth century life shot through the lens of a camera. The creation of this finding aid will enable greater intellectual access to the Kodak Advertising Collection, while helping to preserve it for future researchers by cutting unnecessary access. It is my hope that the project is continued, following guidelines laid out in this paper, so that the collection can be made even more accessible. The material contained in this collection is rare and unique, and thus deserves to be preserved and indexed for future researchers.

40

Bibliography History of Kodak: Brayer, Elizabeth. 2006. George Eastman : A biography. Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press. Collins, Douglas. 1990. The Story of Kodak. New York: H.N. Abrams. Kay, T.. Selling an image: Interpreting gender in Eastman Kodak advertising, 1900--1915. M.A. diss., University of Wyoming, In Dissertations & Theses: Full Text [database on-line]; available from http://www.proquest.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca (publication number AAT EP22395; accessed April 12, 2010 Kauffman, Keri Lee. 2009. Kodak Canada: Increasing Access to Advertising Materials in Ryerson University Library's Special Collections. Edited by Joint Graduate Program in Photographic Preservation and Collections Management. West, Nancy Martha. 2000. Kodak and the Lens of Nostalgia. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, History of Advertising / History of America: Brasted, Monica. 2004. "The Reframing of Traditional Cultural Values: Consumption and World War I." Advertising & Society Review 5, no. 4. http://resolver.scholarsportal.info/resolve/15347311/v05i0004/nfp_trot cvcawwi (accessed July 26, 2010). Brennen, Bonnie, and Hanno Hardt. 1999. Picturing the Past : Media, history, and photography. The history of communication. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. Callister, Sandy. 2007. "Picturing loss: Family, photographs and the Great War." Round Table 96, no. 393: 663-678. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed July 26, 2010). Gold, Philip. 1987. Advertising, politics, and American culture : from salesmanship to therapy. New York: Paragon House. Grant, Susan-Mary. 2005. "Raising the dead: war, memory and American national identity." Nations & Nationalism 11, no. 4: 509-529. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed July 26, 2010). Jackall, Robert, and Hirota, Janice M. 2000. Image Makers : advertising, public relations, and the ethos of advocacy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

41

Johnson, Paul. 1998; 1997. A History of the American People.1 US ed. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers. Karetzky, Joanne L. 1997. The Mustering of Support for World War I by The Ladies' Home Journal. Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press. Kroes, Rob. 2007. Photographic Memories : Private pictures, public images, and american history. Interfaces, studies in visual culture. Hanover, N.H.: Dartmouth College Press : Published by University Press of New England. Langford, Martha, and Musée McCord d'histoire canadienne. 2001. Suspended Conversations : The afterlife of memory in photographic albums. Montreal ; Ithaca: McGill-Queen's University Press. Lears, T. J. Jackson. 1994. Fables of Abundance: A Cultural History of Advertising in America. New York: Basic Books. Marchand, Roland. 1985. Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920-1940. Berkeley: University of California Press. Morris-Suzuki, Tessa. 2005. The Past Within Us : Media, memory, history. London ; New York: Verso. Reeves, Thomas C. 2000. Twentieth-Century America : a brief history. New York: Oxford University Press. Trachtenberg, A.. "Through a Glass, Darkly: Photography and Cultural Memory." Social Research 75, no. 1 (April 1, 2008): 111-133. http://www.proquest.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ (accessed July 26, 2010). Winter, J. M. 2006. Remembering War : The great war between memory and history in the twentieth century. New Haven: Yale University Press. Young, Dannagal Goldthwaite. 2005. "Sacrifice, Consumption, and the American Way of Life: Advertising and Domestic Propaganda during World War II." Communication Review 8, no. 1: 27-52. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed July 26, 2010). Zeiger, Susan. 1996. "She Didn't Raise Her Boy to Be a Slacker: Motherhood, Conscription, and the Culture of the First World War". Feminist Studies 22, no. 1, Women and the State in the Americas:7-39. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed July 26, 2010).

42

Finding Aids: Dudley, Kristin E. 2008. A Finding Aid for the Models' Guild of Philadelphia Collection. Edited by Louis Walton Sipley and Joint Graduate Program in Photographic Preservation and Collections Management. Givogue, Jennifer. 2009. Finding Aid for the Set of George Streynsham Master's Albums at George Eastman House. Edited by Joint Graduate Program in Photographic Preservation and Collections Management. Hennessey, Lisa C. 2007. The Mark A. Freeman Collection of World War II Photographs at George Eastman House. Edited by Joint Graduate Program in Photographic Preservation and Collections Management. Library of Congress. "Finding Aids (Rare Book and Special Collections Reading Room, Library of Congress)." Library of Congress. http://www.loc.gov/rr/rarebook/findaid/findaid.html (accessed May 29, 2010).

43

Appendix A Kodak Advertisement Examples

44

45

Appendix B Finding Aid

Finding Aid : Kodak Advertising Collection Sarah Fay August 31, 2010

46

Descriptive Summary: Creator Eastman Kodak Company. Extent 39 Binders containing 2132 individual advertisements. Repository George Eastman Archives and Study Center. Language English. Some Spanish, French. Administrative Information: Access Restrictions This collection is available for use by researchers, by appointment only. Please contact the George Eastman Archives and Study Centre to make an appointment. gesc@geh.org 585.271.3361 ext. 242/345. Use Restrictions Copyright of these advertisements remains with Eastman Kodak Company. Please speak with Kathy Connor, Curator of the GESC for more information. Preferred Citation Kodak Advertising Collection, George Eastman Legacy Collection, George Eastman House. Provenance Gift of the Eastman Kodak Company. Processing information Unknown. Collection Overview The Kodak Advertising Collection consists of 708 binders and scrapbooks. These are made up of several types of binders, as I am assuming availability changed over Kodak's history. For the twenty-five year

47

period I surveyed, the binders measured 15" wide, 17 ½" high and approximately 2 ½" deep. Each binder contains between 35 and 50 pages that are slipped into plastic protective sheets. The ads themselves are pasted to black or white paper and are sometimes accompanied by penciled-in notes (most often the date). In some cases there is also a date stamped onto the ad, though this is not consistent. These books were compiled by the Eastman Kodak Company and were donated to the George Eastman House in 2003. The collection covers more than 100 years of advertisements-- both tear sheets and printed ads-- from 1884 to 1988.

48

  
Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: In Sealed Tubes Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: "Blue Print" and Sepia Paper Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Pocket Kodak Portraiture Subject(s): product - camera Product: Booklet Color or Black and White: bw Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: "Pocket Kodak Portraiture" Subject(s): product - camera Product: Booklet Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Article for a booklet featuring photos by Rudolf Eickemeyer, Jr. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Kodak Possibilities Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Booklet Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Kodaks price: $5.00 to $35.00 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: The Boy With A Brownie Subject(s): boy Text: Doubles his fun by taking pictures of his other sports. But there's more than just fun in photography--there's instruction too. No dark-room needed--all by daylight. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy holding a kite and a Brownie. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: The Boy with a Brownie Subject(s): boy Text: Doubles his vacation fun. Takes pictures of his sports and games and of the places of interest that he visits. But fun is not the only factor--there's education in photography. Any schoolboy of girl can make good pictures with a Brownie Camera--all without a dark-room and very inexpensively, now that the Kodak developing machine has added the finishing touch to the simplifying of photography. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy with a fishing rod, Brownie. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: "It Works Like A Kodak" Subject(s): five boys Text: Any schoolboy or girl can make good pictures with one of the Eastman Kodak Company's No. 2 Brownie Cameras. These little instruments have fine meniscus lenses and our Rotary shutter for snap-shots and time exposures--the same shutter that is used on the famous Bullet and Bulls-eye Kodaks. They have sets of three stops and two finders one for upright and one for horizontal exposures. They are well made, have nickled fittings, are covered with imitation leather, and like Kodaks they use Film Cartridges and load in Daylight. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie

49

  
Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of five boys, on white looking at a Brownie. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Complete your vacation outfit with one of the Eastman Dollar Brownie Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Interest the young folks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Eastman Kodak Co.'s Brownie Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Camera Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Any school-boy or girl can make good pictures with one of the Eastman Kodak Co.'s Brownie Cameras. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Camera Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Fifteen of the Prize Winning Pictures Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Brownie Camera Description / Notes: The Brownie Camera Club Contest Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: For Unusual Wants Subject(s): product - camera Product: Cartridge Kodaks Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Variety in tones on Dekko paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Dekko paper Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: The "Just as Goods" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Developers and toners Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: "Double-Two" Film Cartridges Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Double-Two film cartridges Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Pin to a card and touch with a match Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Description / Notes: Price per half dozen: $0.25 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8

50

  
Year: 1902 Slogan: Eastman Folding Head Tripod Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Folding Head Tripod Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: The softness and delicacy of a fine etching can be more nearly approached by the use of Eastman's Royal Bromide Paper than by any other photographic process. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Royal Bromide Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Eastman's Permanent Bromide Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Permanent Bromide Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: After Fifteen years! Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Permanent Bromide Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Take a Kodak Home for Christmas Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $10.00 to $17.50 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: The Full Charm of Winter Picture Taking is realized with a Folding Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Kodaks Price: $5.00 to $35.00 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: A practical help in home portraiture Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: The Difference between a folding Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Kodaks $5.00 to $75.00 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Take a Kodak with you Subject(s): Woman Text: Made of aluminum and covered with the finest seal grain leather, the Folding Pocket Kodaks are as rich and dainty as a lady's purse and are hardly heavier, yet they withstand the rough usage of travel and the changes of climate far better than any heavy camera. Carried in the hand, in a case, or in a shopping bag, they are convenient and inconspicuous. Take a Kodak with you. ... Implied Audience: women Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Cut-out photo of a woman in a dress and hat with camera on her shoulder. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901

51

  
Slogan: Take a Kodak with you to the Pan American Exposition Subject(s): woman Text: The Folding Pocket Kodaks are no trouble whether carried in the hand, in a case, or in the pocket, yet are instantly ready for use when wanted. They have the best lenses and shutters, and they load in daylight with our light-proof film cartridges. Implied Audience: women Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak girl with parasol, Kodak in hand. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Take a Kodak with you Subject(s): woman Text: Like one's purse, a Folding Pocket Kodak may be carried in the hand without inconvience and being covered with fine seal grain leather it is dainty and inconspicuous. Implied Audience: women Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak girl, same as above. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: The Folding Pocket Kodaks Subject(s): woman Text: Have the capabilities of cameras of triple their bulk. Though of small compass they possess the very elements of successful picture-taking--a simple mechanism and optical perfection. Implied Audience: women Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak girl in white dress, holding a camera.

Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Complacency Upset Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Glass Plates Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: There's fun for the young folks with a Brownie Camera Subject(s): boy, two girls Text: And it's fun that amounts to something, too--there's education as well as amusement in photography. Any school boy or girl can make good pictures with a Brownie. Loads in daylight-develops in daylight too, if you use a Kodak developing machine. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy photographing two young girls. Caption reads "It works like a Kodak" Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Take a Kodak with you to the Pan American Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: In War as in Peace The Kodak is at the front. Subject(s): soldier Text: In Cuba and the Philippines, in South Africa, in Venezuela and now in Korea and Manchuria, the camera most in evidence is the Kodak. The same qualities that make it indispensable to the correspondent make it most desirable to the tourist--simplicity, freedom fro dark room bother, lightness combined with a strength

52

  
that resists the wear and tear of travel. Implied Audience: travel / soldiers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Caption: "The Correspondent Drawn for Eastman Kodak Co. By Frederic Remington Through Courtesy Colliers Weekly. Copyright 1904 Collier's Weekly." Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Take a Kodak with you Subject(s): woman Text: "Kodak" stands for all that is best in photography. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak girl with parasol, Kodak in hand. Caption reads: " The Kodak Girl" Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Kodak Films Subject(s): woman Text: By reason of their non-halation quality and because of the great "latitude" which they give in exposure, produce better results than glass plates. Kodaks load in daylight--plate cameras require a dark room Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak Girl in a white dress, different pose again. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Kodak Simplicity Subject(s): woman Text: Has made the Kodak way the sure way in picture taking. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman in a hat with Kodak on her shoulder. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: A Kodak Christmas is the Merriest Christmas Subject(s): woman Text: Amid the festivities of Christmas-tide, one often finds the greatest charm of picture taking. The children, the children's tree, the visit at the old home, the flash-light at an evening gathering, the merry sleighing party, the home portraits of one's friends, all these offer subjects that have a personal interest, that one cherishes more highly as the years go by. Implied Audience: women / family / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak Girl with camera in her hand. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: The Dark-Room Abolished Subject(s): woman Text: Every step from loading the Kodak to finishing the prints may now be accomplished without the aid of the darkroom. By means of the Kodak Developing Machine the amateur now develops and fixes his own negatives in broad daylight and does it better than it was done before. The Kodak idea--simplicity-reaches its logical triumph in the new device. Anyone who can operate a Kodak (and who cannot?) can successfully operate the Kodak developing machine. Implied Audience: women / general

53

  
Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a woman with a developing tank on the table. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: A vacation without a Kodak is a vacation wasted. Subject(s): woman Text: No matter where you go or what your hobby may be. Kodakery will add to the pleasure of your trip. Anybody can make good pictures by the Kodak System. It's all by daylight, now that the Kodak developing machine has abolished the darkroom Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak Girl with a Parasol. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Vacation means more if you Kodak Subject(s): woman Text: Not only all the joys that others have, but pictures besides. Pictures of the cherished hobbies and of all the scenes that most appeal to one. "Kodak" Stands for picture taking the easy way, for daylight development and better results. Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak Girl with a parasol. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: The Kodak Baby Book Subject(s): baby Text: Tells in a non-technical way how to make home pictures of the little ones. Contains a dozen delightful Kodak studies of child life. Implied Audience: family Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a baby on a black BG. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Kodak Progress Competition Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak and Brownie cameras Description / Notes: Contest. 2,000 in cash, and 2,000 in prizes. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: April 1903 Slogan: Kodak Developing Machine Subject(s): woman Text: Do away absolutely with the dark-room and give better results than the old way. Anybody can make perfect pictures by the Kodak system. Ask your dealer to show you. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Developing Machines Photo or Illustration Based: Illustration Color or Black and White: bw Publications: Cosmopolitan Description / Notes: Illustration of a woman with the Kodak developing tank. Caption reads: "you press a button, then do the rest" Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Eighty-Seven percent prefer film to Plates / For "Crisp" Negatives. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film Color or Black and White: Publications: Photo Magazine Description / Notes: article

54

  

Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Kodak Success Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: A suggestion for framing photographs / Flash Sheets vs. Flash Powders / Sun Lines on Film Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak film Color or Black and White: Publications: Photo Magazine Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: A New Line of Kodak Albums Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak film Color or Black and White: Publications: Photo Magazine Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Kodak Films Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Buy Photographic Paper in Original Packages Only / Steam Development Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: article

Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: The Kodak Way Subject(s): women Text: By the Kodak system every step in picture taking and picture making is accomplished in daylight--loading, unloading, developing, fixing, printing. The Kodak way gives better results than the old way, too. Dark-Room Abolished. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman shooting a camera, and then sitting at the table, developing. Caption reads: "you press a button, then do the rest" Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Kodaks for Serious Work / Kodak Portrait Attachments Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodaks Description / Notes: Article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Eastman's film negative albums Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Negative albums Description / Notes: Article. Album price from $0.75 to $1.50 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: In the Panoramic Field Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Panoram-Kodak Description / Notes: article. Caption reads: "Made with the No. 1 Panoram-Kodak

55

  
Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Free Cameras For Teachers Disposal Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Brownie Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Slogan: It works like a Kodak. The Eastman Kodak Company's New No.2 Brownie Camera. Subject(s): Young girl. Text: Loads in daylight with six exposure film cartridges, has a fine meniscus lens with the Eastman Rotary shutter and set of three stops. It has two view finders, one for vertical and one for horizontal pictures, is well made in every particular, is covered with a fine quality imitation leather, has nickled fittings, and makes pictures 2 1/4 by 3 1/4 inches. Any school-boy or girl can make pictures with a Brownie Camera Implied Audience: families Product: No. 2 Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a young girl with Brownie on a pile of books, photographing a toy. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: The $5.00 Falcon Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Falcon Camera Description / Notes: Mentions bicycle attachment and photo contest. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Folding Pocket Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $17.50

Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Special Lens and Shutter Equipments for Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Improvements in the Nos. 3, 4, and 5 Cartridge Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Nos. 3, 4, and 5 Cartridge Kodak Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: The Eastman Products Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Papers, plates, tripods, cameras Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: A Demonstration Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Solio Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: Print from your vacation negatives on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: All days are good "printing days" to the photographer who

56

  
used Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: At home, With Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: The Kodak Exhibit at the Pan American Exposition. Velox Demonstrations Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Velox Prints in Any Light Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1901 Slogan: Price List Eastman's W.D. Platinum Paper. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: WD platinum paper Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: The 4x5 Weno Hawk-Eye Subject(s): product - camera Product: Weno Hawk-Eye Description / Notes: Price: $8.00 Binder: 1895-1907 3 of 8 Year: 1900 Slogan: The Weno Hawk-Eye Subject(s): product - camera Product: Weno Hawk-Eye Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Albuma Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Albuma paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Albuma Matchless in brilliancy and gloss Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Albuma paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Photography for the Amateur at half its former cost Subject(s): product - camera Product: American Jr. Camera, Poco, Buck-Eye, American Cameras. Description / Notes: 4x5 Poco price: $4.80 American Jr. Camera price: $1.60 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: It's Brownie Camera Time Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Description / Notes: prices: No. 2 Brownies $2.00 Film Cartridges 12 exposures price: $0.20 Brownie Developing Machine

57

  
price: $2.00, Brownie Developing Machine outfit price: $0.75 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: There is Vacation Fun for every boy in a Brownie Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 to $9.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: A Brownie Camera Means a Jolly Summer Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Cameras Description / Notes: Two Sizes: $1.00 and $2.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Announcement. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Collodion Paper Description / Notes: letter about the amalgamation of the Western Collodion paper company, Cedar Rapids into Kodak Park. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: A Postal Gets Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Bromide Papers Description / Notes: Mentions photo contest -"13 first prize medals" Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: As Long as the Paper lasts so long will the picture endure if it's on Eastman Permanent Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Permanent Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Thirteen years old, yet the chemical properties were perfect! Of course it was Eastman Permanent Bromide Paper. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Permanent Bromide Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Enjoy Photography with little expense - Flexo Kodak $5.00 Subject(s): product - camera Product: Flexo Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: A New Folding Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: No. 0 Folding Pocket Kodak price: $6.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: A New Folding Pocket Kodak / The Judges Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: article - mentions photo contests. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: The success of the Folding Pocket Kodak Subject(s): woman Text: was only made possible by the Kodak film cartridge. Not only does the Kodak go inside the pocket, but inside the Kodak goes the film--all becomes one compact, self-contained mechanism. Kodaks load in daylight--plate cameras require a

58

  
darkroom. Kodak films, because of the great "latitude" which they give in exposure, produce better results than glass plates. Implied Audience: women Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak Girl in a white dress with a camera in her hand. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Built to Satisfy Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodaks / Kodets Description / Notes: "23 styles of Kodaks and Kodets. $6.00 to $100.00" Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Folding Weno Hawk-Eye with Special Equipment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Weno Hawk-Eye Color or Black and White: Publications: Seaway Description / Notes: No. 3 price: $22.50 No. 4 price: $27.50 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: You'll Enjoy photography most with a Folding Weno Hawkeye Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Weno Hawk-Eye Description / Notes: No. 3 Special Folding Weno: $15.00 With Special Equipment: $22.50. No. 4 Folding Weno: $22.50. With special equipment: $27.50. Plate attachment: $3.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Imperial Portrait Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Imperial Portrait Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: The proof of Kloro is in the printing Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kloro paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Tis Kodak Simplicity Subject(s): woman Text: and Kodak film convenience that have made pocket photography possible. Not only does the Kodak go inside the pocket, but inside the Kodak goes the film--all becomes one compact, self-contained mechanism. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak girl in white dress. Same girl as above, different pose. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Demand Demonstration / Took Time and Snaps / Skepticism Annihilated / Brownie Development Machine Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak / Brownie Developing Machine Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Photography without a Darkroom Subject(s): Product: Kodak cameras, Developing machines Description / Notes: prices: No. 2 Brownies $2.00 Film Cartridges 12 exposures price: $0.20 Brownie Developing Machine

59

  
price: $2.00, Brownie Developing Machine outfit price: $0.75 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Kodak Correspondence School of Photography Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Correspondence School of Photography Description / Notes: "Special instruction in: Exposure and Development, Printing-Out Papers, Development Papers, Out-Door Photography, Portraiture and Interiors, Platinum Printing, Bromide Enlarging, Lantern Slide Making." Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: The Kodak Way Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Correspondence School of Photography Description / Notes: "Tuition free to all owners of Kodak and Brownie cameras upon payment of one dollar for text books. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: The Darkroom Abolished Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Description / Notes: Price: 6.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Skeptical? / The 4x5 Kodak Developing Machine Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Enthusiastic / What Editor Todd Saw. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: You Press the Button-- then do the rest Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: No Darkroom Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: The Evidence Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Illusions Dispelled Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Now Ready Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: April 1903

60

  
Slogan: Kodak Developing Machine Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Description / Notes: Price for developing machines: $2.00 $10.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Kodaker Abroad Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film Description / Notes: List of Kodak dealers in Europe and Australia Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: What they said and what happened Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Films Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: An Ingredient Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Handling N.C. Film / Converted to Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Films Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Kodak Films Subject(s): woman Text: The largest clock keeps no more perfect time than a pocket chronometer: the largest camera makes no more perfect picture than a pocket Kodak--'tis the Kodak quality. Not only does the Kodak go inside the pocket but inside the Kodak goes the film--all becomes one compact, self-contained mechanism. By reason of their non-halation quality and because of the great "latitude" which they give in exposure, produce better results than glass plates. Kodaks load in daylight--plate cameras require a darkroom. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak films Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of the Kodak girl in a white dress and hat with flowers, holding a Kodak. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Start Right / Photographic Competitions Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Films, developing machine Description / Notes: Includes a list of the important photographic contests in the United States Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Rapid Rectilinear Lens Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Lenses Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Anybody can make good pictures by the Kodak System Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak System Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904

61

  
Slogan: Kodak Quality Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodaks Description / Notes: Kodaks, Kodets, Bullets, price: $6.00 to $100.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman's Kodoid Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodoid Plates Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: The Focusing Weno Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Focusing Weno Hawk-Eye No. 4 Focusing Weno Hawk-Eye Description / Notes: No. 3 Focusing Weno Hawk-Eye price: $27.50 No. 4 Focusing Weno Hawk-Eye Price: $30.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: A New Plate Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 5 Eastman Plate Camera Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: All the qualities you want in a plate--not merely some of them. Orthonon Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Orthonon Plates. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Kodak Progress Competition Subject(s): product - misc. Product: photo contest Description / Notes: $4,000 in prizes, judged by Rudolf Eickemeyer Jr., Charles I. Berg, Henry Troth. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Pocket Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price with a roll of film: $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Facts about Solio Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Solio Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Solio is an honest paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Solio Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Star Premo Subject(s): product - camera Product: Star Premo Description / Notes: Star Premo Price: $25.00. Film Pack Adaptor: $1.00. Premo Film Pack: $0.70 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: $8.00 One Button Does it. Subject(s): product - camera

62

  
Product: The Bullet Description / Notes: Price: $8.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Bullets Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Bullet Description / Notes: Price $8.00 Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: In any light Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak System Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: Velox will give you the most satisfactory results from your vacation negatives. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: Use double weight Special Rough Velox for your best work Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: At home, With Velox Subject(s): Woman Text: By the light of an ordinary gas jet, by lamplight or by daylight, print making is easy with Velox. Velox yields prints of the softest and richest quality, giving deep, pure blacks, and mellow highlights. No dark room required. Simplest for the amateur. Implied Audience: women Product: Velox Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman holding a printing frame up to a light. Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Velox Liquid Developer Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Liquid Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: No Abrasion Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Liquid Developer Color or Black and White: Publications: Photographer Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1903 Slogan: An Evening with Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 4 of 8 Year: 1902 Slogan: The Dark-Room Abolished Subject(s): woman Product: Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The New 3A Folding Pocket Kodaks

63

  
Subject(s): product - camera Product: 3A Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $20.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Albuma Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Albuma Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Albuma Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Albuma Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: American Jr. Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: American Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $1.60 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: Vacation fun Doubles when you have a Brownie Camera. Subject(s): camera Text: Pictures of everything you are interested in at small cost and no trouble. Implied Audience: travel Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: 1.00 2.00 5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: An Eastman for a An Eastman for a Dollar: The No. 1 Brownie Camera Subject(s): product - camera Text: It works like a Kodak. Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: small Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: The No. 2 Brownie Camera Subject(s): product - camera Text: Photograph your friends - and the places you visit. ... is simple in operation and gives excellent results. Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: It works like a Kodak. A One or Two-Dollar Brownie Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $1 $2 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: A one or two dollar Brownie Camera Subject(s): Text: Text: Will double summer fun of any wideawake boy or girl. Pictures of vacation haunts are well worth preserving, and photography is now so simple that anybody can make good pictures. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: A Christmas Suggestion: Buck-Eye Subject(s): product - camera

64

  
Product: Buck-Eye Description / Notes: Price: $2.50 to $18.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1940 Slogan: The Odyssey of a Camera Man Subject(s): Product: cameras Description / Notes: Article about a news photographer "The Odyssey of a Camera Man" Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Kodak Developing Machine Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Developing Machine Description / Notes: Developing Machine Price: $2.00 to $10.00. Kodaks price: $5.00 to $75.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Imperial Portrait Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Two special qualities in one plate, Orthonon Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Standard Extra Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Standard Extra Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Flash a Flash with an Eastman Flash Sheet Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Flash Sheet Description / Notes: Price per pack: $0.25, $0.40, $0.60 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Just a Second! Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Flash Sheet Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Flashlight Time Subject(s): product - camera Product: Flash Sheets Description / Notes: Price: No. 1 half dozen sheets $0.25 No. 2: $0.40 No. 3 $0.50 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: The Flexo Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Text: Price 5.00 Its simplicity commends it to beginners in photography. Its capability - to the experienced. Product: Flexo Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8

65

  
Slogan: Flexo Kodak : Price $5 Subject(s): product - camera Text: Its simplicity commends itself to beginners in photography. It's capability-to the experienced. Product: Flexo Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: The Flexo Subject(s): product - camera Text: Price, 5.00 ... it has that Kodak simplicity which is of so much importance to the beginner = yet it lacks none of the essentials to good picture making. ... Product: Flexo Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Flexo Kodak Price $5. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Flexo Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $5.00. Loads 2,4,6, or 12 exposures. Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Folding Buck-Eye Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Buck-Eye Description / Notes: Price: $7.50 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: A New Folding Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Text: The No. 3a Broader in scope than anything heretofore attained in pocket photography Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: Increased Possibilities. All the Old Simplicity. Subject(s): product - camera Text: The New Model No. 3 Folding Pocket Kodaks (small) have automatic shutters with pneumatic release, and high speed lenses. Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: The Highest Achievement in Pocket Photography Subject(s): product - camera Text: New Model No3 Folding Pocket Kodak Marked Improvement, But No change in Price. Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: Keeping Step with the Kodak Progress Subject(s): product - camera Text: is the new model of the No 2 Folding Pocket Kodak which is equipped with .... Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: price 15.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: If it isn't an Eastman, it isn't a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Text: The New 3a folding pocket Kodaks.... Photography means Kodakery with the bother left out, means daylight development, fewer chemicals, better pictures. Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: BW

66

  
Description / Notes: price 20.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Folding Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $6.00 to $20.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: $6 to $20. Folding Pocket Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $6.00 to $20.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Folding Hawk-Eye Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-Eye No. 3 and No. 4 Description / Notes: No. 3 Folding Hawk-Eye: $22.50 No. 4 Folding Hawk-Eye: $27.50 Glass plate attachment: $2.50 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Kloro The Insoluble Emulsion Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kloro Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Kloro Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kloro Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: A Christmas Morning Kodak Subject(s): mother / child Text: Where there's a child, there should the Kodak be. As a means of keeping green the Christmas memories, or as a gift, it's a holiday delight. Implied Audience: families / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Publications: women's magazine Description / Notes: Drawn for Eastman Kodak, courtesy Colliers weekly. Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Text: Whatever is good in lenses, in shutters and in mechanical detail is found in the Kodak. Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: 5-97.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Progress Subject(s): product - camera Text: Whatever is new and desirable in picture taking is found in the Kodak System - non curling film, daylight, developmentabsolute simplicity. Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: "Kodakery" Subject(s): product - camera

67

  
Product: Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Kodak Progress Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Description / Notes: Prices: $5.00 to $97.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Christmas Problem Solved--Give a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 to $97.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: In War and in Peace The Kodak gets the news Subject(s): soldier Text: Indispensable to the correspondent Implied Audience: soldier Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Copyright 1904 Colliers Weekly (illustration) "in Korea with the Kodak" By Robert L Dunn sent free upon request. Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: A Holiday Hint: Kodak Subject(s): Text: Implied Audience: Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: v. small. Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Developing be Machine Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machine Description / Notes: Price: $2.00 to $10.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: There is no Dark Room in the Kodak Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machines Description / Notes: Price: $2.00 to $10.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Kodak at the Front Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machines Description / Notes: Article about a Russian Prince developing photos during war. Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Convenience of the Kodak Developing Machine Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Developing Machines Description / Notes: Price: $2.00 to $10.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Kodak Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Enlarging Camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: All of the darkroom fuss and bother is removed from photography by the Kodak way of picture making. Better then the

68

  
old way too. Anybody can make good pictures now that the Kodak Developing Machine has abolished the darkroom. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: Kodak developing machine Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Kodakery Means photography with the bother left out. Better results too. ... has abolished the dark room from every step of picture making. Where the beginner once depended on his untried judgment, he now depends upon his watch and makes good pictures from the start. It's simple certain by the Kodak System. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: Kodakery Subject(s): product - camera Text: Means photography with the bother left out. Better results too. No Darkroom, few chemicals ... Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Kodak System Abolishes most of the opportunities for making mistakes. No dark-room, better pictures. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: Kodak Developing Machines Price: $2.00 to $10.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Changes of Time Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodaks Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Take a Kodak with you to the Exposition Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodaks Description / Notes: Kodaks Price: $5.00 to $97.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodaks Description / Notes: Kodaks Price: $5.00 to $97.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Vacation Days are Kodak Days Subject(s): young man, woman Text: The Kodaker has all the vacation delights that others have and has pictures besides. And there's pleasure in the making as well as in the possessing of Kodak Pictures. Every step is simple now. No darkroom at any stage of the work and better results then ever. Implied Audience: travelers Product: Kodaks Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): product - camera

69

  
Product: Kodaks and Brownies Description / Notes: Kodaks Price: $5.00 to $75.00 Brownies Price: $1.00 to $2.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman's Kodoid Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodoid Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: One Dozen Eastman Koloid Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Koloid Plates Description / Notes: Price Per Dozen: $0.45, $0.65, $1.10 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Koloid Plates and N.C. Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Koloid Plates and N.C. Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Mezzo-Tone Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Mezzo-Tone paper Description / Notes: Price per dozen: $0.15-$0.35 Ad also has a small insert for the Kodak Automatic Shutter. Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Richness in Tone and Texture Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Mezzo-Tone Paper Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: No Curl to Eastman's NC Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: NC Film. Description / Notes: Ad mentions cash prizes for Kodak pictures. Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: A Holiday Hint: The No 0 Folding Pocket Kodak 6.00 Subject(s): product - camera Text: The watch in your pocket is no doubt as accurate as the family clock - likely more accurate. The No 0 folding pocket Kodak is as accurate as cameras of ten times its bulk. It's for the pocket, almost for the vest pocket, yet loads for 6 or 12 pictures... Product: No. 0 Folding pocket Kodak Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: A Holiday Hint: The No. 0 Folding Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 0 Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $ 6.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The No. 2 Brownie Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $2.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The New No. 2 Folding Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Folding Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $5.00

70

  
Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Increased Possibilities. All the Old Simplicity. Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $17.50 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Highest Achievement in Pocket Photography Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Folding Pocket Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: A New Folding Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3A Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $20.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman's Non-Curling Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Non-Curling Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman's NC Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Non-Curling Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman NC Film Lies Flat, Dries Flat Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Non-Curling Film Description / Notes: Ad mentions cash prizes for Kodak pictures. Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman's Permanent Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Permanent Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Photography for the Amateur Subject(s): product - camera Product: PoCo, Buck-Eye, and American Cameras Description / Notes: Price: $1.60 to $4.80 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: An Appreciation of Eastman's Sepia Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Sepia Paper Description / Notes: Sepia Paper Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Of the many prize-winning pictures in the various CAMERA competitions, nearly 40% have been made upon Eastman's Sepia Paper. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Sepia Paper Description / Notes: Quote from "The Camera" August, 1904 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Sepia Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Sepia Post Cards Description / Notes: Price, two dozen: $0.25

71

  
Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Caption reads: "Copyright 1904, Colliers Weekly" Famous image of a soldier with a Kodak, standing with hands on his hips. Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: An Eastman for a Dollar Subject(s): product - camera Product: The No. 1 Brownie Camera Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Velvet Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Velox Liquid Developer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Velox Liquid Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: They Work Best Together Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper and liquid developer Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Solio Stands Alone in Richness of Tone and Detail Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Solio Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: For a Dozen years, Solio has stood alone in richness of tone and detail Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Solio Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Flexo Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Flexo Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Flexo Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Flexo Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 12 exposure film cartridge, $0.60 6 exposure film cartridge: $0.30 Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: In War and Peace The Kodak gets the news Subject(s): Soldier Text: Indispensable to the Correspondent Implied Audience: Soldiers Product: The Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Illustration

72

  
Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Make Pictures of School friends: The Folding Brownie Subject(s): camera Text: It works like a Kodak. Daylight loading, daylight development. Locks into focus automatically-shutter with iris diaphragm stops Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Publications: American Boy Description / Notes: Price 5.00 / 9.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: The New Folding Brownies Subject(s): product - camera Text: Made on the Kodak System which means: No dark-rooms, simplicity, success for the beginner. Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: No 2 and No 3 Brownies. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: Decorate your Den Subject(s): product - camera Text: With vacation pictures. They are easily made with a Brownie $1 $2 $5 $9 Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: "Almost a Kodak" Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: The Dollar Brownie

Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Velox Postcards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Postcards Description / Notes: Price per dozen: 20 cents Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman's WD Platinum Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: WD Platinum Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Use Kloro Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 5 of 8 Slogan: Subject(s): Product: Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Book of the £ 1,000 Kodak Exhibition Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Book Description / Notes: Price: $0.25 "Reproductions of over 60 pictures from the recent London Competition" Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman's Royal Bromide Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Bromide Paper Color or Black and White:

73

  
Subject(s): product - camera Text: With all the great facilities ... Product: brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: No 1 brownie Possibly out of order in the binder? Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Slogan: Brownie Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Text: Made by Kodak Workmen in the Kodak factory. Like Kodak they load and unload in daylight and the films can be developed in daylight. No Darkroom is necessary and the merest beginner can do every step of the work from pressing the button to finishing the prints. Product: brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: No. 2 Brownie 2.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: Kodak Home Portraiture Subject(s): product - camera Text: By either daylight of flashlight is simple and interesting. Winter indeed is full of delights for the Kodaker. Portrait studies, evening groups and snowscapes all have their fascinations. The successful methods are clearly explained in our Kodak books. Product: cameras Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: The New Daylight Method Kodak Tank Developer Subject(s): product - darkroom Text: No Crank Turning During Development. No Dark-Room. Three years of successful use have proven that the Kodak Developing machines produce better negatives then were produced by the old darkroom method. The Kodak TANK is an improvement on the machine. Product: developing tank Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: The New Standard Orthochromatic Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Orthonon Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman Flash Sheets Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Flash Sheet Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: Folding Pocket Kodaks for Christmas Subject(s): product - camera Text: Made in a Factory where accuracy is everything. Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Color or Black and White: BW Publications: American Illustrated Description / Notes: 17.50 / 20.00 No. 3 and 3a Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8

74

  
Year: c1905 Slogan: Christmas Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Text: New Model no. 1 and 1a folding pocket Kodaks. They work with a snappy precision that is a mechanical delight... Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Color or Black and White: BW Publications: Ainslee's Description / Notes: 10.00 - 12.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: New Model 1 and 1a Folding Pocket Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Text: They work with a Snappy Precision that is a Mechanical Delight. With a single motion the front pulls out to the correct focus. In closing the bed automatically covers he working parts. Equipped with out quiet Jarless pocket automatic shutter having instantaneous time and bulb action and iris diaphragm stops. Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: 10.00 - 12.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: The 1905 Hawkeye Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-Eye cameras Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 to $97.30 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: The Richness of Kloro Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kloro Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Landscape Photography with a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Kodak Home Portraiture Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Our 20 Years of Film Experience Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Kodak film for Kodaks Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: "Kodak Film" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: $2000.00 in Prizes for Kodak Pictures. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak photo contest

75

  
Description / Notes: Contest Closes November 1st Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: There's a World of Delight in Kodak Home Portraiture Subject(s): product - camera Text: It is simpler than most people think. Beautiful results are obtained by the light of an ordinary window, or by flashlight. A portrait attachment , at fifty cents adapts the small Kodak to the making of good sized bust photographs. ... Product: Kodak portrait attachment Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Most of the Opportunities for making mistakes are removed by the Kodak System Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: Kodaks Price: $5.00 to $97.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Film at Panama Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: Letter about shooting film in Panama. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Again the Tropics Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: Article Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Tank Development Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: article Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904-5 Slogan: Bring your vacation home in a Kodak Subject(s): women taking photos of Dutch people. Text: Add to the after delights of your holiday with pictures of the people, the places and the sports you are interested in. Every step easy by the Kodak System. Kodaks, $5.00 to 108.00 Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Illustrated by Edward Penfield. Kodaks, 5108.00 $ Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: The Kodak Tank Developer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Tank Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: A New Kodak Tank Developer Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Tank Developer Description / Notes: Price: $2.50, $4.00 $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: The New Daylight Method Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Tank Developer Color or Black and White:

76

  
Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Kodak Simplicity Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: has removed most of the opportunities for making mistakes. No dark-room, few chemicals, little bother. ... The Kodak Girl in Fair Japan Implied Audience: women Product: Kodaks Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Drawn for Kodak by C. Allen Gilbert Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: There are no Game Laws for Those Who Hunt With a Kodak Subject(s): Men (hunters) Text: The rod or the gun may be left out, but no nature lover omits a Kodak from his camp outfit. Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodaks Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Drawn for Kodak by A.B. Frost. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Mezzo-Tone is full of the life and warmth of Summer Sunshine. A simple self-toning paper. New in surface and effect. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Mezzo-Tone paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Eastman's Mezzo-Tone Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Mezzo-Tone paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: No Toning Solution needed with Eastman's Mezzo-Tone Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Mezzo-Tone paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Too Fast for Iowa Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: N.C. Film Description / Notes: Letter from a man who captured a horse race with Kodak film. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Nepera Solution Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Nepera Solution Description / Notes: Price: $0.25 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: No. 2 Folding Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Folding Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: The New Folding Brownies Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Folding Brownie. No. 3 Folding Brownie Description / Notes: No. 2 Folding Brownie price: $5.00. No. 3 Folding Brownie price: $9.00

77

  
Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: For Vacation Pictures No. 3 Folding Film Premo Subject(s): product - camera Text: A compact camera that loads in daylight with the premo film pack. Bausch and Lomb Automatic Shutter. Rising front. Rack and Pinion Focusing. Product: No. 3 Folding Film Premo Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Illegible text on the ad. (photo) Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: No. 3 Folding Film Premo Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Folding Film Premo Description / Notes: Price: $18.00. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Film Convenience--Optical Superiority No. 3 Folding Film Premo Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Folding Film Premo Description / Notes: Price: $18.00. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Folding Hawk-Eyes Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Folding Hawk-Eye Model 4. No. 4 Folding HawkEye Model 3. Description / Notes: No. 3 Folding Hawk-Eye Model 4 price: $22.00. No. 4 Folding Hawk-Eye Model 3 price: $27.50. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Almost a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Text: The New No.2 Folding Brownie More of a camera than has ever before been offered at the price. Good enough to satisfy grown people--simple enough for the children. A Christmas delight to either. Product: No2. Folding Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: cost - 5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1904 Slogan: No. 2 Folding Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Text: Built on the Kodak Plan - daylight loading. Daylight Development. Uses non-curling 6 exposure film cartridges for 2/1/4 by 31/4 pictures. Product: No2. Folding Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: cost 5.00 - similar to other brownie ad photo taken of each. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1904 Slogan: No. 2 Folding Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Text: A wonderfully capable and accurate camera built on the Kodak plan. Good enough to satisfy experienced photographers, yet so simple that children can use it. ... Loads in daylight with film cartridges Product: No2. Folding Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: cost 5.00 - mentions that it's usable for both children and experienced photographers. Similar to other two brownie ads. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8

78

  
Year: 1905 Slogan: Premo Reflecting Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Price: $85.00 (without lens) Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Tone your Royal Bromide Enlargements Sepia Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Royal Re-Developer Description / Notes: Price per package: $0.75 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: "Most as Good" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Solio is Always the Same Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Solio Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Where Detail is important--Solio Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Solio Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Proof of the Uniformity of Solio Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Solio Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: The Kodak Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price: $15.00. Article. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1904 Slogan: The Latest Development in the growth of the Kodak Idea Subject(s): product - camera Text: The Screen focus Kodak an instrument which combines all the advantages of the Kodak Film System with ground glass focusing. Instantly convertible into a compact plate camera Product: The Screen Focus Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: ilus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: cost 30.00 converts film camera to plate. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: The Kodak Idea Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Screen Focus Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $30.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: All the Kodak Advantage Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Screen Focus Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $30.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: The Velox Developing Machine Subject(s): product - film & paper

79

  
Product: Velox Developing Machine Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: c1905 Slogan: Vacation pictures on Velox Post Cards will delight your friends. Subject(s): Man smoking pipe, printing paper. Text: You can print them anywhere-no darkroom needed. Mailed with 1c stamp. Furnished in Regular Velvet, Special Velvet, Special Portrait, Special Rough velox surfaces. Implied Audience: men / general Product: Velox Paper Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Nepera Division. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1904 Slogan: Sepia Tones on Velox and Bromide Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Re-Developer Description / Notes: Price: $0.50 Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Eastman's Velvet Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velvet Bromide Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1895-1907 6 of 8 Year: 1905 Slogan: Hot water is the developer for WD Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: WD platinum paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: The 3B Quick Focus Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: 3B Quick Focus Kodak Description / Notes: Price $12.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: A New Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: 4A Folding Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $35.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: the 4a Folding Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: 4A Folding Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $35.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: The New 4 1/4 x 6 1/2 Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: 4A Folding Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $35.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: For Detail Use Albuma Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Albuma paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Albuma Preserves Detail Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Albuma paper

80

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Now Ready: Angelo Black and White Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo Black and White Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Angelo Sepia Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo Sepia Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Brownie Camera Subject(s): animals / children Text: There is vacation fun for every boy in a Brownie Camera You can do every bit of the work from pressing the button to finishing the print-all without a dark-room. It's inexpensive too... Implied Audience: parents/children Product: brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: three photographs, presumably taken by a child with a brownie. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: $2 Brownie Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Cameras Description / Notes: Price: $2.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: "They Work Like Kodaks." Brownie Cameras. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Cameras Description / Notes: No. 2 Brownie Price: $2.00 No. 2 Folding Brownie Price: $5.00 No. 3 Folding Brownie Price: $9.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: A Dainty Remembrance Eastman Ferro-Prussiate Post Card Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Ferro-Prussiate Post Card Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Broad Sketchy Effects best secured with Eastman's Sepia Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Sepia Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: The New No. 3 Folding Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $9.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Hawk-Eyes Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-Eye camera Description / Notes: Prices: $5.00 to $95.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Rich in Silver That's why Kloro is a favorite with the commercial photographer Subject(s): product - film & paper

81

  
Product: Kloro paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Kloro for Commercial Work Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kloro paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Kodak and Brownie Cameras Subject(s): boy with dog Text: made photography so simple that anybody can take good pictures. Every step is easy: no dark-room is needed and there is as great pleasure in taking and making pictures as there is in presenting them to friends or preserving them in ones collection. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: small ad. Simple illustration of a boy photographing a dog atop the KODAK text. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: There are no Game Laws for Those Who Hunt With a Kodak Subject(s): Caribou swimming in a lake Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Caption: From Pocket Kodak Negative / Caribou swimming in a Newfoundland Lake. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: And in the Sunset Days - Kodak Subject(s): Elderly couple Text: It's "Daylight all the way" by the Kodak System. Loading, unloading, developing, printing- all without a dark-room. Implied Audience: the elderly Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of a man with a Kodak on a pedestal, photographing his wife reading a book. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Home Portraiture Subject(s): Father, Mother, boy posing for a photo taken by a girl. Text: It is simpler and easier than most people think. If you use a Kodak or Brownie camera. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: small ad. Simple drawing of family with girl taking portrait. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: The Kodak, Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: It's daylight all the way by the Kodak system, Loading unloading, developing, printing - all without a darkroom. The Kodak tank developer, and Velox paper have made the process of finishing the pictures as simple as pressing the button. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Caption "A Kodak Morning" illustration of a woman walking in a field with Kodak slung on her shoulder. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Told by the Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: The story of a summer vacation as told by the Kodak. It's

82

  
always an interesting story and it's an easy story to record. For the Kodak works at the bidding of the merest novice. There is no darkroom for any part of Kodak work, it's all simple. Press the button do the rest, or leave it to another - just as you please. The Kodak catalogue tells the details. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of a woman looking at images sitting at a window. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: The Kodak Story Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Of summer days grows in charm as the months go by - it's always interesting - it's personal - it tells you of the places, the people and the incidents from your point of view - just as you saw them. And it's an easy story to record, for the Kodak works as the bidding of the merest novice. There is no dark-room for any part of Kodak work, it's all simple. Press the button - do the rest, or leave it to another - just as you please. The Kodak catalogue tells the details. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of a woman photographing a man repairing a car on the side of the road. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): small boy Text: Let the Kodak tell the story of the home days of the children. Photography is simple now-Kodak has made it so. "Kodak Home Portraiture" is the title of a beautiful little book that shows more than a score of such pictures, made both indoors and out, and gives many valuable hints on how to make them. It may be had free at the dealers of by mail. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph in a frame of a boy reading at a table. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: There is fun for all the family with a Kodak or Brownie Camera Subject(s): father / child Text: ... Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak / brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: small ad, simple drawing of father holding child in front of a lion's cage so that the child can photograph it. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): Girl and boy Text: And then again, when snow and ice hold out-doors- Kodak Turn the lens into the home and picture, for the days to come, its hearthstone harmonies. The album of baby and pictures made by the little folks will be held more precious every year. And the picture making is easy now- the Kodak has made it so. No darkroom, few chemicals, no fuss. It's photography with the bother left out. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak / brownie Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: caption "Elizabeth Shipsen Green" illustration of girl photographing brother and toy lamb. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: For Every Boy or Girl there's a Merry Christmas in the

83

  
Kodak Box Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Box Description / Notes: Price for whole Outfit: $4.00 Individual prices listed. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: The Kodak Box Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Box Description / Notes: Price for whole Outfit: $4.00 Individual prices listed. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Everything for Picture Making in the Kodak Box Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Box Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: There's everything for picture making in the Kodak Box Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Box Description / Notes: Price: $4.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Box Outfit Subject(s): Child with animals Text: You can take good pictures with a Kodak or Brownie camera. Photography is simple now and there is as great pleasure in taking and making pictures as there is in presenting them to friends or preserving them in ones collection. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak box outfit Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: small ad, simple drawing of a child photographing rabbits and chicks. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Box Outfit Subject(s): Mother / child with chickens Text: You can take good pictures with a Kodak or Brownie camera. Photography is simple now and there is as great pleasure in taking and making pictures as there is in presenting them to friends or preserving them in ones collection. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak box outfit Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: small ad, simple drawing of a mother photographing a boy with two chickens. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Box Outfit Subject(s): mother / child with horse. Text: You can take good pictures with a Kodak or Brownie camera. Photography is simple now and there is as great pleasure in taking and making pictures as there is in presenting them to friends or preserving them in ones collection. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak box outfit Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: small ad, simple drawing of a boy photographing his mother and a horse. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Kodak Box Outfit No. 2 Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Box Outfit No. 2 Description / Notes: Price $4.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8

84

  
Year: 1906 Slogan: The Kodak Dry Mounting Press Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Dry Mounting Press Description / Notes: 5x7 price: $15.00 11x14 price: $50.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Curling troubles end if you use Kodak Dry Mounting Tissue Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Dry-Mounting Tissue Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Kodak Dry Mounting Tissue Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Dry-Mounting Tissue Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: "Kodak" Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: The Picture Depends on the film, far more than one lens or on camera... Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: A Settled Question Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak films and paper Description / Notes: Article. Talks about Steichen, Kodak photo contests. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Special Mounting / Flash Fun / Doctor Kodak Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak films and paper, flash. Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Photo Appendicitis Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak films and paper. Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Built like a Pocket Kodak / Development Under Difficulties / A Non-Curling Start--and Finish Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak films and paper. Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: No Moisture / Worth More / Be Sure Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak films and paper. Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Another Velox Success / When to Stop Development Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak films and paper.

85

  
Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Preventing Deception Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak papers Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Six to One Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Tank Subject(s): Man and woman camping Text: Development is at your convenience when you use the Kodak Tank. It's all by daylight, as simple as "pressing the button" and the experts say that it gives better results than the dark-room method. Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Kodak tank Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: illustration of a man developing film at a campsite while a woman watches. Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Kodak Tank Developer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Tank Developer Description / Notes: Price: $2.50, $5.00, $6.00, $7.50 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: The Kodak Method of Tank Development Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Tank Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Kodak Tank Development Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Tank developer. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Mezzo-Tone Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Mezzo-Tone paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Nepera Solution Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Nepera Solution Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: No. 2 Folding Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Folding Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: A New Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: no. 2a Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $3.00

86

  
Slogan: The New No. 3 Folding Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: Price: $9.00 Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Sepia Enlargements made on Royal Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Royal Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Royal Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Royal Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: By Right of Quality Seed Leads the World Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Every Case of Seed Plates is as good as every other case. No waiting for special emulsions from the factory--that's where you are money ahead. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: If it's in the Negative Subject(s): product - film & paper

Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: A New 4x5 Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 4 Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: No. 4 Folding Pocket Kodak price: $20.00 Price with Automatic Shutter: $25.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: No. 4A Folding Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 4a Folding Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $35.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Orthonon for Correct Values Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Orthonon Plates. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Perfect Balance with Orthonon Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Orthonon Plates. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: No Juggling Standard Orthonon Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Orthonon Plates. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906

87

  
Product: Solio Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: The Quick Focus Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Quick Focus Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: A good negative is worthy of good paper. A poor negative needs it. There's a Velox for every negative. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Velox, Not cheaper per gross, but cheaper per year. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Velox The Spare Moment Paper. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Other Papers are Tried Velox is Used. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Velox is Recommended for the Novice By the Expert Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: A Successful imitation of a Velox Print can only be made on Velox Paper. There is no Satisfactory substitute Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: No Danger from Unfixed Prints with NA Velox Liquid Developer Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Liquid Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 7 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: Velox Re-Developer Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Re-Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The Top Notch in Pocket Photography Subject(s): product - camera Product: 3A Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $20.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907

88

  
Slogan: The No. 2A Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $3.00 Caption reads: "Made with a 2A Brownie--actual size." Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The No. 2 Folding Pocket Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Anybody can Kodak. Folding Pocket Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Brownie Description / Notes: Camera price: $5.00 Developing Box: $1.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Vacation and a Folding Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Kodak Solves the Christmas Problem Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Pocket Kodaks Description / Notes: Price List: No. 1: $10.00. No. 1A: $12.00. No. 1A Special: $15.00 No. 3: $17.50 No. 3A: $20.00 No. 4: $20.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Just an Easy Handful of Kodak Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film Description / Notes: Kodaks price: $5.00 to $100.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Highest in America Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film Description / Notes: Ad about the highest smokestack in America. Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: It's the Film that's Important Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Time and Temperature Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Tank Developer Description / Notes: price: $2.50 to $7.50 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Trust your films and plates to tank development Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Tank Developer Description / Notes: Kodak film tanks: $2.50 - $7.50 Brownie Development Boxes price: $1.00 Premo film pack tank price" $3.50 and $4.00. Eastman Plate Tanks: $3.50 and $4.50 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Put a Darkroom in your suitcase

89

  
Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Tank Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The Kodak Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Tank Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: none Subject(s): Comics Product: Kodaks Description / Notes: Two comics about Kodak Cameras from newspapers. Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The No. 1A Folding Pocket Kodak Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1A folding pocket Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: $ 15.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The No. 3 Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $4.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The New No. 3 Bulls-Eye Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3 Bulls-Eye Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $8.00

Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The No. 3A Folding Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3A Folding Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $20.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The Speed Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 4A Speed Kodak Description / Notes: No. 4A Speed Kodak with Shutter without lens Price: $50.00 with No. 6B lens $109.50 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Speed Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 4A Speed Kodak Description / Notes: No. 4A Speed Kodak with Shutter without lens Price: $50.00 with No. 6B lens $109.50 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The No. 1 Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No.1 Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: There's no Better Fun than picture taking Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Brownie family Description / Notes: Price List: No. 1 Brownie: $1.00 No. 2 Brownie: $2.00 No. 2A Brownie: $3.00 No. 3 Brownie: $4.00 No. 2 Folding Pocket Brownie: $5.00 No. 3 Folding Pocket Brownie:

90

  
$9.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: A Pocket Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: The New No. 2 Folding Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1895-1907 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: To Get the full value from your vacation negatives print them, or have them printed, on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: No. 2a Brownie Subject(s): bears in a zoo Text: ...is so simple that anybody can make good pictures from the start. Implied Audience: General Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: caption to photo of bears "Made with a No. 2a Brownie - actual size" Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: There are no Game Laws for Those Who Hunt With a Kodak Subject(s): Deer in the woods Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Caption "Copyright 1906, Sumner W. Matteson. Kodak Negative" Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: Hunt with a Kodak Subject(s): Deer in the woods Text: There are No game laws for those who hunt with a Kodak. Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: "from a Kodak negative" Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: They all remembered the Kodak Subject(s): Five people at a train station Text: A vacation without a Kodak is a vacation wasted. A Kodak doubles the value of every journey and adds to the pleasure, present and future, of every outing. Take a Kodak with you Implied Audience: travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two women, three men waiting at a train station, surrounded by luggage. The woman in the centre holds the Kodak. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: Vacation Kodak Subject(s): hands with camera Text: Vacation and a folding pocket Kodak All the features that help make the pictures good, with no fussy complications to keep the vacation from being a lazy restful one. Catalogue at the dealers of by mail. Implied Audience: travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo? Color or Black and White: BW

91

  
Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Kodak fits every phase of out-door sport. Its very simplicity, its freedom from intricate detail adapts it to use in comfort in even the coldest weather for it can be easily operated with the hands warmly gloved. And winter is full of outdoor opportunity for picture taking, while the long evenings give the time and inclination for the delights of developing and of printing. Kodak means photography with the bother left out. Implied Audience: out-doors / women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: woman in muff, carrying Kodak in case over her shoulder. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: There's twice the pleasure in the journey and twice the pleasure afterward if you Kodak. And anybody can make good pictures. It's simple from start to finish by the Kodak system. Press the button-do the rest-or leave it to another-just as you please. Kodak means photography with the bother left out. Implied Audience: travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo-illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Woman holding a camera, and a muff against a drawn background of the white house (?) Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: There's twice the pleasure in the journey and twice the pleasure afterward if you Kodak. And anybody can make good pictures. It's simple from start to finish by the Kodak system. Press the button-do the rest-or leave it to another-just as you please. Kodak means photography with the bother left out. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: woman loading film while resting foot on suitcase. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: There's More to Vacation when you Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: More pleasure at the moment and afterward the added charm of pictures that tell the vacation story. And it is all so simple by the Kodak system that the merest novice can make good pictures from the start. Kodak has removed most opportunities for making mistakes. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Publications: Seaway (?) Description / Notes: woman in a had holding a Kodak. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: "The World is mine - I own a Kodak" Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Take a Kodak with you, and picture from your own viewpoint, not merely the places that interest you but also the companions who help make your trip enjoyable. Anybody can take good pictures with a Kodak. Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman with her Kodak, as a Porter helps her onto a train.

92

  
Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: There are no Game Laws for Those Who Hunt With a Kodak Subject(s): Man with camera, heavy backpack Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Photo of a man with a pipe, large camping pack on his back on one knee taking a photograph. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: The Kodak Christmas Story Subject(s): mother / child Text: Wherever children are there's a Christmas story, yes, an all the year round story of the Kodak record--a story that grows in interest as the years go by. Let the grown folks with a Kodak and the children with a Brownie join in building the family Kodak Book. And there's no better way to begin than with pictures of Christmas day. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: woman sitting in a chair reading to a young child. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: A Kodak Story Subject(s): mother / child Text: Of the baby- a serial story from the teddy bear days, through childhood and school days until home ties are broken such a story has the charm of human interest that endures. And it's an easy story to record, for the Kodak works are the bidding of the merest novice. There is no dark-room for any part of the Kodak work, it's all simple. Press the button-do the rest-or leave it to another-just as you please Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Woman and baby sitting outdoors, the baby is playing with a teddy bear. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: The Baby's picture Subject(s): mother / child Text: It makes no difference how often baby goes to the photographer and for the sake of admiring relatives his visits should be frequent. The record of his infant days is incomplete unless there are home pictures to supplement the more formal studio photographs. Mother or father or sister can readily make a series of pictures of the little one that will grow more and more precious year by year. Picture taking is easy now and inexpensive too, the Kodak has made it so. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: woman on knees taking a photograph of a baby with a Kodak. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): Young girl, kitten Text: And then, in turn Kodak the children. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: BW Description / Notes: Photo of a small girl sitting on a porch photographing a kitten. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): young man, woman

93

  
Text: Twill double the pleasure of every outing and give twice the pleasure afterward. And anybody can make good pictures by the Kodak system. No dark-room - no bother. Every step is simple. Implied Audience: travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo-illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: woman sitting on a rock taking a shot, man leaning over her, pointing at something off camera. Painting of horses in the background. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): Young boy and girl Text: And then, in turn, Kodak the children. There's pleasure and instruction,- there's education in taking pictures, there's a constantly growing charm in the pictures themselves. And by the Kodak system picture taking is perfectly simple, whether one merely presses the button and lets another do the rest or whether the delights of picture taking be added to the delights of picture making. Implied Audience: parents. Product: Kodak / brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy photographing a girl. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Just an Easy Handful of Kodak Film Subject(s): hand w film. Text: Will tell the story of your summer vacation. There's film for a dozen pictures in each cartridge, the weight is trifling. The Kodak itself slips into the pocket and the picture making is simple from start to finish. Press the button-do the rest-or leave it to anotherjust as you please Implied Audience: travelers Product: Kodak film Photo or Illustration Based: photo? Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Jun-07 Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: "Highest in America" Subject(s): product - misc Text: The manufacture of film to the Kodak standard requires perfect basic materials... The film you use is more important then the camera you use. Look for "Kodak" on the spool. Product: Kodak film Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: long text, not all copied. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: "The Kodak on the Farm" Subject(s): Chicken and chicks Text: A beautifully illustrated little book containing a score of pictures that show how interesting the Kodak may be made in the country. Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: smaller version of above ad, less text. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: "The Kodak on the Farm" Subject(s): Horse, vignette. Text: Is the title of a beautifully illustrated little book that has just come from the press. It contains a score of pictures that show how interesting the Kodak may be made in the country and it explains clearly the simplicity of the Kodak system of photograph Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: photo

94

  
Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: same as above ad, but with different photograph, smaller ad. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1908 Slogan: "The Kodak on the Farm" Subject(s): horses at fence Text: Is the title of a beautifully illustrated little book that has just come from the press. It contains a score of pictures that show how interesting the Kodak may be made in the country and it explains clearly the simplicity of the Kodak system of photography... Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak system Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: not all text copied. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Kodak means photography with the bother left out. Subject(s): Man reading an album by the fireplace Text: The vacation story-as told by his Kodak. In every home there's a story for the Kodak to record-not merely a travel story and the story of the summer holiday, but the story of Christmas, of the winter evening gatherings and of the house party. But above all is the serial story of the children, from the days of wild gallops across the nursery floor... And it's all a simple story to record, for the Kodak system of photography has removed most of the opportunities for mistakes. It's inexpensive now and there's no darkroom for any part of the work. Implied Audience: men / general Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: not all text copied Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: Kodak Tells the Story Subject(s): navy Text: Of every world event- whether it is a peaceful cruise of a great Navy around the globe, a war that changes the map or continents, a devastating earthquake, or the inauguration of a president, you now have the photographic story quickly and accurately told in the illustrated press. .... Implied Audience: Soldiers Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of four navy men on the deck of a ship, two photographing, two developing. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: c1907 Slogan: "The Kodak on the Farm" Subject(s): young girl with a doll Text: A beautifully illustrated little book containing a score of pictures that show how interesting the Kodak may be made in the country. Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak System Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a young girl holding a doll standing in the corner of a wallpapered room. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: There's no Dark room with a Kodak Tank Subject(s): Kodak girls Text: Every step is simple and easy but more than that, it means better pictures. The success of the tank development idea has now been absolutely proven by the fact that many leading professional photographers, although they have every dark room convenience, use our tank system of development for all their work... Experience is in the Tank. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak tank

95

  
Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: two women, one with arms around the other looking at a roll of negatives. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1907 Slogan: Kodak Tank Subject(s): man outdoors developing film Text: Film Development with the Kodak Tank not only means an end to dark-room bother but it means better results than can be obtained in the old way. The time and temperature are the only factors to watch. The Experience is in the Tank Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Kodak tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Man smoking pipe, reading a paper while developing film outdoors. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1908 Slogan: Put a Dark Room your Suit Case Subject(s): product - darkroom Text: Don't lose half the vacation pleasure by waiting until you return home before developing your films. Get results on the spot, and then if you like, sent postcards from your own negatives to your friends. Anybody can develop perfectly, ... Product: Kodak tank Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: bw Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Year: 1906 Slogan: There's no Dark Room with a Kodak Tank Subject(s): three boys developing film Text: Every step is simple and easy but more than that, it means better pictures. The success of the tank development idea has now been absolutely proven by the fact that many leading professional photographers, although they have every dark room convenience, use our tank system of development for all their work... Experience is in the Tank. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three boys at a table developing film. Binder: 1895-1909 8 of 8 Slogan: "The Kodak Baby Book" Subject(s): toddler Text: A helpful little booklet telling how to successfully keep a photographic record of the baby-how to make the pictures, how to arrange them. Illustrated with a dozen home pictures of the authors own baby. Implied Audience: families Product: the Kodak baby book Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of child reading a book Binder: 1909-1913 1 of 6 Slogan: Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Text: You can spend more of your time outside the door when you use the Eastman Plate Tank. Less trouble, More comfort, better results. Product: Eastman plate tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of darkroom door (maybe not relevant) Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Slogan: Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): two women Text: Where the tank enters, the darkroom worries end. Not

96

  
merely less trouble but better negatives for those who use the Eastman Plate Tank Implied Audience: women / general Product: Eastman plate tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of two women outside a darkroom with plates. (maybe not relevant?) Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: First Gun From the 1908 Conventions Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Description / Notes: Talks about the contests won on Angelo paper Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Second Gun from the Conventions Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Description / Notes: Talks about Illinois Convention May 5-7 1908 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Angelo Has Won Four Grand Prizes Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Description / Notes: Talks about the contests won on Angelo paper Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Again Angelo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Description / Notes: Talks about the contests won on Angelo paper Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: And Now in the East Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Description / Notes: Talks about the contests won on Angelo paper -- New England Convention July 28-30 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Still the Pace Maker Angelo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Angelo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo Platinum Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: First in Every Class at Boston Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo Platinum Paper Description / Notes: Talks about photo contest results at the New England Convention, August 27-29th Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Get more money for your work--Raise the Quality with Angelo Sepia and you can raise the price. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo Sepia Paper Color or Black and White:

97

  
Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For nineteen years thousands of show cases have been demonstrating the permanent brilliancy of Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: No Toning--Aristo Gold Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For the Average Negative for the Average Customer-Aristo has the quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The paper you know all about--Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For Superior Results--Aristo Gold Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Angelo Sepia Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo Sepia Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Carbon effects in Sepia without carbon difficulties Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Aristo Platino Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Print, Wash, Fix. Aristo Gold Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Aristo Gold Paper

98

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Twenty Years of Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Description / Notes: 1889-1909 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: No "Perhaps" With Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A short cut to good results--Aristo Gold Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: No Toning with Aristo Gold Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For Sepias rich in detail and gradation use Aristo Gold Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Not promise, but performance--Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Brownie Enlarging Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: No. 2 Brownie Enlarging Camera for 5x7 enlargements: $2.00. No. 3 Brownie Enlarging Camera: $3.00. No. 4 Brownie Enlarging Cameras $4.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A Folding Pocket Brownie / Doubles / Before You Go Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie, Kodaks, Velox Paper Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Kodak Dry Mounting Press Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Dry Mounting Press Description / Notes: 5x7 Dry Mounting Press: $15.00 11x14 press: $50.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: It's poor economy to spoil good films, good plates, and good papers with cheap chemicals. To be sure they're pure insist on the mark that denotes the Eastman Quality: Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman chemicals Color or Black and White:

99

  
Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Flashlight Time Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash cartridge Description / Notes: Prices: Eastman's Spreader flash cartridges No. 1: $0.60. No. 2: $0.40 No. 3: $0.25 Spreader Flash Pistol $0.50. Flash Sheets, No.1: $0.25 No. 2 $0.40 No. 3 $0.60 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: You Must Have the Best Chemicals if you want the best results. There's only one answer: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Spending is Saving when you spend money for chemicals of known quality and strength. To be sure, look for this label: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: It's the Film that is Important Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Eastman Plate Tank For Results.-Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Description / Notes: Price: $ 4.50 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Description / Notes: Price: $ 4.50 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Let Your Tank do the Work Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Description / Notes: Price: $ 4.50 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: 8x10 Now Ready Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Description / Notes: price: $10.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Results Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Plate Tank Description / Notes: Price: Tank 5x7 $4.50 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Just Right / That Vacation List Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman thermometer, Kodak Cameras, developing tanks, flash, Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: There is Money in enlargements made on Eastman's

100

  
Permanent Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Permanent Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman's WD Platinum Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Platinum Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Tested Chemicals Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's PS developer. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Not at your expense / Simple Enlarging Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Film and Brownie Enlarging Camera. Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Two Ways / A Printing Suggestion Subject(s): product - camera Product: Flash Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Flash Light Possibilities. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Flash Description / Notes: article.

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Flash Failures / Mounting on Thin Leaves Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Flash / Kodak Dry Mounting Tissue Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: How you may know / Take it with you Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak chemicals, Film tank Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: That Neat, Professional Finish--Kodak Dry Mounting Tissue Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Dry-Mounting Tissue Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Variety / Emergency Cases Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film and papers. Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Not the Same Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film and papers. Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909

101

  
Slogan: Good Enlargements from Flat Negatives Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film and papers. Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Missed Pleasures Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film and papers. Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Cleverly Linked / Only One / Portrait Possibilities Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak system Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The First Season Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodaks Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Nepera Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Nepera Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Velvet Nepera Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Nepera Paper Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Re-Developed Royal Nepera Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Nepera Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Nepera Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Nepera Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Nepera Waxing Solution Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Nepera Waxing Solution Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A Pocketful of Quality Subject(s): product - camera Product: No.1A Folding Pocket Kodak Special. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Now Ready --Ozobrome Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Ozobrome carbon prints Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Ozobrome

102

  
Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Ozobrome carbon prints Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The "All By Lamp Light Way" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Ozobrome carbon prints Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Carbon with the Bother Left Out Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Ozobrome carbon prints Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A Wide Usefulness / Large Pictures Subject(s): product - camera Product: Portrait attachment / Kodak cameras Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Royal Nepera Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Royal Nepera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Prints Lie Flat Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Royal Nepera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For Those Vacation Pictures--Royal Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Royal Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Seed Tropical Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The "Been Through the mill" Photographer never questions price--just orders Seed, the cheapest plate when measured by results." Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Speed and Latitude Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Be Sure it's Seed Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909

103

  
Slogan: Extract from Seed Demonstrators Instructions Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Made for those who know by those who know Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Seed Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Few Cents More You Pay for Seed Comes Back in Dollars Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Seed Sown in the studio, yield dollars. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Fine and Clear Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Standard Polychrome Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: In Winter--Use Standard Polychrome Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Standard Thermic Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A Significant Fact / All By Daylight Enlarging Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Tank Developing / Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Each Year Has Seen Better Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909

104

  
Slogan: The Reason the Majority of Amateurs use Velox is that they are sure of good results. Velox is the anytime paper with a grade for any negative. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Print those vacation negatives on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 1 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For the Vacation: Velox Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Post Cards Description / Notes: Price: $0.20 per Doz. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: To get the long price, use Angelo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: None As good as Angelo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Angelo has the Quality on which the judges agree Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Novice Simplicity, expert results--Aristo Gold Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For Your Best Negatives Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Permanent Pictures of Quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For Your Very Best Negatives Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Post Cards Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Carbon printing is difficult, but true carbon effects are easy with Aristo Gold Post Cards. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Post Cards Color or Black and White:

105

  
Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Carbon Sepia or Purple tones easily produced on Aristo Gold post cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Post Cards Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: You and your customer--both are satisfied when you deliver Aristo Prints. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Rich Sepias and purples--semi matte surface Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The straight road to good results--Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A Little slower to work, but a lot quicker to sell--Aristo has the quality that satisfies both you and your customers Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: You can see your way Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Acknowledged Standard--Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Back up your operating skill with Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Imitations are "Nearly"--Aristo is. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: 21 years of Supremacy Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Artura Iris Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Iris Paper

106

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For High-Grade Portraiture Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Iris Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Large Pictures Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price: No.2: $2.00 No.3: $3.00 No. 4: $4.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Works like a printing frame--Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price: No.2: $2.00 No.3: $3.00 No. 4: $4.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Bromide Enlarging with a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Eastman Adjustable Lens Hood Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Adjustable Lens Hood Description / Notes: No. 1 price: $2.00 No. 2 Price: $2.50 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: There is profit for you in enlargements on Eastman Bromide Paper. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Bromide Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Enlarged Portraits on Eastman Bromide Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Bromide Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman Spreader Flash Cartridges Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Description / Notes: Spreader Flash Cartridges price: $0.25. Spreader Flash Cartridge Pistol: $0.50. No. 1 Flash Sheets: $0.25 No. 2 Flash Sheets: $0.40. No. 3 Flash Sheets: $0.60. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A Square yard of illumination with a 4x5 Eastman Flash Sheet Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Description / Notes: No. 1 price: $0.25 No. 2 Price: $0.40 No 3 price: $0.60 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Flash possibilities / Best for winter pictures. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Description / Notes: article.

107

  
Year: 1909 Slogan: Use Chemicals of Quality if you want results Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Every atom pure and the best that science can produce Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The result of years of experience. Eastman's NC Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: There is comfort as well as convenience and results in the Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Everything to suit you with the Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Description / Notes: 5x7 Tank: $4.50 8x10 tank: $10.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Be comfortable. Subject(s): product - film & paper

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Easily Found / By Flashlight Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets, negative album Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: You just must have the best chemicals if you want the best results. There's only one answer. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Demand a certificate of character from your chemical assistants: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Your Protection Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Sign of Continued Interest Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6

108

  
Product: Eastman Plate Tank Description / Notes: 4x5 price: $3.50 5x7 price: $4.50 8x10 price: $10.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For Crisp Clean, Clear Negatives, use the Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For the Best Studio in Town--Eastman Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Platinum Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Slightest tinge of warmth in Eastman Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Platinum Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Accepted on sight--Eastman Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Platinum Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Make your better grade enlargements on Eastman's Royal Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Royal Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Kodak Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Enlarging Camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: No Darkroom when you use the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Zeiss Kodak f6.3 Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak lenses Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Autotime Scale / Zeiss-Kodak Quality Subject(s): Product - camera Product: Kodak lenses Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Take a Dark-Room With You Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Tank Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909

109

  
Slogan: Just Right / The Problem Solver / Anti Handicap Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Negative Album, Kodak system Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A New Nepera--Royal Pure White Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Nepera Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The New R.O.C. Post Card Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: R.O.C. Post Card Camera Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Highest Price, Largest Sale--that tells the story of Seed Supremacy Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: When you want a good plate, there are several--when you want the best, there is but one: Seed Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Lengthen the short days with Seed 27 Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For Crisp Brilliant Slides--Seed Red Label Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Seed Red Label Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Your Confidence in Seed Plates is well grounded Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Seed Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Seed is dry-plate perfection Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6

110

  
Year: 1909 Slogan: Full gradation, with short exposures, when you use a Standard Polychrome Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Plate without Frills Standard Thermic Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: At Vacation's end there's Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Velox Book will help you select the right grade of the right paper. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Select the proper grade and Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 2 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For "going away" time--Velox Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Post Cards Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Angelo Sepia Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Angelo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The tone beauty of Angelo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Angelo Wins Both Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For pleasing sepia tone and beautiful gradation nothing equals the popular platinum paper Angelo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White:

111

  
Year: 1909 Slogan: Full value is apparent when the prints are on Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: No toning chemicals required with Aristo Gold Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A satisfied customer is one whose prints are finished on Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Establish new business and hold established business with Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Artura Iris for Portraiture

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Whole Story of Print Perfection told in a word is: Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Aristo gold post cards yield prints of carbon quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Use Aristo Gold Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Post Cards Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For Permanent Prints of pleasing tone and texture: Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For Post card prints of carbon quality use Aristo Gold Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6

112

  
Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Iris Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For sparkle and detail print it on Artura Iris Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Iris Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Artura Iris Solves the Problem Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Iris Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: After all is said and done, "quality counts." Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Iris Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: With Other Photographers Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Booklet Description / Notes: Price: $2.50, India tint paper, booklet by Ryland W. Phillips Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Carbon Black Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Carbon Black Artura Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Make enlargements and money with Eastman Bromide Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Bromide Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman Bromide Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Bromide Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Enlarge the Beauty of that Kodak Negative on Eastman Bromide Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Bromide Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman EB Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman EB Platinum Description / Notes: EB = Etching Black Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Topmost Prices Eastman EB Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman EB Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6

113

  
Year: 1909 Slogan: The rare warm black tone secured with Eastman EB Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman EB Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman ES Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman ES Platinum Description / Notes: ES = Etching Sepia Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman ES Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman ES Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman Ferro-Prussiate Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Ferro-Prussiate Post Cards Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman flash sheet holder Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Eastman Focusing Curtain Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Focusing Curtain Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: If you are having trouble don't blame the films, the plates or the paper. Test your Chemicals, or better and easier still, use E.K.C. Tested Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Active Chemicals tested by experts bear this mark: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman's Permanent Crystal Pyro Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A new developing agent Enol Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: A perfect developing agent of remarkable quality is Enol Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White:

114

  

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Our interest in your final results is the reason for Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman Permanent Crystal Pyro Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The mark on chemical labels indicates reliable chemicals tested for photographic purposes Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: It is only worth our while to spend the time, and money that we do in the scientific testing of chemicals, and in our careful putting up of those chemicals, because such work expense means better results for the users of our sensitized products. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Enol Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Chemicals of proper strength, carefully tested to preserve the high quality of our sensitized materials, bear this seal: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Stays where it belongs. Eastman Permanent Crystal Pyro Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Hall-mark of Chemical Quality Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: One of the tested chemicals Enol Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The difference between tested chemicals and those of unknown quality is distinguishable by this mark on chemical labels Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6

115

  
Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman Mask Cutter No. 2 Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Mask Cutter No. 2 Description / Notes: Price: $10.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Made for the Kodak by Kodak experts. Eastman NC Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman NC Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Your Pictures Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Dependability of Eastman NC Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Experts use the Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Eastman Studio Register System Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Studio Register System Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Enlargements are profitable Eastman's Permanent Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Permanent Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Make your better grade enlargements on Eastman's Royal Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Royal Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Eastman's Sepia Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman's Sepia Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Kodak Film Tank "The Daylight Dark-Room" Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White:

116

  
Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Protect the Kodak quality of your Kodak negatives by developing them in the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Greatest convenience; best results in the use of The Kodak film tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: It's pleasure all the way when you develop with the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Two names that you have confidence in-- Kodak and Zeiss Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak lenses Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The R.O.C. Post Card Printer Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: R.O.C. Post Card Printer Description / Notes: Price: $7.50 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Rounds Print Washer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Rounds Print Washer Description / Notes: Price: $10.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Seed Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Even in the hottest weather Standard Thermic Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: No blisters--no frills when you use Standard Thermic Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Use Standard Thermic Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For speed and a truthful rendering of color values select

117

  
Standard Polychrome Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Eastman Timer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: The Eastman Timer Description / Notes: Price: $2.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: The Eastman Trimming Board Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Eastman Trimming Board Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For correctly developed, clean negatives use The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: The Kodak Film Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: For good prints from all negatives use Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 3 of 6 Year: 1909 Slogan: Velox Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Post Cards Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Use Angelo and raise your standard Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Quality, Certainty of Results, Ease of Manipulation Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Post Cards Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: Oct-11 Slogan: Extreme Simplicity Carbon Quality Aristo Gold Paper Post Cards Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo Gold Post Cards Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Quality--tone--beautiful surface and finish are yours when you use Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White:

118

  
Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: For Excellence of tone--for delicacy of texture--for general satisfaction Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: For Permanent Prints--certain results and pleased customers--use Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: If your prints look almost as good as Aristo, use Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: A Permanent Success--Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Aristo continues to make permanent customers. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Artura Carbon Black Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Carbon Black Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Make Sure; use the genuinely good: Artura Iris Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Iris Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Use the paper of known excellence: Artura Iris Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Iris Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: A success built on Quality Atrura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: "Just as good as Artura" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White:

119

  
quality are factors in the growing success of Eastman ES Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman ES Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: The importance of using pure and active chemicals cannot be overestimated. The dependable kind--tested and analyzed carry this mark of distinction on the label Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: New Name Same Goods Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Description / Notes: Switching the chemical Enol to the name Elon Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Elon Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: It stays where you put it. Eastman Permanent Crystal Pyro Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Artura Success Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Superior Sepias on an inexpensive paper: Azo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Azo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Azo Sepias Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Azo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Enlarge your business by making Carbon Black Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Carbon Black Artura Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Eastman EB and ES Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman EB and ES Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Velvety surface--correct sepia tone and perfect printing

120

  
Slogan: Fill your shelves with The Best-Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: The Proof of Quality continued use of Elon Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Insure your results Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: This seal is the stamp of approval of our chemical testing department; It means, tested chemically--tested photographically-right for our use--right for your use Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: We must be certain of our chemicals--therefore we test them. You can also be certain of your chemicals--because we test them. This seal tells. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: Oct-11 Slogan: Economical Clean and Convenient Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Full Kodak efficiency is realized only in the use of Eastman NC Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: Oct-11 Slogan: Order Eastman Tested Chemicals and be certain Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Permanent Crystal Pyro Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: The Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Twelve Perfectly Developed Negatives Every Time Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: The proof of the tank is in the quality of the negative. The Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom

121

  
Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Use the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Take a Kodak film tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Properly Orthochromatic Kodak NC Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak N.C. Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: In Just Three Minutes Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Your Vacation Postals will be more pleasing on Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Paragon Border Negatives Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Paragon Border Negatives Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Seed CV Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Double the Speed of the Seed 27. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Does this interest you? Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Seed Gilt Edge Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper

122

  
Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: -Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Description / Notes: Letter from Rudolf Diihrtoop, Berlin. To a Mr. Fell at Kodak. Explaining that he has used Seed plates since 1904 and is "perfectly satisfied with the qualities" Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: Oct-11 Slogan: Seed The Standard of Excellence Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: If it's in the negative, you get it in the Velox print. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: 1911 Slogan: Make your album of Vacation pictures an album of Velox pictures Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 4 of 6 Year: Oct-11 Slogan: Select Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Oct-12 Slogan: A photographic Education Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "How to Make Good Pictures" booklet Description / Notes: Price: $0.25 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: An Enviable Reputation. The Permanency of Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Nov-11 Slogan: Twenty-two years of pleased customers is the record of Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jan-12 Slogan: Aristo Facts Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jun-12 Slogan: Pin your faith to the permanency, quality and reliability of Aristo Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Aristo paper Color or Black and White:

123

  
Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jan-12 Slogan: The Reasons for making enlargements are many, the good papers, few. Artura Carbon Black Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Carbon Black Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: The Proof of quality is in the using: Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Artura prints are the best advertisements for you. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: The Holiday Rush loses it's terrors when you use Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jun-12 Slogan: Watch the work of the man who uses Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Aug-12 Slogan: Enlargements on Artura Carbon Black Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Sep-12 Slogan: In Quality Artura Knows no Equal Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: Artura Carbon Black Buff Stock Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: The New Artura Printer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Artura Printer Description / Notes: Complete with special arc lamp 11x14 printer price: $75.00. Without lamp: $55.00. 20x24 with special arc lamp: $100.00. Without lamp: $80.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jun-12 Slogan: Where the one essential is Quality the one paper is Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Printer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jan-12 Slogan: Azo for the Amateur finisher Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Azo paper

124

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Nov-11 Slogan: Eastman EB or ES Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman EB and ES Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: Effective Quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman EB and ES Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Their use is your protection Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Chemical Facts. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Chemical Logic Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: E.K. Tested Chemicals cost you no more. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Proof of the Pudding Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Eastman Tested Acetic Acid Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Nov-11 Slogan: 98.2% Pure Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Nov-11 Slogan: Your Assurance of uniform quality Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-11 Slogan: The Mark of Distinction Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White:

125

  
Year: 1912 Slogan: To get the best possible print--get acquainted with Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-11 Slogan: Use the Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jun-12 Slogan: Less work at the retouching desk when you use The Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Aug-12 Slogan: In hot weather there's no dread of developing--no fear of the result when the Eastman Plate Tank does the work. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Overcome hot weather troubles with The Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Nov-11

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jan-12 Slogan: Roylon A vigorous developing agent for use in connection with Hydrochinon Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Description / Notes: Price 1 ounce bottle: $0.60. 1/4 pound: $2.25. 1/2 pound: $4.25. 1 pound: $8.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jun-12 Slogan: A World of Importance to Photographers "Tested" Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Aug-12 Slogan: When you say chemicals, say also the kind. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Sep-12 Slogan: You Save 20% Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: Get Acquainted with the mark of "Chemical Certainty." Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6

126

  
Slogan: Eastman Studio Reflector Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Studio Reflector Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Systematize your business with an Eastman Studio Register System Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Studio Register System Description / Notes: Two cases with cards price: $5.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Good Times At Home with A Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak cameras, portrait attachment Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-11 Slogan: Be Sure your film is Kodak Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank way is the simplest way--the best way Subject(s): product - darkroom Text: Tank development is a scientific fact past argument. Examine a film developed in the Kodak Film Tank. The developer, so balanced as to be slow in it's action, searches out all the exposed silver and produces an image of fine grain with full delicacy and detail. There is no fog. Then there is the convenience of being able to develop anywhere without a dark-room. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman in an apron holding a roll of film -- same image as before, different text. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Don't Wait Until You Get Home The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Add Zest to picture making at home Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-11 Slogan: Developing is a pleasure with the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Oct-12 Slogan: Double your good times Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: Doubly worth while Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank

127

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: All Good Negatives Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank way is the simplest way--the best way Subject(s): Two boys Text: Added to the pleasure of doing ones own developing is the satisfaction of doing it better when the Kodak Film Tank is used. The dark-room with its many causes for faulty manipulation is eliminated. One may develop anywhere where a Kodak Film Tank. The Experience is in the Tank Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two boys, at a window holding up film. Tank is on the table. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank Way Subject(s): woman Text: The Pleasure is all yours when you develop the Kodak Film Tank Way. And there's the satisfaction of doing the work better-securing clean negatives free from fog, scratches and finger marks. You can develop anywhere with a Kodak Film Tank. The experience is in the tank. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman in a sailor dress sitting at a table, developing in the tank. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jan-12 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank way is the simplest way--the best way Subject(s): woman Text: Negatives developed in the Kodak Film Tank are clean, are free from scratches and finger marks; they have more brilliancy, gradation, and detail, because free from fog. Then there is the convenience of being able to develop anywhere without a darkroom Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman in an apron holding up a roll of film. Tank is on the table. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jun-12 Slogan: She has Confidence in the Kodak Film Tank Way Subject(s): woman Text: It's a pleasure for there's no dark-room, no stained fingers, no muss, and best of all, no uncertainty. Film Tank results are always better, for the negatives are clean, crisp and free from finger marks and fog. They make better prints too. Take a Kodak Film Tank on that vacation trip. The experience is in the tank. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman in a sailor dress sitting at a table, developing in the tank. Same as above, but with different text. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912

128

  
Slogan: The Quality of Carbon The Simplicity of Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: For the Occasional Print that Lends Variety Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Aug-12 Slogan: You get nearer to the truth in Nature when the print is made on Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Oct-12 Slogan: "It's more real--more full of life" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: Prints out of the Ordinary--by ordinary methods Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Roylon A New Developing Agent Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Roylon Developing Agent Description / Notes: Price 1 ounce bottle: $0.60. 1/4 pound: $2.25. 1/2 pound: $4.25. 1 pound: $8.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: The Advantages of Roylon Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Roylon Developing Agent Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Use Seed Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: A Seed Plate for Every Purpose Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: If you would get action Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-11 Slogan: Seed Plates For Pictorial Work Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White:

129

  
Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jan-12 Slogan: Seed Gilt Edge Plates For Speed Work Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Aug-12 Slogan: Seed characteristics are Quality characteristics Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Oct-12 Slogan: Seed Quality is Printing Quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: Speed Plus Quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: Winter Sports Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jan-12 Slogan: Tozol Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Tozol Developing Agent Description / Notes: Price 1 ounce bottle: $0.20. 1/4 pound: $0.70. 1/2 pound: $1.30. 1 pound: $2.50 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Aug-12 Slogan: Tozol Simplifies the Process by Making it Shorter Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Tozol Developing Agent Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: Tozol The simple developing agent for developing papers Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Tozol Developing Agent Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Sep-12 Slogan: The Best Amateurs use Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: Resolve to use Velox. Your negatives are worth it. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: 1912 Slogan: After the vacation there's Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White:

130

  
Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-11 Slogan: Prints by Gaslight Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Jan-12 Slogan: Prints by Gaslight Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Dec-12 Slogan: The result you work for is the print. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 5 of 6 Year: Oct-12 Slogan: Zelta Matte-Surface, Ready Sensitized, Four Grades. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Zelta Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: A Book of practice, not theory. 160 pages of "What to do and why." Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "How to Make Good Pictures" booklet Description / Notes: Booklet price: $0.25. Library edition, cloth covers: $1.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: A Suggestion to the user of Angelo Sepia Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Angelo paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Oct-13 Slogan: Make contact quality enlargements on Artura Carbon Black Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Carbon Black Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Feb-13 Slogan: Artura Knows no Equal Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Apr-13 Slogan: Use the paper that has no equal Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: Make your enlargements on the New Artura Carbon Black Buff Stock Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jun-13 Slogan: The proof of superiority--the number of successful photographers who use Artura

131

  
Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Aug-13 Slogan: Reproduce the quality of the negative in the print Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Sep-13 Slogan: Back up your skill in lighting and posing with Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Sep-13 Slogan: Give your customer the best print you can make from every negative Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: Enlargements by Daylight Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: No. 2 price: $2.00. No. 3 price: $3.00. No. 4 Price: $4.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Oct-13 Slogan: Pictures that tell their story in large type. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Oct-13 Slogan: Make the print on platinum that is different Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman EB and ES Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Sep-13 Slogan: Flash Fun / The Charm of Color Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets / Velox Transparent Water color stamps Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jun-13 Slogan: Eastman Home Portrait Reflector Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Home Portrait Reflector Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: The Element of Certainty Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jan-13 Slogan: Our interest in your results Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6

132

  
Year: Feb-13 Slogan: It costs money to experiment--it costs less to be certain Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Apr-13 Slogan: Successful photography necessitates the use of Dependable Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jun-13 Slogan: The Condition of your chemicals in hot weather is of the greatest importance. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: Specify "E.K. Tested." Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: Use Elon Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Aug-13 Slogan: It costs no more to be certain--specify "E.K. Tested" Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Oct-13 Slogan: Look for this seal on every package or bottle Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: Good Insurance Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Aug-13 Slogan: Systematize your business Eastman Loose Leaf Studio Register Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Loose Leaf Studio Register Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: More Than Convenience / "A Darkless Dark Room" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. Film / Kodak Tank Developer Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: Permanent Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Permanent Bromide Description / Notes: A series of letters, 1894, 1902, 1906 from

133

  
Geo. G. Rockwood talking about his endorsement of Eastman's Permanent Bromide Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jan-13 Slogan: The Eastman Plate Tank makes a shorter day's work a better day's work. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: It's printing quality that counts Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: Eastman Portrait Films Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Films Description / Notes: Price: Same as Seed 30 plates. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Sep-13 Slogan: The Greatest advance since the advent of the dry plate-Eastman Portrait Films Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Feb-13 Slogan: Eastman Portrait Lens Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Portrait Lens Description / Notes: Series A price: $60.00-$120.00 Series B Price: $32.00-$57.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: Kodaking from an Aeroplane. / Two Cameras in One Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak cameras Description / Notes: Article. With photo by Jorge Allan. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: How a Kodak Coached a University Football Team / Eastman Film Negative Album Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak cameras, Eastman Film Negative Album. Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: Monsen of the Desert Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak film and papers. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: Use a Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jun-13 Slogan: Take a Kodak Film Tank on the Vacation--bring the picture story home complete. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Color or Black and White:

134

  
Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Feb-13 Slogan: Take a Look at a clean, snappy, tank-developed film. Subject(s): woman Text: It's the satisfaction of work better done that adds so much to the pleasure of developing the Kodak Film Tank way. The Experience is in the tank Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman at a window holding a roll of film. The Tank is on the table. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Feb-13 Slogan: The Experience is in the Tank Subject(s): woman Text: Besides the pleasure, the convenience, the cleanliness and simplicity of developing the Kodak Film Tank way; there is--best of all--the satisfaction of securing better results. The clean, snappy, tank-developed negatives make the most perfect prints. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman at a window holding a roll of film. The Tank is on the table. Same image as above, different text. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): Woman Text: Make the most of vacation pleasures--develop your films on the spot with a Kodak Film Tank. Not fuss or bother--gives better quality in your negatives--adds zest to the good times. The Experience is in the tank Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman at a window, holding up a film roll. Tank is on the table. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): woman Text: Be Certain of your results and enjoy as well the convenience and pleasure of developing anywhere, all by daylight, with a Kodak Film Tank. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman at a window, holding up a film roll. Tank is on the table. Same image as above, with different text. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): Woman Text: The best of every exposure in every roll of film is assured when you use a Kodak Film Tank. The principle is right, the chemicals are correct, the results are certain. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman at a window, holding up a film roll. Tank is on the table. Same image as above, with different text. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: Little Helps / Has to Be

135

  
Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak portrait attachment / Eastman N.C. Film Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: The Spirit of Summer-time Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Apr-13 Slogan: Make a few prints from your first spring negatives on Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: Add the necessary touch of realism to the landscape by making the print on Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Oct-13 Slogan: Get as close to the tones of nature as possible. Make prints of the summer landscape on Kodak Velvet Green Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: The Kodiopticon Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodiopticon Description / Notes: Lantern Slide projector. Complete with Mazda lamp and carrying case price: $20.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: Kodak Advertising Competition 3,000.00 in Cash Prizes Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: "For pictures to be used in illustrating Kodak Advertisements" Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Sep-13 Slogan: Sixty Days Left Kodak Advertising Competition Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: Contest closes November 1st 1913. $ 3000.00 in prizes Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Oct-13 Slogan: Thirty Days Left Kodak Advertising Collection Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: Contest closes November 1st 1913. $ 3000.00 in prizes Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Sep-13 Slogan: Make sure that every print you deliver is safe, using a Rounds Print Washer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Rounds Print Washer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: Seed Plates The Greatest Efficiency.

136

  
Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Apr-13 Slogan: Uniformly Reliable Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: Uniformly Dependable Speed and Quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: Quality in Fast Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jun-13 Slogan: The superior quality of Seed Dry Plates is invariable Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: Work for Gradation Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Aug-13 Slogan: It's a Seed Plate you need. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Sep-13 Slogan: Seed Capabilities Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Oct-13 Slogan: Seed Results Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Apr-13 Slogan: Works Right--Keeps Right Under the most unfavorable circumstances Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Oct-13 Slogan: The Eastman Timer / Thermometer Stirring Rod Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: The Eastman Timer / Thermometer Stirring Rod Description / Notes: Price for timer: $2.00 Price for thermometer stirring rod: $0.60 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Feb-13

137

  
Slogan: Tozol The Simplified Developing Agent for Photographic Papers Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Tozol Developing Agent Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: You don't have to make a certain kind of negative to fit Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Aug-13 Slogan: Double Printing Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Sep-13 Slogan: The Experienced Amateur uses Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: Velox was and is the First Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: The making of a best possible print is in every sheet of Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Mar-13 Slogan: Cheaper papers have but one thing to recommend them-their cheapness. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Mar-13 Slogan: The Paper that fits. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: To think of quality is to think of Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: If you have not used Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: Make Velox Your Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White:

138

  
Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Zelta Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 1 of 4 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Makes developing a most simple, all-by-daylight process, But of greater importance than its simplicity of convenience - the best results are assured from every exposure. Tank developed negatives are free from fog, scratches and finger marks - have the snap and brilliancy that makes good prints. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman looking at negatives at a window. Binder: 1913-1917 1 of 4 Slogan: Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: On every vacation take a Kodak Film Tank. Half the pleasure of vacation picture making is in developing your films on the spot, seeing your results, making your picture story complete. And more then half the pleasure of developing in the Kodak film tank is in the satisfaction of securing better results. The experience is in the tank. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman in the window looking at negatives. Binder: 1913-1917 1 of 4 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Development Simplified. The Kodak film tank makes

Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Oct-13 Slogan: Begin right, use Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Jul-13 Slogan: The Vest Pocket Kodak Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: $25.00 Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: 1913 Slogan: Show your individuality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Zelta Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Feb-13 Slogan: It's your individuality that counts Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Zelta Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: Apr-13 Slogan: Character in Print Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Zelta Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1909-1913 Ad Books 6 of 6 Year: May-13 Slogan: Stamp your work with the mark of distinctive quality

139

  
developing a part of the pleasure of picture making- insures the best result from every exposure - offers the convenience of developing anywhere without a darkroom. The film tank takes care of the greatest variations in exposure, yields clean, crisp negatives of a printing quality not possible to obtain by hand development. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman looking at negatives at a window. Binder: 1913-1917 1 of 4 Slogan: Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Include a Kodak Film Tank in your vacation kit. Develop your films on the spot - see your results before you leave the scene of your good times. The film tank assures the best results takes care of any reasonable variations in the time of your exposure- renders clean, crisp, snappy negatives. And all without the fuss of a darkroom. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo is a woman developing negatives at the window. Binder: 1913-1917 1 of 4 Slogan: Make the Most of the home side of photography Subject(s): child Text: The charm of home surroundings offers a wealth of material for picture making. And the Kodak portrait attachment brings the entire home within reach of your Kodak lens. Slip the Portrait Attachment over the Kodak lens and you are ready for portraits of other close work. With fixed focus Brownies and Kodaks it brings objects in focus at exactly 3.5 feet - with focusing Kodaks, one may work as close as 2 feet 8 inches. Implied Audience: families Product: portrait attachment Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a child captioned "Made with a Brownie and portrait attachment. Binder: 1913-1917 1 of 4 Slogan: Kodak Portrait Attachment Subject(s): woman Text: Place your camera close to your subject, then bring the lens into focus by using the Kodak Portrait Attachment ... It may be readily seen that with the Kodak Portrait Attachment, thousands of small objects become interesting subjects for your Kodak. Product: portrait attachment Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman with flowers caption: "Made with Kodak and Kodak Portrait Attachment." Binder: 1913-1917 2 of 4 Year: Dec-14 Slogan: The Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Text: The autographic negative furnishes you permanent and positive identification. Date and title your negatives at the time you make them. There can then be no doubt in the years to come as to when, where to under what conditions such and such a picture was taken. ...Facts concerning the children and their age, when the picture was taken, interesting places you visit, a friend's autograph below his portrait, the stop, exposure, and date - the possibilities of the autographic record are endless. Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: caption for photograph: Negative with autographic record. Binder: 1913-1917 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14

140

  
Slogan: Yuletide Calendars Subject(s): product - misc Text: It's time to think of holiday remembrances. Solve the problem by mounting your prints in Yuletide calendars. They cost but a trifle - make most appropriate gifts. The calendars are made for all standard size amateur prints with vertical or horizontal openings, have easel backs and silk cord... Product: yuletide calendars Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: ? Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Apr-14 Slogan: You can make better pictures by knowing first, "How to Make Good Pictures" Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "How to Make Good Pictures" booklet Description / Notes: Booklet price: $0.25. Library Edition, cloth covers: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: A help to better results Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "How to Make Good Pictures" booklet Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Mar-14 Slogan: If it's a matter of quality, use Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: For the Large print, make Artura Carbon Black Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Carbon Black Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: 1914 Slogan: Establish the highest standard of quality with Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: Artura A paper without a disappointment Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jan-14 Slogan: Artura, There's not a disappointment in it. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Apr-14 Slogan: If you want every result to count, use Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: The Real success won and maintained on quality alone Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4

141

  
Year: Aug-14 Slogan: For the best results continuously, use Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Sep-14 Slogan: Artura The Paper without a disappointment Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Aug-14 Slogan: The Autographic Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Mar-14 Slogan: Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: No. 2 price: $2.00. No. 3 price: $3.00. No. 4 Price: $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jul-14 Slogan: The Distinctive character of the print on Eastman EB or ES Platinum Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman EB and ES Platinum Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: Secure perfect control of your illumination with Eastman Flash Sheets Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: Eastman Four-in-one Groupers Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Four-in-one Groupers Description / Notes: Price for a set: $10.00 Solid Oak Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jan-14 Slogan: Make Sure Your Chemicals Fit Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: It costs no more to be certain; use Kodak Acid Fixing Powder Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Description / Notes: Kodak acid fixing powder 1lb: $0.25. 1/2 pound price: $0.15. 1/4 pound price: $0.10 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jul-14 Slogan: The perfect developing agent, Elon Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jul-14 Slogan: Buy the right chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals

142

  
Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Aug-14 Slogan: Insist on Eastman Tested Chemicals, in the container which bears this seal. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Aug-14 Slogan: Kodak Acid Fixing Powder Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jan-14 Slogan: Quality plus Convenience Eastman Portrait Films Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Mar-14 Slogan: Halation is done away with--the cause removed, in Eastman Portrait Films Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Aug-14 Slogan: A higher standard of negative quality is made possible by Eastman Portrait Films Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: 1914 Slogan: The Eastman Studio Reflector Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Studio Reflector Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Mar-14 Slogan: Watch the Temperature / Is your camera far sighted? Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman thermometer, Kodak portrait attachment Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jul-14 Slogan: Eastman View Cameras, No. 1 and No. 2 Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman View Cameras Description / Notes: Price ranges from $19.00 to $72.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Sep-14 Slogan: V.P.K. Enlarging or a Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Enlarging Cameras Description / Notes: Price from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: Kodak Autotime Scale Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Autotime Scale Description / Notes: Price for compound shutter: $1.50. Price for all other shutters: $1.00. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4

143

  
Year: 1914 Slogan: Snow Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak cameras Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: A Kodak Party Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak cameras Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Apr-14 Slogan: Anticipation Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak cameras Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: Many of your Kodak negatives would be truer to nature if made with a Kodak Color Screen Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Color Screen Description / Notes: Price: $0.50, $0.75, $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: Avoid blank white skies in your prints, use a Kodak Color Screen Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Color Screen Description / Notes: Price: $0.50, $0.75, $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jan-14 Slogan: The Kodak Correspondence College Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak correspondence college Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: Holiday Remembrances / Home Photography Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak film and paper / Portrait attachment Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: A Dark-room or The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jan-14 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Mar-14 Slogan: There's the element of certainty in the work of the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Apr-14 Slogan: The Satisfaction of developing your films in the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank

144

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: Develop your films in the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: The Kodak Magnesium Ribbon Holder Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Magnesium Ribbon Holder Description / Notes: Price: $0.20. Kodak alcohol lamp for burning ribbon: $0.20 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: For all exposures over 1/25 of a second, use a Kodak Metal Tripod Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Metal tripod Description / Notes: No. 0 price: $1.60. No. 1 price: $2.50. No. 2 price: $3.25. Leatherette case for No. 0: $0.75. Leather Carrying case: $1.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: 1914 Slogan: The Big Camera Possibilities of a Kodak are found in the Kodak Portrait Attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak portrait attachment Description / Notes: Price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Apr-14 Slogan: Get close to nature with a Kodak portrait attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak portrait attachment Description / Notes: Price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Apr-14 Slogan: The Kodak Portrait Attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak portrait attachment Description / Notes: Price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Aug-14 Slogan: Kodak portrait attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak portrait attachment Description / Notes: Price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jun-14 Slogan: When you pack for your vacation trip Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Sep-14 Slogan: Kodak Trimming Boards Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak trimming boards Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Apr-14 Slogan: Make prints from your choice negatives on Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White:

145

  
Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: Print your vacation postals by daylight on Kodak Velvet Green paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: The Developer that fits--Nepera Solution Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Nepera Solution Description / Notes: Price 4oz bottle: $0.20. 16oz bottle. $0.60. Eastman M.Q. Tubes: $0.05. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Aug-14 Slogan: No. 4 Majestic Print Dryer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: No. 4 Majestic Print Dryer Description / Notes: Price: $45.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: Great efficiency at small cost. The R.O.C. Post Card Printer Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: R.O.C. Post Card Printer Description / Notes: price: $7.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: In the busy holiday season, make sure your prints are safe--use a Rounds Print Washer. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Rounds Print Washer Description / Notes: 100 capacity price: $10.00. 200 capacity price: $20.00

Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: The Wratten Safelight Lamp Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Safelight Lamp Description / Notes: Price for No. 1: $9.00. No. 2: $6.00. Series 1 safelight: $1.00. Series 2 safelight: $1.00. Series 3 safelight: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: You are always sure the plate is right when you use a Seed Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jan-14 Slogan: The right plate for Dark Days Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Mar-14 Slogan: Uniform Dependability Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jul-14 Slogan: Seed Plates. The ideal plate for portraiture. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White:

146

  
Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: 1914 Slogan: The best amateurs and finishers of amateur work use Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Sep-14 Slogan: For your vacation pictures--Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: Velox Lantern Slide Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox lantern slide film Description / Notes: Price Velox Lantern Slide Film per Doz. $0.30. Kodiopticon complete with Mazda lamp $20.00. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: 1913 Slogan: Get the best results--make the print on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: 1914 Slogan: Profit by the successful experience of those who use Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: For the good of all your negatives, insist on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Dec-13 Slogan: Velox the paper that's quite right Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Mar-14 Slogan: Select the surface of paper most suitable to your negative--then make the print on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Apr-14 Slogan: To make the most of every negative, make the print on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: First of all, select Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jul-14 Slogan: The amateur's own paper Velox

147

  
Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Aug-14 Slogan: For Results--Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: 1913 Slogan: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Description / Notes: Booklet of 12 colors price: $0.25. Separate colors, 2 leaves: $0.05. Set of three camel hair brushes: $0.50. Velox Water Color Palette: $0.25. Complete Velox water color outfit: $0.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: May-14 Slogan: Color your prints with Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Sep-14 Slogan: When vacation days are over--color your prints with Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Description / Notes: Price for complete set: $0.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Jul-14 Slogan: The Vest Pocket Kodak with Fixed Focus Anastigmat Lens Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Aug-14 Slogan: The Essentials of Efficiency. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 1 of 4 Year: Aug-14 Slogan: V.P. Kodak Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: How to Make Good Pictures Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "How to Make Good Pictures" booklet Description / Notes: Price for booklet: $0.25 Price for library edition: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: Anastigmatic and Autographic $27.50 The New 3a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: 3a Kodak Description / Notes: Price for Kodak with Anastigmat lens: $27.50. Price with Rapid Rectilinear Lens: $22.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Mar-15 Slogan: The new brand of Artura paper: Artura Aegis Subject(s): product - film & paper

148

  
Product: Artura Aegis Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: May-15 Slogan: Make Sepia prints of quality with uniformity on: Artura Aegis Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Aegis Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: Large Prints from small negatives, when made on Artura Carbon Black Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Carbon Black Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: The print tells the whole story of quality if made on Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Dec-14 Slogan: Build your success on quality--make your prints on Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: Artura. The real success because it is based on superiority Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Oct-14 Slogan: Make your Kodak Autographic Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Backs for Kodaks Description / Notes: Price ranges from $3.50 to $4.25 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Oct-14 Slogan: A distinctive Kodak convenience. Make your Kodak Autographic Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Backs for Kodaks Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: Back Your Memory With an Autographic Record Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Backs for Kodaks Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Sep-14 Slogan: The Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Mar-15 Slogan: Write it on the film--at the time. Subject(s): woman Text: The Autographic feature, the biggest photographic advance in twenty years, enabling you to write valuable data in the margin below each negative, at the time you made the picture has bee incorporated in all the popular-sized Kodaks--the line of Autographic Kodaks is now complete

149

  
Implied Audience: women / general Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman in a white hat writing on the autographic Kodak Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Dec-14 Slogan: Simplicity Itself Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: Brownie Enlarging Camera. The larger print tells the same story but in bigger type. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price: from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Mar-15 Slogan: No focusing; no dark room with the Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price: from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Apr-15 Slogan: Enlarging with the Bother Left Out Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: Do not depend on daylight if your house is equipped with electricity, The Brownie Enlarging Camera Illuminator Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Illuminator Description / Notes: price: $3.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: Eastman Enlarging Outfit Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Enlarging Outfit Description / Notes: Complete price: $85.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: Eastman Film Clips Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Film Clips Description / Notes: price for 3.5 inch pair: $0.25. Price for 5 inch pair: $0.30 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: Eastman Flash Sheets Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: Every Evening has its picture possibilities. Eastman Flash Sheets Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Mar-15 Slogan: The Hundred Per cent efficiency of Kodak / Ten Miles from

150

  
a Tripod Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets / the Universal Clamp Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Oct-14 Slogan: Specify Eastman Permanent Crystal Pyro Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Dec-14 Slogan: It does for chemicals what certification does for a check. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: Get the best results. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: Our formulas specify Elon Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Apr-15 Slogan: The seal that makes you certain: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: May-15 Slogan: Specify E.K.Co. Tested Chemicals in your next order. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: Look for this seal on the container Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: May-15 Slogan: An ideal trimmer that will meet every professional requirement Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Paper Trimmer Description / Notes: Price: from $5.00 to $12.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Apr-15 Slogan: Eastman Photo Paste Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Photo Paste Description / Notes: Price: from $0.15 to $0.25 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: Real Economy The Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15

151

  
Slogan: In hot weather. The Eastman Plate Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Plate Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Apr-15 Slogan: From a photographer's letter regarding Eastman Portrait Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: Retain all the sparkle of highlights--all the delicacy of half-tones by using Eastman Portrait Films Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: A clean cut without a pull. The Eastman Rotary Print Trimmer Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Rotary Print Trimmer Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Extra cutting discs: $0.25 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: A Universal Developer for Plates, Films and Paper. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Special Developer Description / Notes: Price: $0.25 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Dec-14 Slogan: The Eastman Studio Register System Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Studio Register System Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: May-15 Slogan: Accuracy and convenience combined in the Eastman Studio Scale Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Studio Scale Description / Notes: Price: $3.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: May-15 Slogan: Select the right outfit for commercial and out-door work. Eastman View Camera No. 2. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman View Camera No. 2. Description / Notes: Price: from $25.00 to $72.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Oct-14 Slogan: Enlarging Made Easy Subject(s): product - camera Product: Enlarging Cameras Description / Notes: Price from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: With the new Kodak "Maskit" printing frame Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak "Maskit" printing frame Description / Notes: Price: from $0.40 to $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jul-15 Slogan: The Kodak Amateur Printer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Amateur Printer

152

  
Description / Notes: Price: $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: It looks like paper but it sticks like glue Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Dry Mounting Tissue Description / Notes: Price from $0.08 to $1.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Mar-15 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: May-15 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: With the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jul-15 Slogan: Take Along a Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): woman Text: The big link in the Kodak chain of daylight all the way. Aside from the convenience of the Kodak Film Tank but which you can develop your films anywhere, in broad daylight, the fact that tank development yields you the best possible negatives, in every case, is the one point that drives the story home. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman developing film by a window. Tank on the table. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Apr-15 Slogan: Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): woman Text: The Experience is in the Tank. The photographic amateur getting the results he should from each and every negative is using the Kodak film tank because it is only by tank development that best results are possible--not occasionally, but all the time. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak film tank Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman developing film by a window. Tank on the table. Photo is of a woman, but ad uses male pronouns. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: Kodak Anastigmat f.8. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak lenses. Description / Notes: Prices from $10.00 to $25.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15

153

  
Slogan: "Safety First" means a tripod for all exposures over 1-25 of a second. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Metal tripod Description / Notes: Price from $1.60 to $3.25. Leather carrying case: $1.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Dec-14 Slogan: "Safety First" means a tripod / The Kodiopticon Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Metal tripod / Kodiopticon Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: All In-Doors invites your Kodak when it's fitted with The Kodak Portrait Attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak portrait attachment Description / Notes: Price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: Nature's best interpreter of nature at her best--the Kodak and the Kodak Portrait Attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Portrait Attachment Description / Notes: price $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Oct-14 Slogan: Add to the attractiveness of your vacation Kodak Album with prints on Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: May-15 Slogan: Print your landscapes and seascapes on Kodak Velvet Green paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: The Tint's in the Print when you use Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: With the introduction of Nos. 1 and 1a Autographic Kodak Juniors, the line of Autographic Kodaks in the popular sizes is now complete. Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak Junior, No. 1a Autographic Kodak Junior Description / Notes: prices from $9.00 to $27.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: 3,000.00 in cash prizes for pictures illustrating Kodak advertising slogans Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: Prize for the best photo illustrating one of five slogans: $300.00. Five slogans: "Take a Kodak with you. All Out-Doors invites your Kodak. There are no game laws for those who hunt with a Kodak. Let the children Kodak. Write it on the film--at the time." Also, $500.00 prize for the best new slogan and photo accompanying it. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4

154

  
Year: Mar-15 Slogan: Pocketfoto Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Pocketfoto Description / Notes: Price: from $1.25 to $1.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: The R.O.C. Enlarging Back Subject(s): product - camera Product: R.O.C. Enlarging Back Description / Notes: Price: $8.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Dec-14 Slogan: Twenty Minutes in a Rounds Print washer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Rounds Print Washer Description / Notes: Price for 100 capacity: $10.00. For 200 capacity: $20.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Apr-15 Slogan: For every occasion where extreme speed is essential use the Seed Graflex Plate Subject(s): product - camera Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: Seed Graflex Plate Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Apr-15 Slogan: The Souvenir Photo Case Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Souvenir Photo Case Description / Notes: Price: from $0.35 to $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: Strong--Practical--Convenient Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Eastman Studio Reflector Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: The picture worth taking is worth keeping Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Kodak Album Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Dec-14 Slogan: Almost another camera for fifty cents Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Portrait Attachment Description / Notes: price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: Does Double Duty. Thermometer Stirring Rod Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Thermometer Stirring Rod Description / Notes: Price: $0.60 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: With the Thermometer Stirring Rod Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Thermometer Stirring Rod Description / Notes: price: $0.60

155

  
Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Oct-14 Slogan: Tozol - The Complete Developing Agent for photographic Papers Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Tozol Developing Agent Description / Notes: 1oz bottle price: $0.40. 1/4 pound: $1.40. 1/2 Pound: $2.60. 1 pound: $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: The Logical Decision Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: What's in the negative comes out in the print when you use Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: Velox a photographic paper that fits Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Oct-14 Slogan: For the best possible print: Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: Made with you in mind. Velox. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jan-15 Slogan: The paper that meets the amateur half-way, Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Mar-15 Slogan: The last word in photographic printing is Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Apr-15 Slogan: There's success in every sheet of Velox the Amateur's Own Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Jun-15 Slogan: As far as photographic printing goes, results and Velox mean one and the same thing Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Oct-14 Slogan: Color your choice prints with Velox Transparent Water

156

  
Color Stamps Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Description / Notes: Book of stamps price: $0.25. Complete set price: $0.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Nov-14 Slogan: Why not green fields and a blue sky rather than a landscape in black and white Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: May-15 Slogan: A touch of nature with every stroke of the brush if you color your landscapes with Velox transparent water color stamps Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Description / Notes: Price per book of stamps: $0.25. Complete outfit: $0.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Feb-15 Slogan: "That Wonderful Little Camera" Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: Apr-15 Slogan: "Oh if I only had a Kodak" Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 2 of 4 Year: May-15 Slogan: The large print The easy way with the Vest Pocket Kodak or Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Enlarging Camera, Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price: from $2.25 to $3.60 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: To know "How to Make Good Pictures" read it. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "How to Make Good Pictures" booklet Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: Send for this Book. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: 1906 Graflex catalog Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: The New 3a Autographic Kodak Special with Range Finder Subject(s): product - camera Product: 3a Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $66.00 and $77.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: The New 3a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: 3a Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $27.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: Large Prints on Artura Carbon Black Subject(s): product - film & paper

157

  
Product: Artura Carbon Black Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jan-16 Slogan: Duplicate the small print in larger size on Artura Carbon Black Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Carbon Black Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: Artura Carbon Black Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Carbon Black Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: Artura Quality all the way through Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: A New Grade of Artura Iris Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: The success based on superiority. Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Feb-16 Slogan: The Man who uses Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: You have a positive assurance if the print is on Artura. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: Your Kodak becomes Autographic Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Backs for Kodaks Description / Notes: price: from $2.50 to $4.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: Another Autographic Brownie Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Autographic Brownie Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: An autobiography with an Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera

158

  
Product: Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: The construction of the Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price: from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: To obtain large prints with the Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: price: from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Feb-16 Slogan: The Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Sep-15 Slogan: Brownie Enlarging Camera Illuminator Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Illuminator Description / Notes: Price: $3.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jun-16 Slogan: The Brownie Safelight Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Brownie Safelight Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: Developing Conveniences. Core plate developing racks Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Core plate developing racks, Eastman film developing box No. 2. Description / Notes: Price for racks: from $0.50 to $1.60. Price for developing box: $3.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: A good enlarging outfit will yield bigger returns on your investment than any one piece of apparatus you can install in your studio. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Enlarging Outfit Description / Notes: Price complete outfit: $85.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: The right album for your negatives Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Film Negative Album Description / Notes: price: from $0.75 to $1.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: Used in connection with the Kodak Flash Sheet Holder. Eastman Flash Sheets Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Feb-16 Slogan: With Eastman Flash Sheets and the Kodak Flash Sheet Holder Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Description / Notes: Price for Flash sheet holder: $1.00

159

  
Slogan: E.K. Tested Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: Specify Eastman Permanent Crystal Pyro in your next order Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: The seal with the certainty back of it: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: We are both Certain Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jan-16 Slogan: Begin the New Year with a New Studio Register Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Loose Leaf Studio Register / Eastman Card Index Studio Register Description / Notes: Price for Loose leaf register: $2.50. Price for Index card register: $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: The photographer who knows and appreciates quality,

Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: The Mark of Distinction Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Sep-15 Slogan: The Seal that inspires confidence Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: This seal, on every bottle or tin, insures its quality Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: When you see this seal on the container: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: The chemical in its most convenient form: Eastman Permanent Crystal Pyro Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16

160

  
sticks once he has used Eastman Portrait Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: None Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Description / Notes: A Letter from H. Walter Barnett to Kodak, endorsing Eastman Portrait Film. "is yielding splendid results" Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: The real advantage of Eastman Portrait Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: Doubled! Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Feb-16 Slogan: 160% Increase. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jan-16 Slogan: Developing and Printing Outfits Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman printing outfits Description / Notes: Price for Eastman 3a outfit: $2.15. Price for Eastman A B C outfit: $1.50. Brownie Developing and Printing Outfit: $0.90 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: Eastman Studio Reflector Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Studio Reflector Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: To keep the quality right, keep the time and temperature right. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Thermometer Stirring Rod Description / Notes: Price: $0.60 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jun-16 Slogan: Even Kodak Tested Chemicals can't do their work properly if the solutions are too warm. Here are two reliable means of checking up the temperature. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Thermometer, Thermometer Stirring Rod Description / Notes: Thermometer price: $0.65. Thermometer Stirring Rod price: $0.75. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: There is just one temperature at which a solution does its best work. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Thermometer, Thermometer Stirring Rod Description / Notes: Price for thermometer: $0.50. Price for Thermometer stirring Rod: $0.60 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4

161

  
Year: Apr-16 Slogan: The readings are plain as day--in the darkroom with the Eastman Visible Graduate Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman visible graduate Description / Notes: Price: from $0.20 to $0.80 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: The black opaque gradations on the Eastman Visible graduate Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman visible graduate Description / Notes: Price: from $0.20 to $0.80 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: The combination of the Kodak Amateur Printer and the Kodak Film Tank has made every amateur his own finishing department Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Amateur Printer / Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Price for amateur printer: $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: "Every Amateur His Own Finishing Department" Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Amateur Printer / Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Price for Film Tank: $2.50 to $7.50. Price for printer: $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jan-16 Slogan: Another Kodak Convenience Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Amateur Printer / Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: The combination of the Kodak Amateur Printer and the Kodak Film Tank makes every amateur his own finishing department Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Amateur Printer / Kodak Film Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Sep-15 Slogan: The Kodak Autotime Scale Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Autotime Scale Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jan-16 Slogan: Two Darkroom lamps that give you all the light you want with all the safety you need. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Dark Room Lamp / Kodak Candle Lamp Description / Notes: Price for darkroom lamp: $1.00. Price for Candle lamp: $0.25 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: Kodak Dry Mounting Tissue Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Dry Mounting Tissue Description / Notes: price: from $0.20 to $1.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank has made the darkroom a relic and better negatives the rule. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Description / Notes: Price: from $2.50 to $7.50

162

  
Slogan: Where the hand fails use a Kodak Metal Tripod Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Metal tripod Description / Notes: price: from $1.60 to $3.25. Leather carrying case: $1.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: The New Kodak Metal Tripod Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Metal tripod Description / Notes: price: $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jan-16 Slogan: With the Kodak Portrait Attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Portrait Attachment Description / Notes: price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: By increasing the Kodak's field of usefulness, The Kodak Portrait Attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Portrait Attachment Description / Notes: Price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: Close to Nature with a Kodak and Kodak Portrait Attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Portrait Attachment Description / Notes: price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: Kodak Safelight Lamp

Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: The novice who used a Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak film tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jun-16 Slogan: Take a Kodak Film Tank With you Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Price: from $2.75 up. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jan-16 Slogan: Kodak Anastigmat f.7.7 Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak lenses. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: Kodak Magnesium Ribbon Holder Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Magnesium Ribbon Holder Description / Notes: price for ribbon holder: $0.20 alcohol lamp: $0.20 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15

163

  
Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Safelight Lamp Description / Notes: price $3.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: The photographer uses a lamp similar in construction to the Kodak safelight lamp Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Safelight Lamp Description / Notes: Price: $3.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Sep-15 Slogan: The Upper Half of the Kodak Sky Filter Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Sky Filter Description / Notes: Price from $0.50 to $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Feb-16 Slogan: The Significance of Kodak Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Feb-16 Slogan: Two Kodak Conveniences Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Trimming Board / Kodak Magnesium Ribbon Holder Description / Notes: Price for trimming board: $0.40 and $0.60. Price for Ribbon Holder: $0.20. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: The rule, steel blade, and exact construction of the Kodak Trimming Board Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak trimming boards Description / Notes: price: 5x5 inches: $0.40. 7x7 inches: $0.60 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: With the first hint of spring, Kodak Velvet Green Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: The tint's in the print on Kodak Velvet Green Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: Kodak Dominates Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Workmanship Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: Improved Majestic Print Dryers Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Majestic Print Dryer Description / Notes: Price for No 1: $25.00. Price for No. 5: $50.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: No. 1 Autographic Kodak, Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak, Special Description / Notes: price: $45.00

164

  
Slogan: The Panoram Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Panoram Kodak No.1 and No. 4 Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Sep-15 Slogan: Three Thousand Dollars For Pictures Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: Here is opportunity Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: Prize for the best photo illustrating one of five slogans: $300.00. Five slogans: "Take a Kodak with you. All Out-Doors invites your Kodak. There are no game laws for those who hunt with a Kodak. Let the children Kodak. Write it on the film--at the time." Also, $500.00 prize for the best new slogan and photo accompanying it. Contest closes November 1st Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: The only Grand Prize Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: The grand prize at the Panama-Pacific Exposition, awarded to Eastman Kodak Company. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: The 1916 Kodak Advertising Competition Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: "3,000.00 CASH for pictures best illustrating Kodak advertisements." Contest closes November 1st

Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: The No. 1 Eastman Printer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: No. 1 Eastman printer Description / Notes: price: $10.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jan-16 Slogan: Nos. 2 and 2a Folding Autographic Brownies Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 and 2a Folding Autographic Brownies Description / Notes: Price: $6.00 to $10.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: The New No. 2 Folding Autographic Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Folding Autographic Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $6.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: The No. 2c Folding Autographic Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2c Folding Autographic Brownie Description / Notes: price: $9.00 and $11.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Sep-15 Slogan: The Panoram Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Panoram Kodak No.1 and No. 4 Description / Notes: Price for No. 1 Panoram Kodak: $10.00. Price for No. 4 Panoram Kodak: $20.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16

165

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: Plastic Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Plastic Plates Description / Notes: The re-coating of old plates for all plates except: Seed, Standard, Stanley, Weatten & Wainwright, and Eastman Plates. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: A substantial trimmer for small and medium sized prints at a very reasonable price. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: R.O.C. Trimmer Description / Notes: price: $1.50 to $2.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: Increase your efficiency--deliver your work promptly. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Rounds print washer, Improved majestic print dryer Description / Notes: Price for washer: $10.00, $30.00. Print for dryer: $25.00 and $50.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: Seed Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jan-16 Slogan: Super-speed best describes the extreme sensitiveness of the Seed Graflex Plate Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Feb-16 Slogan: Seed Quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: For the commercial photographer: Two New Standard Plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Standard Dry Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: The Eastman Film Negative Album Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Eastman Film Negative Album Description / Notes: Price: from $0.75 to $1.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Year: Oct-15 Slogan: The Right album for Subject(s): product - film & Product: The Kodak Album Description / Notes: Price: Ads 3 of 4 your prints paper from $2.25 to $3.50

Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Jul-15 Slogan: You'll want an album Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Kodak Album Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4

166

  
Year: Dec-15 Slogan: Keep a Photographic Diary Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Kodak Album Description / Notes: Price: from $2.25 to $3.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: Holiday Hints Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Kodak Album / Year Book calendar Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: Day in and day out, the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: The Kodak Film Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: A few gift suggestions for your friend, the amateur Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Kodak System Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: Two first aids to the time exposure: Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Universal clamp, The new Kodak Metal Tripod Description / Notes: Price for clamp: $0.75. Price for Tripod: $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: The Year Book Calendar Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Year Book Calendar Description / Notes: price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: Make gifts that bear the personal touch. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Year Book Calendar Description / Notes: price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Oct-15 Slogan: Velox offers all that your negatives demand Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: Results follow as surely as the night the day if you make your prints on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Sep-15 Slogan: Contrast Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: Velox the photographic paper that fits. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White:

167

  
Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: Say "Velox" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: Simple in manipulation, Dependable in results, Velox. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Feb-16 Slogan: Just one good print after another with Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: Velox is the best print you can get Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Apr-16 Slogan: There are as many reasons for Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: Made to your order: Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: The Versatility of Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: Color your vacation prints Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: Prints colored with Velox transparent water color stamps Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Description / Notes: price for book: $0.25. Price for complete kit: $0.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Aug-15 Slogan: The Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: price: $10.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: Dec-15 Slogan: No photographic equipment is complete without a Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: price: $6.00 or $10.00 with an Anastigmat

168

  
Camera. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 3 of 4 Year: May-16 Slogan: A notebook that takes pictures. A camera that takes notes. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $10.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Sep-16 Slogan: If you don't know how to make good pictures this book will help you. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "How to Make Good Pictures" booklet Description / Notes: Price: $0.25. Library edition, cloth bound: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: The title of the book tells the story Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "How to Make Good Pictures" booklet Description / Notes: Price: $0.25. Price for cloth bound edition: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Mar-17 Slogan: It fits the pocket Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2c Kodak Jr. Description / Notes: Price: from $12.00 to $19.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Feb-17 Slogan: 3a Autographic Kodak Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: 3a Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: price: $55.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: May-17 Slogan: The New 3a Autographic Kodak Special with Kodak Range Finder Subject(s): product - camera Product: 3a Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: $55.00 and $66.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jan-17 Slogan: Artura Carbon Black are better enlargements because they retain the contact quality. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Carbon Black Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jun-16 Slogan: Artura it produces quality for quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jul-16 Slogan: Artura retains this popularity because of its superior quality Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: Your customers may not know why they prefer prints on Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper

169

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Feb-17 Slogan: Quality First. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: Write it on the film--at the time. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: "All folding Kodaks and Folding Brownies are now Autographic" Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: Check up results with an Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Apr-17 Slogan: Autographic, of course Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: Belt case for vest pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Belt case for Vest Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: price: $1.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jun-16 Slogan: It's as simple to make enlargements with a Brownie Enlarging Camera as it is to make pictures with a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price: from $1.75 to $4.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: Large Prints with a Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jan-17 Slogan: As far as enlarging goes you can do without daylight with the Brownie Enlarging Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Enlarging Camera Description / Notes: Price: $3.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jul-16 Slogan: When you take a Kodak with you provide yourself with a carrying case. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Camera carrying case Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: Core Plate Developing Racks / Eastman Film Developing Holder Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Core Plate Developing Racks / Eastman Film Developing Holder Description / Notes: Core plate price: from $0.50 to $1.60. Eastman film developing holder price: $0.40 to $0.50

170

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Apr-17 Slogan: Eastman Film Developing Holder No. 2 / Core Plate Developing Racks Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Core plate developing racks, Eastman film developing box No. 2. Description / Notes: Price for Film holder: $0.30 to $1.50. Price for racks: $0.60 to $1.60 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: Don't overlook the big profits of the enlarging business. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Enlarging Outfit Description / Notes: Price for outfit with lamp, but without lens: $100.00. Lens price: $12.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jan-17 Slogan: Eastman Flash sheets and Kodak Flash Sheet Holder Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Description / Notes: price for flash sheet holder: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Feb-17 Slogan: Fun "By Flashlight" Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Flash Sheets Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: This seal on the container guarantees the quality of its contents Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: Tozol The Complete Developer Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Description / Notes: Price: from $1.20 to $18.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: Eastman Special Developer Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Description / Notes: Price: $0.25 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: This seal outside the container means that the chemical or chemical preparation inside is exactly what it should be--not only Eastman tested but Eastman passed. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: The New Developer: Kodelon Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Description / Notes: Kodelon developer price: from $0.89 to 59.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Mar-17 Slogan: Eastman Tellurium Toner - It cleans and warms the print Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White:

171

  
Year: Jul-16 Slogan: 93% Increase Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16 Slogan: The Quality of Eastman Portrait Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16 Slogan: Eastman Studio Scale Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Studio Scale Description / Notes: Price: $3.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: The good points of the Eastman Trimmer Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Trimmer / R.O.C. Trimmer Description / Notes: Price for Eastman Trimmer: $6.00 to $12.00. Price for R.O.C. Trimmer: $1.50 to $2.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jan-17 Slogan: A New Size that Fits. Eastman View Camera No. 2 Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman View Camera No. 2. Description / Notes: Price: $35.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: There's a Merry Christmas for the Amateur in any one of these Kodak helps.

Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Apr-17 Slogan: This seal is on every carton of Nepera Solution Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Description / Notes: Price: $0.28 to $0.84 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Apr-17 Slogan: Look for our stamp of approval on every container Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jan-17 Slogan: What the Kodak Film Tank does for films, the Eastman Plate Tank does for plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Plate Tank Description / Notes: Plate tank prices: $4.00 to $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Mar-17 Slogan: Eastman Portrait Albums Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Portrait Albums Description / Notes: Price: $10.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jun-16 Slogan: Sparkle and Pluck have a special meaning when applied to Eastman Portrait Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4

172

  
Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Enlarging Cameras, tripod, albums, flashlight, Safelight Description / Notes: Gift ideas. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: May-17 Slogan: Wratten Filters / Orthochromatic Filters / Contrast Filters Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Filters Description / Notes: Prices: from $0.25 to $6.25 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: Flexo Print Roller / Eastman Photo Paste Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Flexo Print Roller / Eastman Photo Paste Description / Notes: price for flexo print roller: $0.20 price for photo paste: from $0.10 to $0.25 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Sep-16 Slogan: If it's a Folding Brownie or a Folding Kodak, it's Autographic. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Folding Kodaks and Folding Brownies Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jul-16 Slogan: Keep the summer story told by your Kodak in book form with a Hercules Album Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Hercules Album Description / Notes: Price: $3.25 to $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jun-17 Slogan: Kodak, as you go Subject(s): Maid Text: none Implied Audience: Women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: color Publications: Outlook Description / Notes: Color ad of the maid giving the camera to the woman in the car. The ad comes with an Outlook magazine, dated June 1917. Also, a letter to Mr. Jack Buggington, Inverness Florida dated August 1975, from Glenn W. Mentch, Director, Advertising Services. (it appears he had sent this ad to the department, and it was added to this binder.) Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: Two Kodak Helps: Kodak Maskit Printing Frame, Eastman Visible Graduate Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak "Maskit" printing frame, Eastman Visible Graduate Description / Notes: price for printing frame: $0.40 to $0.50. Price for Graduate: $0.20 to $0.60 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: Holiday Greeting Carriers. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak accessories Description / Notes: Article about gift ideas. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: The Kodak Amateur Printer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Amateur Printer Description / Notes: Price: $6.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16 Slogan: The experience is in the tank. The efficiency is in the

173

  
printer. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Amateur Printer / Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Price for printer: $6.00. Price for Film Tank: $2.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: Kodak Film Tank and the Kodak Amateur Printer Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Amateur Printer / Kodak Film Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jan-17 Slogan: The Newest of the Kodak Helps Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Auto-Mask Printing Frame Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Feb-17 Slogan: Kodak Color Filter Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak color filter Description / Notes: Price from $0.50 to $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: May-17 Slogan: Kodak Dry Mounting Press Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Dry Mounting Press Description / Notes: Price: $15.00 to $57.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jul-16 Slogan: A little over twenty minutes after the last exposure has been made, you will be able to see "how they came out" with a Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Price from $2.75 up. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Sep-16 Slogan: Developing is done in daylight with a Kodak Film Tank. And the Experience is in the tank. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Price: $2.75 to $8.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jan-17 Slogan: It Does the Rest Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: Kodak Flash Sheet Holder Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak flash sheet holder Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Mar-17 Slogan: In-Door Photography Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak flash sheet holder, Portrait attachment Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16 Slogan: Full tripod service means a Kodak Metal Tripod Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Metal tripod Description / Notes: Price: from $2.25 to $6.00. Leather case:

174

  
$1.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: Make the most of the Thanksgiving homecoming with a Kodak and Kodak Portrait Attachment Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Portrait Attachment Description / Notes: Price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: May-17 Slogan: The Kodak Range Finder Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Range Finder Description / Notes: article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jul-16 Slogan: Two methods of dark room illumination that you can be sure are safe. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak safelight lamp, Brownie safelight lamp. Description / Notes: Price for Kodak lamp: $3.00. Price for Brownie lamp: $1.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jul-16 Slogan: Finish as you Take Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak System Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Sep-16 Slogan: This is the open season for Kodak Velvet Green Paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Apr-17 Slogan: And now for prints on Kodak Velvet Green Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): Woman Text: Give your Christmas shopping the benefit of your experience. Kodak has meant endless pleasure to you--it can mean as much to anyone on your Christmas list. It's the logical gift for you to make. Implied Audience: women / Christmas Product: Kodaks and Brownies Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman sitting in a parlor chair, holding a Kodak, presents in the BG on a table. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jun-16 Slogan: Here is true Kodak efficiency Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak, Special Description / Notes: Price: $40.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16 Slogan: The New Size Picture Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2c Folding Autographic Brownie Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16

175

  
Slogan: The No. 3a Folding Autographic Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3a Folding Autographic Brownie Description / Notes: price: $10.00 and $12.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: May-17 Slogan: There's room for the rest of the view with the Panoram Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Panoram Kodak No.1 and No. 4 Description / Notes: No. 1 price: $10.00. No. 4 Price: $20.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jun-16 Slogan: The 1916 Kodak Advertising Competition Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: Article. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jul-16 Slogan: 1916 Kodak Advertising Competition Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: "For the best of such pictures, ten prizes are offered ranging from $100.00 to $1,000.00" Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Sep-16 Slogan: None Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: Ad for the yearly photo contest with a photo of last years winner (no name given) "A Selling argument put in a print--that's what we want" Photo is of two women on the beach photographing their children. (am sure that was actually used in an ad.) Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: May-17 Slogan: 1917 Kodak Advertising Competition Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Photo contest Description / Notes: "In which prizes aggregating 3,000.00 are to be given." Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: A reputation for promptness is a big asset, especially in a busy season--save time by using a Rounds Print Washer / Improved Majestic Print Dryer. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Rounds print washer, Improved majestic print dryer Description / Notes: Price for washer: $12.00 and $33.00. Price for No. 1 dryer: $25.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: May-17 Slogan: Prints on Royal Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Royal Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jul-16 Slogan: Seed plates Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: Seed Plates. All the quality you look for in a plate--all the time. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Seed Dry Plates Color or Black and White:

176

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: System for the Studio Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Studio Cash Book, Shop tickets, Follow Up Cards, and Studio Register Description / Notes: Price for cash book: $4.00. Price for 100 shop tickets: $0.25. Price for follow-up cards: $0.60. Price for Studio Register: $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: Kodak Told the Story, let a Kodak Album Keep it. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: The Kodak Album, The Hercules Album Description / Notes: Price for Kodak Album: $2.25 or $3.50. Price for Hercules Album: $2.65 to $5.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: The Kodak Film Tank makes anybody an expert as far as film developing goes. All by daylight. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: The Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: price: from $2.75 to $8.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16 Slogan: New even to the size of the picture it makes Subject(s): product - camera Product: The No. 2C Autographic Kodak Junior Description / Notes: Price: from $12.00 to $19.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Nov-16 Slogan: The Olympic Calendar Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Olympic Calendar Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: Handsome in itself. The Olympic Calendar Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Olympic Calendar Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Sep-16 Slogan: A novel effect and you'll like it. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: The Woodmat, The souvenir photo case Description / Notes: price for woodmat: $0.05 to $0.10. Price for Souvenir photo case: $0.35 to $0.50. Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16 Slogan: Universal Tripod Head Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Universal tripod head Description / Notes: Price: $0.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jun-16 Slogan: The best finisher uses Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16 Slogan: You're entitled to Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4

177

  
Year: Aug-16 Slogan: Kodak Eastman Film Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: If it isn't Velox it isn't the amateur's own paper Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Dec-16 Slogan: Re-development with Royal Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Apr-17 Slogan: The Best Print you can get on Velox is the best print you can get Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Aug-16 Slogan: Color your vacation prints with Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Description / Notes: price for book of stamps: $0.25. Price for complete outfit: $0.75 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jan-17 Slogan: This is the actual size of the Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak price: from $6.00 to $22.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Apr-17 Slogan: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price from $10.00 to $22.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Apr-17 Slogan: Vest Pocket Kodak Tripod Adapter Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Tripod Adapter Description / Notes: Price: $0.50 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Jul-16 Slogan: The Wratten Safelight Lamp Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Wratten Safelight Lamp Description / Notes: price: from $6.00 to $9.00 Binder: 1913-1917 Amateur Ads 4 of 4 Year: Oct-16 Slogan: Wratten Safelight Lamps / Kodak Safelight Lamp Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Wratten Safelight Lamp / Kodak Safelight Lamp Description / Notes: Price for Wratten: $9.00. Price for Kodak: $3.00 Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: The 2a Folding Pocket Brownie

178

  
Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2a Folding Pocket Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $6.00 Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Write the Date on the negative Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Make the pictures that you take doubly valuable by recording, briefly, on the margin of the film negative the all important: who - when - where. You can do it instantly, permanently, at the time you make the exposure with an autographic Kodak. Implied Audience: women / general Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a woman outdoors making a note on the film. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Use an Autographic Kodak Subject(s): man on construction site. Text: Every negative that is worth making is worth a date and title. Architects, engineers, and contractors who make photographic records of progressive work and the amateur who wants to improve the quality of his work can make valuable notations on the negatives, by means of the autographic Kodak. The places visited - interesting dates and facts, such notations add to the value of every negative. The greatest photographic advance in 20 years. Implied Audience: Laborers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man at a construction site using the autographic Kodak. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Make Sure Subject(s): man writing on autographic camera Text: Write the date and title on the film at the time you make the exposure. Add to the value of every negative with a permanent record that you can always have for reference. It's only a matter of seconds with an Autographic Kodak... Implied Audience: outdoors Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a man in a yard writing with the autographic camera. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Write it on the film - at the time. Subject(s): mother / child Text: Make your Kodak story of the children doubly valuable, by dating every negative, by making brief notes that will help, in after years, to recall happily to memory the incident that led to the taking of the picture. Dressed for her first party. The first school day. Bob's first skates. Mary's fourth birthday. - a thousand such important events should be titled on the negatives and at leisure copied into the Kodak album. It's a simple almost instantaneous process with an Autographic Kodak. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother writing on the Kodak, while the young daughter watches. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Write it on the film - at the time. Subject(s): Woman Text: Make every negative more valuable by permanently recording at the time of exposure the all important date and title. It's a simple and almost instantaneous process with an Autographic Kodak Implied Audience: women / general Product: autographic Kodak

179

  
Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a woman inscribing autographic Kodak. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: Better than any mere toy. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie Camera Description / Notes: Price: $1.00 to $12.00 Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: A Clear Picture Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: No Matter How Thrilling Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: "How Clear the Pictures Are!" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Film Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: Serial Stomach Examinations Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Screen X-Ray film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: X-Ray Efficiency Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: Eastman X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: For Out of Town Work Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: The New X-Ray Film

180

  
Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: Eastman Screen X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: The Kodak on the Farm Subject(s): Chicken and chicks Text: every live thing on the farm is worth a photograph - and just now when chicks and lambs and calves are arriving so rapidly is a most interesting time to start a Kodak record - such a record often becomes more then interesting, it becomes a business asset. ... Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: simple illustration Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Kodak on the Farm Subject(s): cows Text: At every turn, country life offers opportunity for the camera. In a business way there are records of stock and crops and buildings and trees and ditching to be kept. From the standpoint of the family album there are pictures of the children and pets and the home - pictures that grow in interest with every passing year. And the Kodak adds fun to every wholesome frolic. At the picnic, at every evening gathering, on the trip to the city, on the shooting and fishing trips it adds to the pleasure at the time and the resulting pictures are a pleasure for all time. And the cost is less than you think. Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: illustration of hands photographing a herd of cows. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): farmer / wife standing with corn Text: Everything that you are interested in is worth a picture. On the home place, at your neighbor's, at the picnic, on your fishing or hunting trip - whenever you go there are scenes and incidents that you can preserve for all time with the click of a Kodak shutter. ... Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: another simple illustration for the Kodak on the Farm series. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: For the boy - A Kodak Subject(s): father / son at camera store Text: Indoors and out he will enjoy the making of pictures. 'Twill mean more fun on the vacation and the after-pleasure of showing the pictures to his chums. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a father and son in a camera store. The son is holding a camera as the father and salesman look on. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Baby Book Subject(s): Father photographing mother and baby. Text: The first journey downstairs for exhibition to that secondary consideration - father. The toddling nursery days! That all

181

  
important epoch when the baby first trudges off to school. In all these great events are limitless opportunities for the Kodak. And with the school days come pictures by, as well as pictures of the children. Pictures they take of each other, free from constraint or conscious posing. Spontaneous pictures that reflect simplicity and weave into the Kodak Book the touch of naturalness. It is such pictures as these that add the delightful side-lights to the more formal studio pictures that must be made of little John and Mary. Just as they must have 'dress up clothes' for Sunday School and parties, so, too, you will want them in 'dress up pictures.' But you love them as much in their soiled pinafores as in their party best. And, too, you will love the Kodak pictures that hold the charm of homeyness. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a father with camera and tripod photographing mother and baby - both in white. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: none Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman leaning on a fence, at the lakeshore composing a photograph. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: For Christmas Morning A Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: And throughout the day, the taking of pictures of all that goes to make that day a merry one. Implied Audience: women / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo is a woman with a new Kodak sitting at a snowy window, with wrapped presents. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Anywhere - Everywhere Kodak Subject(s): Kodak girl in silhouette Text: Indoors or out, on your travels or at home, Kodak is at your service. And it means photography with the bother left out. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Silhouette of a woman holding a Kodak. The caption asks the reader to read the March issue of Kodakery to find out how to make these silhouette photographs. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): man at a train station Text: none Implied Audience: travel Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man sitting on his suitcase waiting for a train with Kodak slung over his shoulder. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): man, woman outdoors with golf clubs Text: none Implied Audience: travel Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a young couple sitting on a hill with golf clubs, the woman is holding a Kodak.

182

  
Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Record Subject(s): men in orchard Text: The photograph of the young orchard - just as it starts the summer growth - then another photograph, say in October when the growth is ended the wood is hardening, will make an interesting and valuable record. Such pictures become a real asset when used to comparative growths of trees of crops that have had different treatments in fertilizers or in cultivation. And picture making is very simple by the Kodak method, and less expensive than you think. Ask your dealer or write us for our new booklet "The Kodak on the Farm" Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: simple illustration Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): three young girls Text: Twill be fun for them, will add to the joy of their out-door days. And afterward the unposed pictures of the children by the children - pictures free from consciousness and constraint - will double the value of the family Kodak album. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of three girls on a beach - two sitting under an umbrella - one photographing them. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): young boy standing at lake edge Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy looking out on a lake, with Kodak in hand. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): young girl and boy Text: Get more fun from every trip by taking pictures of all the interesting people and places and 'doings'. And then you can enjoy the fun all over again in the Kodak album. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young boy and girl, boy holding suitcase, standing at a doorway. Girl with Kodak case slung over her shoulder. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: The Story of the Kodak Album Subject(s): family looking at album Text: It's the intimate, personal story of the home - a picture story that interests every member of the family. And the older it grows, the more it expands, the stronger its grip becomes; the greater its fascination Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak album Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of father, mother, three children looking at the Kodak album. (could be grandparents.) Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Baby Book Subject(s): mother / child Text: The first journey downstairs for exhibition to that secondary consideration - father. The toddling nursery days! That all

183

  
important epoch when the baby first trudges off to school. In all these great events are limitless opportunities for the Kodak. And with the school days come pictures by, as well as pictures of the children. Pictures they take of each other, free from constraint or conscious posing. Spontaneous pictures that reflect simplicity and weave into the Kodak Book the touch of naturalness. It is such pictures as these that add the delightful side-lights to the more formal studio pictures that must be made of little John and Mary. Just as they must have 'dress up clothes' for Sunday School and parties, so, too, you will want them in 'dress up pictures.' But you love them as much in their soiled pinafores as in their party best. And, too, you will love the Kodak pictures that hold the charm of homeyness. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak baby book Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother with tripod and camera, photographing baby on a wicker basket. Both are all in white. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: If it isn't an Eastman it isn't a Kodak Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Brand Description / Notes: about the Kodak brand, and warning against knock-offs. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: Let Kodak Shorten the Winter Evenings Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak flash sheet holder Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: The New Kodak Jr. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Jr. Description / Notes: Price: from $7.50 to $11.00 Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: No. 0 Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 0 Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $1.25 Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: No. 0 Brownie, The little camera that does big things Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 0 Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $1.25 Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: The No. 1 Autographic Kodak, Junior Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak, Junior Description / Notes: Price: $15.00 Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: The No. 1 Autographic Kodak, Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak, Special Description / Notes: Price: From $36.00 to $56.00 Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: The Autographic Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3a Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $22.50 Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5

184

  
Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: Custom dictates that, as compared with Christmas, the Easter gift shall be but a trifle - yet it shall convey the true spirit of the season - the spirit of goodwill and friendship and kindliness. And when to these it adds the personal touch it conveys sentiment without sentimentality. Between friends - a photograph. Implied Audience: Easter / general Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: the third ad selling photographs without using any visual aid. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: April, 1915 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: The simple gift that lends the touch of friendship without the embarrassment of an obligation - your photograph. Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photograph - but selling a photograph! Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: There's a quaint and pretty Indian superstition that those who are photographed lose something of their personality - that this personality becomes part of the picture. Be this superstition of be is sentiment, the idea bears both truth and charm. For a picture means something, is personal, gives the homely touch of friendship--especially at Christmas time. Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photograph - taking a superstition and making it an ad tactic!

Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Slogan: The Absentee Subject(s): nothing! Text: It is the day of all the year - thanksgiving day - when every member of the family is under the home roof-tree. Father is skillfully disjointing the juicy gobbler, and mother, with anxiety lest the meal shall not go well sits opposite, serving the cranberries and supervising the whole ceremony; little Johnny is attacking a mighty drum stick and -and Oh! but the marmalade is good. Thanksgiving Day, the family day, but with nearly always a regret that this one or that one could not be present. Had to go to Mary's folks this year, you know. Of course, it doesn't really take the place of the absentee, but on such occasions, along with the letter of regret - a new photograph. There's a photographer in your town. Implied Audience: families Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: clever - there's no photo, and it's called the absentee- emphasizing the lack of a photograph. Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: Seed X-Ray Plates Subject(s): product - medical Product: Seed X-Ray Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914 Slogan: In Stomach Cases Subject(s): product - medical Product: Seed X-Ray Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 1 of 5 Year: 1914

185

  
Slogan: As right as a full jeweled watch. Vest Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: The 3a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: 3a Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $27.50, $22.50 Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Make a Systematic record with an Autographic Kodak Subject(s): man with camera, survey equipment Text: none Implied Audience: Laborers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man in dirty work clothes, writing on a Kodak with survey equipment on a tripod. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Write it on the film - at the time. Subject(s): parents and baby Text: Make the Kodak record accurate, authentic. Then there will never bee the question: "How old was Baby when this was taken," or "What summer was this made?" You can write the who, when and where permanently on the margin of the negative at the time the exposure is made if you use an Autographic Kodak. It's but a matter of a few seconds at the time and it's there to stay. All folding Kodaks now have the autographic feature and there is no extra charge for autographic film. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a father inscribing a photo while Mother and young baby pose. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: At the Front with the Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Article about James H. Hare, war correspondent who uses a Kodak Autographic Camera Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: La Kodak Autografica Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: In Spanish Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: "Eastman" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: "Eastman" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Motion Picture Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: Screen Work Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Screen X-Ray film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5

186

  
Year: 1915 Slogan: Film Efficiency Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: Uniform in Results Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film, Eastman Screen X-Ray Film. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Scout with a Kodak Subject(s): boy Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy on a rock with a Kodak, looking at the camera, as if to photograph it. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: On Every hike--A Kodak Subject(s): Boy Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy with a camera and walking stick, hiking. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Let your Kodak tell the Story of Days afield. Subject(s): Boy Text: There's interest in every moment of the picture making and then the added pleasure of the pictures themselves. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy with a Kodak photographing a bush. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: There are no Game Laws - and no accidents - for those who hunt with a Kodak. Subject(s): boy and girl Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children / outdoors Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young boy with a gun, and a young girl with a camera in a field. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Kodak System Subject(s): boy with camera Text: Every out-of-doors day offers opportunity for picture taking - and there's more than a passing pleasure in a collection of pictures of your sports and your chums. You think more of such pictures every day and year. Ask father what he'd give now for a photographic story of his boyhood. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy with skates and a camera sitting outdoors. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): children Text: none

187

  
Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of an older girl and younger boy, girl writing on the back with Autographic Kodak Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): children Text: The pictures they will make of each other, of their pets and playmates, of their games and romps, will prove as great a delight to you as to them. Such pictures will find their way into the Kodak Album and will preserve for all the family, the story of the childhood that they are so rapidly growing out of. Even in Kindergarten days they can make good pictures wit the Brownies and as they approach the "teens" can readily operate any Kodak. Every step in picture making is simple by the Kodak method--and it's less expensive than you think. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: same photo as above, but with added text. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: The always welcome gift - A Kodak Subject(s): father / son in parlor Text: The gift that keeps the picture of every youthful interest School days and sports, the winter and summer outings, the city boy's trip to the country and the country boy's trip to the city. In all these there is fun in the picture taking and afterwards both fun and satisfaction in possession. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a father and son in the parlor, the father holding the camera while sitting in an armchair, the son leaning against the hearth. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Her Christmas Morning Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: The gift that provides the means for keeping a happy picture story of the day. Implied Audience: family / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman with Kodak in her arms, dressed in a sweater, gloves, and hat. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: On every outing--Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Let picture taking add to the delights of country life. Everyday in the open, every picnic party is made merrier if you Kodak--and afterwards comes in the pleasure in the pictures themselves, and picture taking is less expensive than you think. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of a woman on a branch, photographing nature. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Double the fun and prolong the pleasures of every outing with Kodak pictures. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of a woman outside a car photographing nature, while another woman watches from within

188

  
the car. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Holidays are Kodak Days Subject(s): Kodak girl / couple in horse and buggy Text: Every winter outing, every home coming of the boys and girls, the Christmas and New Years festivities - in each of these are fascinating subjects for the Kodak - pictures that make fun in the taking and that to you will always prove a delight. Picture taking by daylight or flashlight, is simple by the Kodak method, and it's not expensive now a days. Put Kodak on your Christmas list. Implied Audience: outdoors / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of a woman photographing a couple in a horse-drawn sleigh. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: On every out-of-doors day-- Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girls Text: none Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two women on a pier, one photographing, the other with a camera on her shoulder. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: There are no Game Laws for Those Who Hunt With a Kodak Subject(s): man and deer in the snow Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man photographing two deer, in the snow in the forest. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Put a Kodak in your pocket Subject(s): man in a suit Text: Have it ready for the unexpected that always happens. There's a size for the vest as well as the coat. Kodak, you know, means photography with the bother left out. Implied Audience: men / general Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man in a suit, with camera in his pocket. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: There are no Game Laws for Those Who Hunt With a Kodak Subject(s): Man with a gun and two women Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man with a gun, reading a game law sign on a tree, while two women watch. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): two women / two children Text: Let your films make fast for you the impressions of those childhood days that are so soon outgrown. There is a new delight in every moment of the story making--and a lasting pleasure in the pictures themselves. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two women on a beach, one

189

  
photographing two young children holding hands. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): two young boys Text: Add to the collection of your pictures of the children and to the more formal studio pictures that you will surely want of them, the care free, unstudied pictures that they will make of each other - pictures that are free from constraint, filled with the naturalness of childhood. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two young boys on a beach, taking photos. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): young girl and boy Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a young girl and boy on a porch, the young girl poses for the boy. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: Kodak Dominates Subject(s): product - misc Text: Not alone because it is first in photographic invention and progress, but because it so encourages and rewards the taking of infinite pains that honest workmanship has become a habit in the Kodak factories. Product: Kodak branding Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man working on a lens for a Kodak. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Cameras Description / Notes: In Spanish Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: Holidays are Kodak Days Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Cameras Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Cameras Description / Notes: In Spanish Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Cameras Description / Notes: In Spanish Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): two men Text: No trip too long, no conditions too rough for a Kodak outfit. You can take, title and finish the negatives on the spot by the Kodak system. You can make sure. Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak system Photo or Illustration Based: photo

190

  
Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two men in the snow, looking at a roll of developed snow. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: The New Folding Autographic Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Folding Autographic Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $6.00. With rapid rectilinear lens: $7.50 Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: Your friends can buy anything you can send (crossed out) give them - except your photograph. Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. One word is crossed out - looks like that is part of the ad. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: Mar-16 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: Let the Easter card carry the message that lends the personal touch of friendship: Your photograph. Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: emphasis on text - but there is transparent lily photograph in the back. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: Oct. 1915 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: Photographs, like the family furniture are most cherished when very new or very old. Mother banished her mother's old sofa to the attic. You, the grand-daughter, brought it down again and you prize it, even above the latest "new piece" It's the same with pictures- your photograph just as you now are- your friends will appreciate, now. And the second generation will cherish it even more. Implied Audience: families Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: That earliest slight break in home ties - the morning when the boy or the girl first trudges off to school! From that day, the changes are rapid. Every year you note them. And, almost before you realize it, there comes the severer sundering of those ties, when John or Mary with a cheery "Will be home for Christmas, sure," waves a stout farewell. Both of you are choking back sentiment. And afterward-how pictures, showing all the rapid transitions, do help. Implied Audience: families Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: Nov-15 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: For Christmas- your photograph. The simple gift that lends the touch of friendship without the embarrassment of an obligation Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White:

191

  
bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: Results Subject(s): product - medical Product: Seed X-Ray Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: An Ideal Plate Subject(s): product - medical Product: Seed X-Ray Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 2 of 5 Year: 1915 Slogan: X-Ray Examinations Subject(s): product - medical Product: Seed X-Ray Plates Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: A New Kodak in a New Size Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2c Kodak Autographic Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $12.00, $14.00, and $19.00 Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: The New 2c Kodak Jr. Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2c Kodak Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 to $19.00 Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Rays of teeth caption: "Courtesy of Dr. Albert Kinley, Boston, Mass." Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: Prove your Case! Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Ray caption: "No. 1 Dental X-Ray Film Radiographs" Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: If there's any doubt, use Eastman Dental X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Rays of teeth caption: "Courtesy of Dr. Albert Kinley, Boston, Mass." Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: The reason why is shown by Eastman Dental X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Rays of teeth caption: "Courtesy of Dr. Albert Kinley, Boston, Mass." Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: You can stand by the verdict of Eastman Dental X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Rays of teeth caption: "Courtesy of Dr. Albert Kinley, Boston, Mass."

192

  
Year: 1916 Slogan: Make the Diagnosis Easier, use Eastman X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: Eastman X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Slogan: A Happy Christmas Thought --Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: The gift that adds to the good times at the moment; that indoors and out gives zest to the merry making and then preserves the happy picture story of all that goes to make the day a merry one. Implied Audience: women / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman in an armchair, holding a camera. Presents behind her. Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Slogan: A Happy Christmas Thought --Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: The gift that adds to the good times at the moment; that indoors and out gives zest to the merry making and then preserves the happy picture story of all that goes to make the day a merry one. Implied Audience: women / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: an illustration of the above photograph -

Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: All Kodak Film is now Speed Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. Film, and Speed Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: Introducing the Improved--Eastman X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: Restults with the improved--Eastman X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Description / Notes: X-Ray caption: "Courtesy of Dr. J.T. Case, Roentgenologist, The Battle Creek Sanitarium" Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: Prove the diagnosis with Eastman X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Description / Notes: X-Ray caption: "Courtesy of Dr. J.T. Case, Roentgenologist, The Battle Creek Sanitarium" Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: The proof in diagnosis Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5

193

  
same text. Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Slogan: A Happy Christmas Thought --Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: The gift that adds to the good times at the moment; that indoors and out gives zest to the merry making and then preserves the happy picture story of all that goes to make the day a merry one. Implied Audience: women / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Same text as above, but with different photo - a woman in a hat, with a camera. Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): Kodak girls Text: The delights of old companionships, the charm of new and interesting friends, the thrill of novelty that comes with new scenes and a change of routine-- All these mean more to those who Kodak.. There's a joyful fascination in the picture taking. And afterward the Kodak Album brings the added delight of living over again the happy days of that "too short vacation" Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two women in a (very nice) train car, loading film, and possibly reading the manual. Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): Kodak girls Text: Kodak photography is so simple that you can make good pictures from the very start--and is less expensive than you think. Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: same photo as above, but with different text. Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): man, woman Text: none Implied Audience: travel Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Publications: Independent, Sunset, and American, Colliers, Travel, Scientific American Description / Notes: Photograph of a young couple outside their car, the woman with the camera, photographing a blacksmith [?] with a pipe. The woman is wearing a mink. Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: Your friends can buy anything you can give them - except your photograph. Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only. Similar to the other version, but without the crossed out word. Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: "Kodak" Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Brand Description / Notes: "Is our registered and common-law trade-

194

  
mark and cannot be rightfully applied except to goods of our manufacture" Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: There's winter fun too--in a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: All Kodak Film Now Speed Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: The Thing Worth While Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Workmanship Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: An Institution Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Workmanship Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: No. 2C Autographic Kodak Jr. Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2c Autographic Kodak Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: A Camera that fits in the pocket. A picture that fits the view. No. 2c Folding Autographic Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2c Folding Autographic Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $9.00 and $11.00 Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: Christmas 1916. Your friends can buy anything you can give them--except your photograph. Implied Audience: Christmas Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1914-1916 3 of 5 Year: 1917? Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: At Easter-tide. Your friends can buy anything you can give them--except your photograph. Implied Audience: Easter / general Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: The New 2c Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2c Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $11.00 Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5

195

  
Year: 1917 Slogan: Put a "two-c" in your pocket. It fits. Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2c Kodak Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 - $19.00 Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: The thin, slim camera that fits in the pocket Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2c Kodak Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 to $19.00 Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Autographic Kodak Subject(s): cow Text: Every sale of live-stock, especially by mail, is made more easily when the description is backed by pictures. A close up of the head, to show character and virility, (with the body left out to avoid distortion) and then a picture taken from each side with the animal parallel to the camera to show markings and conformation -- such pictures are simple to make and each one can bear the date, and name of the animal on the negative if you use an Autographic Kodak. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of cows. Caption reads "From a Kodak Negative" Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: The High record, trap-nested hen, the A.R.O. Cow, the well finished steer, the well grown colt, the prize hog: Subject(s): farmer, chicken Text: Whatever you raise that's a bit better than the ordinary, is worth an auto-photo-graphic record. And you can make such a record, with the data on the negative. It's a simple, permanent, inexpensive and almost instantaneous process with an Autographic Kodak. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man with a chicken, inscribing something on his camera. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Keep an Autographic record of the children. Subject(s): mother / child with dog. Text: Pictures of the children, just as they are, romping about the yard with their pets or at play in the nursery. And on every negative, written at the time, the all important date and title. It's a very simple and almost instantaneous process with an Autographic Kodak Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother inscribing on the camera, while daughter and dog pose. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Baby Subject(s): mother, father, and baby Text: And, along with it, written on the film at the time, keep the dates and titles. How old was Baby when this was taken? Where were we the year that that was taken? Suck records mean a great deal when baby has begun outgrowing baby ways and time has begun playing tricks with memory. And to make an authentic, permanent record, on the negative it a simple and almost instantaneous process with an Autographic Kodak. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw

196

  
Description / Notes: Photograph of young parents, mother holding the baby, father inscribing something on the film. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Spring-time on the Farm. Subject(s): Pigs Text: Every season is a season of interest there things are growing. And whatever is of interest is worth a picture. The pigs and the calves, the colts, the poultry and the growing crops, always offer pictures that are worth while--that are full of the intensest interest and that often become of value in selling and in record keeping. Pictures of crops, or ditching, of the orchard, all help to make an invaluable record on every farm that is systematically operated. Pictures of the tumbled down line fence to sent the absentee landlord who owns the farm next door, pictures of the bad spot in the road and the broken culvert to send the town board are often worth the whole cost of a photographic outfit. You can make such pictures easily and economically and can completely record with a date and title on the negative with an Autographic Kodak Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of pigs. Caption reads "from a Kodak negative." Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Those things that need attention on the farm Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Write it on the film - at the time. Subject(s): Soldiers Text: Make every negative more valuable by permanently recording at the time of exposure the all important date and title. It's a simple and almost instantaneous process with an Autographic Kodak Implied Audience: soldiers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: First appearance of soldiers! Photograph of three soldiers, one holding a camera, and inscribing. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: The Brownie Boy Subject(s): Boy Text: There's great fun out-doors in taking Brownie pictures and there's great fun in-doors in the developing and printing. There's not only the fun of having the pictures but the little camera and the literature we furnish with it, (including the magazine Kodakery, free for a whole year) gives a good foundation in photography. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy reading Kodakery, carrying a Brownie, outdoors. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Hike with a Brownie Subject(s): boy scouts Text: Whether you go for a month in a camp or for a Saturday hike, take along a camera. There are worth while pictures every time--pictures of the things you see, and above all, pictures of the fellows. And you can make them. It's all very simple with a Brownie or a Kodak, even to the developing and printing. No darkroom is necessary and it's all easier and less expensive than you think. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo

197

  
Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of five boys crowded around a Brownie, taking photos, aiming at the camera. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: A Brownie for her Birthday Subject(s): mother / young girl Text: Even in their kindergarten days, almost from the time they can count the candles on their birthday cake, the children make really good pictures with their simple little Brownie cameras. It's good fun for them, and the pictures they make of each other are among the treasured ones that find their way into the family snapshot album. Implied Audience: families Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother and daughter, the daughter with a Brownie. Birthday cake in the BG. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: The Court of Final Judgment Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Rays of teeth caption: "Courtesy of Dr. Albert Kinley, Boston, Mass." Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Make it conclusive--use Eastman X-Ray Dental Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Practically Indispensable Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Put your "O.K." On your work Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Employ a diagnostician Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Ray caption: "Courtesy of Dr. S.M. Getzoff" Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: Make your Diagnosis certain, by using Eastman X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Certify your Diagnoses--use Eastman Dental X-Ray film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Every out-of-doors sport invites your Kodak Subject(s): boy Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak

198

  
Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy in a baseball uniform holding a Kodak, bat. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: It's a Kodak! Subject(s): boy scouts Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy with a Kodak in the air, yelling, presumably to his friends. Outdoors. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: The Kodak in Camp Subject(s): boy scouts Text: Every kind of out-door fun becomes more fun with a Kodak along. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two boy scouts, one posing with a tent, the other photographing him. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Kodak on the Farm Subject(s): Chicken Text: Every corner on the farm has its point of interest, its picture worth taking. From the dairy to the poultry house and down in the orchard it is filled with picture opportunities. And in the farm house, as in every other home, Kodak finds its happiest subjects among the children and their friends. Implied Audience: Farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a chicken. Caption reads : From a Kodak negative. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: The High record, trap-nested hen, the A.R.O. Cow, the well finished steer, the well grown colt, the prize hog: Subject(s): farmer, chicken Text: Whatever you raise that's a bit better than the ordinary, is worth an auto-photo-graphic record. And you can make such a record, with the data on the negative. It's a simple, permanent, inexpensive and almost instantaneous process with an Autographic Kodak. Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of same ad with a photograph. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Kodak, as you go Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Wherever the purr of your motor lures you, wherever the call of the road leads you, there you will find pictures, untaken pictures that invite your Kodak--intimate pictures of people and places that you and your friends can enjoy again and again as you thumb the leaves of your Kodak album. And you can take them. Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a woman in a convertible, in the drivers seat, leaning her camera out the window, taking a photograph. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Kodak, as you go

199

  
Subject(s): Maid, woman in car Text: Tell the tale of the long road with Kodak pictures of the interesting places you visit and the even more interesting people you meet. You and your friends will enjoy such pictures again and again as you pore over the pages of your Kodak album. And you can take them. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a maid handing the camera off to a woman in the car, the woman's hand only is visible. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Kodak, as you go Subject(s): Maid, woman in car Text: none Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Same as other ad with the maid, but with no Text: Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: There are no Game Laws for Those Who Hunt With a Kodak Subject(s): Two hunters in a canoe, deer Text: none Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two men in a canoe, photographing a deer with a flash. Night photograph. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): Two women, baby Text: From baby days, up through the kindergarten, through school, and high-school days, it grows in interest with every chapter. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman with a camera photographing another woman with a baby at a waterfront. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): boy with dog Text: Next to the possession of pets themselves the youngsters enjoy making pictures of the dogs and cats and ponies of which they make companions. And invariably they will make pictures of each other, pictures that have the charm of genuine naturalness, so delightfully "as they are" that you will demand prints for your own album. And you will be surprised at what good pictures the youngsters can take with a simple little Kodak or Brownie. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak / brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy and his dog, the boy posing the dog on the steps. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: At home with the Kodak Subject(s): mother/children Text: Wherever there are children there is work for your Kodak, work that is even more fascinating than the picture records of your travels. And such pictures live, live because they hold the touch of human interest--because they keep for to-morrow, then they are grown up, the story of the children as they are to-day. You can make such pictures; the children can make them--with Kodak or Brownie. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak / brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo

200

  
Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a mother with camera on a tripod photographing two children. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: With Kodak and Brownie Subject(s): two children Text: You can get more and more fun from your in-door and outdoor sports. Pictures of your friends and your pets and the places you visit make fun in the taking and you will always enjoy the pictures as you look over the Kodak album. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak / brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a girl inscribing onto an Autographic Kodak while her brother watches, with a Brownie at his side. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Kodak knows no dark days Subject(s): man, woman Text: With its allies, the Kodak flash sheets and a Kodak flash sheet holder, youth Kodak camera is ready for every picture opportunity. Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak flashes Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young couple, the woman posing in the corner, the man holding the flash, camera on tripod. Both are dressed in fancy clothes. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Slogan: The Witchery of Kodakery Subject(s): three children Text: Right at home there are hundreds of pictures worth the taking--pictures of children and pets, pictures of all that makes the home home. And even the children can do the developing and printing--also, right at home. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak system Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three children, at home developing film. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: The New Model 3a Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: Model 3a Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $10.00, $12.00 Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1916 Slogan: There's winter sport too--in a Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: Outdoors with skates and skis and coasting, when the trees are snow laden and great drifts tell the tale of the last nights storm, there are pictures well worth taking. And indoors there are group pictures and home portraits, by daylight or flashlight and in the long winter evenings, when rain and sleet make the outdoors impossible, there's good fun in developing and printing. Every step is simple by the Kodak system. Implied Audience: women / general Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Publications: Cosmopolitan Description / Notes: photograph of a woman with a Kodak, in a winter coat, hat, and scarf. Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Seed X-Ray Plates Subject(s): product - medical

201

  
Product: Seed X-Ray Plates Description / Notes: X-Ray caption: "From a seed x-ray plate" Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak, the vest pocket camera that will really go in the vest pocket Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $6.00 to $22.00 Binder: 1914-1916 4 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Your other camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $6.00 to $22.50 Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: The 2c Kodak, Junior Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2c Kodak Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 to $19.00 Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Build your reputation on facts Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Ray Caption: "Courtesy of Federal X-Ray Co" Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Get Advance Information Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Ray caption: "Courtesy of Dr. S.M. Getzoff" Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: You Owe it to your patients to make a preliminary examination with Eastman Dental X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: X-Ray caption: "Courtesy of Dr. S.M. Getzoff" Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: "Eastman" and "Kodak" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Motion Picture Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Keep the Portraits of your Heroes Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Portrait Albums Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: For your Convenience, Doctor--The Eastman X-Ray Reducing Camera Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Reducing Camera Description / Notes: Price: $100.00 Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: For your Soldier Boy in camp or at the front; for your Sailor Lad patrolling the high seas; from you to him, to make his heart light and to help keep tight the home ties--your photograph.

202

  
Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Publications: The American Magazine Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Soldiers Text: none Implied Audience: Soldiers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photograph Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a group of soldiers at night watching one develop film. Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Kodak in Camp Subject(s): soldiers Text: From reveille to taps, each hour will bring something new into the life of every young soldier. New surroundings, new habits, new faces, and new friendships will make for him a new world--a world full of interest to him to-day and a world upon which he will often dwell in memory when peace has come again. And this new world of his offers Kodak opportunities that will relieve the tedium of camp routine at the time and will afterward provide what will be to him and his friends the most interesting of all books--his Kodak album. The parting gift, a Kodak. Wherever he goes the world over, he will find Kodak film to fit his Kodak. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of two soldiers in a tent looking at an album. Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Keep your Kodak Busy Subject(s): Soldiers Text: "The Army lives on letters" is the way the boys at the front put it. And when those longed-for envelopes with the home town postmark contain pictures of the home folks and home doings, they go far toward making lighter hearts and happier faces. Keep your Kodak busy for the sake of the lads in the trenches, the boys in camp and on shipboard. Help keep tight the bonds between the home and those that are fighting for that home. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photograph Color or Black and White: bw Publications: The American Magazine Description / Notes: Photograph of a group of soldiers looking at photographs. Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Pictures from Home Subject(s): soldiers Text: Let the times temper your giving that the spirit of Christmas may be carried to out soldiers over seas. Make your gift to those at home, a Kodak, that they in turn may make light hearts and happy faces by sending a continued Kodak story of that home to the beaver lads, somewhere in France. Helpful organizations are doing a great work in looking after their physical comforts-- but 'the folks at home' are the ones who can help them keep cheerful in mind and heart-- and pictures will help. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a group of soldiers looking at photographs. Caption : "Why mess was late" Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5

203

  
Slogan: Snap-shots from Home. Subject(s): Soldiers Text: Give cheer to the boys in camp and on shipboard by sending them pictures from home. There are likely to be some tedious, homesick days and a little cheer-up in the way of photographs of the home folks and the home doings will do them a lot of good. And some day when you want to give something a little more substantial, send along a vest pocket Kodak and ask your soldier or sailor boy to send pictures to you. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: simpler illustration of the same add used earlier. Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Slogan: Pictures from Home Subject(s): Soldiers Text: Over there, with thousands of miles of sea and land between them and home, are Our Boys, smiling and fighting--fighting with bullets, against a dogged foe; with smiles, fighting homesickness and dread monotony. It's a part of the nation's job to-day to keep those boys cheerful, to hold fast the bonds between camp and home, to make light hearts and smiling faces--and these things pictures can help to do--pictures of the home folks and the home doings, pictures of the neighbors, pictures that will enliven their memories of the days before the war--simple Kodak pictures, such as you can make. These can help Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Publications: The American Magazine Description / Notes: Illustration of soldiers in a camp at night, looking at photographs. Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Take a Kodak With You Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak cameras and film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: No. 3a Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 3a Autographic Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $20.00 Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: Jun-17 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): soldier Text: Loyalty--first to country, then to home. To cheer those who cannot serve as you serve but whose hearts are with you--your photograph. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: illustration of a soldier. Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: none Subject(s): product - medical Product: Seed X-Ray Plates Description / Notes: X-Ray caption: "Seed stereoscopic chest plate" Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Year: 1917 Slogan: Seed X-Ray Plates Subject(s): product - medical Product: Seed X-Ray Plates Description / Notes: X-Ray caption: "Seed stereoscopic plate"

204

  

Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Slogan: The Kodak Story of the War Subject(s): Navy soldiers on a ship Text: War isn't all fighting--but to thousands of young Americans on shipboard and in camp it will be a new world, will open up a new life. New ties will be formed, new friendships cemented. The daily routine on shipboard and in camp, the shore leave in strange cities, the pictures of comrades-- all these things will make a heart gripping Kodak story for the folks at home. It's a genuine part of the Nations present job to keep tight the bonds between its fighters and those at home who can follow only with their hearts. Pictures from home and to the home can do their part. There's room for a little Vest Pocket Kodak in every sailor's and soldier's kit. There expense is small, six dollars. The cheerfulness it may bring is great. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: vest pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of a sailor holding a goat on board a ship, another sailor taking his photograph. Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Slogan: Snap-shots from Home. Subject(s): soldiers Text: Give cheer to the boys in camp and on shipboard by sending them pictures from home. There are likely to be some tedious, homesick days and a little cheer-up in the way of photographs of the home folks and the home doings will do them a lot of good. And some day when you want to give something a little more substantial, send along a vest pocket Kodak and ask your soldier or sailor boy to send pictures to you. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: vest pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of a group of soldiers looking at photographs at a camp.

Binder: 1914-1916 5 of 5 Slogan: The Parting Gift-- A Vest Pocket Kodak Subject(s): woman / soldiers on a train Text: It is monotony, not bullets that our soldier boys dread. No fear, when the time comes, they will uphold bravely the traditions that are dear to every loyal American heart. But in the training camps and during the months of forced inaction there are going to be some tedious, home-sick days-days the Kodak can make more cheerful. Pictures of comrades and camp life, pictures of the housand and one things that can be photographed without endangering any military secret will interest them, and will doubly interest the friends at home. Tens of thousands of brave lads in the camps and trenches of France are keekping their own Kodak Story of the war-a story that will always be intense to them because it is history from their view-point. And when peace comes it will make more vivid, more real their story of the war as they tell it again and again to mother and sister and wife and little ones. The nation has a big job on its hands. It's only a little part, perhaps, but a genuine part of that job to keep up the cheerfullness of camp life, to keep tight the bonds between camp and home. Pictures from home to the camp and from the camp to the home can do their part. There's room for a little Vest Pocket Kodak in every soldier's and sailor's kit. Ther expense is small, six dollars. The cheerfullness it may bring is great. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: vest pocket Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: illustration of a woman handing a soldier on a train a camera. There is a second version with a more simple illustration. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: A Useful Booklet for the Roentgenologist Subject(s): product - medical Product: "X-Rays" Booklet Color or Black and White:

205

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: May-18 Slogan: 2c Kodak Jr. Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2c Kodak Jr. Color or Black and White: Publications: Century, Century Life, Harper, National Geographic, Popular Science, Scribners, Worlds Work, Popular Mechanics, Red Cross, Life, National Sportsman Description / Notes: Price: from $15.50 to $23.50 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Jul-18 Slogan: Eastman Dental Film Tank Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Film Tank Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1917 Slogan: Your Practice Demands Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: Caption reads: "Courtesy of Dr. S. M. Getzoff Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1917 Slogan: The Determining Factor--Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: Caption reads: "Dr. Albert Kinley, Boston, Mass." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Feb-18 Slogan: Be Sure of Your Claims Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: You Need Them Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: May-18 Slogan: Causes and Effects Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Jun-18 Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Judging by the Evidence Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: The Safest Record Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918

206

  
Slogan: Put Your Patients on File. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Make your Diagnoses Permanent Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Make Your Profession Tangible Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Jul-18 Slogan: Introducing the new Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Like Air Photography Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: When Speed is Essential Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Make Your Records Permanent, Use Eastman Duplitized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Eastman Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Jun-18 Slogan: Eastman X-Ray Developer Powders Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Developing Powders Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Eastman X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Apr-18

207

  
Slogan: There's the Evidence Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Jul-18 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): Child with animals Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy at a zoo photographing an elk. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: May-18 Slogan: Prove it--with a Kodak Subject(s): children Text: Every kind of fun when there's a Kodak to keep the picture story. Every negative can carry the date and title, made on the film at the time. It's all very simple by the Kodak system. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of three children playing by the side of a lake. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): children Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two boys by a tree, looking at a camera. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Jul-18 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): hunter Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Publications: Field and Stream, Description / Notes: Photograph of a man with a rifle, taking a photograph of something. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: none Implied Audience: Women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman with her Kodak in a fur coat and hat, leaning on a car. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: none Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman on a mountainside with snowshoes in her hand, Kodak slung over her shoulder. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10

208

  
Year: May-18 Slogan: Keep a Kodak story of the Children for the children Subject(s): mother / young girl Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother and young girl looking at an album. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Slogan: The Kodak Album Subject(s): mother / young girl Text: All the little kings and queens of childhood's realm command your Kodak--command it to keep their picture story. Pictures of them and by them, pictures of their friends and their pranks-pictures that breathe the very joy and frankness of childhood. Such is the intimate picture story that makes the Kodak Album the most cherished book in all the house. And picture taking is very simple now. Kodak has made it so. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother and young girl looking at an album--same as above but with different text. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: The pictures you are planning to send to that Soldier of yours--they must soon be on the way if you would make sure that he has them to gladden his heart on Christmas morning. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only.

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Mar-18 Slogan: The Pictures from Home Subject(s): soldier Text: Keep your Kodak busy for the sake of the boys "over there." Implied Audience: soldier Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a soldier sitting in his tent the same image is used in different ads. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: May-18 Slogan: The Days of His Going Subject(s): Soldier / parents Text: In a million homes, pictures are keeping the story of the war as it touched those homes. John in his first khaki as he proudly marched away, and John tanned and hardened as he looked when home on leave. More than ever the Kodak album is keeping the home story. To-day that story means history, and more than ever it is important that it be authentic history--that every negative bear a date. Memory plays strange tricks and one of its favorite vagaries is to fail in the all important matter of dates. But with a Kodak there's no uncertainty. The date--and title too, if you wish-is written on the autographic film at the time the exposure is made. And it is there permanently. It makes the Kodak story authentic and doubly interesting. It is all very simple, is the work of an instant and there's no extra charge for autographic film. Let the Kodak keep the dates. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Publications: American, Motion Picture Way, Cosmopolitan, Country Gentleman, Saturday Evening Post, Life, Mumseys, Popular Science. Description / Notes: photograph of a soldier, holding a young

209

  
girl while the mother writes on the camera. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Slogan: Those pictures from home Subject(s): soldiers Text: "If they only knew the pleasure they bring us I am sure they would come" .... Thus writes Gustave Geboers a Belgian boy of twenty three. And your boy, our boys, will pictures mean less to them?... Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo/Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: extracts from a letter. Caption identifies his position in the Belgian army, and there is the French writing as well. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Slogan: There's cheer in the pictures from home. Subject(s): soldiers Text: To a homesick boy at the front, a picture of Dad waiting at the end of the lane wile "Shep" brings in the cows is worth more than the Croix de Guerre. Pictures of mother, how much they mean to him now! And of his kid sister perhaps she is "wearing her hair up" by this time--all the old familiar scenes around the farm, yes, and that little girl with the big blue eyes that lives down in the village--these will mean a world of comfort to the boy who is lonesome among a million strangers. The YMCA the Red Cross, the Knights of Columbus and kindred organizations are doing a world of good in ministering to the bodies and the minds of our boys. But in their hearts, homes are first. Cheerful letters and cheerful pictures from home--these will keep their hearts light and their courage high. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of soldiers outside the YMCA looking at photographs. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1917 Slogan: "Kodak" Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Branding Description / Notes: Trademark & Copyright info. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1917 Slogan: If it isn't an Eastman, it isn't a Kodak. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Branding Description / Notes: Trademark & Copyright info. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Jan-18 Slogan: No. 1a Autographic Kodak Special with Kodak Range Finder Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: from $50.00 to $65.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Jun-18 Slogan: All Outdoors invites your Kodak Subject(s): man in a canoe Text: In the woods where the big game hides, in every marshy haunt of the swift-winged duck, pictures are awaiting you. In the cover where your good dog noses out the quail; in the pool where King Trout is waiting to fool you, if he can; and by the little lake where lurk the gamey bass and mighty muskalonge, there are pictures--waiting for you and your Kodak. Accept, on behalf of yourself and your Kodak, Nature's urgent invitation. And next winter, when business and snow and ice conspire to keep you in, those pictures will again be waiting for you--secure within the pages of your Kodak Album. Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: photograph

210

  
Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man in a canoe with a Kodak photographing birds eggs. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: That lad of yours, over seas. All that is humanly possible is being done to see to it that he is well equipped. Organizations like the YMCA, are looking to his physical comfort, healthful recreation and clean fun. If he is sick or wounded the Red Cross will provide for him with tender, loving care. Yet there is one thing that will bring a smile to his face and joy to his heart that none of these can give; that only you can give--your photograph. Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Publications: Century, Country life, Harpers, National Geographic, Scribners, Popular Mechanics, Red Cross. Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Those Pictures from Home Subject(s): product - misc. Product: photograph Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Jun-18 Slogan: Before He Goes Subject(s): Soldier / family Text: When we have won this war--when our boys sail home across seas forever freed from pirates submarines--when our boys, bronzed and sinewy, hardened veterans all, swing with martial, ringing tread past the reviewing stands, victors in the battle for the democracy;--first in their heartsand minds will the thoughts of home. Mustered out--overwhelmed with the acclaim of a nation-they go back to the brave homes so bravely defended. Happily, they take up the pursuits of peace--but never will they will to forget that they have been soldiers for democracy. And they will always be grateful for that which will keep fresh in their memories the story of the Great War. This thing pictures can do. Pictures of the parting and of the home coming, pictures of comrades in arms, pictures that tell intimetly of how the war touched their lives. These will have value beyond price. And while they are still in camp, are patrolling the high seas, or battering the Teuton line in France, pictures of their home folks and home doings, Kodak pictures such as you can take will help to "Turn the Dark cloud inside out, till the boys come home." Implied Audience: soldiers / families Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Publications: McClures Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman photographing a soldier holding his child. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: Pictures from Home Maintain the Morale Subject(s): product - misc. Product: photographs Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: Nov-17 Slogan: Seed X-Ray Plates Subject(s): product - medical Product: Seed X-Ray Plate Description / Notes: Caption reads: "Seed Stereoscopic Chest Plate" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1917 Slogan: 100% Increase in the use of Seed X-Ray Plates

211

  
Subject(s): product - medical Product: Seed X-Ray Plate Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 1 of 10 Year: 1918 Slogan: The Special Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Special Kodaks Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: Jan-23 Slogan: Kodak welcomes Winter Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: There's a tang to the air, and a zest to the occasion that give life and action to the pictures you make. Winter prints contribute prized pages to your album. And it's all easy the Kodak way--and all fun. Implied Audience: outdoors / women Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman photographing a horsedrawn sleigh full of people. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: Jan-23 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: none Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman on the ice waving at the camera, a man with a sailboat in the bg. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: Jan-23 Slogan: A Kodak for the Farm Subject(s): Pigs Text: It's easy to make pictures the Kodak way, and the resulting prints of livestock, buildings, crops, and equipment, whether for purposes of sale or record, are of obvious value. There's fun with a Kodak for everyone--and growing pleasure in the pictures, but on the farm photography has a practical side that should not be overlooked. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a lot of pigs eating at a trough. Caption reads "From a Kodak negative." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Slogan: Her Christmas Kodak Subject(s): young man, woman Text: Out of the holiday package into the spirit of Christmas Implied Audience: Christmas Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman holding a Kodak while man watches. Christmas gifts are on the table. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Slogan: Her Christmas Kodak Subject(s): Young woman Text: None Implied Audience: women / Christmas Product: autographic Kodak / brownies Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a young woman standing at a front door holding a Kodak and a pile of Christmas gifts. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10

212

  
Slogan: A Brownie for Christmas Subject(s): boy and girl Text: Means pictures of your friends, your sports, your pets-- of all the things that interest you. There's fun in photography and pride in the kind of pictures a Brownie makes. It's all easy--dead easy--from the start, with this Eastman-made camera. You'll get good pictures on Christmas day. Implied Audience: parents/children/Christmas Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a boy photographing his sister and a sled on their front yard, in the snow. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Slogan: Bring Along A Brownie Subject(s): three boys Text: Making pictures--that's fun. Looking at them afterwards and showing them to your friends and family--that's still more fun as you'll find from the first. And it's all easy with a Brownie. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three boys on a fallen tree near the water, one holding a fishing rod, one holding a Brownie and photographing the other boy holding a fish. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Slogan: Get it with a Brownie Subject(s): three boys Text: The shack that the bunch built offers a great chance for a picture. Get it with a Brownie. Cross country hikes, sports of all sorts--your friends, your pets--all call for pictures that are easy to make the Brownie way. No matter what the occasion there's always more fun with a Brownie along. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy photographing two other boys building a shack out of branches. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman Dental Film Mount Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental Film Mount Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: For your Convenience an Eastman Dental Film Safe. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental Film Safe Description / Notes: price: $3.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: The great advantage of Eastman Dupli-Tized Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1923 Slogan: To Certify the Inter-Oral Set: A Stereo Pair--Extra Orally Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals - List No. 8 America's Handbook of Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White:

213

  
Slogan: For Efficiency, Speed, Quality, and Uniformity Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Intensifying Screens / Eastman DupliTized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: A New model Kodak--and just in time for Christmas No. 1 Pocket Kodak Series II Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Price: $20.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Kodak pictures prove your selling arguments Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2c Autographic Kodak, Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $50.00. Caption reads "From a Kodak negative" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: This Christmas your photograph--the only gift that only you can make. And now is the time for a studio appointment. Implied Audience: Christmas Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: Jan-23 Slogan: Photographing Five Miles Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Anastigmats Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals - Over 1400 Available. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals - Quality Unsurpassed Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: Jan-23 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals - Over 1500 Available Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Announcing Eastman X-Ray Intensifying Screens Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Intensifying Screens Description / Notes: Price from $8.00 to $24.00 each. $15.00 to $45.00 for pairs. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman X-Ray Intensifying Screens Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Intensifying Screens Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 10 of 10 Year: 1923

214

  
Description / Notes: photograph of a father with a camera photographing his son playing with a boat. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: Jun-19 Slogan: The Day that Will Never Come Again Subject(s): Man and woman watching soldier's parade. Text: The boys are home. Eyes front and chins up, crusaders all, hardened veterans in a glorious cause they tramp past your point of vantage. Your heart becomes a trip hammer; you join wildly in the cheers; you thrill with a great love; a love of country and a love for the men who have saved the world. This day marks an epoch whose events you are privileged to witness; it is a day that will never come again. It is all worth far more than merely seeing-it is worth saving. Pictures from your point of vantage--just as you saw it--that recall the glory and the greatness of it all these will keep it fresh and vivid, will bring back the thrill and breathless glow even when memory alone can scarce recall the scene. And on each negative you may have, not merely the picture story, but the date and title, the full authentic history--with an autographic Kodak. Implied Audience: soldiers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: illustration of a woman inscribing on the camera, while a man watches. Outside, soldiers are parading by. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): mother / young girl Text: And keep, as well the date on the film, the authentic record that tells how old Mary was when she took her first toddling steps and the year and month when "brother" proudly donned his first trousers, or bravely set out for school with primer under his arm. Such records are instantly and easily made and permanently kept with an Autographic Kodak. Implied Audience: families

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: His First Dress Suit Subject(s): family Text: Bill Jr. is conscious of a newly acquired dignity; little Jim is envious; Mother sits in rapt admiration; Betty has an attack of the giggles, and Dad, in spite of his sense of humor, realizes that this is a great day in the history of his son and heir. Faithful to his Kodak habit, he has taken a picture of the boy in his first dress suit--and now he is about to jot down the date on the autographic film. In just a few years when he and Son are looking at the family Kodak album, he will smile slyly and say--"William you were great! Let's see, how old were you then?" And the autographic film will tell. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a family in the parlor, looking at the oldest boy in a new suit. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: For the Days to Come Subject(s): father / son Text: Building his boat of pine and dreaming, as he works, of the days when he will sail a real ship on a real ocean--a regular boy, that. And Dad, with his Kodak, has caught the boyish story. Now he is writing the autographic record--the date and title on the film; the record that will give double value to the picture when time has played sad tricks with memory. Make the family chronicle complete. Let every picture of the children bear at least a date. It's all very simple, as simple as taking the picture itself--with an Autographic Kodak Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw

215

  
Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo? Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a woman photographing her young daughter who is blowing bubbles. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): mother and two young children Text: In every day of their young lives are events of almost dramatic interest: The painted gallop across the porch on the hobb horse; the adventure with the puppy in the garden; sister's new frock and brother's tricycle; that important morning when stout hearts first trudge off to school--such pictures, preserving forever the childhood days, mean a world of comfort to mother's heart-yes, and fathers too. And just a few years afterward: "That's you, Polly, when you were--let me see. Oh yes, the film says it was August 8, 1919, your fourth birthday. And Junior was five." Every picture worth taking is worth at least a date, if not a title. It's all very simple with an Autographic Kodak, as simple as pressing a button. And Autographic film costs no more than the other kind. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother with a camera, photographing her two young children at a gate. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: The Date on the Film. N just a few years you will ask: Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: Let the Children Kodak Subject(s): two young girls Text: And get them to keep, on every film, the date and title that add so much in interest. It's all very simple with an Autographic Kodak of Brownie--and all folding Kodaks and folding Brownies are now autographic. Implied Audience: parents. Product: autographic Kodak / brownies Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two girls on the seaside, writing with an Autographic Kodak. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: Every Sport is more Sport with a Brownie along. Subject(s): boys fishing with dog Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two young boys fishing. One boy holds a rod, the other holds a brownie, there is a dog sitting between them. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Keep a File Record. Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Give yourself assurance. Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919

216

  
Slogan: X-Ray Diagnosis. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Keep pace with the times. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: You know their value. Eastman Dental X-Ray Films. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Do The Obvious Thing. Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Put your patients on record Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: The Business-like way. Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Keep Pace with the Times. Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Efficiency plus, with Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Description / Notes: Caption Reads: "Two Screen Portion / One Screen Portion" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: That important case may depend on Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: For Gastro-Intestinal Diagnoses. Eastman Dupli-Tized XRay Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White:

217

  
Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: For Stereoscopy: Eastman Duplitized X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: A Shrapnel Wound shown by Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Gastro-Intestinal Roentgenology with Eastman DupliTized Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Description / Notes: Caption on image gives info about exposure, method, etc. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: The New Package Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: A Kodak Christmas Subject(s): Family Text: Kodak helps to make the Christmas Merry--then keeps a picture story of the Christmas Merriment. And nowhere are there more Christmas pictures for the Kodak than in the country where Christmas is so real, so home like, so full of the old-fashioned, whole souled spirit of the day. The arrival of the visitors; the children romping in the snow, the gorgeous sun and snow effects in the orchard...All these are subjects for the Kodak. In taking and titling the pictures there is fun and interest that give an added zest to the Christmas merry-making--and afterwards these pictures, telling so faithfully the home story, help to keep fresh the memories of the great home holiday. Put Kodak on your Christmas list. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: illus Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Illustration of a man, woman, and baby arriving at a home in a car, while older parents wait at the house door, and a girl photographs the arrival. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: The gift that helps to make her Christmas merry--then keeps a picture story of the Christmas merriment. Implied Audience: women / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a woman holding a Kodak in

218

  
a fur coat and hat, holding a bouquet of holly. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): mother / young girl Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a mother, writing on an autographic Kodak while daughter holds a toy. They are sitting outside. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: Along with your other fun--A Kodak Subject(s): two young boys Text: Kodak adds to the sport on every outing. At the shore, hunting, camping, fishing--there are always pictures worth while-pictures you will be glad you have next winter and in all winters to come. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two boys on the shore, one with a Kodak. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: Your First Dress Suit Subject(s): Young man / family Text: It is a big event in your life--but it is only one of many things that are happening to you every week. Years from now you would give anything to recall these days. You know what to do: Kodak as you go. Take pictures of your good times. Photograph your friends at every party or picnic. Snap the scenes of your trips and outings. Picture your big fish, your camp, your den, your cave or fort, .....everything that means fun to you now. With a Kodak you can write the date on the film when you take the picture. Then--years from now--it will all come back to you and mean more then it does now. Ask your Dad if he doesn't think a Kodak would make a good Christmas present for a young man your age. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a family in the parlor, looking at the oldest boy in a new suit - Same photograph as used above, but with different text. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: The Kodak Album Subject(s): Group of girls Text: There's joy in every page of the school girl's Kodak book. There's a hint of good times in every tiny print and between its covers is the pictured story of happy years and enduring friendships--a story that means fun in the making, and afterward the still greater joy of living over again those happy, care-free days. Implied Audience: parents/girls Product: Kodak album Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a group of teenage girls looking at an album. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: If it isn't an Eastman, it isn't a Kodak. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Branding Description / Notes: Info on Trademark. Includes a definition of the word "trademark" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: The Kodak Film Subject(s): mother / young girl

219

  
Text: And beneath each negative the date and title--the autographic record that makes the story, complete, authentic. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak film Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother holding a film roll, while daughter watches. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: The Advantages of Eastman Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Motion Picture Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: Between Friends--a photograph. Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: At Christmas Time. Your friends can buy anything you can give them--except your photograph. Product: photographs Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 2 of 10 Year: 1919 Slogan: The Picture Story, with the all important date and title on every negative is easy to keep with a Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: It doubles the fun with a Brownie along. Subject(s): young girl and boy Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy with a bicycle, his sister taking a photograph of him with a Brownie. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Your Responsibility does not end. Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: An Impacted Third Molar Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Speed with Quality. Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White:

220

  
Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: For the Bedside Case Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Simplify the Difficult Dental Case with Eastman DupliTized X-Ray Films used Extra-Orally. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: For Kidney and Gall-Bladder Technique Eastman DupliTized X-Ray Films with Double Screens Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: New Price List. Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: The Eastman X-Ray Exposure Rule Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Exposure Rule. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Slogan: Proof Positive Subject(s): Fisherman posing with a fish. Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three fishermen posing with a fish, while a fourth holds a Kodak, takes a photograph of them. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): landscape - mountains Text: none Implied Audience: travel Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mountain range, lake, trees. Caption reads: From a Kodak Negative. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): Man and woman Text: none Implied Audience: travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man and woman at a baggage check, the man handing the woman the Kodak. While a porter watches.

221

  
Text: And not merely the alluring picture story, but on every negative at least a date; and a title, too, if you like. Titling is the work of but an instant with an Autographic Kodak; is as simple as making the picture itself--and there is no extra charge for Autographic film. Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman with a Kodak, photographing a young couple in tennis outfits, holding racquets, and leaning on a net. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): Men carrying a canoe Text: Then you can go back at any time, without even leaving your arm chair. The autographic feature tells you when and where each picture was taken. Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a group of men carrying a canoe through a forest. Caption reads: Kodak negative. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): mother / child Text: none Implied Audience: families / travel Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother and daughter sitting in the back of a car, the girl holding the Kodak in her lap. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): Man and woman Text: none Implied Audience: travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man and a woman, standing beside a car. The man holds the camera, the woman is pointing off in the distance. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Man putting skiis on. Text: none Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man kneeling in the snow, putting on skis with Kodak slung over his shoulder. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Man XC Skiing Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man cross-country skiing away from the camera, with Kodak slung over his shoulder. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Slogan: For the out-of-doors days Kodak Subject(s): man, two women

222

  
Slogan: The History of a Word Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Branding Description / Notes: Trademark info Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Two "k's", an "o", a "d" and an "a" Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Branding Description / Notes: Trademark info Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: What "Kodak" Means Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Branding Description / Notes: Trademark info Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Slogan: Kodak Cartridges Subject(s): Birds in a tree. Text: Not game--but part of the lure of the wild just the same-and worthy of your Kodak Cartridges. Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: Kodak cartridges Photo or Illustration Based: Photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of seven birds on a tree. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Kodak Yourself and your catch Subject(s): man Text: A picture of your gamest fish taken in back of the house when you get home has not half the realism of the one you snap in front of the stream where you out-guessed your wily opponent hardly five minutes ago. Even if you go alone, you can get both your fish and yourself in the picture by taking along with your Kodak these two unobtrusive little Kodak accessories... Implied Audience: outdoors / men Product: Kodak Self Timer, Kodapod Photo or Illustration Based: photo-illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man with a fish, posing for the camera. Overlayed arrows indicate the accessories. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Mile after mile of Eastman Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Motion Picture Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: "Eastman" and "Kodak" Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Motion Picture Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Eastman Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Motion Picture Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 3 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: In a place of an Easter card--your photograph. Both seasonable--but one a permanent reminder of you. Implied Audience: Easter / general Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only.

223

  
Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo-illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young couple superimposed over a photo of a church, making it look as if they are standing outside a church. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: "Kodak Literature" Subject(s): product - misc. Product: booklets Description / Notes: List of available publications. "For the Amateur who wants to know the why of what he does." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Standardize your Exposure Technique with Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: A Matter of Record--Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: "Angulation" Becomes extremely easy with Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: Captions read: "Distorted" and "Correct" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: Make your Kodak Story Autographic Subject(s): man in a canoe Text: Keep on every negative the date and title, make your Kodak story not merely a picture story but also a record story; a story that will take you back to the year, the month, the very spot--will bring those outing days freshly before you even when time has played sad tricks with memory. Making the autographic record is the work of but a moment--and autographic films cost you no more then the other kind. Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man in the front of a canoe, writing on the camera. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: Kodak on the Job Subject(s): man on construction site. Text: A daily negative, with its autographic date and title on the film, makes the progress record authentic, indisputable. Implied Audience: Laborers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photograph Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man at a construction site using the autographic Kodak. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: Make your Kodak Record authentic--autographic. Subject(s): young man, woman Text: Keep not merely the picture story of your travels but write the date and title on every film, at the time of exposure--before you forget. It's a matter of but a few seconds with an Autographic Kodak and autographic film. And the record is always there, on the edge of the film, as Permanent as the negative itself. Implied Audience: travel

224

  
Year: 1921 Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Regular of Extra-Fast Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Standardization. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: For Adaptability--Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Begin with Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: For Use with the Modified Bucky Diaphragm. Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Standardize your dark-room technique with Eastman Prepared X-Ray Developer Powders Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Developing Powders Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: Standardization in Radiographic Technique Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray products Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: The Eastman X-Ray Reducing Camera Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Reducing Camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: Let Kodak Sell your Livestock. Subject(s): Cow Text: You know cattle and horses and sheep and hogs. You know the pose that will bring out their strong points. The rest is easy. Kodak has so simplified photography that anybody can make good pictures--and it's less expensive than you think.

225

  
Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a cow - the caption reads: A Holstein King in a Kingly pose Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: None Subject(s): Fish Text: The thrill of the strike, the swish of the line, the whirr of the reel, the myriad diamonds flashing in the sun as King Specklesides leaps from the pool in futile fury, the filled creel--Kodak can keep for you all these and bring them back at will--At your will Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of huge dead fish on rocks, with nets and fishing poles. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: none Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a well dressed woman with a Kodak climbing into the front seat of a car. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Man with two dogs. Text: None Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man in a snowy field with two dogs, holding a gun. Caption reads: From a Kodak Negative. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): man, woman Text: none Implied Audience: travel Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young couple. The woman is skiing, the man is holding a Kodak, and a sled. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: The Christmas gift with the personal touch-- your photograph. Implied Audience: Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: There's Game for your Kodak, as well as game for your gun--and it's all apart of the lure of the wild. Subject(s): photographs of animals Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photograph Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Seven photographs of animals: raccoon, porcupine, owls, crane, baby birds. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10

226

  
Slogan: Complete the Kodak Story--with the Autographic date and title. Subject(s): two women and a man. Text: none Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Two women sit, one with a Kodak, as she writes on it. A man stands, holding a set of golf clubs. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): young girl Text: Means most in the home, because home pictures tell the simple every day story of the children--each one a fascinating chapter for the Kodak Album. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a girl at a window. Close cropped - shoulders and head only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: none Subject(s): young girl Text: After all, pictures of the children, just every day pictures in and about the home are the ones we care for most. Such pictures are easily made with a Kodak or Brownie and the expense is less than you think. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Portrait of a young girl in a hat standing outside her house. Caption reads: From a 2a Brownie negative. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): young girl Text: Means most in the home, because home pictures tell the simple every day story of the children--each one a fascinating chapter for the Kodak Album. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Same text as above ad, but with a photograph of a different young girl, less closely cropped. She is sitting in a library, wearing a headband. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: When the children outgrow Childhood. Subject(s): young girl. Text: After all home pictures mean the most. Pictures of travel, of the week-end motor trip and of our sports--all these add to the fascination of the picture album. But the home pictures--for the most part pictures of the children, just everyday pictures--these are the ones that never lose their appeal, that grow more and more in value as the children out-grow childhood. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young girl in a hat--same photograph as above but with different text. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Kodak means most in the home, because home pictures tell simple everyday stories of the children. Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Album Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920

227

  
Slogan: Among the Christmas Gifts Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Cameras Description / Notes: A list of the available Kodak Cameras, including 3a Kodak, Vest Pocket Kodak, No. 1 Autographic Kodak Junior, and No. 0 Brownie Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: The boy and the girl. They are off to school; they will come back as grown ups--you wouldn't have it otherwise. But you will want always, a clear memory of them as they are to-day. Before they go--a photograph. Implied Audience: families Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: Not much chance for self-consciousness in the photographic portrait of to-day. Modern equipment enables the photographer to choose the happy moment and --it is done before you know it. Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: You don't carry it; you wear it--like a watch. The Vest Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price for camera: $9.49. Film for 8 exposures: $0.25.

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1920 Slogan: You don't carry a Vest Pocket Kodak; you wear it like a watch. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Description / Notes: Price for camera: $9.49. Film for 8 exposures: $0.25. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 4 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Service. Subject(s): product - medical Product: X-Ray Department at Rochester. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Kodak Keeps the Record Subject(s): construction workers Text: And on every negative the indisputable autographic date and title, made at the time. Implied Audience: Laborers Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man with a Kodak, writing on it, at a construction site, while two other men work. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Kodak on the Job Subject(s): construction workers Text: There's a simple, certain way of keeping an authentic, indisputable record of the progress of every contract. With an Autographic Kodak you get not merely the picture, but all the important date and title on every negative. Implied Audience: Laborers

228

  
Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man writing on a camera, while standing on a house construction site. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: The Picture, the date, the title--you get them all with an Autographic Kodak. Subject(s): Man, two women Text: none Implied Audience: travel Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man, two women out in the snow. The man is inscribing the picture, though the woman has a camera on her shoulder. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: The Picture, the date, the title--you get them all with an Autographic Kodak. Subject(s): Woman and two men. Text: And when you are home again, making up your album travelogue, there, on every negative, you can have the answer to each "Where and when was this taken?" Implied Audience: travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo-illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man and woman on vacation, the woman holding the camera, the man pointing in the distance, while a man sits beside them. It is unclear where they are. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: Mar-21 Slogan: Kodak on the Job Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Slogan: The Brownie Boy Subject(s): young boy. Text: None Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young boy in a field, posing for the camera. The Caption reads "No. 2 Brownie Negative." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: Apr-21 Slogan: For your Convenience Eastman Dental Film Safe. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental Film Safe Description / Notes: Price: $3.50 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: Apr-21 Slogan: For Diagnosis and Record--the use of Eastman Dental XRay Films. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: May-21 Slogan: The Symbol of Quality on Each Packet of Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White:

229

  
Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: Mar-21 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: "New price list with over 900 items" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: May-21 Slogan: The Manufacture of Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: May-21 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals. During the past month the following chemicals have become available: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Graflex Subject(s): product - camera Product: Graflex Camera Description / Notes: "Folmer & Schwing Department" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Graflex. The Camera that does the difficult things in photography--and does them well. Subject(s): product - camera

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: Mar-21 Slogan: For Safety. Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: Apr-21 Slogan: Film Efficiency A Fact--not an experiment. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: Apr-21 Slogan: Standardized Chest Technique Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Load with the dependable film that comes in the Yellow Box--Eastman. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman N.C. and Autographic Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921

230

  
Product: Graflex Camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Graflex. The Choice of those sportsmen who know cameras as they know guns and tackle. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Graflex Camera Description / Notes: Caption reads: "From a Kodak Negative." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: May-21 Slogan: Graflex Subject(s): product - camera Product: Graflex Camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): dog Text: Every phase of out-door sport means more with a Kodak along. Not merely your friends and your camp but your dogs, of course they are your friends too, the game that you shoot and the catch you make--all these add to the delights of your Kodak album. Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a hunting dog -- caption reads "From a Kodak Negative" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: None Implied Audience: women Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman in a striped dress, standing in a field. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Slogan: The Great Out-doors Invites your Kodak Subject(s): Man on horseback Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man on a horse, riding away from the camera, through the forest. The camera isn't visible in the image. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: There's always more fun with a Kodak along Subject(s): teenage boy Text: none Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy with a fishing rod, caption reads "From a Kodak Negative" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children. Subject(s): three young girls Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo

231

  
Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of three young girls outside. The caption reads "Gossip." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: none Subject(s): two boys Text: There's always more fun with a Kodak along. There's fun at the time in the picture making--and afterwards the pleasure for you and your friends in the Kodak album. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two boys with a fishing pole, and a fish, walking down a dirt road. Caption reads "From a Kodak Negative" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Kodak on the Farm Subject(s): two boys and a cow. Text: On the farm Kodak serves a double purpose. Like the auto it is ready for business of for pleasure. It is always ready for pictures in and about the home. The children, the family pets, the grange picnic, the thousand and one familiar scenes around the farm--all these contribute delightfully to the family Kodak album. And there's a worth-while business use for the Kodak on every farm. It keeps the record of crop and orchard growths, the progress of building, the condition of the "line fence". It sells live stock. Implied Audience: families / farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two boys and a calf. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): two girls Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two young girls picking wildflowers in a field. Caption reads "From a Kodak negative" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): young girl Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young girl sitting on a park bench, holding flowers. Caption reads "From a Kodak Negative" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Slogan: Five-O'clock Tea Subject(s): Young girl with doll Text: Every day, in their little-world-of-make-believe, the children offer countless Kodak opportunities. Mary, entertaining at fiveo'clock tea, or with motherly solicitude putting Dolly to bed; little Jim manfully mastering his spirited steed or in Indian garb carefully stalking a mountain lion, impersonated by Tabby who is blissfully blinking beneath hydrangeas--such are the pictures that mean the most. It is pictures of these every-day happenings that give to the Kodak Album its intimate, human interest. To-day it is full of charm; to-morrow, when the children have outgrown childhood, it will be priceless. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a girl having a tea party with

232

  
a doll. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): young girl. Text: Wherever children are, there pictures are, always. But tomorrow it will be a different picture, for all too quickly the children out-grow childhood. Let there be no skips, no missing chapter in the Kodak story of the children as told by your Kodak album. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a small girl, in white dress and hat--the caption reads "1A Kodak Special." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Young man in a canoe Text: none Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young man standing in a canoe, with a rifle, aiming it out onto a lake. Caption reads "From a Kodak Negative." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: A Kodak Self-Portrait Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Portrait Attachment, Kodak Self-Timer Description / Notes: Price for self-timer: $1.25. Price for Portrait Attachment: $0.75. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: The Kodak and Close-ups Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Portrait Attachment Description / Notes: Price: $0.75 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: The No. 0 Brownie. More Summer Fun and then--more winter fun Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 0 Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $2.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: May-21 Slogan: Enlarged from a negative made with a Two Dollar Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 0 Brownie Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: Apr-21 Slogan: It is Kodak Made. The No. 2a Folding Brownie. $10.00 Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2a Folding Brownie. Description / Notes: price: $10.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: Mar-21 Slogan: The No. 2c Autographic Kodak, Junior Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2c Autographic Kodak, Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $25.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: May-21 Slogan: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak, Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak, Special. Description / Notes: Price: $15.00

233

  
Text: You can "keep tabs" on the daily progress of every contract with an Autographic Kodak. The date and title on the negative identify each picture definitely... Implied Audience: Laborers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man at a construction site using the autographic Kodak. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Slogan: A Kodak history of the job. Subject(s): construction workers Text: Shows not only the progress made from day to day, but also the equipment used and methods employed. Such pictures prevent argument, because the autographic record tells the date, project, station, or similar information written on the film at the time of exposure. Thus the Kodak account of the job is Permanent and indisputable. Implied Audience: Laborers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man writing on a camera, standing in front of a digging machine. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Slogan: Kodak on the Job Subject(s): workman Text: It shows you how the job is progressing; its daily use serves to remind the workmen that you have a record of what they are accomplishing. The Autographic date and title, made in a moment, at the time the picture is taken makes the record indisputable. Implied Audience: Laborers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man writing on a camera, standing in front of workers ant boats.

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 5 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Here is Efficiency. A Focusing Model of the Vest Pocket Kodak Special. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Special. Description / Notes: price: $21.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: "At Home with the Kodak" Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "At Home with the Kodak" Booklet Description / Notes: Free booklet Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: What the 2a Brownies do. Subject(s): product - camera Product: 2a Brownie Description / Notes: Price: $3.50 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: "There's no Room for Argument" Subject(s): construction workers Text: Every day, a Kodak negative of every job with an autographic date and title and the progress record is indisputable. Implied Audience: Laborers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man writing on a camera, while standing on a house construction site. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Slogan: No Matter How Many Jobs Subject(s): construction workers

234

  
Base. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films. Development, Fixing, Washing and Drying. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Uniformity. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: Graph. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Announcing-- Eastman Barium Sulphate for Roentgenology Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Announcing Eastman X-Ray Tank. Eastman X-Ray Illuminator

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Slogan: "It Checks up the Job" Subject(s): workman Text: Everyday a Kodak negative that shows what has been done, with an autographic date that is indisputable. The 3a Kodaks, for pictures of post-card size--a practical size for such records, from $19.00 upwards. Implied Audience: Laborers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man standing near a train (?) car writing on his autographic Kodak. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: For the Farm. No. 1 Autographic Kodak Junior. $15.00 Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Kodak Junior. Description / Notes: Price: $15.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: A Page of Brownies Subject(s): product - camera Product: Brownie cameras Description / Notes: Very large ad. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Announcing the Eastman Dental Film Mount Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental Film Mount Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Announcing--Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Translucent

235

  
Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Tank. Eastman X-Ray Illuminator Description / Notes: Price for tank: $15.00. Price for Illuminator: $16.50 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Let your Kodak Keep the Christmas Story Subject(s): Family Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a family -- mother and father standing in the doorway, mother with camera, photographing child asleep on grandfathers lap. Toys spread out on the floor. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): young girl Text: An authentic, complete photographic record of livestock, farm equipment, crops --that's business. Pictures like the one reproduced above--and every home abounds in such opportunities--that's pleasure. Kodak does double duty on the farm. Implied Audience: families / farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young girl holding a knitting needle, sitting on a step. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: The No. 2c Autographic Kodak, Junior Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2c Autographic Kodak, Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $25.00. Very large ad. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: Kodak Anastigmat f.7.7 Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2c Autographic Kodak, Jr. Description / Notes: Price: $25.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: They will go away to school as children; they will return as young men and young women. You want them to--but you also want the childhood memories. Photographs of the children never grow up. Implied Audience: families Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: no photo- text only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: The Special Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Special Kodaks Description / Notes: Price: $50.00 and up. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Achievement. Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Anastigmats Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1922

236

  
Slogan: A Significant Fact Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Anastigmats Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 6 of 10 Year: 1921 Slogan: They are your pictures. Subject(s): boy on a horse Text: It is when the picture shows something that you are interested in, that to you, it becomes worth while. You do not , perhaps care anything about taking pictures (though many people think it great fun) but the pictures themselves you do care for when they are of people or places or things that are yours or that you are interested in. There's a personal, human touch in pictures of your home, your children, your broad meadows and your fine cattle. There's interest to you in pictures that tell the story of your auto trip, your camping party, or of the picnic where your children had such a good time. It is because such pictures have the personal appeal that, in millions of homes, the snap-shot album has become the most thought of book in all the house. Picture taking is very simple with a Kodak or Brownie, and less expensive than you think. Implied Audience: families / farmers Product: Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a boy in a pond riding a horse, the horse is drinking from a pond. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: "At Home with the Kodak" Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "At Home with the Kodak" Booklet Description / Notes: Caption: "Made with Kodak and Kodak Portrait Attachment" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: Jan-22 Slogan: Keep the story of the children with an Autographic Kodak Subject(s): Child Text: Pictures of the children gather interest with the years--and as the picture gains in interest, the date gains in importance. "When was it made?" That's the inevitable question that a picture of a child provokes. You know the answer now perhaps,--but later- Through the autographic feature, exclusively Eastman, and an integral part of the Kodak, each negative may be dated--and titled too,--at the time of exposure. The result is all the story--for all time. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young girl leaning on a window sill, kneeling on a couch. The caption reads "From a Kodak Negative." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Slogan: Kodak Pictures of the Job Subject(s): man on construction site. Text: Construction methods, equipment used, progress of the work from day to day -- you can keep track of them easily with a Kodak on the job. Daily negatives, each dated and titled at the time of exposure, make a progress record that is accurate and indisputable. Implied Audience: Laborers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man on a building site, writing on an autographic Kodak. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Winter Days Invite your Kodak Subject(s): man, woman Text: none Implied Audience: outdoors / women

237

  
Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a young man and woman standing in a doorway of a house. They are dressed for the outdoors. Woman with a camera in her hand, man smoking a pipe. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Dental Film Developing Cabinet / The Tank Unit Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental Film Developing Cabinet / The Tank Unit Description / Notes: Price for developing cabinet and tank: $75.00. Tank unit only: $25.00. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Dental Film Safe Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental Film Safe Description / Notes: Price: $3.50 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: A New Film in a New Package. Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films. Translucent Base. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals bear labels with this seal which means purity and uniformity: Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: "America's Greatest Stock. Nearly 1300 available" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: Special Reagents Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman X-Ray Developer Powders Five Gallon Units Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Developing Powders Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Slogan: You will make good pictures with a Brownie Subject(s): Dog Text: The Folding Brownies particularly, offer just that photographic equipment you want. They are such capable cameras and so easy to work that the pictures you make of your pets, your friends and your sports will be good pictures--from the start. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Folding Brownie. Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a dog standing in a window. The caption reads "From a Brownie Negative." Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Slogan: Keep the Christmas Story with a Kodak Subject(s): Child Text: none

238

  
Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Same photo of young girl as above. Caption reads "Jest 'fore Christmas I'm as good as I kin be." and "From a Kodak Negative" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: none Implied Audience: women / general Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman on a beach with a Kodak in her arms, waving at someone off camera. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: Let your Kodak catch the picture Subject(s): Man and woman Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man fishing, while a woman stands on a nearby rock photographing him. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: Jan-22 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): man, woman Text: none Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of same man and woman as above, but standing outside the house, on the porch. Woman still has Kodak on her shoulder, man holds snowshoes under his arm. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Slogan: Keep the story with a Kodak Subject(s): Mother, children, grandmother Text: Today it's a picture of Grandmother reading to the children. Tomorrow it may be Bobbie playing traffic policeman or Aunt Edna at the wheel of her new car or Brother Bill back from college for the week-end or-- There's always another story waiting for your Kodak. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother with a camera photographing three children standing around grandmother in a chair. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: A Drastic Cut. Kodak and Graflex Prices. Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak and Graflex Cameras Description / Notes: Price list for all cameras. "Many models are back to pre-war prices" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Books that are never finished Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Anastigmats Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: When Light Rings Flash their Warning

239

  
Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Anastigmats Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: An Aristocracy of Labor Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Anastigmats Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Aiming at a Common Bulls-Eye Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Anastigmats Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Testing the Infinitesimal Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Anastigmats Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 7 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Lens Achievement Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Kodak Anastigmats Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Auto Graflex Junior Subject(s): product - camera Product: Auto Graflex Junior Description / Notes: Price: $85.00. small ad Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Slogan: Let Kodak Sell your Livestock. Subject(s): Cow Text: You know how to pose your cattle, horses sheep or hogs so as to bring out their strong points and you can leave the rest to the lens. Kodak pictures tell the story. Each print is the strongest kind of a selling argument. Making pictures the Kodak way is inexpensive--and easy. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a Cow in front of milk jugs. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: May / June 1922 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Father, daughter and son Text: Dad showing Billie and Bess a trick of the trade makes a picture you want of the fishing excursion. There will be plenty of such trips this summer--even if you only get away a day at a time-and chances for pictures are endless. The farm itself is full of them. It's all easy the Kodak way. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a father on the dock with his son and daughter. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films With Transparent Base Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922

240

  
Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films in the new package Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: The Standard Radiographic Medium. Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Introducing Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films in 6-Dozen Packages Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Uniformity. Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals. Made in USA Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: Illustration of "National Distribution of a Month's Sales" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals new quality specifications Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals. Quality Unsurpassed Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Graflex Subject(s): product - camera Product: Graflex Camera Description / Notes: caption: "From a Graflex Negative made with a Kodak Anastigmat Lens" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: The Graflex Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Graflex Camera Description / Notes: small ad Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: In the Hood of a Graflex Subject(s): product - camera Product: Graflex Camera Description / Notes: small ad Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Good Composition is easy with the Graflex Subject(s): product - camera Product: Graflex Camera Description / Notes: small ad

241

  
standing on a ship, sailing out of harbor. Man and one woman carry Kodaks. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Your Dealer will show you how easy it is to make pictures like these with a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Cameras Description / Notes: very large ad Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Your Kodak in Europe Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Film Color or Black and White: Publications: The Ocean Times Description / Notes: list of Kodak dealers in Europe Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: May / June 1922 Slogan: Scout with a Kodak Subject(s): Boy scout Text: And when the hike carries you where dull light demands a time exposure--the woods, for example--there's the KODAPOD, a handy little Kodak convenience no bigger than your fist that converts a fence rail, tree, or the handle of your scout hatchet into a tripod. Implied Audience: parents/children/outdoors Product: Kodapod Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a scout leaning on a tree with his camera attached to the hatchet with a Kodapod. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: At graduation time your friends expect your photograph

Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Slogan: Every sport is more sport with a Kodak Subject(s): children Text: Your album filled with pictures of good times will be the book you like the best. Whether it's riding or fishing, tramping or camping, Kodak as you go. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy photographing a girl in a bicycle-car, on a trail. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): mother / child with dog. Text: It's all so easy the Kodak way, and the pictures, precious at the time, will be priceless to you later. You can spend your vacation and have it, too--in pictures. Implied Audience: families / travel Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother on the beach photographing child hugging a sheepdog. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): two women and a man. Text: Kodak film in the yellow box, over the counter all over the world. Implied Audience: travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two women and a man

242

  
Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Offer the Premo Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Camera Description / Notes: sales Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Your Premium Campaign will Succeed if you offer Premo Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Camera Description / Notes: sales Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: A Premium that people want Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: The Special Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: Special Kodaks Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: An Eastman Product--The Premo Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Premo Camera Description / Notes: sales Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 8 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: The Premo Camera is Known Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Premo Camera Description / Notes: sales Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: The Hoyle of Amateur Photography Subject(s): product - misc. Product: "How to Make Good Pictures" Booklet Description / Notes: Price: $0.40 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: Depth is the quality which distinguishes the rich tone of the print on Artura Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: Artura. The paper without a disappointment Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Artura Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jul-22 Slogan: Autographic Brownies Subject(s): product - camera Product: Autographic Brownies Description / Notes: Price: From $9.00 to $17.00. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10

243

  
Year: 22-Jul Slogan: Kodak on the Farm Subject(s): boy Text: Kodak does double duty on the farm. Pictures like the one reproduced above--that's pleasure. A photographic record complete even to the date and title of crops, stock, buildings and equipment--that's business. In either capacity it serves you well. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a boy in a haystack drinking milk. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Slogan: Let Kodak tell the Story Subject(s): Family Text: This is a big day for Ed, Junior. To be allowed to go hunting with dad is a real event--and calls for a picture as a matter of course. Little story-telling incidents like this make the best kind of Kodak pictures. They are happening every day at your house. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of father and son standing in the yard, in hunting gear. Father has a gun, the boy has a Kodak on his shoulder. The mother and daughter stand on the porch, mother taking a photo of the men leaving. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: November / December 1922 Slogan: Keep Christmas With a Kodak Subject(s): mother / daughter Text: While far too excited to dress, little Jane has popped into bed again to pose for a picture with mother's new Kodak. And that only starts the fun. Even now father and Uncle Stan are renewing their youth in a snowball fight--and there's another picture. Kodak is a gift that slips out of the holiday box into the spirit of Christmas. Implied Audience: families / Christmas Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a mother photographing her daughter in bed. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): Mother, child and dog. Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a mother standing in the front yard photographing her daughter holding a dog. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Aug-22 Slogan: There's a story at your house that Kodak can tell Subject(s): Three children, and mother Text: Whether or not the leading characters are the children, it is enough that the pictures are made at your house. Just this little fact gives them, as far as you and yours are concerned, an interest eternal. It's all easy the Kodak way. Pleasure from the start--and good pictures. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Same photo of boys with hose as above, but with different text geared towards parents instead of children. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Kodak as you go

244

  
Subject(s): Two boys, man and woman in car. Text: The lens sees with you--the autographic record remembers for you-- and the story is complete for all time. Kodak brings back the trip to your library table. Implied Audience: travel Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a young couple in the car, the woman is photographing two small boys on the road, one with a dead rabbit and a gun. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Slogan: Kodak brings your vacation back Subject(s): two women Text: All the fun you've had--all the friends you've made--your vacation story told in split seconds, with a Kodak. Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a two woman, one leaning on a tree on a beach, the other photographing her. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Oct-22 Slogan: Pictures of your pets with a Brownie Subject(s): Boy and dog Text: With this simply-operated, Eastman made camera, it's good fun and good pictures from the start. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a boy holding a folding Brownie in the yard, getting his dog to stand. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Nov-22 Slogan: Bring Along A Brownie Subject(s): three boys Text: "Got those turkey pictures yet, Bill?" "Let's see the prints you made at the lake Saturday." "There's the picture you made of me and Doc?" Everybody likes pictures, and the Eastman-made, easily-worked Brownie gives you the kind you'll be glad to show. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three boys, two posing with a turkey, one photographing. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: For Your Vest Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Cable release attachment / Belt Carrying Case. Description / Notes: Price for Cable release: $0.50. Price for carrying case: $1.50 leather. $0.75 leather. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: For Enlarging--Eastman Bromide Papers Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Bromide Papers Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: May-22 Slogan: For Contact Prints use velox; for enlargements--Eastman Bromide Papers. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Bromide Papers Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Announcing the Eastman Clinical Camera Outfit

245

  
Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Clinical Camera Outfit Description / Notes: Price: $160.00. Includes Camera, stand, lights Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Standardized Time-Temperature Development With Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Translucent or clear base Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Aug-22 Slogan: Standardized Time-Temperature Development With Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films - In the Monogrammed Box. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: Eastman Film Negative Album / Kodak Photo Paste Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Film Negative Album / Kodak Photo Paste Description / Notes: price for Album: $0.75 and up. Price for Photo Paste: $0.15 per 2oz tube. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: Look for this seal on every package or bottle. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Kodak Company Tested Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jul-22 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: Caption: "Apparatus for Hydrolysis of Esters" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals - Three Points Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals

246

  
Description / Notes: "Send for our September Price List" Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals - Widest Choice of Indicators Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals - America's Largest Stock Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: Eastman Portrait Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: Make your large prints on Eastman Portrait Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: The print on Eastman Portrait Bromide Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Bromide Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: Eastman Portrait Diffusion Disks Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Portrait Diffusion Disks Description / Notes: Price: from $6.00 to $7.50 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: Eastman Portrait Film Par Speed--Super Speed Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Eastman Portrait Film Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: What they think of the Eastman Projection Printer in England Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Projection Printer Description / Notes: Letter from Reflex Studios in England. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: Eastman Projection Printers Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Projection Printer Description / Notes: Price: for 4x5 negatives: $200.00. For 5x7 negatives: $450.00. For 8x10 Negatives: $675.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: May-22 Slogan: To Weigh easily--to measure easily and correctly Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Studio Scales / Eastman Visible Graduates Description / Notes: Price for scale: $4.50. Price for Graduates: $0.30 to $1.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: Making out Next Year's Income Tax Report Will Be Easy if

247

  
You Now Install The Eastman Studio System Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Studio System Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: Eastman View Cameras No.2 Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman View Camera No. 2 Description / Notes: Price: from $42.00 to $50.75 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: Accessories that assist in making developing easy--and correct. Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Eastman Visible Graduate / Eastman Thermometer Description / Notes: price for graduate: $0.30 and up. Price for Thermometer: $0.75 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Introducing Eastman X-Ray Fixing Powders Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Fixing Powders. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: Elon Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Elon Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: Elon. We Make it--We know it's right. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Elon Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: When you Specify Elon Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Elon Developer Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Aug-22 Slogan: There's always more fun with a Kodak Subject(s): Three children, and mother Text: First the fun of "shooting" the scene--and after that the pictures. Think of the things you would like to photograph-incidents around the home like the one shown above, for example, pictures of your friends, your sports, your trips, your pets. And it's all easy with a Kodak or Brownie, as you can see for yourself when you look them over at the store. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak / brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three boys playing outside with a hose while the mother watches and takes photos. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: May-22 Slogan: Kodak Acid Fixing Powder Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Kodak Acid Fixing Powder Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: A New Enlarger--Kodak Auto-Focus Enlarger Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Auto-Focus Enlarger

248

  
Description / Notes: Price: $35.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: Kodak Auto-Focus Enlarger Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Auto-Focus Enlarger Description / Notes: Price: $35.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jul-22 Slogan: For Amateurs, the new Kodak Auto-Focus Enlarger Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Auto-Focus Enlarger Description / Notes: Price: $35.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: Kodak Color Filter / Kodak Sky Filter Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Color Filter / Kodak Sky Filter Description / Notes: Price: $0.75 to $1.50 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jul-22 Slogan: Announcing Kodak Cut Film Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak cut Film Description / Notes: Price from $0.46 a dozen. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: The Kodak Dry Mounting Press Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Dry Mounting Press Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: May-22 Slogan: Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Price: $3.00 and up Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jul-22 Slogan: Finish the fun--develop your own vacation films with the Kodak Film Tank Subject(s): product - darkroom Product: Kodak Film Tank Description / Notes: Price: $3.00 and up. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: All-metal--Always Accurate. Eastman Metal Trimmer Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Metal Trimmer Description / Notes: price: $15.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: Kodak Metal Tripods Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Metal Tripods Description / Notes: price: $2.75 and up. Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: They help you make good pictures-Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Kodak Metal Tripods / Optipod Description / Notes: price for metal tripod: $2.75 and up. Price for Optipod: $1.25 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: V.P.K. Tripod Adapter / Brownie Tripod Adapter Subject(s): product - misc.

249

  
Product: Kodak Tripod Adapters Description / Notes: Price for V.P.K. adapter: $0.50. Price for Brownie Adapter: $0.50 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jun-22 Slogan: The Green of the Scene is in the tint of the print on Kodak Velvet Green Paper. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Kodak Velvet Green Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: For Fun on the Farm and for practical pictures of the business of farming Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak Junior Description / Notes: Price: $12.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jul-22 Slogan: A new model Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: The New No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: $50.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: $50.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Well Known and Well Liked--Premo Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Cameras Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: 1922 Slogan: Premiums that Produce. Premo Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Cameras Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: May-22 Slogan: To Record the Scenes of the Motor trip - The Panoram Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: The Panoram Kodak Description / Notes: Price for No. 1: $20.00. Price for No. 2. $30.00 Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: For The Results you want, print on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Mar-22 Slogan: Ask your finisher to print your negatives on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Paper Color or Black and White:

250

  
Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: The Versatile Paper--Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: May-22 Slogan: For Results from start to finish: Kodak, Kodak Film and Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Jul-22 Slogan: You can get the best print on Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1918-1923 General Ads 9 of 10 Year: Apr-22 Slogan: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamp Outfit Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Velox Transparent Water Color Stamps Description / Notes: Price for the outfit: $1.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: 1975 Slogan: Subject(s): Product: Advertisement Description / Notes: Letter from Mary Hackett to Mr. Sweeting regarding a Kodak ad that used to be in this binder. Mr. Sweeting had wanted a copy of an ad, and Hackett sent the original instead. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: Kodak keeps the story Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: All the story--not only the picture but the date and title written on the film at the time. And this feature is exclusively Eastman. Implied Audience: women / general Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman in a checkered dress and hat holding a camera. The caption reads "Writing the Autographic Record." Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: none Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Publications: The American Magazine Description / Notes: Photograph of a woman on a fence in a striped dress holding a Kodak Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: Take a Kodak with you Subject(s): man Text: none Implied Audience: travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man, chest down, holding a Kodak, and his watch, with suitcases, and golf clubs at his feet. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: Kodak is the ally of every other sport Subject(s): Man on a mountain Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen

251

  
Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man sitting on top of a cliff with his Kodak. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: May-23 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): mother/children Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a mother photographing three children, one on a swing. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: Kodak and Afterwards it's all in the album Subject(s): three women and one man. Text: none Implied Audience: travel Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman at the side of the water, holding a Kodak, photographing two woman and a man swimming. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): Woman and two men. Text: All roads lead to pictures--the quiet lane just as surely as the busy highway. With your Kodak tucked beside you, you have only to pick and choose--and press the button. Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman and two men sitting in a car, the woman is photographing boats in the harbor. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): young man, woman fishing Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a couple at a waterfall, the man with fishing equipment, the woman with a Kodak. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: A Brownie Belongs Subject(s): two boys Text: It's fun sailing boats--it's more fun sailing boats and making pictures too. That's the beauty of a Brownie. On the diamond, at the lake, on the track--this simply-worked, Eastman-made camera adds to the sport at the time and gives you pictures that store up fun for the future. Whatever it is you like to do best, a Brownie belongs. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two boys sailing toy boats. One is photographing the other. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Nitron Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: 1923

252

  
Slogan: Sulfosalicylic Acid A Reagent for Albumin Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Thioacetic Acid Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Mar-23 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: 1923 Slogan: For the Best Results-- Your Darkroom Should Have Subject(s): product - medical Product: Darkroom equipment Description / Notes: Medical darkrooms. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: 1923 Slogan: A Suggestion-Subject(s): product - medical Product: Dental X-Rays Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Apr-23 Slogan: Dependability, Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: May-23 Slogan: Clinical Photography - A necessity in modern medical practice. Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Clinical Camera Outfit Description / Notes: Price: $160.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman Universal Colorimeter Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Universal Colorimeter Description / Notes: Caption reads: "Color measurement made easy" and "Numerical specification of color made simple" Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Apr-23 Slogan: Picture Stories Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Description / Notes: Autographic Kodaks $6.50 and up Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Jun-23 Slogan: Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Description / Notes: Autographic Kodaks $6.50 and up Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1

253

  
Year: Jul-23 Slogan: For The Fourth Load with Kodak Film and Shoot with a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Description / Notes: Autographic Kodaks $6.50 and up Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Jul-23 Slogan: Every good time is a good time to Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Description / Notes: Autographic Kodaks $6.50 and up Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Boy Text: You'll want pictures of the canoe trip, the hike, of all the fun that summer has in store and it's all easy with a Kodak or Brownie. The rest of the gang will want to see the pictures you make and you'll be proud to show them. Remember the time that Bill found the hornets' nest and the hornets found bill? Next time have a Kodak along and keep all the story--even to the date and title. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak / brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy with a camera, sitting beside a canoe. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Mar-23 Slogan: No. 1 Pocket Kodak, Series II Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Pocket Kodak Series II Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: May-23 Slogan: No. 1 Pocket Kodak, Series II Fixed focus model. Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Price: 13.50 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Apr-23 Slogan: Autographic Brownies Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2C Autographic Brownie. Description / Notes: 2c Autographic Brownie price: $15.00 Four sizes of Autographic Brownies priced from $9.00 up. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Apr-23 Slogan: Announcing a new Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2C Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: $65.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Jul-23 Slogan: Two New Kodak Models Subject(s): product - camera Product: Nos. 1 and 1A Pocket Kodaks Series II Description / Notes: No. 1 Pocket Kodak Price: $20.00 No.1A Pocket Kodak Price: $22.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: The bride or graduate will make an appointment with her photographer as a matter of course. Not that the giving of a portrait needs an occasion. At any time it's a gentle, graceful way of acknowledging friendships. Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only.

254

  
Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man in a canoe with his Kodak attached to his belt. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Oct-23 Slogan: Autographic Kodak Subject(s): Man on a cow Text: Good pictures, easily made, and complete even to date and title written on the film at the time by means of the exclusively Eastman autographic feature-- that's the Kodak way. You'll want such pictures of live stock, crops, equipment, buildings, for reference, and year-to-year comparison you'll point to them proudly in your Kodak album when they are made just for fun, like the illustration above. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Publications: Farm Description / Notes: Photograph of a man on a cow. Caption reads: "From a Kodak Negative Made on the Farm." Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Dec-23 Slogan: A Kodak for Christmas Subject(s): Mother, three children Text: Hardly is it out of the package when it's out the door in happy hands, "clicking" the holiday story. Kodak is a gift that everyone wants. Implied Audience: families / Christmas Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a mother photographing three children building a snowman.

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: May-23 Slogan: The Premo Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: 1923 Slogan: Because They're Better Subject(s): product - camera Product: Special Kodaks Description / Notes: Prices: $50.00 and up at your dealers. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #1 Year: Jun-23 Slogan: Eastman Prepared X-Ray Developer and Fixing Powders Subject(s): product - medical Product: X-Ray developer and fix. Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Slogan: Just what I wanted--A Kodak Subject(s): Kodak Girl Text: none Implied Audience: women / Christmas Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman with a new camera-Christmas presents on the table. (might be pregnant?) Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Slogan: Wear a vest pocket Kodak on your belt. Subject(s): man in a canoe Text: Vest pocket autographic Special, focusing model, is excellent photographic equipment for any sportsman... Implied Audience: outdoorsmen

255

  
Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Nov-23 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Two men Text: You'll find plenty of opportunity for a Kodak on your hunting trip. And there are no game laws to stop the shot. Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two men, one handing his rifle to the other, and pulling out his Kodak. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Oct-23 Slogan: Kodak on the Hunt Subject(s): Woman and two men. Text: There could be no more interesting trophies of the trip than clear, clean-cut pictures--the king a Kodak makes. Any Kodak is compact to carry. Some are small enough to wear. Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman photographing two men with their hunting equipment, and dogs. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): young man, woman Text: And then as you press the button, the story that the happy hours hold is yours for the years. Implied Audience: travel Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of same woman in striped dress as above, but with a man with golf clubs. The woman is holding the camera.

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Nov-23 Slogan: Bring Along A Brownie Subject(s): father / son Text: A day with Dad--there's a chance for pictures, and just the kind a Brownie likes to make. Incidentally, unless your dad knows about a Brownie he's going to be a little bit surprised when you show him the prints. "Why these are fine son," He says, and his face registers amazement. Well, why shouldn't they be fine? You and your Brownie made them. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man in a canoe, posing as his son takes a photo. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Oct-23 Slogan: What you Want is a Brownie Subject(s): three boys Text: Sam makes the Jack-O'-lantern -- you make the picture. Then in a day or so you both see the print. "Some photographer," Says Sam. And you are. A Brownie makes good picture-making easy. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy photographing two boys on a bench outside, one holding a pumpkin. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Sept-Oct 1923 Slogan: Bring Along A Brownie Subject(s): three boys Text: Ask your father how much he would give for pictures of the things he did when he was a boy--his pets, and sports and chums.

256

  
Then tell him that the prices of Brownie cameras, made in Kodak shops by Kodak workmen, and easily worked, thoroughly capable picture-makers, begin at 2.00 Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy photographing two other boys climbing a tree. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals - Xanthydrol Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: bw Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals - Over 1600 Available. Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: bw Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Aug-23 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Carbon Tetrachloride Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: bw Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: Announcing a New Film--Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Film Super Speed Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: bw Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: "Radiography with Eastman Dental X-Ray Films" Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: bw Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Oct-23 Slogan: Three Things about Anastigmat Lenses Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Anastigmat lens Color or Black and White: bw Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: Close-Ups with your Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodak Portrait Attachment Description / Notes: Price: $1.25 and $1.50 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Jun-23 Slogan: No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: $50.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: There are three New-Model Special Kodaks Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special, No. 1A Autographic Kodak Special, No. 2C Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: No. 1 Price: $50.00 No. 1a Price: $60.00 No. 2C Price: $65.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Sep-23

257

  
Slogan: No. 1a Autographic Kodak Special Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: $60.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Sep-23 Slogan: No. 1a Autographic Kodak Special - A New Model in a Popular Size Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Autographic Kodak Special Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Jul-23 Slogan: A new model--always in focus Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Price $15.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: There's bound to be fun with a Brownie Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2C Autographic Brownie. Description / Notes: Price: $15.00 Four sizes of Autographic Brownies: $9.00 and up. Box type Brownies: $2.00 and up. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Nov-23 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: Portraits for Christmas Your friends can buy anything you can give them--except your photograph. Phone your photographer now. Implied Audience: Christmas Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: People Want the Premo Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: An Eastman-made Premium The Premo Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Jun-23 Slogan: Offer the Premo Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Color or Black and White: Publications: Novelty News Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: Jul-23 Slogan: Premos for Premiums Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #2 Year: 1923 Slogan: For Better Prints for You Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3

258

  
Year: Feb-24 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Kodak girls Text: none Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two women, one in stripes, one in checks. One sitting on a fence, holding a camera, the other pointing at something. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: Kodak on the Farm Subject(s): Young man, woman horse and carriage. Text: Winter sets the stage for picture stories you will be glad to get with a Kodak. That's pleasure. But Kodak plays part in the business side of life on the farm, as well. There are pictures that sell cattle, horses, sheep, hogs; there are pictures that record crops, equipment, buildings--pictures worth the making, all of them. And the Kodak way is the easy way and one that's fun from the start. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Same photo as above, with horse and sleigh, but with different text. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Young man, woman horse and carriage. Text: Whether city stroll of country hike, winter sets the stage for a picture worth the making. And the Kodak way is the easy way and one that's fun from the start. Implied Audience: travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a couple, woman holding the camera, photographing horse-drawn sled with logs on it. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Dec-23 Slogan: Childhood's kaleidoscope never waits and rarely repeats. Have your Kodak ready! Subject(s): Family Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a father pulling two children on a sled, while mother photographs. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Dec-23 Slogan: Just what you want--a Brownie Subject(s): Father, two children Text: And picture making is one sport that you and your dad can enjoy together. Implied Audience: parents/children /Christmas Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of father standing over a young boy holding a Brownie. Christmas tree, toys in the BG. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: Bring Along A Brownie Subject(s): three boys Text: It's fun to ski, and fun to hike, but it's more fun still with a Brownie. The rest of the bunch can hardly wait to see the pictures you made. And they're so good that you, yourself, can hardly wait to show them.

259

  
Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of three boys, one photographing the other two making a fire, outside in Winter. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Dec-23 Slogan: Just what I wanted--a Brownie Subject(s): two girls, parents in the bg Text: Think of the fun you'll have with your own camera. Better tell mother or tip off Dad that this easily-worked Eastman-made camera is just exactly what you want. Implied Audience: parents/children/Christmas Product: Brownie cameras Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two young girls, one holding Brownie, Christmas tree, presents in the BG, as well as parents. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Oct-23 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: Shows a chart of five years progress. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Nov-23 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Quality Specifications Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Jan-24 Slogan: The Use of Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: List No. 10 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Slogan: A Specific Test for Albumin Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: 1924 Slogan: Motion Pictures Subject(s): product - camera Product: Ciné-Kodak Description / Notes: Caption: "You press the button" and "Operating with Kodak Motor Drive" Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: The Kodak Way Subject(s): product - camera Product: Ciné-Kodak Description / Notes: Caption: "We Do the Rest" Price: $335.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Nov-23 Slogan: Darkroom Design Subject(s): product - medical Product: Darkroom plans Description / Notes: "Complete darkroom plans, photographs, and equipment data will be sent free on request." Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Aug-23 Slogan: Eastman Dupli-Tized Films Super Speed Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White:

260

  
Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Jan-24 Slogan: Eastman Dupli-Tized Super Speed Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: 1924 Slogan: "Angulation" Becomes extremely easy with Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Oct-23 Slogan: A New Booklet, Radiography with Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Nov-23 Slogan: Reliability, Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Jan-24 Slogan: Detail is Assured With Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Dec-23 Slogan: Eastman Universal Colorimeter Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Eastman Universal Colorimeter Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: Kodak in the Home Subject(s): Mother father, child Text: A Kodak record of the children catches them just as they are and keeps them just as they were. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of father fixing a doll carriage while young girl watches, mother takes photos. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Jan-24 Slogan: A Kodak for the Farm Subject(s): Young boy with skates Text: In addition to the dollars-and-cents value that Kodak pictures of cattle, horses, hogs, crops, equipment, buildings, have in the business of farming, Kodak plays part the year 'round in the farm's fun--as the picture above shows. Implied Audience: farmers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy carrying skates, walking through the snow. Caption reads: "When skating pond takes Tom from kindling pile, there's a chance for a story-telling picture. Such pictures are sure of a smile when you turn the page in your Kodak Album. Illustration from a Kodak Magazine" Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: "Wait till I load my Brownie"

261

  
Subject(s): two boys Text: Of course he wants his Brownie along. He wished he had it with him the other day when Joe Herbert took up fancy skating one moment and sat down hard--the next. There's always more fun with a Brownie--and you'll get good pictures from the first. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Kodak / brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy loading his Brownie, indoors, while a friend holding skates, in winter clothes waits. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Price: $11.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: 1924 Slogan: Two Premiums in One Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: No. 2 Film Pack Hawk-Eye, Kodakery Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: As a Premium--A Premo Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Color or Black and White: Publications: Novelty News Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Slogan: A Nationally Known Product for a Premium Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Nov-23 Slogan: A Premium with wide appeal Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Camera Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Jan-24 Slogan: If your photographic print was made on Velox the name is on the back. Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: Look for "Velox" on the Back Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #3 Year: Oct-23 Slogan: Eastman X-Ray Illuminator Subject(s): product - medical Product: X-Ray illuminator Description / Notes: Price: 8x10--$6.00 14x17--$16.50 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: May-24 Slogan: 1a Autographic Kodak Special Take this Kodak with you Subject(s): product - camera Product: 1a Autographic Kodak Special Description / Notes: Price: $60.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Jun-24

262

  
Slogan: The Speed You Need. Subject(s): product - camera Product: 1a Autographic Kodak Special Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: May-24 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): Boy with chickens Text: Then when years pass and Jimmie wears his hair short and his trousers long, you have him just as he was. It's all easy the Kodak way--and fun from the first. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy looking in a chicken coop, with chicks. Caption reads "From a Kodak Negative" Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Jun-24 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Family Text: You'd like to remember a day like this and pictures won't let you forget. Any Kodak is convenient to carry, easy to work and fun to use; you'll get good pictures from the first. Implied Audience: families Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man, woman and child standing in a meadow, mother holding flowers, father photographing child sitting in the field Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: April, 1924 Slogan: Kodak Picture-records Subject(s): Farmer Text: Kodak pictures play a definite part in your business. The illustration above, for example, plus the title and date you wrote on the film at the time by means of the autographic feature, is a complete picture-record. Each year you'll find it invaluable for reference. The autographic Kodak gives you just the pictures you want--gives them the easiest way and the cost is little enough. Implied Audience: farmers Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a man on a horse-drawn farming machine. Caption reads: "'Harrowing Apr 7, '23' --picture and title from an autographic Kodak negative." Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Apr-24 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): four men Text: Days like this, that you've looked forward to, offer pictures that you'll turn back to, again and again in your album. And any Kodak is compact to carry, easy to work and fun to use. Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of four men with camping equipment, canoe at the edge of a river. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Slogan: Kodak on the Farm Subject(s): Horses Text: With spring plowing done and the team in pasture for a wellearned Sunday's rest, there's a chance for a Kodak picture. Storytelling pictures like this are plenty on the farm--you'll always be glad you have them. And for practical use in advertising and selling your cattle, horses, hogs, pictures are of obvious worth. It's all easy, and fun, the Kodak way. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo

263

  
Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three horses. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: May-24 Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): mother / child Text: none Implied Audience: families Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a mother about to take a photo of her baby in a carriage. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Apr-24 Slogan: Brownie cameras make good pictures Subject(s): Two boys Text: The rest of the bunch will want to see the pictures your Brownie made--and you'll be proud to show them. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two boys looking at photographs. One has camera on his shoulder. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Jul-24 Slogan: Have your Kodak ready Subject(s): Two men camping Text: none Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two men on a rock, with camping equipment, one showing the other his camera. Caption reads: "See Jim, how easy it is the Kodak way" Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Mar-24 Slogan: Swing a Kodak from your shoulder Subject(s): Two men fishing Text: And then you take home the trip. It's all easy the Kodak way and you'll find it fun from the first. Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two men standing at a river, one holding fish, and a pole, the other a Kodak. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Apr-24 Slogan: Kodak keeps the story Subject(s): woman, captain of ship Text: Just "click" the shutter of this easily-worked camera and today's good times become to-morrow's good pictures. Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of woman on a ship photographing the captain at the wheel. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: May-24 Slogan: Get the picture with a Brownie Subject(s): two boys and a dog Text: You think a lot of that dog of yours--and with Bud's assistance he makes a fine subject for your camera. Pictures of your friends, your sports, your trips--of whatever it is that you like to do best--are easy to get with a Brownie. Let them show you at the store. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie

264

  
Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two boys, one holding a camera, the other posing the dog in a hat, on a box. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: Use Orcinol..., an Eastman Organic Chemical Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Mar-24 Slogan: Use Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride Eastman Standard Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Apr-24 Slogan: A new list of Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: List No. 11 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Apr-24 Slogan: Use Nitron, an Eastman Organic Chemical Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Slogan: You press the button; we do the rest Subject(s): Family, with maid. Text: Cine-Kodak, the new Eastman invention, and its projector, the Kodascope, enable you to show in motion on your screen the sort of pictures you turn to first in your album. Train the camera, press the button and the result is a reel of personal motion pictures, obtained with characteristic Kodak ease, that for you and yours will be priceless. And the fascination of personal photoplays isn't all. Through Kodascope Libraries, Inc., professional releases may be rented for projection in your own home. Price of complete outfit, Cine-Kodak with either motor drive or tripod and crank, Kodascope, Screen, etc., $335. Cost of operating is less than 1/5 of the operating expense of equipment using standard width film, and your finishing by Eastman experts in Eastman laboratories is paid for when you buy the film. You press the button; we do the rest. Implied Audience: families Product: Cine-Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of a man filming his children being served snacks outdoors by a maid, while the mother watches. Caption reads: "Making motion pictures with a CinéKodak (the motor cranks the camera) Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: May-22 Slogan: Motion pictures the Kodak Way Subject(s): men in canoes Text: Rushing water, swirl of spray, flashing paddles--press the button on your Ciné-Kodak and you're getting it all in motion. And then back from the trip, you have only to turn the switch on your Kodascope and once more the racing canoes swoop past you and the thrill of the moment is yours again. Nor are you limited to personal motion pictures of your favorite sports, your vacation trip, or the children. Professional releases--dramas, comedies, etc.-may be rented from Kodascope Libraries, Inc. and projected in your own home. ... Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Cine-Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: Photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man filming three canoes going down the river. Caption reads "The motor cranks the camera"

265

  
color made simple Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Mar-24 Slogan: Ciné-Kodak for Motion Pictures Subject(s): product - camera Product: Ciné-Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $335.00 Caption reads: You press the button; we do the rest Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Apr-24 Slogan: Speed in Exposure With--Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Apr-24 Slogan: For Extra-Oral Radiographs Use-- Eastman Dupli-Tized XRay Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Feb-24 Slogan: To Meet Every Need--Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: 1924 Slogan: Eastman Universal Colorimeter Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Universal Colorimeter Description / Notes: An instrument to measure colors. Caption reads: Color measurement made easy, Numerical specification of Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Mar-24 Slogan: Developer Economy with--Eastman X-Ray Developing Powders Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman X-Ray Developing Powders Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Jun-24 Slogan: One Hundred Kodaks to One Hundred Scouts for One Hundred Pictures Big Kodak Competition Starts Now Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Contest for Boy Scouts June 1, 1924October 1, 1924. Prizes for 100 best photographs. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Mar-24 Slogan: Demonstrated Pulling Power Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Film Pack Hawk-Eye Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Slogan: Have your Kodak ready Subject(s): Man, two women Text: Picture-making is fun at the time and there's pleasure ahead--years of it--as you turn to the prints in your album. Implied Audience: women / general Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a man and woman having a picnic, a second woman photographs it. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4

266

  
Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): none Text: The exchange of photographs at graduation time has rightly become a universal custom because it provides a graceful way of acknowledging friendships. In order that those who expect your portrait may not be disappointed--Phone your photographer now. Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: 1924 Slogan: Added Pulling Power Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #4 Year: Jun-24 Slogan: Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: Kodak at the Fair Subject(s): Chicken, cow, and pig Text: Fair time means vacation time to you and your family, and that means Kodak pictures as a matter of course. Everybody takes a Kodak on vacation. You'll make pictures of the picnic along the roadside, of prize stock at the fair grounds, of your own entries in county or state competitions. Then as the years go by, the prints in your Kodak album bring back the fun you had. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photos of farm animals with caption: "pictures you'll prize" Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Jul-24 Slogan: Take a Kodak with you Subject(s): Kodak girls Text: none Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of two women sitting in a boat. Both have cameras, one is taking a picture. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): man and horse Text: And then long after those happy vacation days you trip is still before you--in your album. Any Kodak is compact to carry and easy to work. Stop in at your dealer's and see. Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man with a horse, standing beside a mountain, photographing. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Sep-24 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Man and woman Text: none Implied Audience: outdoors Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man helping a woman with a

267

  
Kodak up a steep trail. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: Let Kodak Keep the Story Subject(s): Mother with four children Text: What a chance for a picture! Yes, and your Kodak will make the most of it. Vacation's fun is Kodak's opportunity. Implied Audience: families / travel Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a mother photographing four children playing in the sand at the waterside. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Oct-24 Slogan: Ready with your Kodak Subject(s): two women and a man. Text: And a split second is all you need for a picture you'll treasure for years. That's picture making the Kodak way. Implied Audience: outdoors Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two women posing with a stack of corn stalks in a field, while a man photographs them. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Oct-24 Slogan: Ready with your Kodak Subject(s): Woman, two dogs Text: Kennel and stable, house and grounds--all present endless opportunity for a Kodak--your Kodak Implied Audience: women Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman photographing two dogs on a bench in a garden. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Sep-25 Slogan: All Out-doors invites your Kodak Subject(s): young man, woman Text: none Implied Audience: travel Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man and woman standing on a rock at the waterside, the man is photographing. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Jun-24 Slogan: A Brownie for Vacation Subject(s): boy and girl Text: Vacation's almost here. Think of the fun you're going to have--and the fun you're going to keep if you have a camera. Any Brownie is easy to use--whether it's box type or folding. Look one over at your Kodak dealer's and see for yourself. You'll get good pictures from the first. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy photographing a girl at the beach. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Jul-24 Slogan: Get your Brownie out Subject(s): five boys Text: Probably Fat Smith was concealing something up his sleeve beside muscle, but it was a great chance for your Brownie. That picture will get a laugh every time you show it. It's all easy the Brownie way, and the finest sort of fun from the first. Let them show you at the store. Your dad would give a lot if he'd had a

268

  
camera when he was your age. And Brownies cost little--in fact the prices start at $2. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy photographing three boys gathered around another who is showing his muscle. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: Picture-making is fun from the first with a Brownie Subject(s): Man, two boys. Text: Uncle Frank was so interested in sailing Bob's boat that he never knew your Brownie made the picture till you showed him in the album. Then he was so tickled that he wanted an extra print for himself. Brownies are easy to work, cost little, and do a lot. See for yourself at your Kodak dealer's. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy photographing another boy and his uncle sailing a toy boat. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Widely Known Photographic Plants for Sale Under Government Decree Subject(s): product - misc. Product: Camera factories in Rochester Description / Notes: Ad for the sales of the Premo, and the Folmer and Schwing Camera factories, Rochester, NY. August 15, 1924. Minimum prices: for Folmer & Schwing--796,041,60. For Premo--589,449,20 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Nearly 1800 Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Quality specifications of Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: May-24 Slogan: For Making--Standard Refractive Index Solutions Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Aug-25 Slogan: Your own movies Subject(s): Man at horse-race Text: The life and animation of the horse show crowds, the thrill of the jumps, the rhythmic swing of the winning tandem--press the button on your Ciné-Kodak and, with utmost ease, you're getting it all in motion ... Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Cine-Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man filming a horse race from the stands. Caption reads: "You press the button; we do the rest." Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Jul-24 Slogan: In Motion Subject(s): Girl with two men on horse, many dogs Text: The hunt is your hobby--the Ciné-Kodak keeps for you in motion pictures all the story save the music of hounds and the

269

  
tan-ta-ra--tan-ta-ra of the horn. Tennis and golf, bathing and yachting, fishing and hunting, horse show and race-meet--it's the action in each that gives the thrill. And the Ciné-Kodak tells and retells the story--in action. Just as it first made amateur photography popular by making it simple, Kodak now brings to you, in motion, personal pictures of the very things you care for most. And again it is done by the mere press of a button. You can now have personal movies with Kodak ease Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: Ciné-Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman filming two men on horse, with more than ten dogs, leaving on a hunt. Caption reads: "You press the button; we do the rest." Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Ciné-Kodak gets the picture in motion Subject(s): product - camera Product: Ciné-Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $335.00 Caption reads: You press the button--the motor cranks the cmera-you're making motion pictures--the easy Kodak way Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: The Ciné-Kodak makes motion pictures Subject(s): product - camera Product: Ciné-Kodak Description / Notes: Price: $335.00 Caption reads: The Motor Cranks the Camera Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Jul-24 Slogan: Get the scene in motion Subject(s): Three boys fishing Text: Life, action, the true spirit of the scene--Ciné-Kodak keeps it all in motion pictures with typical Kodak ease. And afterwards, as you turn the switch on your Kodascope, you and your friends see the scene as you saw it first--in all it's vigourous action-- and the original thrill remains. ... Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Ciné-Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three boys fishing, one netting a fish, the other two filming and watching him. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Jul-24 Slogan: Action! And your Ciné-Kodak gets it all Subject(s): two men on a dock Text: The gentle whir of your Ciné-Kodak motor as it steadily cranks the camera is lost in the roar of the onrushing hydroplane, but you're getting the scene in motion. And all you do is train the lens and press the button. That's motion pictures the Kodak way. ... Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: Ciné-Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two men on a dock, watching a plane land in the water. Caption reads: "You press the button; we do the rest." Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Safety Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: May-24 Slogan: An announcement, To be available soon, Eastman Safety Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Super-Speed Subject(s): product - medical

270

  
Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Keep Your Radiographs in--Eastman Dental Film Mounts Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental Film Mounts Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Jun-24 Slogan: Standard Technique in Dental Radiography Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Your Kodak in Europe Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: film Description / Notes: list of Kodak developers and printers in Europe. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Concessionaires! Salesboard Operators! Premium Users! Use a Premo for Pulling Power Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-eye and Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Concessionaires--Premium Users Sales board Operators Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-eye and Premo Description / Notes: sales

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Sep-24 Slogan: This Boy Scout Wins a Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Contest for Boy Scouts June 1, 1924October 1, 1924. Prizes for 100 best photographs. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Demonstrated Pulling Power Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Film Pack Hawk-Eye Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Concessionaires--Sales board Operators--Premium Users. Use an Eastman Camera for Pulling Power Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2a Folding Cartridge Premo Description / Notes: sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: You too can win a $22 Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: No.1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Contest for Boy Scouts June 1, 1924October 1, 1924. Prizes for 100 best photographs. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Oct-24 Slogan: A new Kodak with a new shutter. Nos. 1a and 2c Kodaks Series III Subject(s): product - camera Product: Nos. 1A and 2C Kodaks Series III Description / Notes: Prices: 1A $30.00 2C $33.00

271

  
Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photograph of two hunters, one posing with three dogs while the other takes a photograph. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Dec-24 Slogan: A Brownie Gift Box Subject(s): Boy Text: You're ready for pictures right off the reel. Outfit includes a No. 2 Brownie Camera, two rolls of Kodak film, Eastman album, Kodak portrait attachment, and blank for free year's subscription to the photographic magazine Kodakery Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo-illustration Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy with a new Brownie, box on the table. There is a drawing of a boy photographing his dog inset into the photo like a thought bubble. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Nov-24 Slogan: Brownie Gift Box Subject(s): boy and girl Text: A complete picture-taking, picture-keeping outfit--just what you'd like for Christmas. A barrel of photographic fun packed in a holiday box and you're ready to start enjoying it as soon as you lift the lid. Inside is everything the Junior photographer needs for pictures of his play and playmates--including equipment for "closeup" portraits at arm's distance--and an album for keeping the prints in tip-top shape. ... Implied Audience: parents/children/Christmas Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy with a Brownie in his hands, sister watching. Box sits on the desk beside him.

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: 1924 Slogan: Everybody likes to take pictures Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #5 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: An Established Reputation for your Premium Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Nov-24 Slogan: Get your Kodak Out Subject(s): Man, woman, three dogs Text: An ideal time for picture making is autumn. Whether a hunt or a hike, have your Kodak ready for the pictures you're sure to want. Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a hunter posing with his three dogs while a woman photographs them. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Oct-24 Slogan: You'll be glad you had your Kodak Subject(s): Two men, three dogs Text: No trouble to carry it--just put it in your pocket or swing it from you shoulder; and think how you'll prize the pictures you make. It's all easy the Kodak way, as your Kodak dealer will show you. Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: autographic Kodak

272

  
Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Oct-24 Slogan: Every Boy wants a Brownie Subject(s): four boys Text: Chances are that your dad passes a Kodak dealer's store on his way from the office Chances are, too, that he would be glad to have you make pictures the easy Brownie way because he can enjoy them with you. Price, $2 up, and good sport and good pictures from the start. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a three boys, one with a camera watching another boy do a handstand. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: 1924 Slogan: Eastman Dintrosalicyic Acid Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Jul-24 Slogan: Announcing Eastman Low Viscosity Cotton Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Jul-24 Slogan: Low Viscosity Cotton for Automobile Lacquers Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: Use Eastman Pyrogallol for Gas Analysis Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: Eastman Cotton Forms a Tough Skin Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: For Medicinal use Eastman Carbon Tetrachloride Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Sep-24 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: With graph charting growth over six years Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Oct-24 Slogan: Kodalak Metal Lacquers Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Oct-24 Slogan: Kodalak Wood Lacquers Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White:

273

  
Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Ciné-Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man with Ciné-Kodak filming four men in skis. Caption reads: "With the Ciné-Kodak you press the button; the motor cranks the camera Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Sep-24 Slogan: Movies you make yourself Subject(s): Woman, man with horse Text: There's something new in photography--a new pleasure and a fascinating one--motion pictures the Kodak way. With the same ease that you make ordinary snapshots you can now film "movies" of your family, your friends, your sports and pleasures, and show them on screen in your own home. The camera is the Ciné-Kodak, and to operate it all you do is train the lens and press the button. A motor cranks the camera and gets the scene in action. The projector is the Kodascope--also Eastman made--and it not only allows you to show your own movies but professional releases as well... Implied Audience: travel Product: Ciné-Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman with a movie camera, filming a man on a horse jumping over a fence. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: 1924 Slogan: Quality and Safety are combined in the new Eastman Safety Dupli-tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: 1924

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Dec-24 Slogan: Acetic Anhydride, 99-100%, an Eastman Organic Chemical Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Nov-24 Slogan: And you made the movie yourself. Subject(s): four men, one woman Text: In your own home, on your own screen, you can show movies that you made yourself with typical Kodak ease. A reel or two of your favorite sport, little dramas in which you and your friends star, movie chronicles of the children... Implied Audience: families Product: Cine-Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a group of adults around a screen, with a man running the projector, showing films. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Dec-24 Slogan: Movies of your Merry Christmas Subject(s): five men skiing Text: It's all easy with a Ciné-Kodak, and there's an unusual chance for movies now. Coasting, skiing, skating--the tang of winter speeds up the sports of winter. There's action galore at holiday time, and that's what you want for the screen. From the "spill" on the toboggan slide to the fancy skaters at the rink, press the button and you're making a movie of it; turn the switch on your Kodascope and you're showing it home on the screen. Movies you make yourself aren't all the story either. Through Kodascope Libraries, Inc., professional releases with such stars as Douglas Fairbanks, Charlie Chaplin, and Norma Talmadge may be secured at a modest rental for projection on your own screen.

274

  
Slogan: Detail in Radiographs Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Nov-24 Slogan: For Every Technique, Use Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: 1924 Slogan: In the Practice of Orthodontia Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Sep-24 Slogan: Radiographs show Impacted Molars Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Nov-24 Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Packet "C" Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Sep-24 Slogan: An Eastman-made Roll-film Camera for Premium Users Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-eye Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: Concessionaires--Premium Users Sales board Operators Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-eye and Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Oct-24 Slogan: Suit Yourself Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-eye and Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Nov-24 Slogan: An Eastman Camera is a Year-'round Premium Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-eye and Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Dec-24 Slogan: "From Dot and Daddy"--A Kodak Subject(s): Mother, father, daughter Text: It has been hard for Dot to keep the big secret but she managed somehow, and mother is the most surprised person in the world. And pleased, too. A Kodak is just what she wanted. Implied Audience: families / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a father taking a camera off of the tree, while young daughter covers mothers eyes, sitting in a chair. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Nov-24

275

  
Slogan: Keep a Kodak Story of the Children Subject(s): Mother, two young children. Text: With children in your home, there certainly should be Kodak pictures in your album. And the time will come when you'll never forgive yourself if the chance slips by. Get a Kodak to-day. You'll be making good pictures with it to-morrow. Implied Audience: families Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a mother taking a photograph of two small children, one in a crib/playpen. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Dec-24 Slogan: All Outdoors invites your Christmas Kodak Subject(s): Woman Text: none Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman on the top of a hill, wearing snowshoes, waving at the camera. Snowshoe tracks in the foreground. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Jan-25 Slogan: An Added Attraction Subject(s): product - camera Product: Kodakery Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: 1924 Slogan: A Sensible Headliner for any sales scheme Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Description / Notes: Sales

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Nov-24 Slogan: There's a photographer in your town Subject(s): None Text: A gift inspired by sentiment and thus expressive of the true spirit of Christmas--your photograph. Implied Audience: Christmas Product: photograph Photo or Illustration Based: Text: Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: No photo - text only. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Aug-24 Slogan: Modern Radiography Demands Detail and Safety Subject(s): product - medical Product: X-Ray intensifying screens Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #6 Year: Sep-24 Slogan: Eastman X-Ray Intensifying Screens Subject(s): product - medical Product: X-Ray intensifying screens Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Feb-25 Slogan: Your Brownie gets the picture Subject(s): Five boys Text: All set for the bump, and in a second more, all upset. You and your Brownie get two pictures that hand you a laugh every time you look at them. Picture-making is lots of fun and easy from the start with a Brownie. Prices start in low--$2. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw

276

  
Description / Notes: photograph of a boy with a camera, photographing four boys on a sled, about to go down a hill. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: May-25 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Man Text: none Implied Audience: travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man facing away from the camera, with Kodak on his shoulder, at a train(?) station. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Mar-25 Slogan: All Outdoors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Man with a gun Text: none Implied Audience: hunters / outdoorsman Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man from behind, with a gun and a Kodak on his shoulder, in the snow. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Apr-25 Slogan: The Autographic Kodak Way Subject(s): Man with horses Text: Whether you're disliking the south lot, taking a Sunday trip, or stealing time to fish, today's Kodak snapshot is tomorrow's picture record. For in addition to the print that keeps the story there's the date and title you wrote on the film at the time-information you want for reference. All the Kodaks have this exclusively Eastman, autographic feature. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man photographing two horses pulling a plow, with another man on it. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: May-25 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Two men camping Text: Every incident along the trail suggests a Kodak picture. It's sport at the moment--and sport again whenever you open the album. Implied Audience: outdoorsmen Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two men at a campsite, one photographing the other cooking dinner over a fire. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Feb-25 Slogan: Kodak Does Double Duty Subject(s): two photos of a child Text: Once the hilarious tot, now the serious six-year-old; here's a page for your Kodak album that will always be a genuine joy. From sun-up till evening chores are done you'll find chances a-plenty for story-telling pictures like these. And chances, as well, for picturerecords of cotton field and fruit orchard, of drove, herd and flock-pictures you'll value later for reference. Implied Audience: families Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Two photos, of a baby and a young girl-the text implies that the images are of the same girl. Caption reads: "From a Kodak Negative" Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Jan-25

277

  
Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Two women and a man Text: When nature beckons, Kodak calls and you put the scene in a picture. It's all easy the Kodak way and pleasure a-plenty as well. Implied Audience: outdoors / women Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman on skis photographing a woman and man, also on skis. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Jun-25 Slogan: All Outdoors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Woman with umbrella Text: none Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman on the beach with Kodak, walking while holding an umbrella / parasol. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Apr-25 Slogan: Picture Ahead, Kodak as you go. Subject(s): Woman's arms Text: None Implied Audience: travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a Kodak in the map pocket of a car, the door is open, and a woman with gloves is reaching in to get the camera out. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Jan-25 Slogan: Kodak on the Farm Subject(s): Young girl Text: Snapshots of the children that you make to-day you'll treasure to-morrow. And pictures of stock and crops that you want now for advertising and selling, you'll find valuable later for reference. Implied Audience: families / farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a young girl working at a desk. Caption reads: "Illustration from a negative made with an Autographic Kodak" Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Feb and March, 1925 Slogan: Ready with your Kodak Subject(s): young man, woman Text: There's a real thrill to the picture that breaks on the scene without warning. Out comes your Kodak; quickly and easily you bring it into play and -- the picture that found you prepared Implied Audience: outdoors / women Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a young couple in the snow, by a lake. The man is pulling his Kodak out of it's case on his shoulder. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Apr-25 Slogan: "I'm bringing my Brownie" Subject(s): Boy on a bike Text: A Brownie doubles the day's fun; and once you have the story in pictures, it's yours for keeps. That's what you'll get out of a Brownie. Here's that we put in, three big features. Folding advantage: you can always take along a Brownie, for it's never in the way. Autographic attachment: you can write the date and title on the film the minute you click the shutter. Eastman dependability: Brownies are made to stand up.

278

  
Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy with a Brownie on his shoulder, on a bike riding away from the camera, his arm up, waving. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: May-25 Slogan: Keep your fun with a Brownie Subject(s): boy with dog Text: Now that Tige has learned the trick, it's no trick at all to make his picture. Every day, whatever you're doing, you'll find chances a-plenty for just such snapshots. It's like rolling off a log to "shoot" pictures with a Brownie. Open the camera, "click" the shutter, and you have your fun on the film. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photograph of a boy with a camera, photographing his dog. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Jun-25 Slogan: It's more fun with a Brownie Subject(s): three boys Text: Making the paddle wheel was fun, and so was making the picture. That's the Brownie's job--to get good pictures of your good times. Just open the camera, "click" the shutter and it's all over but the thrill you'll have when you see the print. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three boys wading in a river, with small waterfall, one photographing the other two with a paddle wheel.

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Apr-25 Slogan: Brownie pictures "go big" Subject(s): three boys and a horse Text: Ed's pony-cart snapshot tickled the boys and, of course that tickled Ed. You'll get the same thrill when you show the fellows your Brownie pictures. And Brownies reduce photography to its simplest terms. Let the nearest Kodak dealer prove it to you. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a boy with a camera, photographing two boys in a cart being pulled by a horse. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1924 Slogan: Eastman Cotton for Better Finishes Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: Announcing Kodalak Furniture Finishes Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925

279

  
Slogan: Eastman Cotton Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Jan-25 Slogan: Use Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Jan-25 Slogan: There are 46 Indicators listed as Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Feb-25 Slogan: Kodalak Metal Finishes Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Mar-25 Slogan: There's a Kodalak for Every Purpose Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Mar-25 Slogan: Kodalak Furniture Finishes Rich and Durable Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Mar-25 Slogan: Kodalak Black Lacquers Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1924 Slogan: High Speed Radiography Reduces Movement Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: Good X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: Shadow Detail Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Dec-24 Slogan: For Screen Efficiency Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Super-Speed Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7

280

  
Year: 1925 Slogan: The Latest Eastman Aero Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Aero Camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: K-5 The Latest Eastman Aero Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Aero Camera, K-5 Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Aero Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Aero Camera, K-5 Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1924 Slogan: From every point of view--Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films The World's Standard Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: When you use Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Mar-25 Slogan: It's fun with a Brownie Subject(s): Boy Text: Ted couldn't wait for the paint to dry; the moment he put his brush down he got his Brownie out. And now he'll hardly sleep till he shows the bunch the print. Brownies are cameras of the easy-to-work, handy-to-carry, sure-fire kind. You start right in to get good pictures; it's nothing but fun from the first. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Folding Brownie. Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: photo of a boy photographing a toy boat indoors on a workbench. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Jun-25 Slogan: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II - For the kind of pictures you like Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Price: $26.00 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: To Promote Sales Use an Eastman Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Color or Black and White: Publications: Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: The Public Knows Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye.

281

  
Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Mar-25 Slogan: Boost Business with this camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Mar-25 Slogan: Center your sales scheme on an Eastman camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: Apr-25 Slogan: Premos--Will please your customers Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1925 Slogan: Look for Velox on the back Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox paper Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #7 Year: 1924 Slogan: Your X-Ray Darkroom Subject(s): product - medical Product: X-Ray darkroom equipment Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Apr-09 Slogan: Take a Kodak to the Fair Subject(s): Father, son Text: With a Kodak along you'll make pictures for fun and a practical record of whatever interests you--cattle, horses, hogs, machinery--pictures full of pointers to apply when you're back on home acres. Implied Audience: farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a father and son, from behind, father with Kodak on his shoulder. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: June / July 1925 Slogan: Let Kodak Save the Day Subject(s): Two women, baby Text: Particularly at vacation time, there's so much you want to remember--and pictures won't let you forget. Kodak saves the day--for the years. Implied Audience: travel Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman with a camera, photographing a woman and baby sitting on the beach underneath an umbrella / parasol. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Jul-25 Slogan: Kodak as you Go Subject(s): Two women, two men Text: The most precious mementos of any trip are the Kodak pictures you make. Again and again you'll turn to them with everincreasing pleasure. All Kodaks are autographic. You can date and title each exposure as you make it--an exclusive, Eastman feature. Implied Audience: travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo

282

  
Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman with a camera, photographing two men and a woman sitting on deck chairs of a ship. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Jul-25 Slogan: Take a Kodak with You Subject(s): Woman and man Text: none Implied Audience: outdoors Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man and woman on a dock, the man helping the woman into a canoe. Woman has a Kodak slung on her back. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Jul-25 Slogan: Be sure your Brownie goes, too Subject(s): four boys Text: Having fun and making pictures travel right along together. And when the fun is over, you still have the prints. You dad would give a lot for snap-shots of himself and his bunch that were made when he was a boy. Wonder if he knows you'd like a Brownie? It wouldn't do any harm to talk to him about it. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of four boys, one on the beach, with a camera, photographing the other three in the water, on a log. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Jul-25 Slogan: Your Brownie Gets It. Subject(s): Three boys Text: Your ears are tingling yet from Jack's first attempts at the bugle. But it was a great chance for a picture just the same--and, as usual, your Brownie made the most of it. This Eastman-made camera is certainly easy to work --and there's a barrel full of fun in an album full of pictures. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three boys, one photographing another who is playing the horn, while the third boy points. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Low Viscosity Cotton Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Cotton is Uniform Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: An Eastman Organic Chemical Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: Kodalak Metal Lacquers Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White:

283

  
Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: Announcing the Kodalak Auto Finishing System Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Apr-25 Slogan: Kodalak for Furniture Finishing Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Apr-25 Slogan: Use Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Jun-25 Slogan: The Kodalak System of Automobile Refinishing Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Jun-25 Slogan: Buyers Appreciate Kodalak Finishes Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Jun-25 Slogan: For Acetone Determinations Use an Eastman Organic Chemical Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Jun-25 Slogan: For Aluminum Detection Use Aurin Tricarboxylic Acid an Eastman Organic Chemical Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: The familiar package--dependable results Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Description / Notes: Different variations of this ad in the binder. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: May-25 Slogan: Be Sure They Are Eastman Made Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films, Eastman Dental X-Ray films, Intensifying Screens, Clinical Camera Outfit, Ciné-Kodak Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Description / Notes: Different variations of this ad in the Binder: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: Periodic Radiographs on--Eastman Dental X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films

284

  
Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: Kodak Abroad Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: film Color or Black and White: Publications: L'Atlantique, Ocean Post, Chicago Tribune, Ocean Times, Daily Mail, Atlantic Edition Description / Notes: List of European Kodak branches for development and printing. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: Aug-25 Slogan: Kodak as you go Subject(s): Family in the car Text: Round the bend, over the hill, down the lane, there's a picture at hand or a picture ahead--always. Implied Audience: travel / family Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a man, two women, and a boy all in a car. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Price: $26.00 Different variations of this ad in the Binder: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Color or Black and White: Publications: Spice Mill Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: For Building Business Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: The Logical Choice as your premium Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: A well-known name for your premium, Premo Subject(s): product - camera Product: Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: Kodak Simplicity further Simplified Subject(s): product - camera Product: The 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Price: $26.00 Different variations of this ad in the Binder: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #8 Year: 1925 Slogan: Velox Subject(s): product - film & paper Product: Velox Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9

285

  
Year: 1925 Slogan: Kodak Keeps the Story Subject(s): man, woman, child, horse Text: A Kodak makes it easy to keep the fleeting moments you enjoy. And on the farm with a Kodak you'll make a practical story of your business--a picture record of stock, crops, machinery, that you will refer to with profit from year to year. Implied Audience: families / farmers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman with a camera photographing a young girl on a horse, while a man holds the horse. Outside a barn. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Keep the story in Kodak pictures Subject(s): three men Text: Thanksgiving Day--volunteer help in the barnyard, hustle and bustle in the kitchen, the rest of the folks expected soon--is a big day for Kodak pictures. You'll find the fun of picture making matched only by the pleasure of picture keeping. And it's all so easy the Kodak way. On your next trip to town stop at your Kodak dealer's and get ready for the pictures you're sure to want. Implied Audience: families / farmers Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of three men outside the barn, one photographing the other two cutting wood with a long saw. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: Nov-25 Slogan: Take a Kodak with you Subject(s): two men Text: Gorgeous view or story-telling incident--every trail leads to pictures. Any Kodak is easy to work and convenient to carry, and-as an exclusive Eastman touch--all Kodaks are autographic. Implied Audience: outdoors Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two men (or possibly a man and woman) sitting on a cliff. One man stands and is taking a photograph. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Take a Kodak with you Subject(s): two women, a peddler, one man. Text: With a Kodak along, your trip is never over--just over the page in your album. Any Kodak is to carry, easy to work; and the exclusively Eastman autographic feature, by means of which the date and title may be written on the film at the time of exposure-for positive and Permanent identification later--is of particular value to the traveler. Implied Audience: women / travelers Product: autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman with a Kodak photographing another woman buying something from a peddler on the street. A man sits nearby. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: Nov-25 Slogan: Kodak Keeps the Story Subject(s): two women, man Text: Almost every day there's sure to be something you'd like a picture of--and with a Kodak you'll find it easy from the first. All Kodaks are autographic--an exclusively Eastman feature. Whenever you want the date and (or) title--with pictures of the children, for example--you can write it on the film at the time. Implied Audience: families / farmers Product: Autographic Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw

286

  
Description / Notes: Photo in a cornfield of two women, one with a Kodak photographing a man standing near a stack of corn stalks posing with feathers. The text of the ad has the word 'and' crossed out, and the work 'or' is written above, in ink. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: Dec-25 Slogan: See, I got it, Bill--it's a Brownie Subject(s): two boys Text: Brownie cameras (they're Eastman made) cost from $2 up. Implied Audience: parents/children/Christmas Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two boys on a porch, wreath on the door behind them. One boy is showing the other his camera. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Be sure to have your Brownie Subject(s): two boys and a dog Text: You'll want it when, after the hike, Davy roasts the "hots" (and incidentally his finger). You'll want it at the football game, or out in the woods. A Brownie (Eastman-made) will give you pictures that will be the envy of the rest of the bunch. Your Kodak dealer will show you. Implied Audience: parents/children Product: Brownie Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of two boys sitting on a porch, one handing the Kodak to the other. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Low Viscosity Cottons Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White:

Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: The Kodalak System for refinishers Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Five new Eastman Organic Chemicals are now in stock Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Save valuable time by using Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: It is cheaper to use Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Cotton Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Kodalak Finishes for Lighting Fixtures

287

  
Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Retailers like Kodalak finishes Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Save by using Kodalak Furniture Finishes Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: Different variations of this ad in this Binder: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: The Kodalak System is fast and reliable Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Organic Chemical Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Description / Notes: Different variations of this ad in this Binder: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Cotton for pyroxylin lacquers Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Low Viscosity Cotton Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: A High Luster with Kodalak Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Over 2,000 Eastman Organic Chemicals Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Kodalak Furniture Finishes Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Carbon Tetrachloride, Sulfur Free Subject(s): product - Chemicals

288

  
Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: For Radiographs of Gall Bladder Tetraiodophenolphthalein Sodium Salt Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Two Reasons for the Determination of Copper Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: A Kodalak Finish Helps Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Measuring the Acidity of Plant Juices Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Appearance Sells Furniture Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Kodaloid Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Chemical Charcoal Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Methanol, pure Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Methyl Acetone Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Kodalak Furniture Finishes Subject(s): product - Chemicals Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Use Kodaloid Subject(s): product - Chemicals

289

  
Product: Eastman Organic Chemicals Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Films must be Noticably Better Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Story Telling Radiographs Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Dupli-Tized Safety X-Ray Films Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Safety Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Super-Speed Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Description / Notes: Different variations of this ad in the binder. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: To be sure use Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Film Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Is an Operation Indicated? Eastman Dupli-Tized X-Ray Films Super-Speed Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Safety Films Reduce the Fire Hazard Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Radiographs Subject(s): product - medical Product: Duplitized X-Ray Films Description / Notes: Different variations of this ad in the Binder: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Eastman Aero Camera, K-5 Subject(s): product - camera Product: Eastman Aero Camera, K-5 Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Orthodontia and Photography Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Clinical Camera Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Use Radiographs to locate trouble Below the Gum Line Subject(s): product - medical

290

  
Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: The use of Radiographs Marks Progress of Dentistry Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Dental Abnormalities Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Pulpless Teeth Subject(s): product - medical Product: Eastman Dental X-Ray Films Color or Black and White: Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: For your Fall campaign an Eastman Camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: Hawk-eye and Premo Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: Dec-25 Slogan: The best surprise of all--a Kodak Subject(s): Mother, father, young boy Text: none Implied Audience: families / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a mother walking down the stairs, a father and young boy waiting by the Christmas tree, father is holding a Kodak behind his back. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: All Outdoors invites your Kodak Subject(s): Woman and dog Text: Any Kodak is easy to work, as you'll see for yourself at your dealer's. Implied Audience: women / outdoors Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman in fur, holding a Kodak, standing on a hill with a dog. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: Dec-25 Slogan: A Christmas Kodak for the Christmas Story Subject(s): Women, two men Text: none Implied Audience: families / Christmas Product: Kodak Photo or Illustration Based: photo Color or Black and White: bw Description / Notes: Photo of a woman with a Kodak standing at a window, beside a Christmas tree. She is looking outside at two men in a car, waving at her. Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Price: $26.00 - different variations in this binder with different example images.

291

  
Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 1a Pocket Kodak Series II Description / Notes: Price: $26 Pictures 2.5 x 4.25 Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Something that Everybody Wants, Hawk-Eye Cameras Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye, No. 2 Folding Cartridge Hawk-Eye Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Boost Fall business with a camera Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: As a Prize or Premium--No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: The Logical Premium--No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: All Season Business Builders Subject(s): product - camera Product: No. 2 Cartridge Hawk-Eye. Description / Notes: Sales Binder: 1923-1925 General Ads #9 Year: 1925 Slogan: Vest Pocket Kodak Subject(s): product - camera Product: Vest Pocket Kodak Model B Description / Notes: Price: $5.00

292

