NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

DYNAMIC MODELLING AND SIMULATION OF ROTATING BIOLOGICAL CONTACTORS
By HAFIZ M. ABDULLAH
BSc Chemical Engineering, University of the Punjab, Pakistan 1995 MSc Chemical Engineering, University of the Punjab, Pakistan 1997

A Thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the program of Chemical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004 © Hafiz Muhammad Abdullah 2004

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

UMI Number; EC52904

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, If unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52904 Copyright 2009 by ProQuest LEG. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Borrower's Page

Ryerson University requires the signatures o f all persons using O F photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

1. . . .

2 ..., 3... 4... 5...
6 ...

7... 8 ... 9...
10 .

11.
12 .

13. 14. 15.

Ill

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

DYNAMIC MODELING AND SIMULATION OF ROTATING BIOLOGICAL CONTACTORS MASc Chemical Engineering 2004 Hafiz Muhammad Abdullah Department of Chemical Engineering RYERSON UNIVERSITY

Rotating Biological Contactor is a remediation technology used in the secondary treatment of wastewater (domestic and biodegradable industrial wastes). In this work, a mathematical model for rotating biological contactors (RBC) is presented, which encapsulates the consumption of soluble substrate in the developed bio-film attached to the disk of a rotating biological contactor. The model describes the consumption o f the substrate and oxygen in the bio-film, and in the trough assuming the liquid in the trough is completely mixed, and the rates o f substrate and oxygen utilization within the bio-film follow Monod kinetics. The numerical solution o f the model agrees with the

experimental data reported by other workers. The simulation also predicts the performance o f RBCs in the event o f any fluctuations in the flow rate and concentration of the soluble BOD5 in the influent wastewater stream. The developed model can be used in the future to aid in the optimization of the p e r f o r m a n c e
o f

RBCs.

IV

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Acknowledgements

M y sincere appreciation goes to Dr. Manuel Alvarez Cuenca, and Dr. Simant R. Upreti, my advisors, who made this technological and scientific challenge a reality. M y gratitude also goes to Dr. Manuel Alvarez Cuenca and Dr. Simant R. Upreti for the supervision, support and the time that they afforded to the success of this work. Their academic

guidance is invaluable. M y deep gratitude also goes to Dr. A ll Lohi for providing the partial financial support during the course o f my study. M y thanks also go to the faculty members and staff o f the Department o f Chemical Engineering for their contribution to my career development during my program in the University.

I deeply thank my colleagues Sajjad Yasin, Baranitharan Sundraram, Zafar Khan, Adnan Khan and Mujahid Shah for their friendship and emotional encouragement.

I especially owe to my mother, brothers and sisters for their true understanding o f my time who always support me with their love to spur my spirits up in return.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Dedicated to Muhammad Akhtar Khawaja

A tribute to my father, who is ever alive in my heart as he used to be before, a comforting shoulder to rest my head in the long summer afternoons

VI

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Author' s declaration Borrower's page Abstract Acknowledgements Dedication Table o f contents List of tables List of illustrations Nomenclature

PAGE
ii ill iv
V

vi vii ix
X

xvi

CHAPTER IHNTRODUCTION

1.1 B rief history o f the rotating biological contactors 1.2 Role o f the RBC technology 1.3 Advantages o f the RBC process 1.4 Limitations o f the RBC process 1.5 Physical description 1.6 Functional description 1.7 The biodégradation process 1.7.1 Micro-organisms 1.7.2 Nutrient requirements

1
2

4 4 5
6

9 12 12

CHAPTER 2: PROCESS DESIGN CONSIDERATION

14

2.1 Design and operating parameters 2.2 Principal process design parameters 2.2.1 Media surface area 2.2.2 pH and nutrient balance 2.2.3 Toxic and inhibitory substances 2.2.4 Oxygen transfer 2.2.5 Flows and loading variability 2.2.6 Solids production

14 15 15 16 17 17 18 19

CHAPTER 3:REVIEW OF MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF RBC
3.1 RBC models: state o f the art 3.1.1 Models based exclusively on empirical observations 3.1.2 Models based on reaction order and substrate diffusion through bio-film 3.1.3 Models based on microbial growth kinetic 3.1.4 Models based on micro-organisms kinetic growth & transport inbio-film vii

20
20 20 20 21 22

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

3.2 Summary o f different mathematical models 3.2.1 Kornegay model 3.2.2 Gujer model 3.2.3 Watanabe model 3.2.4 Hansford model 3.2.5 Spengel and Dzombak model

23 23 24 24 25 27

CHAPTER 4:SIMULATION MODEL FOR RBCs
4.1 Objective 4.2 Model parameters for a 4-stage RBC pilot plant 4.3 Model parameters for a 3-stage RBC lab scale unit 4.4 Assumptions o f the process model 4.5 Dynamic model equations 4.5.1 The bio-film 4.5.2 Equation for rate o f substrate consumption 4.5.3 The trough 4.5.4 Mass balance equation for concentration o f oxygen in the trough 4.5.5 Equation for rate o f oxygen consumption in trough

30
30 31 32 32 33 33 34 35 36 36

CHAPTER 5: SIMULATION
5.1 Model validation 5.2 Runge-kutta-fehlberg method 5.3 Case I 5.3.1 Initial conditions 5.3.2 Effect o f upsets for Case I 5.4 Case II 5.4.1 Initial conditions 5.4.2 Effect o f upsets for Case II

38
38 38 39 47 57 64 70 79

CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
6.1 6.2 Conclusion Future work

86
86 86

References Appendices Appendix A Appendix B Appendix C

Runge-kutta-fehlberg method Formulae Sensitivity analysis

88 93 93 96 97

vm

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

LIST OF TABLES
TABLE DESCRIPTION PAGE

1

Pilot plant unit specifications, wastewater characteristics and model input parameters for Case I 41 42

2 3

Experimental results fo r concentration o f soluble BOD 5 , Case I The dynamic model results for the concentration o f soluble BO D 5 in the four-stage RBC

43 44

4 5

Simulation results o f % BOD 5 removal from the dynamic model Comparison o f the simulated model and experimental results o f Case I

45

6

Pilot plant unit specifications, wastewater characteristics

and model input parameters fo r Case I I

65

7

Experimental Results for concentration o f soluble BO D 5 in three-stage RBC, Case-II
66

8

The dynamic model results for concentration o f soluble BOD5

in a three-stage RBC.

67

9

Comparison o f the simulated model and experimental results o f Case II ix
68

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
FIGURE DESCRIPTION PAGE

1 .1

Flow chart o f the biological treatment process General representation o f RBC process RBC Process general flow arrangements Flow parallel to the shaft Flow perpendicular to the shaft Step feed flow Tapered feed flow parallel to the shaft

7
8

1 .2

1.3

10

1.3 (a) 1.3 (b) 1.3 (c) 1.3 (d)

10

10

11

11

Figure 5.1(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loadings 1.9 g/m'.d fo r Case I Figure 5.1(b) Predicted Cq 2 , t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading =1.9 g/m" .d for Case I Figure 5.2(a) Predicted Csbod.r in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 4.5 g/m".d fo r Case I Figure 5.2(b) Predicted Coa.rin 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 4.5 g/m'.d fo r Case I Figure 5.3(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.4 g/m'.d fo r Case I Figure 5.3(b) Predicted Cq2 , t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.4 g/m'.d for Case 1
X

48

48

49

49

50

50

he copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.4(a) Predicted Csbod, t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m".d
for Case I Figure 5.4(b) Predicted Cq2 , t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m".d for Case I Figure 5.5(a) Predicted for Case I Figure 5.5(b) Predicted C0 2 , t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 20.5 g/m".d for Case I Figure 5.6(a) Predicted Csbod, t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 21.1 g/m".d for Case I Figure 5.6(b) Predicted Co2 , t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 21.1 g/m".d for Case I Figure 5.7(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 26.0 g/m".d for Case 1 Figure 5.7(b) Predicted C0 2 , r in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 26,0 g/m",d for Case Figure 5.8 Comparison o f simulated model results and the experimental results o f 4-stage RBC for Case 1 Figure 5.9(a) Predicted
Csbod.
bf

51

51 in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 20.5 g/m".d 52

Csbod, t

52

53

53

54

54

55

in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 26.0 g/m^.d 56

for Case I Figure 5.9(b) Predicted C 0 2 , b f in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 26.0 g/m" .d for Case 1

56

XI

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5 .10(a) Predicted Csbod, t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m".d for Case I, when the influent flow rate is doubled Figure 5.10(b) Predicted Cq2 , t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m^.d fo r Case I, when the influent flow rate is doubled Figure 5.11(a) Predicted Csbod, t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m^.d for Case I, when concentration o f soluble BO D 5 is doubled Figure 5.11(b) Predicted Cq 2 , t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m '.d for Case I, when concentration o f soluble BOD3 is doubled Figure 5.12(a) Predicted Csbod, t in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m '.d fo r Case I, when influent flow rate is increased one & half times and the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 is doubled Figure 5.12(b) Predicted C 0 2 . T in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m'.d fo r Case I, when influent flo w rate is increased one & half times and the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 is doubled Figure 5.13(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading - 12.7 g/m '.d fo r Case I, when both the influent flow rate and the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 are doubled Figure 5.13(b) Predicted C 0 2 , T in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m '.d for Case I, when both the influent flow rate and the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 are doubled Figure 5 .14(a) Predicted Csbod, b f in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading=12.7 g/m '.d fo r Case I, when both the influent flow rate and the concentration o f the soluble BOD^ is doubled 63 61 61 60 60 59 59 58 58

xn

Reproduced with permission o f the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5 .14(b) Predicted C 0 2 , b f in 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m'.d
fo r Case I, when both the influent flow rate andthe concentration o f the soluble BOD5 is doubled Figure 5.15(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m^.d fo r Case I I Figure 5.15(b) Predicted C 0 2 . T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m '.d fo r Case II Figure 5 .16(a) Predicted Csbod. r in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 11.1 g/m '.d for Case I I Figure 5.16(b) Predicted Co.2.Tin 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading =11.1 g/m '.d fo r Case I I Figure 5 .17(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 3 -stage RBC at Organic Loading = 18.9 g/m'.d for Case II Figure 5.17(b) Predicted C 0 2 . T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 18.9 g/m'.d fo r Case I I Figure 5 .18(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 22.1 g/m '.d for Case II Figure 5.18(b) Predicted C 0 2 .T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 22.1 g/m'.d fo r Case II Figure 5.19(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 27.7 g/m'.d for Case II Figure 5.19(b) Predicted C 0 2 .T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 27.7 g/m'.d for Case 11 75 75 74 74 73 73 72 72 71 71 63

xiu

Reproduced w ith permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.20(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 39.5 g/m'.d
for Case I I Figure 5.20(b) Predicted Coz t in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 39.5 g/m'.d for Case II Figure-5.21 Comparison o f the simulated model and the experimental results of 3-stage RBC Figure 5.22(a) Predicted Csbod, b f in 3 -stage RBC at Organic Loading = 39.5 g/m'.d for Case II Figure 5.22(b) Predicted C0 2 , b f in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 39.5 g/m'.d for Case II Figure 5.23(a) Predicted Csbod, t in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m^.d fo r Case II, when the influent flow rate is doubled Figure 5.23(b) Predicted C ozTin 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m'.d for Case II, when the influent flow rate is doubled Figure 5.24(a) Predicted Csbod.T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m'.d for Case II, when the concentration o f soluble BO D 5 is doubled Figure 5.24(b) Predicted Co 2,Tin 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m'.d for Case II, when the concentration o f soluble BO D 3 is doubled Figure 5.25(a) Predicted Csbod, t in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m'.d for Case II, when the influent flow rate is increased one & half times and the concentration o f the soluble BOD 5 is doubled Figure 5.25(b) Predicted Coz Tin 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m'.d for Case II, when the influent flow rate is increased one & half times 82 81 81 80 80 78 78 77 76 76

X IV

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

and the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 is doubled Figure 5.26(a) Predicted Csbod, t in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m^.d for Case II, when both the influent flow rate and the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 is doubled Figure 5.26(b) Predicted C0 2 ,T in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m^.d for Case II, when both the influent flow rate and the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 is doubled Figure 5.27(a) Predicted Csbod, b f in 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m'.d for Case II, when the influent flow rate is doubled Figure 5.27(b) Predicted Coa.spin 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m'.d for Case II, when the influent flow rate is doubled

82

83

83

85

85

XV

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

NOMENCLATURE

A ^sbod.BF C 0 2 .B F ^.sbod.in ^sbod.T Cq2,t Co2 ,in F kg^Qj ^sbod ko 2 Kq2

Disk surface area (m^) Concentration o f soluble substrate in the bio-film (g/m^) Concentration o f oxygen in the bio-film (g/m^) Concentration o f soluble substrate in the influent wastewater (g/m^) Concentration of soluble substrate in the trough (g/m^) Concentration of oxygen in the trough (g/m^) Concentration o f oxygen in the liquid film (g/m^) Volumetric flow rate o f the influent wastewater (m^/hr) Mass transfer coefficient o f substrate from liquid to bio-film (m/hr) Substrate half saturation constant (g/m^) Mass transfer coefficient o f oxygen from liquid to b io -film (m/hr) Oxygen half saturation constant (g/m^) Mass o f the soluble substrate transferred (g/hr)

M q2 RBC r^ ro2 |l

Mass o f oxygen transferred (g/hr) Rotating biological contactor Rate o f substrate consumption in the bio-film (g/m^.hr) Rate o f oxygen consumption in the bio-film (g/m^.hr) Specific growth rate o f attached biomass (1/hr) Maximum specific growth rate (1/hr)

XVI

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

V X Y

Volume o f the trough (m^) Specific concentration o f attached biomass (g/m^) Yield coefficient for attached biomass (g cells produced/g cells consumed)

xvii

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

1.1 Brief history of the rotating biological contactors
In the last two decades, Rotating Biological Contactors (RBCs) have been consolidated as one o f the most remarkable technologies in domestic and industrial wastewater treatment. Thousands o f installations in North America, Europe, and Japan show the extraordinary interest that this process has attracted among wastewater treatment professionals and equipment manufacturers [ 1 ]. In 1975, the Comptroller General o f the United States issued a report to the Congress entitled "Potential o f Value Analysis fo r Reducing Waste Treatment Plant Costs". This report, prepared by several teams o f experts from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, focused on new advanced technologies and identified RBCs as:

"The major development most often mentioned... in light o f recent technical progress, the teams foresaw few problems with use o f this treatment process in lieu of activated sludge and recommended strong consideration o f this process" [ 1 ]. Rotating biological contactors (RBCs) were first installed in West Germany in 1960 and later introduced in the United States. Hundreds o f RBC installations were installed in the 1970s, and the process has been reviewed in a number o f reports [2]. The history o f RBC installations has been troublesome due to inadequate mechanical design and lack o f understanding o f the biological process. Structural failure o f shafts, disks, and disk support systems has occurred in some installations. Development o f

excessive growth and sloughing problems has also led to mechanical shaft, bearing, and

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

disk faiJures. Afany o f these probtems were reJaïed to a Jack o f conser-i'adsm in design and scale-up issues from pilot-plant to full-scale units [3]. The development o f RBC technology in Canada has applications in the following areas: 1. Treatment o f industrial wastewater 2. Municipal wastewater treatment 3. Landfill leachate treatment. In 1973, the M inistry o f the Environment o f Ontario undertook the evaluation of an RBC to treat municipal wastewater. The design basis for such evaluation was the production o f a secondary quality effluent i.e. 15 mg/1 BOD; and suspended solids.

A literature

survey carried out by the Ministry o f the Environment o f Ontario report indicated that a secondary effluent quality could not be expected from a Rotating Biological system, treating domestic waste, when organic loading exceeds 1 lb/day/1000 ft" BOD 5 . The results o f the study concluded that secondary quality effluent could only be achieved when the organic load is limited to about 1 lb/day/1000 ft" disk area. Present RBCs can achieve that secondary effluent quality with organic loads well above 2.51b/day/1000 ft" [3].

1.2 Role of the RBC technology
The emergence o f RBC technology in the last thirty years comes as a result of comparative evaluations with respect to other biological treatment systems. This technology involves allowing wastewater to come in contact with a biological medium in order to facilitate the removal of contaminants. In its simplest form, disks or media blocks mounted on a horizontal shaft of a rotating biological contactor are driven so that the media rotates to the flow o f sewage.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

A biological slime grows on the media when conditions are suitable. The slime is rotated into the settled wastewater, and then into the atmosphere to provide oxygen for the organisms. The wastewater being treated either flows parallel or perpendicular to the shaft as it flows from one stage to another. As the drum rotates, the media pick up a thin layer o f wastewater, which flows over the biologica* .slimes on the disks. Organisms

living in the slimes use organic matter from the wastewater as substrate and dissolved oxygen from the air, thus removing organic content from the water being treated. As the attached slimes pass through the wastewater, some o f the slimes are sloughed from the media. The effluent with the sloughed slimes flows to the secondary clarifier where the

slimes are removed from the effluent by gravity settling.

The RBC process is usually divided into four different stages. Staging is used in order to maximize the effectiveness o f a given amount o f media surface area. Organisms on the first stage media are exposed to high levels o f BOD 5 and reduce the BOD 5 at a high rate. As the BOD 5 levels decrease from stage to stage, the rate at which the organisms can remove BOD 5 decreases and nitrification starts. Rotating biological contactor units are usually covered for the following reasons [3]:

1. To protect biological slime growths from freezing 2. 3. To prevent intense rains from washingo ff someo f the slime growths To stop exposure o f media to direct sunlight to prevent growth of algae, and which may cause the media to become brittle 4. To provide protection for operators from sun, rain, snow or wind while maintaining equipment.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1.3 Advantages of the RBC process
RBC process has some major advantages over other more conventional water treatment processes. These advantages are [3]: 1. Low energy consumption up to 20% o f that used by activated sludge for the same application. 2. 3. Easy maintenance and mechanical simplicity, hence lower operating costs. Good recovery from organic and hydraulic surges because o f its micro fauna diversity. 4. Low floor space requirement and because o f its modular configuration,greater design flexibility. 5.
6

Low sludge production Faster recovery from toxic shocks is achieved in RBC than in slurry reactors or activated sludge processes because o f its biomass short residence time.

.

7. 9.

No need fo r biomass control. Low noise and odour emissions.

1.4 Limitations of the RBC process
RBC process failure have resulted due to the follow ing [3];

1. 2. 3. 4. 5.

Structural failure o f the shaft, media, or media support systems. Less than anticipated treatment performance. Excessive development o f nuisance organisms. Development o f excessive or uneven biomass growth, and Inadequate performance o f air-drive systems for shaft rotation.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Primarily, these process failures have been attributed to [4]:

a. Misapplication o f the process or use o f inadequate design criteria. b. Original designs for shafts and media support systems that were inadequate. c. Inadequate upstream treatment. d. Failure to consider the effect of side stream loadings in the process design. e. Lack o f a thorough understanding o f the long-term performance efficiency and characteristics o f the process in full-scale use. f. The development o f design standards and criteria on the basis o f lim ited data, much o f which was developed using small scale systems, and g. The general lack o f a conservative approach in developing design relationships fo r the process.

For the successful application o f the process, proper sizing and process design, a conservative and flexible design approach, and careful consideration to the specification o f materials and components are necessary [4].

1.5 Physical description

An RBC consists o f series o f circular plastic disks as media, attached to and supported by a horizontal rotating shaft and placed in a trough. The circular disks made o f styrofoam or polyethylene are partly submerged in wastewater [5]. The shaft is rotated by drive equipment that consists o f a motor, gear reducer, and chain drive. The main shaft is supported by two main bearings. Since the RBC has few moving parts, it requires relatively minor amount o f maintenance. A ll that is required is to keep the chain, reducer.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

shaft bearings, and motor well lubricated, and the chain and belt drive systems well aligned and w ith proper amount o f tension. Maintenance procedures that are in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations should be adopted for maintenance and lubrication.

1.6 Functional description
Figure 1.1 shows the flo w chart o f the biological treatment process and figure 1.2 provides a graphic representation o f the process. During rotation, the disk of the Rotating Biological Contactor carries the biomass and a film o f wastewater into the air where oxygen is absorbed. The dissolved oxygen and organic materials in the wastewater diffuse into the biomass, and are then metabolized into additional biomass, carbon dioxide and water. During this process, either oxygen or the substrate could be the lim iting reagent, which can lim it the rate o f reaction. The supply o f food and nutrients in appropriate concentrations is necessary for cell syntheses to increase the rate o f substrate consumption. Excess biomass shears o ff at a steady rate as the media rotates. These

solids are carried through the RBC process for subsequent removal in a conventional clarifier. An inter-stage baffle is used to separate the shaft into different stages. RBCs are covered to protect biomass from freezing as the reduction o f biological activity, and a decrease in BOD 5 removal occurs at low temperatures. The RBC process is typically configured with several stages arranged in series, with one or more shafts composing each stage and with one or more parallel trains o f shaft stages

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 1.1: Flow chart of the biological treatment process PRETREATMENT
IN FLU E N T Removes roots, rags, and large debris

SCREENING

GRIT R E M O V A L

Removes sand and gravel Skim o il from wastewater

PRE-AERATIO N

FLO W M ETER Records flow

PRIMARY TREATMENT
S E D IM EN TATIO N A N D FLO TA TIO N Removes substances that can settle & float

SOLIDS H A N D L IN G Treats solids removed

SECONDARY TREATMENT ROTATING BIOLOGICAL CONTACTOR
Removes suspended & dissolved solids

DISIN FEC TIO N K ills pathogenic organisms

EFFLUENT

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 1.2 General representation of RBC process [4]

Cover

Disk o f R B C

Inter-stage Baffle

Influent
tin]------

Effluent

bod &
Nutrient

Degradation Products

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

to provide the needed surface area. The ;:^b e r o f stages required depends on the degree o f treatment desired, w ith one or two stages provided for roughing applications, two to four stages for BOD5 removal and six or more stages provided where advanced treatment with nitrification is necessary. Figure 1.3 shows the general arrangements typically used for the RBC process [2].

RBC shafts are placed parallel to the direction o f the flow path w ith each stage separated by baffles as shown in Figure 1.3 (a). In larger installations, shafts are mounted perpendicular to flo w w ith several stages in series to form a process train. Figure 1.3 (b) represents this type o f arrangement. To handle the loading on the initial units o f the

RBCs in larger installations, the step feed arrangement as shown in Figure 1.3 (c) is used. For situations in which upsets in the initial units o f RBCs are more likely, a tapered system as shown in Figure 1.3 (d) is used. This flow arrangement helps maintain

hydraulic fluctuations in larger installations. Also, the units can be isolated for shutdown or maintenance purposes. Treatment systems applying RBC technology have been used for BOD 5 removal, pretreatment o f industrial wastewater, combined BO D 5 removal and nitrification, tertiary nitrification, and de-nitrification [ 2 ].

1.7 The biodégradation process
The use o f bacteria to consume carbonaceous material has been a method o f water purification for a very long time. Scientists have learned which operating
c o n d itio n s

must be set to increase the efficiency o f this process. Advancements in industrial processes have led to the production o f complex organic and inorganic molecules.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 1.3 RBC process general flo'

. . angements
R B C shaft

D riv e m otor

Primary Effluent

To Secondary C larifier

Figure 1.3 (a) Flow parallel to the shaft [2]
Baffle

Primary Effluent

To Secondary C larifier

>

D rive motor

Figure 1.3 (b) Flow perpendicular to the shaft [2]

10

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Primary Effluent

To Secondary Clarifier

Flow

Drive motor

Figure 1.3 (c) Step feed flow [2]

To Secondary C la rifie r

To Secondary Clarifier

Primary effluent

r

S ta g e

2 "^ s ta g e

stage

4 * '' S ta g e

Figure 1.3 (d) Tapered feed flow parallel to the shaft [2]

11

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The size o f these molecules, coupled with their strong bonds, allows them to pass through conventional biological treatment. This section w ill discuss the important concept o f biological degradation, which is an inexpensive alternative process in the wastewater and water treatment industry.

1.7.1 Microorganisms

Microorganisms can be found almost anywhere, provided there is a food source and water to sustain life. Reproduction occurs mainly through binary fission, although some cases o f sexual reproduction and budding have been noted. Since there are thousands of bacterial species, they have been subdivided into three categories based on their shape [ 6 ]. These are; 1. Spherical (0.5 - 1 p in diameter) 2. Cylindrical (0.5 - 1 p in diameter by 1-3 p in length) 3. Helical (0.5-5 p in width by
6

- 15 p in length)

The temperature ranges at which they thrive, are given by 1. Cryophilic bacteria live in environments between -- 2 to 30 °C 2. Mesophilic live in environments between 20 to 45 °C 3. Thermophilic live in environments between 45 to 75 °C

1.7.2 Nutrient requirements

It is a well-established fact that chemical reactions are limited by the lack o f one reactant, the lim iting reagent. In the case o f aerobic biodégradation, it is easy to assume that the lim iting reagent is either oxygen or the substrate. However, cell syntheses also require

12

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

inorganic nutrients, which are often lacking in industrial effluents.

This requirement

limits the rate of cell growth and substrate removal. As such, it is often necessary to supply these nutrients in appropriate concentrations in order to maximize the rate of biological degradation [7].

13

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 2

PROCESS DESIGN CONSIDERATION

2.1 Design and operating parameters
Soluble and particulate carbonaceous BOD5 components o f wastewater are reduced in an RBC process by a combination o f oxidation by the attached bio-film and synthesis into new cell mass. While designing RBCs, it must be ensured that soluble waste

components, nutrients, and oxygen should be transferred to the bio-film from the bulk liquid, and degradation products should be transferred from the bio-film to the bulk liquid. Furthermore, particulate waste components must be enmeshed by the bio-film and hydrolyzed before degradation can occur. For the overall process to work successfully, the proper environmental and process conditions must be present [4].

Some disadvantages observed in the past, like shaft failure o f biomass overload, have largely been overcome by better control and operation. A t the same time, kinetics,

microbial growth, oxygen mass transfer mechanisms, and fluid flow behaviour in RBCs are not well known. Thus, the impact and nature o f operating and design parameters are often qualitative. Following are the most related variables [3]:

1. Nature of the influent
· · · · · Biochemical Oxygen Demand, BOD 5 . Chemical Oxygen Demand COD. Dissolved Oxygen, DO. pH Total suspended solids, TSS. 14

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

· ·

Total volatile suspended solids, TVSS. Temperature [3].

2. Wastewater flow rate
· · Residence Time Type o f reactor (Plug flow, CSTR, Dispersion) [3].

3. RBC: Operation and design
® Disk surface area and geometry. · · · · Disk submergence, spacing, and rotational speed. Feeders' configuration. Staging. Recirculation [3].

4. Nature of microbial population
· · Distribution o f the micro fauna. Pathogens removal [3].

2.2

Principal process design parameters

Water Environment Federation [4] lays out the following RBC process design considerations:

2.2.1 Media surface area

Adequate media surface area is essential to the RBC process to provide sufficient bio film for the effective treatment o f the biodegradable waste, and produce specific substrate
15

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

use rate (for example, the mass o f BODj/unit time/unit media surface area). This rate must be matched by the oxygen transfer capability o f the system, because the concentration of substrate, oxygen or both can lim it the substrate removal rate. Sufficient media, and proper operational modes, like rotation o f disk and additional oxygen supply through diffusers, are necessary to reduce the potential for nuisance organism development and to lim it excessive bio-film buildup that could lead to structural damage to the shaft or media [4].

The selection o f the media surface area to meet design objectives is a balance between a conservative assessment o f the capability o f the process and economics. Because higher specific substrate consumption rates occur at higher bulk wastewater substrate concentrations, staging the process can provide the same degree o f treatment that could be provided by a single stage system having a larger surface area. Care should be taken, however, so that loading to the first stage is not high enough to cause inadequate oxygen transfer, nuisance organism development, overweight shafts, and associated process problems [4].

2.2.2 pH and nutrient balance
As with any biological treatment process a proper pH and nutrient balance must be provided for effective treatment by the RBC process. Where nitrification is required, optimum performance has been observed at a slightly alkaline pH, with the optimum pH being 7.5 to 8.5 for suspended growth systems [ 8 ]. For RBC systems, nitrification rates have been reported to fall o ff rapidly, with decreasing pH from 7.0 to 6.0 [9]. Wellacclimated RBC systems, where pH is maintained in a narrow range, may be able to

16

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

tolerate pH values somewhat below 7.0. However, with the minimal buffering at this pH, a stable pH is d ifficu lt to maintain.

As microorganisms providing treatment require nutrients for cell growth, an adequate supply o f available nutrients is necessary for the proper performance o f the RBC process. A minimum mass ratio of 100:5:1 (BOD 5 : nitrogen: phosphorus) is typically used [4].

2.2.3 Toxic and inhibitory substances
Toxic and inhibitory substances, for example, nickel, iron, etc., i f present in sufficient concentration in plant influent, have a negative effect on wastewater treatment. In

addition, excessive quantities o f such substances may have a deleterious effect on solids management and effluent quality because o f pass-through. The review o f design data from current technical literature is helpful, for information on such substances, i f they are suspected o f being present in concentrations that are deleterious to biological systems [4].

2.2.4 Oxygen transfer
The rate o f oxygen transfer must be sufficient to maintain fu lly aerobic conditions in the RBC process. Organic loadings above the oxygen transfer capability o f the system could result in reduced performance, odors, and development o f nuisance organisms. Maximum oxygen transfer rates o f
6 .8

to 7.3 g oxygen/m".d (1.4 to 1.5 Ib/d/lOOOft") have

been reported [ 1 0 ] based on tests conducted with fu ll scale, mechanical-drive systems. Studies o f supplemental aeration applied to a mechanical-drive RBCs indicate an oxygentransfer efficiency o f 2 to 2.5% for applied air [11].

17

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Historically, pilot testing of the RBC process was performed using small-scale units operating at the same media peripheral velocity (approx. 18 m/min [60ft/m in]) as fu llscale units [4]. Data on process performance collected on small diameter units can be misleading because o f the higher oxygen-transfer capability o f the smaller units compared to fu ll scale units. In one study [12] it was estimated that a 0.5 m diameter test unit provided an oxygen transfer rate 1.6 times that o f a 3.2 m diameter unit that was also tested. Other researchers noted similar scale-up problems as w ell [9]. For these reasons, data collected on small-scale systems can only be used for treat-ability considerations, and not to establish sizing criteria [4].

2,2.5 Flows and loading variability
Manufacturers o f RBC equipment have recommended maximum organic loadings to the first stage o f RBC systems o f approximately 20 g soluble BODs/m^.d (4 lb/d/1000ft") o f media. This equates to the organic loading o f 39 g BODj/m^.d
(8

lb/d/10(X)ft") on a total

BOD 5 basis for a typical domestic wastewater with 50% soluble BOD 5 /BOD 5 in the primary effluent [4]. However, a survey o f 23 plants indicated nuisance organism

development because o f oxygen lim iting conditions for first stage loadings in excess o f approximately 31.2 g BODs/nr.d (6.4 Ib/d/IOOOft") o f media [13]. Another manufacturer [14] recommends maximum first stage loadings of 12 to 20 g soluble BOD^/m'.d (2.54.0 Ib/d/1000ft"). The designers considered lim iting organic loading to approximately 29 g B O D j/m '.d
(6

Ib/d/lOOOft" total BOD 3 basis) to any RBC stage. These criteria limited

loadings to levels within the oxygen transfer capability o f the system and the growth o f nuisance organisms [4].

18

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Typically, higher effluent concentrations during the higher loading periods o f the day are counterbalanced by lower effluent values during low loading periods. A high degree o f variability in influent flow or organic loading, however, may disrupt the RBC process. The designer should be aware o f the variability in organic loadings, including the effect o f recycle loads from solids processing unit operations. Providing flow equalization may compensate for both flow and loading variability and eliminate the requirement for additional RBC tank-age and media [4].

2.2.6 Solids production
The estimation o f excess solids production is necessary for the sizing o f the solidshandling facilities o f the plant. Solids production in the RBC process is a function o f synthesis o f new cell mass, cell mass decay caused by endogenous respiration and solids loss from the system caused by total suspended solids in the process clarified effluent. In general, solids production from the RBC process is expected to be similar to fixed film processes [4].

19

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 3

REVIEW OF THE MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF THE RBC

3.1 RBC models: state of the art
A number o f mathematical models have been developed to describe the kinetics o f substrate utilization in RBC units. These models can be divided into four categories

according to the criteria on which they are based [15]:

3.1.1 Models based exclusively on empirical observations
The manufacturers o f bio-disk plants have themselves developed empirical design methods based on curves derived from data gathered in their plants. These curves are used fo r plants designed to treat domestic wastewater or common industrial wastewater. These curves cannot predict the behaviour o f other plants or even o f the same plant in different operative conditions from those experimentally studied. I f the feed, temperature, number o f stages, type o f disk, and other operative characteristics fa ll w ithin the specified parameters, these curves are to be regarded as reliable [15].

3.1.2 Models based on reaction order and substrate diffusion through bio-film
In the simplest models o f these types, it is assumed that the substrate removal follows an experimentally determined kinetic order. The more developed models also take into account the transport o f nutrients and oxygen w ithin the layer o f attached biomass, thus modifying the constants, and the order o f reaction. The procedure established for these models [7,16] is as follows: · Define the order o f reaction w ithin the layer o f biomass,

20

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

· Identify the lim itin g substrate, · Determine whether the b io -film is w holly or partially active, · M odify the order o f reaction accordingly. These models actually are semi-empirical, and not w idely used because they can predict the behavior o f the reactor only w ithin the ranges o f data calibration, and hence only for highly specific operating conditions [15].

3.1.3 Models based on microbial growth kinetics
In these types o f model, the substrate removal is described by correlating its concentration in the reactor w ith the microorganism growth rate [17]. A Monod-type expression is adopted and inserted into the substrate mass balance. This means that such models can be used for any lim iting substrate, and hence for both carbon removal and nitrification. It also means, however, that the kinetic constants must be separately determined for each individual stage and each individual substrate. The models o f this type were developed to describe the removal o f substrate by attached-biomass systems [18,19]. Experimental testing o f these models demonstrated their validity, and confirmed their capacity to use data obtained in a wide range o f organic loading rates [ 2 0 ]. The greatest lim itation o f these types o f models lies in the underlying assumption that the only lim itin g factor for microbial growth is substrate concentration itself. The availability o f required oxygen is thus taken fo r granted, which makes the result uncertain when organic loading rate is comparatively high and oxygen supply to the microorganisms may become insufficient and hence lim iting, as often occurs in the first disks o f a large RBC treatment unit. These models are therefore unreliable fo r high organic loading rate or in any case fo r the concentrations o f dissolved oxygen lower than 1-2 mg/1 [15].
21

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout permission.

3.1.4 Models based on micro organisms kinetic growth and mass transport in the bio-film
Far more complex models have been developed with a view to solving the problems o f insufficient oxygen transport, and the simultaneous utilization o f more than one substrate [21,22]. These models take into account the different conditions in the several layers o f attached biomass and the diffusion o f all the substrates through them, the mechanisms o f oxygen transport, the various phenomena underway in the different areas o f the disk during its phases o f immersion and emersion, the layer o f liquid film , and thus the disk rotational speed [15]. Another model [20] developed from and by sim plifying previous model [23], provides a good example. The laboratory-scale application o f this model may be particularly useful w ith a view to predicting the organic loading rate at which lim itation in oxygen transfer occurs. Such information is very useful in the scale-up process o f constructing a treatment plant, usually by means o f a pilot plant o f intermediate size. Its actual use appears awkward due to both the complex mathematical operation involved and the quantity o f experimental tests and data required [15]. Some o f the important research contributions that have been reviewed are as follows; W illiamson & McCarty [17,24] presented and verified a model o f substrate utilization by attached microorganisms that considers the effects o f substrate diffusion to the bio-film from the bulk liquid and, subsequently, through the b io -film to the reaction site. The fundamental principles o f substrate transport and reaction described in their model have served as the basis fo r a number o f more complex models o f substrate utilization by attached microorganisms. Also, bio-film models have become more advanced

[17,20,24,25], and can be used to calculate the unsteady state utilization o f multiple 22

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

substrates by several types o f microorganisms growing on the same media. Few o f these models have been applied specifically to a particular attached growth wastewater treatment such as the RBC processes. This is because the b io -film models incorporate a large number o f parameters, many o f which are d iffic u lt to measure [26,27].

It should be noted that numerous empirical models have been proposed that predict the steady state removal o f substrate in a rotating biological disk reactor in terms o f the operating variables [28,29]. In these models, the removal o f substrate per stage is written as a power function o f operating and design variables such as feed rate, feed concentration, retention time, disk area, disk diameter, disk speed, and temperature. The removal rate constant, and the coefficients in the models are obtained by the regression analysis o f experimental data.

Finally, several researchers have studied the physical transfer mechanism o f oxygen from air to water in RBCs. Some researchers [30-32] suggested that the oxygen transfer

process in the water film on the RBC disk affects the overall performance o f the process because the treatment efficiency depends on the oxygen capacity o f water.

3.2 Summary of different mathematical models:

3.2.1 Kornegay model

This model [33] ignored the aerated and submerged sectors, and assumed that the entire bio-film was exposed to the substrate concentration in the bulk liquid. It also assumed that the rate o f substrate removal by suspended cells in the trough o f the RBC was negligible. The effects o f mass transfer were accounted for by assuming that the Monod 23

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

half-saturation coefficient was a function o f the rotational speed o f the disks. This was equivalent to making the overall effectiveness factor dependent on the substrate concentration, and half-saturation coefficient [34].

3.2.2 Gujer model
Gujer and B oiler [22] developed a model that incorporated carbon oxidation, nitrification and denitrification. Surface shear o f the b io -film was also included, allowing the bio

film thickness to be an output from the model. The rotating biological contactor was modeled as a series o f CSTRs with the reactions occurring only in the submerged sector. The model was able to predict the effect o f organic substrate biodégradation on nitrification, and represents a significant step in the modeling o f all possible events in RBC, though it did not include the effects o f disk rotational speed [34]. Gujer and Boiler [22] considered two surface reactions, flocculation and shear, which they thought to be important in RBC systems. They chose simple mathematical rate

equations due to the lack o f detailed understanding o f these processes. Flocculation was modeled as a first order process; the flux o f particulate material from the reactor bulk liquid to the surface o f the b io -film was considered. Shear from the b io -film surface to the reactor bulk liquid was modeled as a process dependent on the b io -film thickness and the concentration o f the particulate component at the surface o f the b io -film [34].

3.2.3 Watanabe model

Watanabe [27] developed a mathematical model for carbon oxidation, nitrification and denitrification providing a number o f empirical relationships. W hile a direct solution technique was used, the kinetics were simplified, with zero order intrinsic kinetics being 24

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

assumed for both nitrification and denitrification, giving overall half order reaction rates v/hen substrate transport was considered. In addition, an empirical relationship was

employed to estimate the distribution o f heterotrophic and autotrophic biomass in the bio films. The model also assumed that the oxygen flu x into the b io -film was independent o f the composition o f the microbial community, so that the use o f oxygen by the microbial community would depend upon their distribution in the b io -film [34]. The biofilm kinetic was developed under the follow ing assumptions: 1. The bulk liquid is completely mixed. 2. Molecular diffusion o f substrates occurs through the diffusion layer 3. Molecular diffusion o f substrates with a simultaneous zero order biochemical reaction occurs w ithin the biofilm . The substrate flux through the diffusion layer was given by the follow ing equation.

((:»

( 1)

In this equation,

F^is the substrate flux (g/m" .h),

is the molecular diffusion

coefficient o f the substrate (m '/h), L ^is the diffusion layer thickness (m), andC^.C^are the concentrations o f the substrate in the bulk liquid and at the biofilm surface respectively (g/m^).

3.2.4 Hansford model
Hansford [35] developed both
d y n a m ic a n d

steady state models for the rotating biological

contactor. It had many similarities to the model o f Grady and L im [36]. Hansford model recognized two sectors, submerged and aerated, and that a rotating disk carries a liquid film from the trough into the aerated sector as it turns. The major difference between this 25

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

model and one o f Grady and Lim [36] was, Hansford model assumed that the substrate concentration in the bio-film was independent o f depth. Further Hansford model

assumed that the reaction takes place only in the bio-film rather than in both the bio-film and bulk liquid, and the thickness o f the liquid film in the aerated sector was assumed ta be constant [34].

Hansford provided the dynamic equations for the substrate removal considering an elemental volume AV^ liquid film is given by fixed in space at position 6 . Mass balance o f substrate in the

dC| "dë"

kb (C| 27tN5,

^2)

(2)

In this equation, c, is the substrate concentration in liquid film (g/m^),C2 is the substrate concentration in the biofilm (g/m^), k^ is mass transfer coefficient between liquid film and biofilm (m/h), N is the disk rotational speed (h"'), ë^is the thickness o f liquid film (m), and A0is the elemental angle.

Mass balance o f substrate in the biofilm on the exposed portion o f the disk at steady state is given by

dc. d0

kb 27tN5r;

kb

2nN5g

·-t-

27[N Y (K ,+cj

(3)

26

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

In this equation, X is the specific microorganism concentration attached to the biotilm (g/m^), g is the thickness o f the biofilm (m), }l is the maximum specific growth rate is the half saturation constant (g W ).

5

constant (h'`), Y is the yield constant (g/g), and

The mass balance o f substrate in the biofilm on the submerged portion o f the disk at steady state is given by

In this equation, Cg is the substrate concentration in biofilm on the submerged portion o f disk (g/m^), andC; is the substrate concentration in the bulk o f liquid in the trough (g/m^).

Mass balance of substrate in the trough at steady state is given by

c

Fg.+F,C|(P)

, 5,

'

F+F,+ki.A,(k,/l+K,)

In this equation, F is the volumetric flow rate o f feed (m^/hr), c^is the concentration of substrate in feed (g/m^),Ffis the volumetric flow rate o f liquid film (m^/hr),c,(P) is concentration o f substrate in the liquid film on disk re-entering the trough (g/m^), K, is the coefficient o f biological parameters.

3.2.5 Spengel and Dzombak model
Spengel and Dzombak [20] developed a very complete model, based on another work [23], which considered both carbon oxidation and nitrification with competition for 27

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

oxygen in the bio-film . Their substrate utilization terms were double Monod expressions. However, the bio-film thickness and density had to be provided as input to the model. Two simplifications were made to facilitate their solution. First, the disk was divided into four sectors, two in the submerged region and two in the aerated region and the substrate removal rates were calculated for each sector. Second, the bio-film was divided into four layers, with each being considered as a mixed zone [34]. The model employed following mass balance equations for the trough and liquid film :

4

V --- = Q (S '-S '^ ) + Q ,( S ^ - S ^ ) - K M A s ^ S ''- S = '') - h K M T A .,( S '- S '" )
4 t j= 3

(6 )

In this equation, t is time (days), V is the mixed liquid volume in stage (L),S^is the substrate concentration in mixed liquid (mg/L), S' is the substrate concentration of stage influent (mg/L), S'" is the substrate concentration in attached liquid film (mg/L), S' is the saturated liquid substrate concentration for oxygen (mg/L), S ® *"' is the substrate concentration at biofilm -liquid interface (mg/L), Q is the volumetric flow rate of influent/effluent (L/d), is the mass transfer coefficient from liquid to bio-film,

(m/d),K^,,. is the oxygen transfer coefficient from air to the mixed liquid, (m/d), Q l is the volumetric flow rate o f attached liquid layer (L/d), A , is the surface area o f submerged sector (m") and A^, is the surface area at air and mixed liquid interface (m"). The liquid film substrate mass balance equation for oxygen employed was:

A .8 , ( --

) = Q , ( S j: , - S ; - ) - K ^ A . ( S | '- S = '') + K ^ ,A .( S '- S ; - )

(7)

28

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

In this equiation, A ^is surface o f aerated sector (m"), S^is the thickness o f attached liquid layer (m), Sjl, is the substrate concentration in liquid film ; subscript denotes sector number (mg/L), and is the oxygen transfer coefficient from air to liquid film (m/d).

The rate o f substrate utilization equation was:

R
' zk IS,, AL

^______ ^ ___

(8)

In this equation, R ,is the substrate utilization rate (mg/L.d),

is the maximum

specific growth rate o f microorganisms (day''), X , is the surface concentration o f microorganisms in region (one layer in one sector) (g/m~), A is the surface area o f attached microorganisms in sector (m '), S is the substrate concentration in region (mg/L), Sois the oxygen concentration in region , Y is the organism yield coefficient (g biomass produced/g substrate used), Kg and Kg o are the substrate and oxygen half saturation constants (mg/L).

Spengel and Dzombak model [20] was useful in identifying the trough dissolved oxygen concentration at which RBC performance started to decline as a result o f oxygen limitation. They proposed that the radial variation of biomass thickness and density

would improve the u tility o f the model for scale up [34].

29

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 4
4.1 Objective

SIMULATION MODEL FOR RBCs

The primary objective o f this study is to use mathematical models developed by previous researchers, Spengel et al. [20], Watanabe [21], and Hansford et al. [35], and as a general direction to develop a simplified model and to compare the predicted values from the developed model with the experimental data obtained by Alvarez-Cuenca [5] and Paolini [37]. These researchers [5,37] have determined the soluble BOD5 concentration at

different organic loadings, and the overall removal rate for dissolved organic carbon. The particular model used in this study is taken from Spengel et al. [20]. Another objective o f the study is to predict any process changes due to the upsets in the influent wastewater flow, and the soluble BOD^ loadings from the model used in this study. This model describes the phenomenon o f degradation o f the substrate by considering the two regions for analysis, which are, the bio-film and the trough.

The model is based on the approach o f earlier researchers [20,21,35], and considers the mass transport o f the substrate from the liquid film , and the reaction within the bio-film on the exposed and the submerged portion o f the rotating disk. The simulated model

calculates the concentration and the overall removal rates o f the dissolved organic carbon and oxygen in the bulk liquid in the trough.

The model assumes that a liquid film is attached on the bio-film o f the rotating disk as it emerges from the mixed liquid and remains stationary on the disk. When the disk reenters the trough, the stationary liquid attached to the disk strips off, and mixes completely with the liquid in the trough. The liquid and bio-film layers are considered to be well mixed. 30

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The model considers that the concentration, and the activity o f the suspended biomass in the RBC unit are far lower than that o f the attached biomass, and can be regarded as negligible [15]. Grady and Lim , for their model [36], also assumed that both the attached and detached microorganisms contribute to substrate removal. The simulated model assumes that
0- 2

% substrate consumption takes place in the submerged portion o f the

disk, and the liquid in the trough.

4.2 Model parameters for a 4-stage RBC pilot plant [5]:
The approach adopted for the parameter selection is to use the best estimate o f the values o f maximum growth rate, microorganism concentration and yield constant available in the literature. The parameter selection for the Case I o f this study is described below;

The active thickness o f the bio-film has been shown to be less than the total thickness o f bio-film in several forms o f fixed film reactor having well-established biofilms [35]. Kornegay and Andrews [38] reported values ranging from 70 to 200 jim for the active depth o f the biofilms. model. A value o f 200 jam has been chosen for the simulation o f the

The value for the mass transfer coefficient is taken from the work by Grieves [39]who found the values for mass transfer coefficient ranging from 0.3 to 1.0 m/hr for his dynamic model o f the rotating biological disk. A value o f 0.4 m/hr has been used for this study. Kornegay [40] reported a value o f 95000 g/m^ for the concentration o f the microorganism for the entire film , while Heohn [41] showed that the concentration o f the

31

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

microorganism varied from 20000 to 105000 g/m^, which is dependent on several factors including overall film thickness. A value o f 26400 g/m^ has been used for this study.

The values for the maximum growth rate constant, the yield constant, and the saturation constant reported in the literature for disperse cultures vary widely depending on the substrate and the growth conditions [42]. The values for these parameters have been taken from Clark et al. [19] for this study.

4.3 Model parameters for a 3-stage RBC lab scale unit [37]:

The values o f biofilm s thickness, mass transfer coefficient, microorganism concentration, and half saturation constant for Case II study have been taken from the work done by Paoilini [37], and are provided in Table 6 .

4.4 Assumptions of the process model
The mass balance equations o f the simulated model for the bio-film and the trough are based on the following assumptions. 1. The liquid in the trough is completely mixed. 2. The wastewater in trough has uniform compositions at any given time. 3. The biofilm s are fu lly grown and have uniform compositions. 4. Oxygen consumption in bio-film is directly proportional to substrate consumption 5. The concentration o f microorganisms is constant throughout the bio-film .
6

. Substrate and oxygen concentrations are independent o f radial and tangential positions within the liquid and bio-films.

32

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

7. The liquid film on the exposed portion o f the disk is assumed to be o f constant thickness, which is dependent on the disk rotational speed and d i a m e t e r .
8

. It is assumed that the liquid film mixes immediately with the bulk o f the liquid when it passes through the submerged portion o f the trough.

9. The growth lim iting substrates are (i) (ii) The soluble substrate in the exposed portion o f the rotating disk and The dissolved oxygen in the submerged portion o f the disk.

10. Rates o f substrate and oxygen utilization within the b io -film and the liquid in the trough follow Monod kinetics. 11. Rate o f substrate utilization and microbial activity are confined to bio-film on the disk, and do not occur in the liquid film on the exposed portion o f the disk. In the bulk liquid in the trough, the rate is 0-2 % o f that in the b io -film [36].

4.5 Dynamic model equations
Consider a rotating disk about its axis parallel to the surface o f the liquid in a trough as shown in Figl.2. When the disk rotates and passes through trough and air, a thin liquid layer o f wastewater is formed on the bio-film developed on disk. The organic material in wastewater is removed by microbial metabolism in bio-film . The dynamic equations are written by applying mass balances for substrate and oxygen in the follow ing two areas: 1. The bio-film 2. The trough

4.5.1 The bio-film
Mass balance equation for concentration o f substrate in the bio-film is given by

33

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

(9)
which is the equation for the change in concentration o f the soluble BOD 5 in the bio-film . In this equation, C ^bod.BP is the concentration o f the soluble substrate in bio-film-(g/m^), C ^bod.T is the concentration o f the substrate in the trough (g/m^), r^ygj is the rate o f substrate consumption in the bio-film (g/m^.hr), A is the disk surface area (m"), k^bod is the mass transfer coefficient o f substrate from liquid to b io -film (m/hr) and Vb is the volume o f the biofilm s (m^).

4.5.2 Equation for rate of substrate consumption
Assuming soluble carbonaceous substrate is the only lim iting substrate, during the aeration phase, provided that the liquid film adhering to the layer o f biomass is constantly oxygenated and attains quickly oxygen saturation conditions, the follow ing Monod expression is used for the growth o f the biomass

K=

^ ^sbod'^^sbnd.BF

(10)

In this equation, K,bod specific growth rate ( 1 /hr).

the half saturation constant (g/m^) and |i^,, is the maximum

Rate o f substrate consumption can be calculated from the expression is given by [34]:

' shod= ^^

(11)

In this equation, X is the specific concentration o f attached biomass (g/m^), p. is the specific growth rate o f attached biomass (1/hr), and Y attached biomass (g cells produced/g substrate consumed). 34 is the yield coefficient for

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

W riting mass balance equation for consumption o f oxygen in the b io -film , we get

= lCo,/lCCo,,n - Co:.Bf)/Vy --To, In this equation,

(12) is the

gp is the concentration o f oxygen in the b io -film (g/m^),

saturated concentration o f oxygen in the liquid film (g/m^),

is the mass transfer

coefficient o f oxygen from liquid to bio-film (m/hr), and r^^ is the rate o f oxygen consumption in the b io -film (g/m^.hr). Rate o f oxygen consumption is calculated from the M onod expression, which is given by

T o, = y X

( 13)

=

(14)

In this equation, K q, is the oxygen half saturation constant (g/m^).

4.5.3 The trough
For the attached biomass in the trough, assuming 0-2% o f the soluble substrate is consumed in the trough fo r residence times o f more than an hour, under higher oxygen concentrations in the trough. W riting the mass balance equation for the concentration o f the soluble substrate in the trough, we get
* ^ ^ s b a d ,T T JT , _ ~ P ,T r (p i
\W - s Sb Do Ud u .in . in

dt

V,

,

p ) , ^ -s S bDo OU d . I. T/ / +

^sb o d
^ r

V,

^ * r s^ by oü

( 1 ^ )

\
In this equation is the concentration o f the soluble substrate in the influent stream

(g/m^), F is the volumetric flow rate o f the influent stream (m^/hr), V, is the volume o f 35

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout permission.

the trough and /

is the mass o f substrate transfeiTed in the trough (g/hr). The factor

is the percent consumption o f the substrate in the attached b io -film in the submerged

portion o f the rotating disk in the trough, and the value o f 0.015 was used in the computer program for simulation. The mass o f soluble substrate transferred in the trough is given by the follow ing equation,
^sbo d -- (IG )

4.5.4 Mass balance equation for concentration of oxygen in the trough
% = (17)

In this equation, equation (5).

is the rate o f oxygen consumption in trough (g/m^.hr), and is given by

The mass o f oxygen transferred in the trough is given by

4.5.5 Equation for rate of oxygen consumption in trough
The rate o f oxygen utilization follows Modified Monod (Double Monod Model) in this case. In the trough, the wastewater in contact with the biomass has a dissolved oxygen concentration that may prove lower than the required level, as there are no oxygen saturation conditions in the liquid film attached to biomass in the submerged portion o f the disk in the trough. Oxygen concentration then comes to influence the substrate

removal kinetics [20], i f no additional oxygen supply is maintained in the trough. The following Monod expression is used in this phase.

36

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Il = ll

X T

Ip \ 1 C ^sbod^'^sbod \

j- P

( 19)

'^O] y

In this equation, K q^ is the Monod half saturation constant fo r oxygen (g/m^), and is the substrate h a lf saturation constant (g/m^).

The above model equations were solved using the Runge Kutta Fehlberg and adaptive step size control algorithm such that the exit concentration o f the soluble BOD o f the 1^' stage is the inlet to the 2"'* stage and the concentration o f soluble BOD at the exit o f the second stage is the inlet concentration o f soluble BOD to the 3 "^ "^ stage.

37

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Chapter 5

SIMULATION

5.1

Model validation

The dynamic model described in the previous chapter is validated from the experimental results o f two studies [5,37], herein described as Case I and Case II. Case I study is o f a 4-stage RBC p ilo t plant operation for the treatment o f raw sewage from Toronto Metroworks main plant whereas Case II is a 3-stage lab scale RBC unit used for the treatment o f an industrial effluent. The wastewater used in the tests was diluted w ith tap water when the BO D exceeded the established high value in the influent wastewater stream. The ratio between the values o f the soluble BOD and o f the COD was practically independent o f the strength o f the wastewater and was equal to 0.88-0.90,which is the required one for readily biodegradable waste.

5.2 Runge kutta fehlberg method [43]:

The differential equations were solved using the 5"' order Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method, and adaptive step size control with Cash-Karp parameters.

The integration methods such as this one automatically avoid unnecessary and excessive calculations compared to constant step size methods. These methods require the estimate o f the local truncation error at each step. This error estimate serves as a basis for

lengthening or decreasing the step size. There are two approaches to incorporate adaptive step size control into one-step methods.

38

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1. The error is estimated as the difference between two predictions using the same order R K method but w ith different step sizes. 2. Local truncation error is estimated as the difference between two predictions using different order R K methods.

The 5'*' order Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method uses the approach for obtaining an error estimate that involves computing two R K predictions o f different order. The results can then be subtracted to obtain an estimate o f the local truncation error.

The fourth and fifth order prediction amount to a total o f 10 derivative evaluations per step while the Runge-Kutta Fehlberg prediction amounts to step.
6

derivative evaluations per

5.3

Case I

In this case study, the dynamic model is examined by applying the experimental results obtained in the treatment o f raw sewage from the main plant o f Metroworks in Ashbridges Bay (Toronto) [5]. The pilot plant unit consisted o f six stages; the first four stages were aerobic. The characteristics o f the pilot plant unit, and the characteristics o f the raw sewage studied are provided in Table 1. The various parameters for this case study are provided in Table 1[35]. The values o f half saturation constant and maximum specific growth rates are taken from the estimated kinetic coefficients fo r a 4-stage RBC pilot plant [19], operated under varying organic loadings. Table 2 provides the experimental data for the concentration o f soluble BOD5 for case I [5].

39

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The computer program with the

order Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method [43] using the

Cash-Karp approach was run for these different organic loadings, assuming 0-2% o f the rate o f soluble BOD 5 consumption in the trough. Table 3 shows the results obtained from the computer program run for the dynamic model at the organic loadings chosen by Alvarez-Cuenca M [5]. The simulation results of % BOD 5 removal calculated from the dynamic model are provided in Table 4. Table 5 shows the comparison o f the model predictions and the experimental results in terms o f % BOD 5 removal obtained by Alvarez-Cuenca, M [5],

40

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 1: Pilot plant unit specifications, wastewater characteristics and model input parameters for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5].

----- T

Parameter
No. o f biological stages

Value
4 47
0.88

Pilot plant unit specifications

Total number o f disks Disk diameter, m Net volume per stage, Total surface area o f the disks, m^ COD, g/m^ Soluble BOD;, g/m'^ Nitrate-N, g/m^

0.18
57.15

850 243 9.2
9.7
0.86

Wastewater characteristics

Dissolved Oxygen Nitrite-N, g/m^ Total suspended solids, g/m^ pH value Mean thickness of bio-films, m

598 9.7, 5.2
2 x 1 0 ''^

Values of parameters used in model for the simulation [38]

Mass transfer coefficient, m/h Microorganism concentration, g/m^ Yield constant, g cells/g substrate

0.4

26400 0.96

41

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 2: Experimental data for the concentration of soluble BOD 5 for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5];

Organic load (g/m\d) 1.9 4.5 8.4 12.7 20.5
21.1

Organic load (g/m^.hr) 0.079 0.1875 0.35 0.53 0.85
0.88

BODs removal exiting the 4'" stage of the RBC (%) 99 92 94 90 97 79
88

26.0

1.08

42

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 3: Soluble BOD5 concentration in wastewater predicted by the model for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5]:

Steady-state Organic load Concentration of soluble BOD 5 at the exit of 1® ` stage (g/m^)
1.9 4.5 27.7 60.4

Steady-state Concentration of soluble BODs at the exit of 2" * ^ stage (g/m^)
4.43 19.3

Steady-state Concentration of soluble BOD 5 at the exit of stage (g/nf)
0.066

Steady-state Concentration of soluble BOD 5 at the exit of 4"' stage (g/m^)
0.0026

(g/m\d)

0.693 3.21 8.41 25.3 27.5 42.6

0.062
0.525

8.4
12.7

96.7 124 156
158 170

46.2 73.5
111

2.19 13.9
15.9 31.3

20.5
2 1 .1

114

26.0

130

43

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 4: Simulation results of soluble BOD5 concentration in terms of percent removal predicted by the model for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5]:

Organic load (g/m^.d)

Organic load (g/m^.hr)

BOD 5 removal exiting the
4"' stage of the RBC (%)

1.9 4.5 8.4 12.7 20.5
21.1

0.079 0.1875 0.35 0.53 0.85
0.88

99.99 99.97 99.78 99.10 94.27 93.43 87.1

26.0

1.08

44

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 5: Comparison of the experimental data for the concentration of soluble BOD 5, and the simulation results of soluble BOD5 concentration in terms of percent removal predicted by the model for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5]:

Organic load (g/m^-d) 1.9 4.5 8.4 12.7 20.5
21.1

% BOD5 removal (Experimental) 99 92 94 90 97 79
88

% BOD5 % Deviation = [1 - (%BODg simulated/ removal %BODs Experimental)] 100 (Simulated) 99.99 99.97 99.78 99.10 94.27 93.43 87.10
1

8

6

10

3 18
2

26.0

45

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The data from Table 3 show that the concentration o f soluble BOD5 at the fourth stage increases with an increase in the organic load. The model' s predicted results o f percent BOD5 removal lie within close proxim ity to the experimental results as shown in Table 4. The model predictions agree w ith the observed experimental values at organic loads from 1.9 to 26.0 g /n f .d. The percent deviation o f simulated model results, as shown in Table 5, ranges from 1% to 18 % from that o f the experimental results.

The simulation results for the concentration o f soluble BOD5, and the concentration o f oxygen in the trough at different organic loadings, for Case I [5], are provided in Figure 5.1 to Figure 5.7. The comparison o f the model and the experimental results is shown in Figure 5.8. These figures show the substrate (expressed as soluble BOD5), and oxygen consumption profiles with respect to time at different organic loadings, plotted for the four stages o f the RBC. The data show a decrease in concentration o f soluble BOD5 with each stage, and is in agreement with the experimental results o f Case I study [5].

From Figures 5.1(a)-5.4(a), it is observed that at organic loadings (less than 12.7 g/m~.d), low substrate concentration levels (less than
10

g/m^) are achieved in the third stage o f

RBC, and concentration levels less than 5 g/m^ are obtained in the fourth stage. Figures 5.5(a)-5.7(a) show that the concentration of the substrate, in each stage, starts increasing at a higher organic loading. At the loading o f 21.1 g/m'.d, the concentration o f the substrate in the trough is less than 20 g/m^ in the fourth stage o f the RBC, and at the maximum loading o f 26 g/m'.d, the substrate concentration in the trough is greater than 20 g/m^ in the fourth stage. Further, the drop in the third stage is steeper than expected. This is due to the fact that the value for the half saturation constant for soluble BOD 3 in

46

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

the third stage is much less compared to the

1 ^'

and

2

"^' stage half saturation constant

values, used in the program, taken from the experimental observations [19], for Case I study. The values o f these estimated kinetics constants for the four stage RBC pilot

plant [19], show that due to less concentration o f soluble BOD5 in the third stage, the maximum specific growth rate for the biomass is less, giving low value o f half saturation constant. The oxygen consumption profiles with respect to time in the trough, in 4-stages are shown in Figures 5.1(b)-5.7(b) at different organic loadings.

5.3.1 Initial conditions:
The initial conditions for the four-stage pilot plant RBC are given by A t time t = 0
Csbod,T=

243 g W

Co2.T = 9.7 g/m"
f-sbod, B F--

243 g/m'

C0 2 . BF = 9.5 g/m^

The trends for the oxygen consumption with respect to time in figures 5.1 (b)-5.7 (b) show a drastic decrease in oxygen concentration initially in each stage, and achieve steady state in 5-20 hours. The simulation profiles with respect to time for the

consumption o f the soluble BOD 5 and oxygen, in the bio-film , are provided in Figure 5.9, at the organic loading o f 26 g/m'.d. In the bio-film , the consumption o f the substrate, as shown in Figure 5.9 (a) follows the same trend as that observed for the consumption of the substrate in the trough as shown in Figure 5.7 (a). The concentration o f oxygen in the bio-film is drastically decreased in each stage, as shown in Figure 5.9 (b).

47

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.1 (a); Predicted Csi,«d, T in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 0.0026 g/m^
3 0 0

1.9 g/m".d

2 5 0

200

I

Ü

I

1 oo
5 0

O

5 0

1 OO

1 5 0

200

2 5 0

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.1 (b): Predicted C 02, x in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 1.9 g/m .d for Case I Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 2.35x10"'^ g/m

1 . 6+01
1 . 6+00
1.E-01

I
I
S '

1. 6-02 1 .6 -0 3

1 . 6 -0 4
1 .6 -0 5

1 . 6 -0 6
6 -07 6-08

1 . 6-0 9 6-10 1 . 6 -1 1 1 .6 - 1 2
1 .6 -1 3 1 .6 -1 4 100
T i m e

150
(h r)

250

I

Stage

S '" " stage
4

3" ' stage

"' stage

48

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.2 (a): Predicted Csi,,,d, r *« a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 0.062 g/n f
300

4.5 g/m .d

250

200

I-

150

100
50

O
0 50

100

150

200

250

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.2 (b): Predicted Coz, t in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 4.5 g/m .d for Case I
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 0.0026 g/rn^ 12 Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC - 5.38x10 g/m''
1 .0G+01 1 .05+00 1 .05-01 1.05-02 1 .05-03 1 .05-04 1 .05-05 1 .05-06 1 .05-07 1 .05-08 1 .05-09 1 .05-1 O 1 .05-1 1 1 .05-12 1 .06-13 50
1 OO 1 5 0

200

2 5 0

T im e (hr)

f

Stage

2 "'' .stage

3"" stage

4"' stage

49

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5 3 (a); Predicted Csbod, t in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.4 g/m^.d for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5] Steady slate concenti-ation at the exit of RBC = 0.525 g/nf
300

250

I
H

200

-

150

Ü

100

50

0

50

100

150

200

250

Time (hr)

Figure 5.3 (b): Predicted C 02, t in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.4 g/m .d for Case I
Steady state concentration at tlie exit o f RBC = 3.87x10'" g/nr^
1 1

.oE+ 0 1 .oE+ 0 0 1 .oE- 0 1 1 .oE- 0 2
1 .0E-03 1 .0E-04 1 1 1

1
I
8>

.0E-05 .OE-06 .OE-07

1 .O E -0 8

1 .OE-09 1 .0 2 - 1 0
1

.OE-1 1

1 .OE-1 2

O

50

ICO

150

200

250

Time (hr)

Stage 3'`' stage

2"^' stage
4

"' stage

50

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.4 (a): Predicted Csbod, x in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m^.d for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 2.19 g/nT^
300

250

C

I
I-

200
150

o

100

S O

O

50

100

150

200

250

T im e (hr)

F ig u re 5.4 (b): Predicted C oz/r in a 4-stage R BC a t O rganic L o ading = 12.7 g/m ".d fo r Case I Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 1.21x10"'° g /n f 1.0E+01
1.O E+O O 1.0E-01 1.0E-O2 1.0E-03 1.0E-04 1.0E-05 1.0E-06 1

0E-07

1.OE-08 1.0E-09
1.0E-10

1.OE-1 1 50 100 150 200 250

Time (hr)

1 Stage 3''^ ' stage

2 "'' stage

4"* stage

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.5 (a): Predicted Qbod.T a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 20.5 g/m".d for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 13.9 g/ra^
300

250

CO

_

200

I..
(J
100
50

0

50

100

150

200

250

Time (hr)

Figure 5.5 for Case I

(b ):

Predicted C 02, t in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 20.5 g/m .d

Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 4.18x10'"^ g/m'
1.oE+01 1.0E+00 1.0E-01

I
g

1.OE-02 1.0 E-O S 1.0E-04 1.0E-05 1.0E-06 1.OE-07 1.0E-08 1.0E-09 1.0E-10
50

I

100

150

200

250

Time (hr)

-

r ` stage 3"" stage

------- 2 " ^ stage -------4* stage

52

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.6 (a): Predicted Csbod, t in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 21.1 g/m .d for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 15.9 g/m^
300

250

I

200

150

`V .
100

50

o o
50

100

150

200

250

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.6 (b): Predicted C02, t in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 21.1 g/m .d for Case I
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 4.61x10"'" g/m
1.0 E+01 1.0 E+00 1.0 E-01 -

I
r

1.0 E-02 1.OE-03
1.02-04

8

1.02-05 1.02-06

Ü

g)

 2

1.02-07 1.OE-08 1.02-09 1.0E-10

O

50

100

150

200

250

T im e (hr)

1 Stage S"' stage

2 4

'"' stage "' stage

53

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.7 (a): Predicted C sb o d , t i» a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 26.0 g/m'.d for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [S] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 31.3 g/m^
300

250 

100

-

50

0

50

100

150

200

250

Time (hr)

Figure 5.7 (b): Predicted C02, r in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 26.0 g/m .d for Case I
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 8.24x10"'^ g/ra^
·O E+01  O E +O O .OE-01 ·OE-02 .0E-03 -0E-04 .0E-05 -0E-06 -OE-Q7 ·OE-08 -OE-09 O E-10

0

50

100

150

200

250

Tim e (hr)

1 Stage

2"^ stage 4"^ stage

stage

54

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.8: Comparison of simulated model results and the experimental results of a 4-stage RBC for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5]

120

100

i
D C

i
Experim ental Results
m Model Results

O

o

C O

10

15

20

25

30

Organic Load (g/m .d)

55

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.9 (a): Predicted Q sbod, bf iu a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 26.0 g/m^.d for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 31.3 g/m^
300 250

eO
fc

200 150

Ü

i

100

50

O

50

TOO

150

200

250

Time (hr)
2 "^'

Stage

stage

3"* stage

4'*^ stage

Figure 5.9 (b): Predicted C 0 2 , b f b i a 4-stage RBC a t Organic Loading = 26.0 g/m '.d fo r Case I

I
I

J

100

150

250

Time (hr)

A ll four-stage values are overlapping 56

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

5.3.2 Effect of upsets for Case I:

Another effort is done to check the behaviour of the system under any organic or hydraulic shock loadings. The computer program was run for variations in the influent wastewater flow rate, the influent concentration of the soluble BOD 5 , and with changes in both the variables. This upset was introduced in the computer program by defining a function called ChangeVariable. This function was provided with data to introduce the upsets in flow and concentration of soluble BOD 5 when the system reaches the steady state. For example, considering the upsets at an organic load of 12.7 g/m'.d, Figure 5.4(a) represents the situation where there is no variation in the influent parameters at this load, and the system reaches a steady state in 35 hours. The following upsets are applied to find the variation in the concentration of soluble BOD 5 in each stage of RBC: 1. When the influent flow rate is doubled. 2. When the concentration of soluble BOD 5 is doubled. 3. When the flow rate is increased one and a half times, and soluble BOD 5 is doubled. 4. When both the flow rate and the soluble BOD 5 is doubled. The simulation results of Case I [5], for the upsets in the system, show variations in the behaviour of the system. These variations incur, when a change is introduced in the

influent flow and the concentration of the soluble BOD 5 at 12.7g/m".d organic load. These simulation results are provided in Figures 5.10-5.12. Figure 5.10 (a) shows an increase in the concentration of the soluble substrate, in each stage, when the influent flow rate is doubled. The concentration of soluble substrate in the fourth stage after the second steady state achieved, is 29.1 g/m^ due to the upset in the flow rate. The trend for 57

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.10 (a): Predicted Csbod, t a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading g/m^.d, for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5], when the influent flow rate is doubled.
Steady state achieved after upset = 63 hours

12,

Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 29.1 g/m^
300

250 -

-g
^

200
150

if

100
50

0

50

100

150

200

250

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.10 (b): Predicted C02, r in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading for Case I [5], when the influent flow rate is doubled.
Steady state concentration at the exit o f R B C = 7.6x10'"^ g/m^
1.E+01

12.7 g/m .d,

1.E+00
1.E-01 1 .E-02 1 -E-03 1 .E-04 E-O S 1.E-06 E-07 E-08 1.E-09 1.E-10 E-11

50

100

150

200

250

T im e (h r)

f Stage 3''`` stage 58 4^ stage

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.11 (a): Predicted Csbod, t in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m^.d, for Case I» Alvarez-Cuenca [5], when concentration of soluble BODs is doubled.
Steady state achieved after upset = 79 hours Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 11.2 g/nr^
300 -

250

s

200

50

O

50

100

150

200

250

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.11 (b): Predicted Co2, t in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading : 12.7 g/m .d, for Case I [5j, when concentration of soluble BOD5 is doubled.
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 3.98x10'" g/m^
1 1 1

.E+ 0 1 .E+ 0 0 .E- 0 2

1 .E-01

I
8>

1.E-03 1.E-04 H 1 .E-05 1 .E-06 1.E-07 1.E-08 1.E-09 1 .E-10 1 .E-1 1 50 100 150 200 250

T im e (h r)

C Stage

4 stage

59

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5,12 (a): Predicted Csbod, t in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m^.d, for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5], when the influent flow rate is increased one and half times and the concentration of the soluble BODs is doubled.
Steady state achieved after upset = 82 hours Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 72.7 g/m^
350 300 250

%

a h.

200
_.

!
·

100
50

0

50

100

150

200

250

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.12 (b): Predicted Coz, r in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m ,d, for Case I [5], when the influent flow rate is increased one and half times and the concentration of the soluble BODs is doubled.
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 1.15x10^" g/nr^ E+ 0 1
·E-OI

E-03

E-Ü4
E-05 E-06 E-07 E-oa E-09 E-1 O

--
so
1G O 150

200

250

Tim e (hr)

r Stage

2

"'' stage

3"^ stage

4"' stage

60

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.13 (a): Predicted Csbod, r in a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g /n f .d , fo r Case Ï, A lv a re z -C u e n c a [5], w hen both the in flu e n t flo w ra te a n d th e concentration of the soluble BOD 5 are doubled.
Steady state achieved after upset = 76 hours Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 146 g/m^
400 350 300 E 250 200 150

5}
^

Ü
100
-

50

o

50

100

150

200

250

T im e (hr)

F ig u re 5.13 (b ): P re d ic te d C 0 2 , r in a 4-stage R B C a t O rg a n ic L o a d in g = 12.7 g /m .d, f o r Case I [5], w h e n b o th the in llu e n t flo w ra te a n d th e c o n c e n tra tio n o f the soluble

BOD 5 a re

d o u b le d .

Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 3.01x10''" g/m''
1.E+01 1 .E-01 1.E -02 1-E-os 1. E-04

1 .E-05
1 .E-06 1 .E-08 1.E-09

50

100

150

200

250

Tim e (hr)

C stage 3'^' stage 61

2"'' stage 4*'' stage

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

the concentration o f the oxygen in the trough, in Figure 5.10 (b), shows a sharp increase in the oxygen consumption, when the upset in the flow rate is occurred, and achieves the steady state in almost
10

hours.

The rise time fo r Case I [5] upsets is calculated to find the time, which the four stage treating system takes to reach the steady state after the upset is occurred. It is observed that the four-stage RBC system takes 28 hours to reach the steady state when the flow rate is doubled, and the system takes 44 hours when the concentration o f soluble BO D 5 is doubled in the influent stream. The rise time is 47 hours when the flow rate is increased one and a half times and the concentration o f soluble BOD 5 is doubled, and 41 hours when both the flow rate and the concentration o f soluble BOD 5 are doubled.

The profiles w ith respect to time for the consumption o f the soluble BOD5 and oxygen in the bio-film , for upsets in the system, when the influent flow and concentration o f soluble BOD 5 are doubled at an organic load o f 12.7 g/m'.d, are provided in Figure 5.14. In the bio-film , the consumption o f the substrate follows the same trend as that observed for the consumption o f the substrate in the trough as shown in Figure 5.13 (a). The

concentration o f oxygen in the bio-film is readily consumed in each stage, as shown in Figure 5.14 (b).

62

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.14 (a): Predicted Csbod, nr iu a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/m^.d, for Case I, Alvarez-Cuenca [5], when both the influent flow rate and the concentration of the soluble BOD 5 is doubled. Steady state concentration, at the exit of RBC -- 146 g/m'^
400 350 _ 300

=5°

&
^

200

I
100
50

0

50

100

150

200

250

Time (hr)

r'' stage

2 "" stage

4*'' stase

Figure 5.14 (b): Predicted C02, ijf iu a 4-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 12.7 g/ra".d, for Case I [5], when both the influent flow rate and the concentration of the soluble BOD< is doubled.
10 9 8 7

1

6

h c?

4 3 2 1 0 50 100 150 200 250

Time (hr)

All four-stage values are overlapping

63

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

5.4 Case II
In this case study, the dynamic model is examined by applying the experimental results obtained from the treatment o f industrial wastewater [37]. The laboratory scale RBC unit consisted o f three stages w ith seven disks per stage. The characteristics o f the unit are provided in Table 6 .

The wastewater treated by the unit was the sewage produced by an industrial process. The process consisted o f the recovery o f ferrous metals, paper, organic material, plastics, etc. and o f their transformations to products such as animal feed, pulp paper, plastic film , compost and steel. The industrial sewage had the average characteristics as shown in Table
6

. The various parameters for this case study are provided in Table

6

. The values

o f the parameters used in the computer program are taken from the 3-stage lab-scale study [37].

Table 7 shows the results o f the soluble BOD5 obtained at the end o f each stage o f biological unit fo r the experiments carried out at six different organic loadings [37]. The computer program with the 5"' order Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method [43] using the CashKarp approach was run fo r these different organic loadings, assuming 0-2% o f the rate o f soluble BOD5 consumption in the trough. Table
8

shows the simulated model results

obtained for different organic loadings treated in the three stages o f RBC. Table 9 shows the comparison o f the simulated model and the experimental results in terms o f percent

BOD5 removal.

64

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 6 : Lab-scale unit specifications, wastewater characteristics and model input parameters for Case II, Paolini [37]

Parameter
No. o f biological stages

Value
3 7 0.275 0.00871 0.831 1840

Lab-scale bio-disk unit specifications

No. o f disks per stage Disk diameter, m Net volume per stage, m^ Total surface area o f the disks per stage, m" COD, g/m^ Soluble BOD 5 , g/m^ Ammonia (as N), g/m^

1640
40
0 .0

Wastewater characteristics of lab-scale unit

Oxidized nitrogen, g/m^ Total nitrogen, g/m^ Suspended solids, g/m^ pH value Mean thickness o f bio-film , m

65
110

6 .6 - 7 .0

0.0034 0.028 26400
202

Values of parameters used in model for the simulation [40]

Mass transfer coefficient, m/h Microorganism concentration, g/m^ Saturation constant, g/m^

65

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 7: Experimental data for the concentration of soluble BOD5 for Case II, Paolini [37]:

Organic load (g/m^.d)

Concentration of soluble BODs at stage (g/m^)

Concentration of soluble BODs at 2"'* stage (g/ra^)

Concentration of soluble BODs at stage (g/m^)

8.7
11.1

208

18 27
208

18
20

240

1&9

775 810
900

34

22.1

245
367

50

27.7
39.5

89

1150

680

320

66

Reproduced with permission of fi e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 8 : soluble BOD5 concentration in wastewater predicted by the model for C ast II, Paolini [37]:

Steady-state Organic Concentration of load soluble BOD 5 at the (g/m^.d) exit of 1® ` stage (g/m^)

Steady-state Concentration of soluble BOD 5 at the exit of 2 " * *stage (g/m^)

Steady-state Concentration of
)

soluble BOD 5 at the ; exit of stage (g im fk I

8.7
11.1

120

6J9
20.1

0379 L82 143
20 J

^ }

236 531 643 803 1030

18/9
22.1

924
144

1
^ i

27.7

262 543

633 234

1
i

39.5

67

I Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 9: Comparison of the experimental data for the concentration of soluble BOD5, and ihe simulation results of soluble BOD 5 concentration in terms of percent removal predicted by the model for Case II, Paolini [37]:

Organic load (g/m^.d)
8.7

% BODs

% BODs

% Deviation = [I - (% BODs simulated / % BODs Experimental)] 100
1

removal (Experimental) 9&9 98J8 9%42 9&95
94.57

removal (Model) 99.97 99 99J4 9&4 9&1 85J

11.1

1

I&9
22.1

1

1

2T7 39J

2

8&48

6

68

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The concentration o f soluble BOD 5 at the third stage increases with an increase in the organic load. The model predicted results lie within the close proximity o f the values at third stage as shown in Tables 7 and 8 . The results differ approximately by 20 g soluble BODs/m^ from the experimental results at low organic loading in the third stage. The percent deviation o f simulated model results is results.
1%

to 6% from that o f the experimental

The simulation results for the concentration o f soluble BOD5 and the concentration of oxygen in the trough, at different organic loadings for Case II [37] are provided in Figures 5.15 to Figures 5.20 These figures show the substrate profile (expressed as BOD5), at different organic loadings, plotted for the three stages o f the RBC. The figures

show a decrease in concentration o f the soluble BODj and oxygen to steady state values
in each stag'' The comparison o f the model and the experimental results is shown in Figure 5.21.

From Figures 5.15 (a)-5.16 (a), it is observed that at organic loading o f (less thanl2 g/nr.d), low substrate concentration levels (less than 5g/m^) are achieved in the third stage o f RBC. Figures 5.17 (a)-5.20 (a) show that the concentration o f the substrate, in each stage, starts to increase with higher organic loading. Figure 5.18 (a) represents the substrate profile at an organic load o f 22.1g/m".d. The concentration o f the substrate obtained from the simulated result, at this load, is 20g/m^ in the third stage o f the RBC. Figures 5.19 (a) and 5.20 (a) provide the profiles with respect to time at higher organic loading (greater than
2 2 .1

g/m".d), showing higher levels of concentration o f soluble

substrate (greater than 20 g/m^) in the third stage o f the RBC.

69

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

5.4.1 Initial conditions:
The initial conditions for the three-stage lab scale RBC unit are given by At time t = 0
C sbod, T =

1640 g/m^

Co2,T = 9 g/m^ C sbod, Bp-- 1640 g/m Co2,BF = 9.5 g/m^

The profiles with respect to time for the consumption of the oxygen in the trough, in the three stages, are shown in Figures 5.15 (b) - 5.20 (b) at different organic loadings. The trends for the oxygen consumption show a drastic decrease in oxygen concentration initially in each stage to a steady state in almost 10-80 hours.

The simulation profiles w ith respect to time for the consumption o f the soluble BOD5 and oxygen, in the bio-film , at an organic load o f 39.5 g/nr.d, are provided in Figure 5.22. In the bio-film , the consumption o f the substrate follows the same trend as that observed for the consumption o f the substrate in the trough as shown in Figure 5.20 (a). The

concentration o f oxygen in the bio-film is drastically consumed in the three stages, as shown in Figure 5.22 (b).

70

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.15 (a): Predicted C sb o d , t in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading for Case n , Paolini [37] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 0.379 g/m^
1800 1600 1400 1200
-

8.7 g/m \d

1000

-

Ü

I

800 600 400 200

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T im e (h r)

Figure 5.15 (b): Predicted Co2, t in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/nr.d for Case II
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 1.94x10'^ g/m^
1.E+01 1.E+00 1.E-01

«

1.E-02 1.E-03 1.E-04

I
S Ü 8^

1 .E -0 5
1.E-06 1.E-07 E-08 1.E-09 1.E-10 1.E-11

1.E-12

100

200

300

400

700

Time (hr)

staee

stase

71

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.16 (a): Predicted Csbod, t in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 11.1 g/m .d for Case II, Paolini [37] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 1.82 g/m'^
1800 1600 1400

1200

â

1000

(J

600 400

200

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Time (hr)

Figure 5.16 (b): Predicted Co2, rin a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 11.1 g/m'.d for Case II
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = i .5 Ix lO ''' g/ra^
1 .E + 0 1 1 .E + 0 0 1 .E -0 1 1 .E -0 2

I
o

1 .E -0 3 1 .E -0 4 1 .E -0 5 1 .E -0 6 1 .E -0 7 1 .E -0 8 1 .E -0 9 1 .E -1 0 1.E-11 -

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Time (hr)

1

stage

slase

3 ' stase

72

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.17 (a): Predicted Csi,od, r in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 18.9 g/m^.d for Case II, Paolini [37] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 14.0 g/m^
1800 1600 1400 C" 1200 -

a

1000
800 600 400 200

O

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.17 (b): Predicted C oi/rin a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 18.9 g/m .d for Case II
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 5.23x10'^ g /n f
1.E+01 1.E+00 1 .E-01 1.E-02 1.E-03 1.E-04 1 .E-05 1 .E-06 1.E-07 1.E-08 1.E-09

00

400

700

T im e (h r)

r " stage

3"" stage

73

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.18 (a): Predicted Csbod, t in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 22.1 g/m^.d for Case II, Paolini [37] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC --20.1 g/m^
1800 1600 J 1400

I
Ü

1200

600 400 

200

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Time (hr)

Figure 5.18 (b): Predicted C 0 2 , t in a 3-stage R BC at O rganic Loading = 22.1 g/m '.d fo r Case I I Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 3.73x10"^ g/m^
1.E+01 1 .E+00 1 .E-01

cC E
^

1

.e- 0 2

1.E-03 1.E-04

u D Î
^

8

1.5-05
1.5-06 1.E-07 1 .E-08 1 .E-09 1.E-10

O

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Time (hr)

r'stage

r " stage

3"' stage

74

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.19 (a): Predicted Csbod, r in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 11.1 g/m^.d for Case II, Paolini [37]
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 63.8 g/m^

1800 1600 1400

I
h.
Ü

1200 1000

800 600  400 200
.

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.19 (b): Predicted Coz, r in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 27,7 g/ni^.d for Case II
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 2.63x10'^ g/nv'
1 .E+01 1 .E+00 1.E-01 .E-02 .E-03 .E-04 .E-05 .E-06 .E-07 .E-08 -E-09 .E-10

O

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Time (hr)

1 Stage

-,i'i

stage

3"^ stage

75

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.20 (a); Predicted Csimd.T iu &3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 39.5 g/m'.d for Case II, IPaolini [37] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 234 g/m^
1800 1600 1400 CO

E & h.

1200

1000
800 600 400 -

(J

200

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.20 (b): Predicted C 0 2 , t in a 3-stage R B C at O rganic Loading = 39.5 g/m '.d fo r Case I I ^ Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 2.7x10"^ g/m^
1.E+01 1.E+00 1 .E-01 1 .E-02 1.E -03 1 .E -0 4 1 .E -0 5 -] 1 .E -0 6 1 .E -0 7 1 .E -08 1 .E -09
O 100 200 300 400

500

600

700

Tim e (hr)

C Stage

2"'^ stage

3"' stage

76

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.21: Comparison of simulated model and experimental results of a 3-stage RBC for Case II, Paolini [37]

120

100

9

*

9

6

r, ¥ 8 3 

80

§

o E
Q O m

D C 40

Q )

60 -

20

 E xpe rim en ta l R esults

« M odel R e sults

|

........ ............................................. ....................
10 20

30

40

50

Organic Load (g/m .d)

77

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout permission.

Figure 5.22 (a); Predicted Csbod, bf in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 39.5 g/m^.d for Case II, Paolini [37] Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 234 g/nr^
1800 1600 1400

cO
2

1200
1000 800

^
U -

"l 1

O
400

200

-

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.22 (b): Predicted Co2,bf in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 39.5 g/m~.d for Case II
10

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 100 200 300 400 5 00 600 7 00

T im e (hr)

A ll four-stage values arc overlapping

78

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

5.4.2 Effects of upsets for Case II [37]:
The simulation results o f Case II [37], for the upsets in the system, show variations in the behaviour o f the system. These variations incur when a change is introduced in the

intluent flow rate and the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 at 8.7 g/m".d organic load. These simulation results are provided in Figures 5.23-5.26. Figure 5.26 (a) shows an

increase in the concentration o f the soluble substrate, in each stage, when both the influent flow rate and the concentration o f soluble BOD^ are doubled. The concentration o f soluble substrate in the third stage after the second steady state achieved, is 43.9 g/m^. This is due to the upsets in the concentration o f soluble BOD^ and the flow rate in the influent stream, when these parameters are doubled. The trend for the concentration o f the oxygen in the trough provided in figure 5.26 (b) shows a sharp increase in the oxygen consumption, when both the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 and the flow rate are doubled, and the three stage treating system achieves steady state in 10-40 hours.

The rise time fo r the Case II [37] upsets is calculated to find the time, which the three stage treating system takes to reach the steady state after the upset is occurred. In this case, it is observed that the system takes 89 hours to reach the steady state when the flow rate is doubled, and it takes 136 hours when the concentration o f soluble BOD.i is doubled in the influent stream to the RBC. The rise time is 223 hours when the flow rate is increased one and a half times and concentration o f soluble BOD5 is doubled, and 238 hours when both the flow rate and the concentration o f soluble BOD^ are doubled.

79

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.23 (a): Predicted Csbod, t i» a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m'.d, for Case II, Paolini [37], when the influent flow rate is doubled. Steady state achieved after upset = IS 8 hours Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC = 4.6 g/m^
1800 1600 · 1400 H

1200

-

Ï

1000

H

800  600 · 400
200

Ü

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T im e (hr)

Figura ' .23 (b): Predicted C02, t iu a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading for Case II, when the influent flow rate is doubled.
Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 9.96x10'^ g /n f
1.E+01 1.E+00 -

8.7 g/m'.d,

1.E-02 1 .E-03

I I
S'

1 .E-04 1.E-05 1.E-06 1 .E-07 1 .E-08

1 .E-09
1.E-10

1.E-12

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T im e (h r)

F stase

stase

-T stase

80

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.24 (a): Predicted Csbod, ï in a 3-stage R BC a t O rganic Loading = 8.7 g/m^.d, fo r Case I I , P aolini [37], when the concentration o f soluble B O D 5 is doubled. Steady state achieved after upset = 235 hours Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 1.58 g/m^
1800 1600 1400

E & h.

1200 1000 800 600 400

o

200

0

100

200

300

4 00

500

600

700

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.24 (b): Predicted C 0 2 , 1 in a 3-stage R BC at O rganic Loading fo r Case I I , when the concentration o f soluble B O D 5 is doubled. Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 2.62x10'^ g/m^
1 .E+01 1 .E+00 1 .E-01  1.E -02 -T

8.7 g/m".d,

1.E -03
1.E -04 1 .E-05

Ü

a

1.E -0 6 1.E -07 1 .E -0 8 1.E -0 9 1 .E -10 1.E-11 1 .E-12 300 400 700

§

T im e (h r)

stage

2

"^ stage

3"^ stage

81

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.25 (a): Predicted Csbod. ï in a 3-stage RBC a i O rganic Loading = 8.7 g/m .d, fo r Case II, Paolini[37], when the influent flow rate is increased one and h a lf times and the concentration o f the soluble BOD 5 is doubled. Steady state achieved after upset = 322 hours Steady state concenti-ation at the exit o f RBC = 10.4 g/m^
1800 1600 1400 1200

E
1000

h. Ü

B O O 600 400 200

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.25 (b): Predicted C 0 2 , r in a 3-stage RBC at O rganic Loading = 8.7 g/nT.d, fo r Case II , when the in flu e n t flo w rate is increased one and h a lf times and the concentration o f the soluble BO D 5 is doubled. Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 8.84x10"'° g /n f
1.E+01 1.E+00 1.E-01 1 .E -0 2 1.E-03 1.E-04
1 .E -0 5

I I
S'

1.E-06 1.E-07 1.E-08 1.E-09 1.E-10 1.E-12 200 300 400 500 600 700

T im e (hr)

1

' stage 82

staK

stase

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.26 (a): Predicted Csbod.T in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m".d, fo r Case II, Paolini [37], when both the influ e n t flow rate and the concentration o f the soluble B O D 5 is doubled. Steady state achieved after upset = 337 hours Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 44.2 g/m^
1800 1600 1400 -

I

1200
1000
-

I

800
600 400

200

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

T im e (hr)

Figure 5.26 (b): Predicted C 0 2 , t in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m '.d, fo r Case II, when both the influ e n t flo w rate and the concentration o f the soluble B O D 5 is doubled. Steady state concentration at the exit o f RBC = 3.87x10"'° g/nr'
1.E+01
1.E+00 1.E-01

1.E-02

1.E-03
E-04 E-05 1.E-06

U

1.E-07

S '

1.E-08 1.E-09
1.E-10

1.E-1 1
1.E-12

00

400

700

T im e (hr)

stase

2

stage

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The profiles with respect to time for the consumption o f the soluble BOD 5 and oxygen in the bio-film, for upsets in the system, when the influent flow is doubled at an organic load of 8.7 g/m".d, are provided in Figure 5.27. In the bio-film , the consumption o f the substrate follows the same trend as that observed for the consumption of the substrate in the trough, as shown in Figure 5.23 (a). The concentration o f oxygen in the bio-film is readily consumed in each stage, as shown in Figure 5.27 (b).

84

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 5.27 (a): Predicted Csb«d, bf in a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/m^.d, for Case II, Paolini [37], when the influent flow rate is doubled. Steady state concentration at the exit of RBC - 4.6 g/m^
1800 1600 1400 -

cC

I
Ü

1000 800

-

I

600 400
200

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Tim e (hr)

Figure 5.27 (b); Predicted Coz, BFin a 3-stage RBC at Organic Loading = 8.7 g/ra'.d, for Case II, when the influent flow rate is doubled.

100

200

3 00

400

500

600

7 00

T im e (hr)

All four-stage values are overlapping

85

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 6
6.1 Conclusion

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

A dynamic model to predict the concentration of soluble BOD5 in Rotating Biological Contactor systems was simulated. The model was solved using the Runge Kutta

Fehlberg adaptive step size control algorithm [43]. The results show a decrease in the concentration o f soluble BOD5 in each stage of the RBC. For Case I Alvarez-Cuenca [5], the four-stage RBC takes 35 hours to reach the steady state at an organic load of 12.7 g/m'.d. For Case 1 1 Paolini [37], the three-stage RBC takes 123 hours to reach the steady state at an organic load o f 11.1 g/m'.d. The dynamic model results were found to be

compatible with the results o f two different experimental studies [5,37].

The simulated model was also applied to find the changes in behavior o f the system due to variations in the upstretmi variables. The variables considered for both studies [5,37], were the influent flow rate, and the concentration o f the soluble BOD5 in the influent wastewater. The model simulation provides an approximation in time to achieve the steady state under conditions o f upsets in the inlet flow rate, and the inlet concentration o f the soluble BOD5.

6.2

Future Work

The model has neglected the effect that rotational speed o f the disk o f rotating biological contactor has on the following important factors: The thickness o f the liquid film

carried by the disk, the rate of oxygen transfer into the liquid in the trough, the mass transfer coefficient from the liquid in the trough to the submerged bio-film , the shearing

86

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

action and its effect on sloughing, and the physical properties o f the bio-film and the suspension of the solids in the trough.

The mass transfer coefficient varies considerably with the speed o f rotation. Paolini et ah, in their work [37], provided the relationship between mass transfer coefficient and the rotational speed as follows.
=

0 . 012» 4- 0.016

( 12)
is the substrate transfer coefficient into the liquid film (m/hr) and

In this equation,

n is the rotational speed o f the disk (rev/hr).
Applying this relationship into the simulated model for the lab scale RBC unit [37], the behavior o f the treating unit can be examined for the consumption o f the substrate, as the number o f revolutions o f the disk varies. The dynamic model can also be extended to find the substrate consumption in the bio film by considering the consumption o f soluble substrate along axial and tangential directions o f the bio-film attached to the disk of a rotating biological contactor.

87

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

References

1. http://www.ecotechnos.com [05-02-20041 2. Tchobanoglous G., Burton F.L., Stensel H.D., 2003. Wastewater Engineering,

Treatment and Reuse. 4'*' ed., Metcalf & Eddy Inc., Dubuque, lA : M cGraw-Hill.
3. Alvarez-Cuenca, M., Smith, T, and Coelho, V.A. 1993. Rotating Biological Contactors: The Canadian Experience. Third international conference on Waste

Management in the Chemical and Petrochemical Industries, New Technologies and Practices fo r Waste Minimization. Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. October 20-23.
4. WEE 2000. Aerobic Fixed Growth Reactors, a special Edition by Aerobic Fixed

Growth Reactors Task force o f the WEF under the direction o f Municipal subcommittee o f the technical practice committee. Alexandria, VA.
5. Alvarez-Cuenca, M., 1996. Nitrification-Dénitrification Studies in Rotating

Biological Contactors (RBC). Report submitted to the Ontario M inistry o f the Environment and Energy. (Program ET 340). Ryerson University, Toronto.
6

. Tchobanoglous G., 1991. Wastewater Engineering, treatment, disposal, and

reuse. M etcalf & Eddy Inc., New York, M cGraw-Hill.
7. Arvin, E., and Harremoes, P., 1990. Concepts and Models for B io-film Performance. "Water Sci. Technol.",11, 171.
8. S aw yer, C .N ., 1973. N itr ific a tio n and D é n itrific a tio n F a c ilitie s , W astew ater

Treatment, U.S.EPA Technol. Transfer, Cincinnati, Ohio.

9. Brenner, R.C., 1984. Design Information on Rotating Biological Contactors.
EPA-600/2-84-106, U.S. EPA, Cincinnati, Ohio.

88

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

10. Scheible, O.K., and Novak, J.J., 1980. Upgrading Primary Tanks w ith Rotating Biological Contactors. Proc. yo/. //,

Natl. Symp. Rotating Biol. Contactor Technol.,

Champion, Pa.

11. Chou, C.C., 1978. Oxygen Transfer Capacity o f Clean Media Pilot Reactors at South Shore. Autrotrol Corp. memorandum, Milwaukee, Wis. 12. Reh, C.W., 1977. An. Approach to Design o f RBCs for Treatment o f Municipal Wastewater. Paper presented at Am. Sac. Civ. Eng. Natl. Environ. Eng. Conf., Nashville, Tenn. 13. Weston, Inc., 1985. Review o f Current RBC (Rotating Biological Contactor) Performance and Design Procedures. EPA-600/2-85-033, U.S. EPA, Water Eng. Res. Lab., Cincinnati, Ohio. 14. LYCO, Inc., 1992. Rotating Biological Surface (RBS) Wastewater Equipment. RBS Design Manual, Marlboro, N.J. 15. Palma Di, L, M erli C., Paris M., and Petrucci E., 2003. A Steady State Model for the Evaluation o f Disk Rotational Speed influence on RBC Kinetic: Model Presentation. "Bioresoiirce Technology''. 8 6 : 193.

16. Harremoes, P., and Henze, M., 1995. Biofilters. In: (Biological and Chemical Processes). Sperling, Berlin.

Wastewater Treatment

17. Williamson, K., and McCarty, P.L., 1976. Model o f Substrate utilization by Bacterial Films. "J. Water Pollution Control Federation",AS, 9. 18. Kornegay, B.H., and Andrews, I.E., 1968. Kinetics o f Fixed film Biological Reactors. " J. Water Pollution Control Federation ", 40, R460.

89

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

19. Clark J.H., 1978. Performance o f a Rotating Biological C c

under Varying

Wastewater Flow. "7. Water Pollution Control Federation ", 50, 896. 20. Spengel, D. B., and Dzombak, D. A., 1992. Bio-kinetic Modeling and Scale-up considerations for Rotating Biological Contactors. "Water Environ. R e s", 64,

223.
21. Watanabe, Y., 1985. Mathematical Modelling for N itrification and

Dénitrification in Rotating Biological Contactors.

Mathematical models in

Biological Wastewater Treatment. Jorgensen, S., and Gromiel, M. Elsevier, New York, pp. 419.
22. Gujer, W., and Boiler, M ., 1990. A mathematical Model for Rotating Biological Contactors. "Water Science and Technology", 22(1/2), 53. 23. Famularo, J. Mueller, J. A. and Mulligan, T., 1978. Application o f Mass Transfer to Rotating Biological Contactors. "J. Water Pollution Control Federation ", 50,

653.
24. Williamson, K., and McCarty, P.L., 1976. Verification studies o f the B io-film Model for Bacterial substrate utilization.

"J.

Water Pollution

Control

Federation", 48, 281.
25. Gujer, W., and Wanner, O., 1990. Modeling Mixed Population Bio-film s. In Bio-

films. W.G. Characklis and K. C. Marshall (Eds.), W iley Interscience, New York,

N.Y., 397.
26. Watanabe, Y., and Ishiguro, M ., 1978. Dénitrification Kinetics in a Submerged Rotating Biological Disk Unit. "Progress Water Technology", 10(5/6), 187.

90

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

27. Watanabe, Y., Bravo, H., and Nishidome, K., 1982. Simulation o f N itrification and its Dynamics in a Rotating Biological Contactor.

"Water Science and

Technology", 14, 811.
28. Antonie R. L. and Welch F. M ., 1969. Preliminary results o f a Novel Biological Process fo r treating Dairy Wastes, Proc. 24^ Purdue Ind. Waste Conf., pp. 115. 29. Weng C.N and M o lo f A.H., 1974. N itrification in the Biological Fixed film Rotating D isk System. "J. Water Pollution Control Federation", 46, 1674. 30. Bintaja, H., Van Der Erve, J., and Boelhouwer, C., 1975. Oxygen Transfer in a Rotating Disk Treatment Plant. "Water Research " , 9, 1147. 31. MatsuoT., and Yamamoto, K., 1985. Mathematical Models for the Oxygen

Transfer Processes in a Rotating Biological Contactor. Mathematical Models in

Biological Wa.stewater Treatment. Second Edition, Jorgensen, S., and Gromiel, M. Elsevier, New York, pp. 357.
32. Zeevalkink, J., Kelderman, P., Visser, D., and Boelhouwer, C., 1979. Physical Mass Transfer in a Rotating Disk Gas-Liquid Contactor. "Water Research", 13, pp.913.

33. Kornegay B.H., 1975.

Modeling and Simulation o f Fixed film Biological

Reactors for Carbonaceous Waste Treatment in Mathematical Modeling fo r

Water Pollution Control Processes Edited by Kienath T.M. & Wanielista M. Ann arbor Science, Ann Arbor, Mich., pp.271. 34. Grady, C.P., Daigger, G., and Lim, H., 1999. Biological Wastewater Treatment. Second Edition, Revised and Expanded. Marcel Dekker, New York.

91

Reproduced with permission o f the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout permission.

35. Hansford, G., Andrews, J. Grieves, G., and Carr, D., 1978. A Steady State Model for the Rotating Biological Disk Reactor. "Water Research " , 12, 855. 36. Grady, C.P.L. Jr. and Lim, H.C., 1980. Performance. A Conceptual Model o f RBC

Proceedings, First National Symposium/Workshop on Rotating

Biological Cofitactor Technology, E. D. Smith, R.D. M iller, and Y.C. Wu, eds. University o f Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, pp.829.
37. Paolini A.E., Sebastinani, E.and Variali, G., 1978. Development o f Mathematical Models for the Treatment o f an Industrial Wastewater by means o f Biological Rotating Disk Reactors. ``WaterResearch", 13, pp.751. 38. Kornegay B.H. & Andrews I.E., 1969. Application o f continuous culture theory to the trickling filte r process. Proc. 24''' Purdue Ind. Waste Conf., pp. 1398. 39. Grieves C.G., 1972. Dynamic and steady state models fo r the rotating biological

disk reactor, Ph.D Thesis, Clemson University.
40. Kornegay B.H., 1969.

The characteristics and kinetics a ffix e d film biological

reactors, Ph.D Thesis, Clemson University.
41. Hoehn R.C., 1970. The effects o f thickness on the structure and metabolLwi o f

bacterial films, Ph.D Thesis, University o f Missouri, Columbia.
42. Piel K.M . and Gaudy A.P., 1971. Kinetic constants for aerobic growths o f microbial populations selected with various single compounds and with

municipal wastes as substrates, "Appl. Microbiol", 21, 253. 43. Chapra S. C., Canale R. P., 2002. Numerical Methods fo r Engineers With

Software and Programming Applications. 4''' edition. Boston; M cG raw -H ill.

92

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

APPENDICES Appendix A
RUNGE KUTTA FEHLBERG METHOD:
The fourth and fifth-order algorithm for Runge-Kutta method w ith Cash-Carp approach is as follows:

The fourth-order Runge-Kutta method:
Yi+i   = Yi + a h w h ere

h = step size

a ----(k I + 2 k , + 2 k-^ + k^)

In this equation k,= f(x!O h )

k ] - f ( X j + --h,yj + --kjh)

k) =f(x, +-h,y,. +-k;h)
k4 = f ( X j , y i -f-k^h)

The fifth-order Runge-Kutta method:
Ym = Y i + a h

where:

93

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

h = Stepsize

a

+32k; +12k, +32k; + 7 k J

In this equation k, = f ( X | , y i )

k j = f(X j + ^ h ,Y j + ^ k ,h )

k] - f ( X i + --h,y| + - k , h + - k 2 h )
4 o o

k 4 = f(X| + ^ h ,y ; - y k . h + k . h )

k , - f(Xj + --h,yj + -- k|h + -- k^h) 4 1o lu

kg - f ( X | +h,y,. - y k , h + ^ k 2 h + -- k 2 h - - ÿ - k ^ h + y k g h )

The Cash-Carp Runge-Kutta method:
Yw =y,- +ah h = Stepsize

a = ( _ ! Z

378

_ k , 4 ^ k , Æ

621

^

594 ^

k , 4 ^ k , )

1771

for the 4`^ order algorithm

and for the 5'^ order algorithm 94

Reproduced w ith permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

, 2825 , ^^ 27648

18575. '^ 4 8 3 8 4 ^

. 13525,^ , 55296

277 14336 ^

l|r ^ 4 ^

In this equation

k 1 --f (x i , y i )

k.2 = f ( X j + --h , Y i + --k,h)

k ^ = f(x ,+ -^ h .y ,+ ^ k ,h + ^ k ,h )

k+ = f(x.,+ |h ,Y i

+

k.,

+ ^ h , Y ; - - ^ k , h + - | k , h ' -- k,h )

7 1631 , , 175, . ^ 575 k. =f(x, + - h , y , + -- k,h + ~ k ,h + -- k,h
+ j!2Z lk . h + ^ k , h ) 110592 4096

95

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

A P P E N D IX B

FO RM ULAE:

The following formula was used for the calculation of finding the flow rate o f the influent wastewater stream at an organic loading.

Flow = (organic loading x disk surface area)/ soluble BOD

The mass transfer coefficient values for oxygen were calculated using the following formula and used in numerical algorithm for simulation.

k = D iffusivity / length o f the biofilm

96

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

APPENDIX C SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
The sensitivity analysis was carried out by changing the values o f the half saturation constant for soluble BOD and maximum specific growth rate o f the attached biomass for the four-stage RBC pilot plant. The values o f the half saturation constant and maximum specific growth rate, at which the sensitivity analysis was carried out for the four-stage pilot plant, are provided below.

Value
Ks [19] Base Case jU [19] Base Case Ks (25% increased) Ks (25% decreased)
(25% increased)

L' stage
431

stage 3 '" '* stage 546
0.16 32

4"*stage
8

0.18 538.75 323.25 0.225
0.135

0.08
40 24
0 .1

0.0125
10

682.5 409.5
0.2

6

0.015625 0.009375

// (25% decreased)

0T2

(106

The results obtained from the numerical solution o f differential equations by introducing these param eters, at an organic load o f 12.7 g/m'.d for case I study are provided in the following table.

97

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Stead y-state Values of Ks and |j. Cone of SBOD5 at 1'' stage (g/nf)

Steady-state Cone of SBOD5 at 2"" stage (g/m^)

Steady-state Cone of sBODs at 3"" stage (g/m^)

Steady-state Cone of sBODs at 4 "' stage (g/m^)

[19] Base Case

124

73.5

8.41

2.19

Ks (25%
141 increased)

90.8

13.2

4.4

K,(25%
109 decreased)

56.9

4.8

0.9

X25% 109
increased)

57.8

5.0

1 .0

X25% 144
decreased)

95.7

16.4

6.5

Similarly for the three-stage lab scale RBC unit, the results obtained from the numerical solution o f differential equations by intro^'chig the different values o f the parameters for half saturation constant and maximum specific growth rate, at an organic load o f g/nr.d are provided in the following table.
1 1 .1

98

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Steady-state Values of Ksundjx Cone of sBODs at stage (g/m^)
[37] Base Case

Steady-state Cone of sBODs at 2"'' stage (g/m^)

Steady-state Cone of sBODs at 3'"'' stage (g/m^)

236

20.1

L82

(25% 281
increased)

30.2

3.16

X, (25% 187
decreased)

0.80

0.80

^(25% 180
increased)

0.85

0.85

^(25% 337
decreased)

40.2

4.5

It is observed that the concentration o f soluble BOD increases by increasing the value of Ks in each stage from the results of concentration o f soluble BOD at referenced values [19], and decreases by decreasing the value o f Ks. Whereas the concentration of soluble BOD decreases by in crea sing the value o f maximum specific growth rate, in each stage, and increases by decreasing the value of maximum specific growth rate. Also, the results of concentration o f soluble BOD, by changing the two parameters o f half saturation constant and maximum specific growth rate, do not deviate much, in each stage. 99

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

