NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI
R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n o f th e cop yrigh t ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm ission o f th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

SORPTION OF PHARMACEUTICALS IN AQUEOUS SOLUTION USING INSOLUBLE {3-CYCLODEXTRIN POLYMERS

By

Atefeh S. Mirani B. Applied Chemistry, Tehran University, 1994

A thesis Presented to Ryerson University In partial fulfillment of the Requirements for tire degree of Master of Applied Science In Chemical Engineering

Toronto, Ontari i, Canada, 2004 ©Atefeh S. Mirani 2004

PROPERTY OF RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

R eproduced with p erm ission o f th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

UMI Number; EC52932

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52932 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

Ryerson University jpqnires the signature of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

NAME

ADDRESS

DATE

1 1 1

R ep rod uced with perm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

ABSTRACT
Sorption o f Pharmaceuticals in aqueous Solution Using Insoluble /3-cyclodextrin Polymers, Atefeh S. Mirani, Ryerson University, 2004, Master o f Applied Science in Chemical Engineering.

Present study was aimed at evaluating the ability of insoluble p-cyclodextrin polymers (PCDps) to recover pharmaceuticals from aqueous solutions. Two different

p-- cyclodextrin polymers, one composed of epicblorobydrin-crosslinked p-cyclodextrin and the other a p-cyclodextrin-polyurethane, were prepared by condensation

polymerization and addition polymerization of pCD using epichlorohydrin (EP) and diisocyanatohexane (HDI) as crosslinking agents, respectively. The contaminants tested were naphthalene, naproxen, nabumetone, 2-naphthol, pyrene and propranolol which represent model pharmaceutical molecules. The adsorption isotherms of the organics and pCDPs were well described by Freundlich isotherm equations. The trapping efficiencies were determined using fluorescence spectroscopy as the analytical technique. Based on the results o f this study, it was found that the epichlorohydrin-crosslinked p-cyclodextrin polymers were more efficient in adsorption of organic contaminants both in batch and column systems when compared with P-cyclodextrin-polyurethane polymers. Reasons for these differences are discussed.

IV

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

AKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It is my pleasure to thank the following people who made this thesis possible. I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my thesis advisor. Dr. Christopher Evans for his encouragement, patience and guidance as well as for financial support and for providing me with the opportunity to pursue the research project that I was most interested in. I would like to thank the Ontario Ministry of Education and Ryerson University ib r the financial supports. I would also like to express my gratitude to my family for the ongoing care and warmth, which they have offered over the years. 1 am forever thankfiil to my parents for their endless love and encouragement when it w^as needed. My husband's continuous enthusiasm and my daughter's sweet smile have been inspiring to me in my work and in helping me to finish this thesis.

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

' To myfam ity 'Whose Cove 6 Ï support have made this journey possihte

VI

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT AKNOWLEDGEMENTS LIST OF FIGURES LIST OF TABLES CHAPTER 1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 INTRODUCTION Preliminaries Pharmaceuticals and their Properties Evidence for Pharmaceuticals in the Environment Pharmaceutical Sources Toxic Effects due to Medical Substances in the Environment Prevention of Pharmaceutical Pollution Environmental Fate Standard Methods for Pharmaceutical Determination Pharmaceuticals: Separation and Removal from Water 1.9.1 Primary Treatment for Removing Pharmaceuticals from Wastewater 1.9.1.1 Microbial Degradation 1.9.1.2 Sorption to Filterable Solid (Sand Filtration) 1.9.1.3 Flocculation 1.9.2 Advanced Wastewater Treatment 1.9.2.1 Chemical Oxidation

iv v x xiii 1 1 4 5 8 12 15 17 18 21

21 21 23 23 25 25

vu

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

1.9.2.2 Adsorption on Activated Carbon 1.9.2.3 Membrane Filtration Processes 1.9.2.3.IMicrofiltration 1.9.2.3.2 Reverse Osmosis 1.10 Obj ective o f this Thesis CH APTER 2 ADSORBENTS CONTAINING CYCLODEXTRINS 2.1 Cyclodextrins (CDs): an Overview 2.2 Inclusion Properties 2.3 Application of CDs 2.4 Cyclodextrin Polymers 2.4.1 Epichlorohydrin-Crosslinked p-Cyclodextrin Polymers (pCDEP) 2.4.2 p-- Cyclodextrin-Polyurethane Polymers (PCDPU) 2.4.3 Advantages o f Cyclodextrin Polymers CH APTER 3 EXPERIM ENTAL 3.1 Materials 3.2 Instrumentation 3.3 Methodologies for Polymer Preparation 3.3.1 Preparation and Characterization of pCDEP 3.3.2 Preparation and Characterization o f pCDPU 3.4 Analysis o f Model Pollutants

30 33 33 34 38 40 40 45 48 49

50 55 58 60 60 62 62 62 63 64

V lll

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

3.5

Experimental Procedures 3.5.1 Batch Experiments 3.5.2 Packed Column Experiments

64

66 66 67 69 69 69

3.6 CH APTER 4 4.1

Re-use o f P -Cyclodextrin Polymers RESULTS Epichlorohydrin Crosslrnked p-Cyclodextrin Polymer (pCDEP) 4.1.1 Characterization of Polymer 4.1.2 Adsorption o f Model Pollutants from Water in Batch Experiments 4.1.3 Adsorption of Model Pollutants from Flowing Water

71 77 80 80

4.2

P-Cyclodextrin-Polyurethane Polymer (pCDPU) 4.2.1 Characterization of Polymer 4.2.2 Adsorption o f Model Pollutants from Water in Batch Experiments 4.2.3 Adsorption o f Model Pollutants from Flowing Water

82 87 90 102 104 105

CHAPTER 5 CH A PTER 6 CH APTER 7 REFRENCES APPENDIX A APPENDIX B

DISCUSSION CONCLUSIONS RECOM ENDATIONS

Calibration Curves for Model Pollutants Freundlich Adsorption Isotherm o f Model Pollutants on pCDEP Polymer

113

120

IX

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

APPENDIX C

Packed CoIvunn Treatment of Model Pollutants on
pCDEP Polymer 127

APPENDIX D

Frf;Uûdlich Adsorption Isotherm of Model Pollutants on (3CDPU Polymer 134

APPENDIX E

Packed Column Treatment of Model Pollutants on pCDPU Polymer 141

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n o f th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

L IST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.1 Possible sources and pathways for the occurrence o f pharmaceutical residues in the aquatic environment. Figure 1.2 Schematic illustration o f the two types o f flocculation: (a) microflocculation and (b) macroflocculation. Figure 1.3 Schematic representation o f advanced oxidation involving the use o f a) ozone and hydrogen peroxide, b) ozone and UV radiation. Figure 1.4 Macropore, mesopore, micropore, and submicropore adsorption sites on activated carbon. Figure 1.5 a) Mechanism o f reverse osmosis and b) flow scheme o f a commercial reverse osmosis unit. Figure 2.1 a) Molecular structure of cyclodextrin, b) scheme of two glucopyranose units that illustrate the oc-(l,4) glycosidic linkage and C-1(D) chair conformation and c) position o f primary and secondary hydroxyls on CD. Figure 2.2 a) Molecular models o f a , P and y cyclodextrins viewed from the secondary hydroxyl side of the toros; and b) their dimensions. Figure 2.3 Figure 2.4 43 41 36 32 29 24 9

Cyclodextrin forming a complex with an aromatic organic compound. 46 Synthesis o f epichlorohydrin-crosslinked 3-cyclodextrin polymers. 51

XI

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

Figure 2.5

a) Likage o f EP to primary hydroxyl groups o f pCD; b) Molecular model o f epichlorohydrin-crosslinked p-cyclodextrin polymers. 54 56

Figure 2.6 Figure 2.7

Preparation o f p-- Cyclodextrin-polyurethane polymers. a) Linkage o f HDI to primary hydroxyl groups o f pCD; b)Molecular model o f p-Cyclodextrin-polyurethane polymers.

57 67 70

Figure 3.1 Figure 4.1 Figure 4.2

Schematic illustration of experimental procedures. IR spectrum o f pCDEP obtained at 1/29 pCD/EP. Fluorescence spectra of 2-naphthol solutions at different concentrations before shaking with one g pCDEP polymer for 24 hours.

72

Figure 4.3

Fluorescence spectra of 2-naphthol solutions at different concentrations after shaking with one g pCDEP polymer for 24 hours. 73 75

Figure 4.4 Figure 4.5

Freundlich adsorption isotherm o f 2-naphthol on pCDEP. Fluorescence spectra o f naphthalene influent and effluents from the pCDEP column.

76 81

Figure 4.6 Figure 4.7

IR spectrum o f pCDPU obtained at 1/8 pCD/HDI. Fluorescence spectra o f nabumetone solutions at different concentrations before shaking with one g pCDPU for 24 hours.

83

Figure 4.8

Fluorescence spectra o f nabumetone solutions at different concentrations after shaking with one g pCDPU for 24 hours. 84 85

Figure 4.9

Freundlich adsorption isotherm of nabumetone on pCDPU.

xn

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

Figure 4.10

Fluorescence spectra o f naproxen influent and effluents from the pCDPU column. 88

Figure 5.1

Comparison o f sorption capacities of model pollutants by pCDEP and pCDPU polymer in Freundlich adsorption tests. 91

Figure 5.2

Comparison of trapping efiiciencies of pCDEP and pCDPU polymer in packed column treatment. 92

Figure 5.3

Comparison between n values for pCDEP and pCDPU polymer in Freundlich adsorption tests. 95 98

Figure 5.4

Bond lengths in the naphthalene molecule.

xm

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

L IST OF TABLES

Table 1.1

Concentration o f different drugs (mg/1) as measured in wastewater, surface water, groundwater, and drinking water. 7 19 27

Table 1.2 Table 1.5 Table 1.6

Fate of selected medical compounds. Selected target pharmaceuticals. Average concentrations of selected contaminants in the raw water and in permeate and removal rate of reverse osmosis unit.

37 44 61 65

Table 2.1 Table 3.1 Table 3.2 Table 4.1

Chemical and physical properties of various cyclodextrins. Molecular structures o f model pollutants. Excitation and emission wavelengths for model pollutants. Regression equations o f log q vs. log Ce for Freundlich isotherms on pCDEP polymer as absorbent.

76

Table 4.2

Efficiencies of trapping of model pollutants by |3CDEP in packed column treatment. 79

Table 4.3

Regression equations of log q vs. log Ce for Freundlich isotherms on pCDPU polymer as absorbent. 86

Table 4.4

Efficiencies o f trapping of model pollutants by pCDPU in packed column treatment. 89

X IV

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Preliminaries The continued exponential growth in human population has created a corresponding increase in the demand for the earth's limited supply of fresh water. Thus, protecting the integrity o f our water resources is one of the most essential environmental issues of the 21®' century. Recent decades have brought increasing concerns for potential adverse human and ecological health effects resulting from the production, use, and disposal of numerous chemicals that offer improvements in industry, agriculture, medical treatment and even common household conveniences. It is now quite apparent that little information exists about the extent of environmental occurrence, transport, and ultimate fate of many pharmaceuticals af:er their intended use. One reason for this general lack o f data is that, until recently, there have been few analytical methods capable of detecting these compounds at the low concentrations, which might be expected in the environment [1,2,3]. Researchers have studied the detrimental effects of chemical substances on the environment where they may contaminate drinking water and pose a threat to aquatic wildlife [2]. In the 1970s, for the first time, pharmaceuticals in the environment (hormones in particular) were the subject of scientific interest and public awareness [4]. During the 1980s, there was only little interest in this topic. Since the middle of the 1990s, awareness o f pharmaceuticals in the environment has been growing [3]. Parallel to this, the discussion of risks associated with endocrine disrupting (sometimes called endocrine modulating) substances (EDS) and non-hormone pharmaceuticals, like lipid

1

R eproduced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

lowering agents and others, came into focus. Since then, several research activities have been initiated relating to EDS, beginning in the USA, and for other pharmaceuticals mainly in Europe. Pharmaceutical substances have been detected in sewage, the effluents of sewage treatment plants, surface water, manure and soil since the 1980s [3]. Pharmaceuticals in a wastewater discharge can come from many sources ranging from domestic sewage systems to large industrial sewage systems. Unused drugs may be thrown into the trash, ultimately ending up in ground water or surface water, where they may affect aquatic life and drinking water quality Some of the more common sources appear to include homes, hospitals, manufacturing facilities, drug stores and fish farms. Veterinary pharmaceuticals may also enter water via excretion from animals onto the soil [5.2]. Pharmaceutical drugs may be considered to be the best investigated and characterized man-made chemicals. The millions of doses of prescription drugs that people swallow annually to combat cancer, pain, depression and other ailments do not disappear harmlessly into their digestive systems. Being able to track these drugs is important because many prescription medicines are not rendered biologically inactive when they pass through the body. Most pharmaceuticals have not been examined for adverse environmental effects. Many of them are designed to cause physiologic effects. Consequently an impact on aquatic and terrestrial organisms would not be surprising [5.2]. While, the concentration of individual drugs in the aquatic environment could be low (they are often referred to as micropollutants), the presence of numerous drugs sharing a specific mode o f action could lead to significant effects through additive

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

exposure. Research has shown that selected chemical combinations can exhibit additive or synergistic toxic effects, with even compounds of different modes of action having interactive toxicological effects [1,6]. Another factor is that pharmaceutical

concentrations that have no effect on humans may hurt lower life forms, including primary producers like algae. Much is yet to be learned pertaining to the effects on humans, plants and animals exposed to low-level concentrations of pharmaceuticals and about the potential interactive effects that may occur from complex mixtures of those compounds in the environment [I]. Identifying such emerging risks is reflected in one of the top five goals of the strategic plan 2000 for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (U.S.EPA) Offrce o f Research and Development [6]. As the problem of pharmaceuticals in the environment gets more pronounced, scientists are trying to find cost effective technologies to remove them from wastewater. Although pharmaceuticals are of concern, conventional sewage treatment systems may not completely remove them from water. Environment Canada has reported high levels of estrogens and other birth control compounds in the effluent of sewage treatment plants nationwide [5]. Current technologies for polishing water such as activated carbon and reverse osmosis suffer from limitations [3]. However, some recent work has investigated the use o f cyclodextrin polymers to trap organic pollutants. For example, phthalic acid esters were found to be stror.tii^ adsorbed by columns of epichlorohydrin-crosslinked pcyclodextrin (pCDEP) [6]. The goal o f this study is to assess if it is possible to extend the usefulness of the p-cyclodextrin polymer approach to pharmaceuticals. The set of model pharmaceuticals to be tested has been carefully selected to reflect a range of compounds o f current concern.

R ep rod uced with perm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

1.2 Pharmaceuticals and their Properties Pharmaceuticals are bioactive chemicals used for tire diagnosis, treatment

(cure/mitigation), alteration, or prevention of disease, and control of the health condition o f the human body [5]. These substances may be divided into those used by humans and veterinary medicines. Veterinary pharmaceuticals are physiologically highly active substances used in animal husbandry. They are used for combating parasites, prevention and treatment of bacterially transmitted diseases, growth promoters for livestock production, coccidiostatica used in poultry production, or as feed additives in fish farms [7,8]. Human pharmaceuticals can be classified according to their biological effects but also "crosswise" according to chemical structure. Normally, they are classified according to their therapeutic purpose (e.g. antibiotics, analgesics, antineoplastics, anti

inflammatory substances, antihistaminic agents, contrast media, etc.). Classification according to chemical structure is used mainly for subgroups of the active substances, e.g. P-lactams, cephalosporins, penicillins or quinolones and others within the group of antibiotics. A closely related chemical structure is accompanied by an identical or at least similar mode of action. To further complicate matters, besides the active substances, formulation adjuvants and, in some instances, pigments and dyes are also drug components [3]. It also must be noted that the active ingredient in a drug may or may not be the actual formulated parent compound. For example, prodrugs such as the esters of clofibric acid, a metabolite o f certain lipid regulators, are converted firom pharmacologically inactive parent compounds to the physiologically active form in vivo. With the exception

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

o f antibiotics and antineoplastics, the objective for most drug classes is simply to control symptoms and not to actually cure conditions. As such, many drugs are taken for very long periods, sometimes a good portion of the user's lifetime [6].

1.3 Evidence for Pharmaceuticals in the Environment The environmental distribution of pharmaceuticals largely reflects their production volume. The West is the major producer and consumer of drugs. In some investigations carried out in Austria, Brazil, Canada, Croatia, England, Germany, Greece, Italy, Spain, Switzerland, the Netherlands and the U.S., more than 80 pharmaceuticals and several drug metabolites, have been detected in the aquatic environment [9]. Recent investigations showed the exposure of rivers and creeks to a wide range of pharmaceuticals from many medicinal classes (e.g. betablockers, sympathomimetics, antiphlogestics, lipid regulators, antiepileptics, antibiotics, vasodilators) [10].

Environment Canada has reported high levels of estrogens and other birth control compounds in the effluent of sewage treatment plants nationwide. On Iona Island (British Columbia, Canada) Rogers et al. identified the two anti-inflammatory drugs ibuprofen and naproxen in wastewater [10]. Similarly, low levels of the anti-cholesterol drug clofibric acid, the antiflammatory naproxen, and the hormone estrone were detected in water samples from the Mississippi River and Louisiana's Lake Ponchetrain [5]. Concentrations of some selected drugs were measured in wastewater, surface water, ground water, and drinking water in Europe. Results are given in . able 1.1. Recent results reveal the concentration of clofibric acid (the active metabolite from the lipid regulators clofibrate, etofibrate, and theofibrate) ranged from 0.8 p g f' to 2.0 pgT' in raw

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

sewage and activated sludge effluent [3]. Some investigations to prove the existence of drugs in sewage treatment plant (STP) effluents were carried out in the mid-1980s, mainly in Great Britain [3]. In Germany the first observations of a lipid-lowering agent were reported in 1992 [3]. The concentration in the surface waters and the STP effluents were in the ngp' to pgi"' range for this compound. Thus, there is clear evidence of a wide variety o f different active drug substances in the aquatic environment as wt I as in liquid manure and in the soil. Moreover, the data show that active substances are at least not completely eliminated in sewage treatment or biodegraded in the environment [3,6,10].

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission o f th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

Table 1.1 Concentration o f different drugs (mg/1) as measured in wastewater, surface water, groundwater, and drinking water in Europe [3].

Active substance/ Group Analgesics/ Antirheumatic agents

Wastewater

Surface

Ground Water (GW) Drinking Water (DW)

24 20

Up to 0.5 Up to 0.5 Up to 0.5 0.006 (DW)

Antibiotics

Approx. 1 0.1-0.7 Up to 1

Up to 1.7 Up to 6* Up to 1 0.17 (DW) 0.55 7.5 (GW) 0.07 (DW)

Lipid lowering agents

1.7 up to 1

Psychopharmacological Agents Cytostatic agents

<1 Up to 6 .1 Up to 5 Up to 0.02 Up to 4*

X-ray contrast media

9* Up to 3.1 * 0.01-0.15

Up to 0.07

*STP-effluent (diluted by surface water).

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

1.4 Pharmaceutical Sources Pharmaceuticals can enter the environment continuously via a number of different routes. Figure 1.1 presents possible sources for the occurrence of pharmaceutical residues in the aquatic environment.

1.4.1 Residential The main source for the entry of drug compounds and tlieir metabolites into the environment is by excretion from patients treated for medical-therapeutical reasons [11]. Thousands o f tons of pharmaceutically active substances are used yearly to treat illnesses, to prevent unwanted pregnancy, or to face the stresses of modem life [12]. After having an internal curing effect somewhere in the human body, a medical substance will be excreted through urine or feces as a mixture of unconverted drug and metabolites [8,12,9,6]. Tiie extremely large populations of pet dogs and cats are recipients o f numerous drugs (e.g. antiparasitic agents, tranquilizers and antidepressants) prescribed by veterinarians m the United States and Canada. Veterinary pharmaceuticals are administrated to the animals with medication feed, via injection, or by external application. Depending on the chemical and animal species, they are excreted as the parent compound, as conjugates, or as oxidation or hydrolysis products of the parent compounds [7].

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission o f th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

ZI

-§ o a
c

§ CL
* D
CD
(fi

oe o' 3 O O "D C q'
zr
Z3 CD CD

Medicinal products for human use

Medicinal products for animal use

Excretion (hospital effluents, private households)

Waste disposal (unused medicinel

Excretion

Manure Domestic waste Municipal wastewater Sewage farms Sewage treatment plants (STP) Soil Waste disposal site

3. 3"
CD T3

s

O OE C g. O 3 0 3" g

X5

1
o c

Surface water

Ground water

* D
CD
(fi

(0
3

o'

Aqua cultures

Pharmaceutical production plants

Drinking water

Figure 1.1 Possible sources and pathways for the occurrence of pharmaceuticals residues in the aquatic environment [9].

From the literature it is known that 30 to 90% of an administrated dose o f most antibiotics to humans and animals is excreted via the urine in the form of the active substance [13]. Improper disposal of expired or unused medication to sewage systems can also contribute to environmental contamination.

1.4.2 Industrial Manufacturing facilities can be important local point sources. Some industrial products are released through regulated or unregulated industrial discharges to water resources. Hcl et al [14] describes findings and distributions o f organic compounds originating from waste from the pharmaceutical industry in the down gradient o f a landfill. The authors reported findings o f e.g. different sulfonamides (concentrations up to 5 mg/1), propylphenazone (concentration up to 4 mg/1), and 5,5-Diallylbarbituric acid

(concentration up to 0.2 mg/1). All three medical substances were used for treatment of humans between the 1940's and 1970's. As a common practice in this period, waste from pharmaceutical industries was disposed of at landfills without leachate collection systems. The chemicals may have entered the surrounding aquifers as a part of the leachates [9,6,14],

1.4.3 Public Pharmaceuticals have the potential for ubiquitous direct release into the environment, anywhere that humans live or visit. Even areas considered relatively pristine (e.g. national parks) are subject to pharmaceutical exposures, especially given that some parks have very large, aging sewage treatment systems, some of which discharge into park

10

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n o f th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

surface waters and some o f which overflow during wet weather events and infrastructure failures (e.g. Yellowstone National Park) [15]. Release o f treated and untreated hospital wastes to municipal sewage systems and also disposal by pharmacies and physicians can be other sources o f environmental contamination [6].

1.4.4 Agriculture and Aquaculture It was demonstrated that drug metabolites excreted by medicated livestock (e.g. as glucuronides) are decomposed by bacterial action in the liquid manure and reconverted into the active drugs. Due to the application of manure to agricultural soils as fertilizers, the substances may finally enter ground water via soil [3,6,8]. Animal husbandry as well as aquaculture, discharge drugs and their metabolites into the environment. In the United States, the estimated use o f antibiotics in livestock in 1985 amoimted to 8300 tonnes. In the EU, antibiotics and anthelmintics (parasiticides) are the most important groups of veterinary pharmaceuticals, both with a market volume of more than 200 million Euros in 1999. O f the total usage o f 5000 tonnes of antibiotics m Europe, 3500 tonnes are used for therapeutic purposes while the remaining 1500 tonnes are added to the feed in order to promote the growth o f farm animals [7]. Calculations have indicated that 70-80% of drugs administered m fish farms end up in the environment, and drug concentrations with antibacterial activity have been found in the sediment underneath fish farms [3,6,8].

11

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

1.5 Toxic effects due to M edical Substances in the Environm ent Traditionally, drugs were rarely viewed as potential environmental pollutants due to their low concentrations in environment. Pharmaceuticals have physico-chemical properties, which make them exhibit unwanted bio-activity in the environment. Despite this, the attention paid so far by governmental authorities to the presence o f pharmaceuticals in the environment and their possible toxic effects can be considered as negligible. Most medical substances, are metabolized to phase I or phase II metabolites before being eliminated from the body via the urine and may enter the environment as such. Phase I reactions usually consist o f enzyme catalyzed oxidation, reduction or hydrolysis, and the products are often more reactive and sometimes more toxic than the parent drug. Phase II reactions involve conjugation, which normally results in inactive compounds. Both phase I and phase II reactions changé the physical chemical behavior of the substance because metabolisation always renders the metabolites more water soluble than the parent compounds. Thus, often it is not only the parent compound, which should be the subject o f a risk assessment but also the main metabolites [ 8 ]. In addition, selected pharmaceuticals may be converted into more persistent compounds that could be transported into the environment instead of (or in addition to) their associated parent compound [1 ]. Even compounds with short environmental residence times can cause chronic exposures if they are continuously discharged into the environment. Most

pharmaceuticals have not been examined for adverse environmental effects. However, the limited data show toxicity effects o f some such compounds on environmental organisms

12

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n o f th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

not only at high concentrât' in chronic tests, e.g. toward.

,.e. in the g per liter range, but also in low concentrations phnia, algae and bacteria [16].

A t first glance, the risk o f adverse effects on humans by ingestion of pharmaceuticals from drinking water seems to be negligible. The maximum possible intake within a life span (2 liters drinking water per day over 70 years) is far below the dosages used within therapy [17]. But the problem of how to extrapolate data from high dosage short-term ingestion within a therapy to low dosage long-term ingestion remains an unresolved issue. Many o f these chemicals are designed to cause physiologic effects and even though individual concentrations o f any drug might be low, the combined concentrations from drugs sharing a common, or similar, mechanism of action could be substantial [4], In addition research has shown that selected chemical combinations can exhibit additive or synergistic toxic effects, with even compounds of different modes of action having interactive toxicological effects [18,19]. The biochemical interactions of pharmaceuticals in humans are often well known. Little is known, however, of this interplay in aquatic organisms [3,5]. The medical substances have many of the necessary properties to bioaccumulate and provoke effects in the aquatic or terrestrial ecosystems. Long-term exposure to a low concentration o f a contaminant, which does not produce immediate effects, might lead to endangerment of (one or more) species. If the infected organism is key to a food chain, the potential for disaster is high [9]. While in the human situation the concern is directed towards toxic effects, in the environmental situation it is not the fate o f the individual (mouse, bird, fish, Daphnia)

13

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

that is o f concern, rather protection o f whole species, populations or ecosystems against harmful effects [ 1 1 ]. Synthetic steroid hormones such as the estrogens 17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2) and mestranol are frequently prescribed as oral contraceptives but due to their high pharmacological potency the total amounts annually sold are relatively low. The resulting concentrations are in the low ng/l-range in sewage effluents [21]. Although the detected concentrations are very low, they are important for the aquatic environment because studies have shown that exposure of fishes to as little as 0.1 ng/1 of EE2 may provoke feminization o f males in some species of wild fishes [22,5]. The lower the target concentration needed to elicit a pharmacodynamic response, tlie higher the chances that, given a fixed contamination level, some respective effects might be induced in an environmentally exposed organism [ 1 1 ]. Due to their potential for eliciting resistance and their bacterial toxicity, antibiotic agents and disinfectants deserve special attention. The presence o f antibiotics in manure and other waste may cause the following problems: (i) If the manure is used as fertilizer it may produce adverse effects on groundnitrifying bacteria. (ii) The introduction of waste containing antibacterial drugs to treatment plants that use bacteria (e.g. methane production) may cause disruption of the purification processes. (iii) If the waste may have toxic effects on aquatic or terrestrial ecosystems it may consequently interfere with trophic chains [23].

14

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

Antibacterial resistance is a threat to the efficacy of antibacterial substances. Recently, a number of stream surveys documented the significant prevalence of native bacteria that display resistance to a wide array of antibiotics including vancomycin. Isolates fi'om wild geese near Cliicago, Illinois, are reported to be resistant to ampicillin, tetracycline, penicillin, and erythromycin [24]. All these reports could simply indicate that the natural occurrence o f antibiotic resistance in native bacterial populations is much higher than expected or that these bacteria are being selected for by the uncontrolled release of antibiotics into the environment Besides toxicity, the element of persistence of drugs in the environment is of particular importance to the assessment of the environmental significance of substances [3]. Many drugs are designed to be persistent, so they can retain their chemical structure long enough to do their therapeutic work. After excretion, such drugs also tend to persist in the environment. A landfill used by the Jackson Naval Air Station in Florida contaminated ground water with a plume of chemicals that has been moving slowly underground for more than 20 years. The drugs, pentobarbital (a barbiturate), meprobamate (a tranquilizer sold as Equanil and Miltown) and phensuximide (an anticonvulsant) are still measurable in that ground water plume [8 ].

1.6 Prevention of Pharmaceutical Pollution Pollution prevention is the use of materials, processes, or practices that reduce or eliminate the quantity and/or toxicity of wastes at the source of generation. Pollution prevention is often the most cost-effective means to reduce environmental and health risks associated with waste.

15

R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

Source reduction can be considered to be among the most preferred environmental management techniques for dealing with a waste generation problem. Strict inventory control is the most effective way to prevent usable materials from needlessly becoming wastes. Careful pharmaceutical inventory management throughout medical facilities can provide savings by avoiding the expense of disposal, especially if the pharmaceutical is deemed a hazardous waste. Medical logistics should establish contacts with the return contractor to let people return expired pharmaceuticals so manufacturers can dispose o f them properly. For wastes that caimot be reduced at the source recycling is the next best option but it should be considered that most disposable patient and animal care articles can become easily contaminated with secretions/excretions and cannot be recycled [25-28]. Combining waste streams without giving consideration to the impact on toxicity or the cost of treatment should be avoided. For example, it may make sense to separate a low-volume, high-toxicity wastewater stream from several high-volume, low-toxicity wastewater streams. Examining each waste stream at the source and determining the degree o f toxicity o f pharmaceuticals is suggested [27]. Advanced technologies to remove these drugs at their sources of discharge, thus preventing them from entering into the environment, can result in lower concentrations of pharmaceuticals in the environment. The Poseidon-project, supported by the European Union, is divided into several groups or "workpackages ". One of these groups is focused on improvement of conventional wastewater treatments, which are already widely used in most European countries for the removal of selected pharmaceuticals. In addition, this

16

R ep rod u ced with perm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

group considers source control, e.g. urine separation to be one of the most important ways to control environmental pollution [29]. A complicating factor is that some pharmaceuticals are mixtures of isomers. For a specific optically active drug, it is often only one of its optical isomers, which is responsible for the desired physiologic, therapeutic effects; the other isomers are at best inactive, or even worse, responsible for unwanted side effects. In the environment this physiologically undesirable isomer may be as significant a hazard as the physiologically desirable species. A recent trend in the pharmaceutical industry and now supported by the FDA, is to produce only the optically pure therapeutic isomer [30]. This has the potential to not only lessen side effects, but for some drugs, the total dosage can be reduced by at least 50%. This could help in reducing the burden on sewage treatment plants. Finally, appropriate training and educational programs can inform the public about pollution prevention concepts and suitable ways of disposing of unused pharmaceutical materials.

1.7 Environmental Fate For some compounds used in aquaculture, data about occurrence, fate and effects are published. The researches into occurrence, fate and effects of human pharmaceuticals in environment are just beginning [3]. The fate o f pharmaceuticals in the environment can be differentiated into sorption and degradation processes. Selected pharmaceuticals may be hydrophobic and thus may be more likely to be present in stream sediments than in streamwater. For example the low frequency o f detection for the tetracycline (chlortetacycline, doxycyclme,

17

R ep rod u ced with perm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

oxytetracycline, tetracycline) and quinolone (ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin,norfloxacin, sarafloxacin) antibiotics in water is not unexpected given their apparent affiinity for sorption to sediment [31,9]. Tetracycline, for instance, has been detected in liquid manure-treated agricultural fields at concentrations of about 10 pg/kg [29,32]. Some drugs such as X-ray contrast media, are excreted completely unchanged. It has been stated that compared to the other drug residues, the iodinated X-ray contrast media exhibited generally higher maximum levels in STP effluents [33]. In addition, selected pharmaceuticals may degrade in the environment into new, more persistent compounds that could be transported in the environment instead of, or in addition to, their associated parent compound [9,31]. Some pharmaceuticals and metabolites may also be resistant to biodégradation as some level of metabolic stability is necessary to pharmacological action. Other pharmaceuticals (or their metabolites) are highly watersoluble. When combined with a lack of biodégradation, removal during wastewater treatment will consequently be limited for such compounds. These compounds will consequently enter the aquatic environment [34]. Table 1.2 summarizes the present knowledge of the fate of some selected medical substances in the environment [8 ].

1.8 Standard Methods for Pharmaceutical Determination Until the 1990s, any concrete efforts to look for drugs in the environment would have met with limited success because the requisite chemical analysis tools with sufficiently low detection limits (i.e. nanograms per liter or parts per trillion in some cases) and sufficiently high separatory efficiencies (to resolve the drugs from the plethora of other substances) were not commonly available.

18

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

Table 1.2 Fate of selected medical compoimds [8 ].

M edical com pound Hum an treatm ent Amitrriptyline Ampicillin Aspirin Caffeine Chlorhexidine Codeine phosphate Cyclophosphamide Dextropropoxyphene Ephedrine

Therapeutic use

Process

Fate

Antidepressant Antibiotic Analgestic Psychomotor stimulans Desinfection Narcotic analgestic Antioplastic agent Anajgestic Asthma,nasal decongestion

Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation

Non-biodegradable 48%biodegradation Readily biodegradable Readily biodegradable Non-degradable Non-degradable Not degradable Not degradable Readily degradable after acclimatization

Erythromycin Estrogen

Antibiotic Hormone

Biodégradation Biodégradation

Non-degradable Persistent in sewage and lake water

Ibuprofen

Analgestic

Biodégradation

Inherently biodegradable

Ifosfamide Meprobamate Methyldopa Metronidazole Naproxen Nicotinamide Paracetamol Sulphamethoxazole Sulphassiazine Tetracycline Theobramine Theophylline Tolbutamide Clofibrate

Antioplastic agent Hyponotics Hypertension Antiprotozoal,antibiotic Analgestic Treatment o f pellagra Mild analgestic Antibiotic Antibiotic Antibiotic Hypertension Psychomotor stimulans Hypoglycaemic agent Lipid lowering agent

Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation Biodégradation

Not degradable Not degradable Non-degradable Non-degradable Non-degradable Readily degradable Readily degradable Non-degradable Non-degradable Non-degradable Readily degradable Readily degradable Non-degradable Non-degradable

19

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

other obstacles, which still exist to a large degree, are that many drugs are also highly water-soluble. This prevents the application of the straightforward, conventional sample clean-up/preconcentration methods, coupled with direct gas chromatographic separation, that have been used for years for conventional organic pollutants [6 ]. The analytical methods used to determine individual organic compounds require the use o f sophisticated instrumentation capable of measuring trace concentrations in the range of 10"'^ to 10'^ g/1. Gas chromatography (GC) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) methods are most commonly used to detect individual organic compounds. Different types o f detectors are used with each method, depending on the nature o f the compound being analyzed. Typical detectors used in conjunction with gas chromatography include electrolytic conductivity, electron capture (BCD), flame ionization (FID), and photoionization (PID). The combination of GC and mass spectrometry (GCMS) is the most popular method to determine pharmaceuticals. Typical detectors for high-performance liquid chromatography include photodiode array (PDAD) and post column reactor (PCR) [35]. The U.S. Geological survey used five newly developed analytical methods to measure concentrations of 95 organic wastewater contaminants (OWCs) in water samples from a network o f 139 streams across 30 states during 1999 and 2000 [1]. Each method was developed independently, with somewhat different data objectives, such as identifying hormones versus identifying antibiotics. Selected methods used filtered water for solid-phase extraction (SPE) with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry positiveion electrospray (LC-MS-ESI(+)) analysis, while other methods used whole-water

20

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

continuous liquid-liquid extraction (CLLE) with capillary gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis [1,36-39].

1.9 Pharmaceuticals: Separation and Removal from Water 1.9.1 Primary Treatment for Removing Pharmaceuticals from Wastevrater 1.9.1.1 Microbial Degradation The overall objectives o f the biological treatment of domestic wastewater are to transform dissolved and particulate biodegradable constituents into acceptable end products, and in some cases, remove specific trace organic constituents and compounds. For industrial wastewater, the objective is to remove or reduce the concentration of organic and inorganic compounds. For agricultural irrigation return wastewater, the objective is to remove nutrients, especially nitrogen and phosphorus that are capable of stimulating the growth o f aquatic plants. The removal of dissolved and particulate organic matter found in wastewater is accomplished biologically using a variety of microorganisms, principally bacteria. Microorganisms oxidize the dissolved organic compound into simple end products and additional biomass, as represented by the following equation [35];

V, (organic material) + V2 O 2 + V 3 N H 3 + V4 ? 0 4 ^'

Microorganisms ^ V5 (new cells) + V6 CO 2 + V7 H2 O ( 1 .1 )

Where v, =the stoichiometric coefficient

21

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

Biological treatment of organic pollutants, sometimes leads to complete mineralization but recent studies indicated that no significant removal of pharmaceuticals was observed. For instance these results showed that antibiotics cannot be completely eliminated during biological treatment and they are emitted into receiving water systems [10,40], Why is microbial degradation of pharmaceuticals ineffective? First of all, the concentrations of some pharmaceuticals are so low that the lower limits for enzyme affinities may not be met. Secondly, many new drugs are introduced to the market each year; some of these drugs are from entirely new classes never seen before by the microbiota of an STP. Each o f these presents a new challenge to biodégradation. The daily loading o f drugs into STPs is largely a function of the human population serviced, the dosage/duration of medications consumed and the metabolic /excretory half- lives, which are all highly variable [6]. The biodegradative fate of most compounds in STPs is governed by nongrowth-limiting (i.e., enzyme-saturating) substrate concentrations. In contrast, drugs are present in the STPs at concentrations well below enzyme-saturating levels, which necessitates oligotrophic^ metabolism. These micropollutants might be handled by only a small subset of specialist oligotrophic organisms, whose occurrence is probably more prevalent in native environments characterized by low-carbon fluxes (e.g. sediments and associated pore waters, where desorption mass transfer is limiting) than in STPs. This means that degradation of pharmaceuticals may occur more prevalently in the receiving waters/sediments than in the STPs. This also has implications for contamination.

' Oligotrophic organisms use minimal media such as simple sources o f energy and carbon [5].

22

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission o f th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

1.9.1.2 Sorption to Filterable Solid (Sand Filtration) In some cases, recirculating sand filters can be an option for pretreatment o f wastewater before discharge. The sand filter acts as a biological treatment unit. Studies have shown that the sorption properties of the selected pharmaceuticals can be expected to be low and that their persistence in the wastewater should be relatively high under real conditions such as slow sand filtration or subsoil passage [10].

1.9.1.3 Flocculation The term "flocculation" is used to describe the process whereby the size of particle increases as a result of particle collision and adhesion. Flocculation in wastewater treatment is a transport step that brings about the collisions between the destabilized particles needed to form larger particles that can be removed readily by inexpensive particle- separation procedures such as settling or filtration. There are two types of flocculation [35]; 1. Microflocculation (or perikinetic flocculation) in which the particle aggregation is brought about by the random thermal motion of fluid molecules known as Brownian motion (Figure 1.2-a). This type of flocculation is significant for particles in the size range from 0.001 to about 1 pm. 2. Macroflocculation (or orthokinetic flocculation), in which particle aggregation is brought about by including velocity gradients and mixing in the fluid containing the particles to be flocculated. As illustrated in Figure 1.2-b, faster moving particles will overtake slower-moving particles in a velocity field. Another form of

macroflocculation is brought about by differential settling in which large particles

23

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission o f th e cop yright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

Microflocculation Brownian motion
. o o ° °

Macroflocculation Velocity gradient Differential settling

(a)

(b)

Figure 1.2. Schematic illustration of the two types of flocculation: (a) microflocculation and (b) macroflocculation [35].

24

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n of th e cop yrigh t ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

overtake small particles to form larger particles. In raacroflocculation by differential settling, particles settle via the influence of gravity. Several flocculation experiments have been done on selected pharmaceuticals (the antiphlogistic diclofenac, the antiepileptic carbamazepine, the lipid regulators clofibric acid and bezafibrate) by a group in Germany. Flocculation with Iron HI chloride in labscale tests and in waterworks exhibited no significant elimination of the pharmaceuticals from raw water [10]. Many pharmaceutical products cannot be removed by conventional flocculation technology because their polarity makes them unlikely to adsorb to organic matter [41]. Thus, it is relatively unlikely that in water works, which use only flocculation and sand filtration, a substantial removal of pharmaceutical residues will take place.

1.9.2 Advanced Wastewater Treatment Treatment methods for dissolved organics that consider the specific characteristics of the wastewater and the nature of the constituents also exist Treatment methods used to try to remove dissolved pharmaceuticals include:

1.9.2.1 Chemical Oxidation Chemical oxidation in wastewater treatment typically involves the use of oxidizing agents such as ozone (O3 ), hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ), permanganate (MnO^), chlorine dioxide (CIO2 ), chlorine (CI2), hypochlorite (HOCl), and molecular oxygen (O2 ), to bring about change in the chemical composition o f a compound or a group of compounds.

25

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

Chemical oxidation reactions often require the presence o f one or more catalysts to proceed at an acceptable rate. Transition metal cations, enzymes, pH adjustment, and a variety o f proprietary substances have been used as catalysts for oxidative degradation of dissolved contaminants [35,40]. Most countries including the United States use chlorine, chloramines, or ozone to disinfect drinking water. Studies have shown that chlorination is not nearly as effective as ozone at degrading pharmaceutical compounds [41]. Also, because o f the potential toxicity problems that may develop if chlorinated compounds are discharged to the environment, it is usually necessary to dechlorinate the effluent. Ozone's effectiveness is tied to its ability to chemically attack the pharmaceutical molecules. For instance, it can oxidize different kinds o f aromatic functional groups in pharmaceuticals [40,41]. On the other hand studies have shown that the efficiency o f the ozonation process for the removal o f pharmaceuticals can be very product specific. For instance, an experiment was conducted on some selected pharmaceuticals (bezafibrate, clofibric acid, diclofenac, carbamazepine, primidone) [10]. Their molecular structures are shown in Table 1.5. The results show that ozonation was very effective in oxidizing carbamazepine and diclofenac. It also appreciably reduced the concentration levels o f bezafibrate and primidone but exhibited only limited efficiency in removing clofibric acid [10]. These data show the effectiveness o f ozonation on compounds with amino groups [41].

26

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of the cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

Table 1.5 Selected target pharmaceuticals [10].

Name

Chemical structure

Application

COOH

Bezafibrate

Lipid regular

Calofibric acid

O

COOH

Metabolite of lipid Regulators clofibrate, elofibrate, theofibrate

HOOC'

Diclofenac

antiphlogistic

antiepilectic Carbamazepine

antiepileptic Primidone

27

I R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n o f th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

Advanced oxidative processes using a combination of ozone and UV or ozone and hydrogen peroxide, should also remove pharmaceuticals. These processes typically involve the generation and use of the hydroxyl free radical (HO ) as a strong oxidant to destroy compounds that cannot be oxidized by conventional oxidants such as oxygen, ozone and chlorine. Schematic flow diagrams of the Ozone/UV and Ozone/ Hydrogen Peroxide processes are illustrated in Figure 1.3. Based on numerous studies, it has been found that combined advanced oxidation processes are more effective than any other individual agents (e.g. ozone, UV, hydrogen peroxide). Because it was recognized that free radicals generated from ozone were more powerful oxidants than ozone alone, it was reasoned that the hydroxyl free radicals could be used effectively to oxidize microorganisms and refractory organic materials in water and wastewater. Unfortunately, because the half-life of the hydroxyl free radical is short, on the order o f microseconds, it is not possible to develop high concentrations of this species. As a result, hydroxyl radicals can't be used for conventional disinfection; instead they are used more commonly for the oxidation of trace amounts of refractory organic compounds found in highly treated effluents [35].

28

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

O z o n e o ff-g a s to T h c m ia l d e s tru c tio n u n it

A
T re a te d e filu e n t
-b W * My? VÜ

i` -«Vn »<S

if, fta

P a c k in g m a terial m a y h e u sed w ith in co lu m n to e n c o u ra g e p lu g flo w F in e b u b b le d ifb is e rs to

Influent

increase contact area o f
o z o n e w ith w a s te w a te r

O zone

(a)

O z o n e o ff-g a s to T h e rm al d es [ru ctio n u n it

O z o n e c o n ta c t re a c to r U y la m p s

In flu e n t

%r.i -·m ***^ ",

" a '1-s`i

R a <s H

·· T re a te d e fflu e n t

UV Fine b u b b le d iffu s e rs to in c re a se c o n ta c t area o f o z o n e w ith w a ste w a te r

O z o n e gas g e n e ra tio n

Cb)

Figure 1.3 Schematic representation o f advanced oxidation involving the use o f a) ozone and hydrogen peroxide and b) ozone and UV radiation [35].

29

Reproducetd with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

1.9.2.2 Adsorption on Activated Carbon Adsorption is the process of accumulating substances that are in solution on a suitable interface. The adsorbate is the substance that is being removed from the liquid phase at the interface. The adsorbent is the solid, liquid, or gas phase onto which the adsorbate accumulates. Two important characteristics of a solid adsorbent are: 1. Its extremely large surface area to volume ratio. 2. Its preferential affinity for certain constituents in the liquid phase. The principal types of adsorbents include activated carbon, synthetic polymers, and silica- based adsorbents. Activated carbon is commonly used for the removal of selected constituents from wastewater. It has some affinity for organic compounds such as pharmaceuticals, and it is used in many filtration and purification processes. Activated carbon treatment of wastewater is usually thought o f as a polishing process for water that has already received normal biological treatment. Activated carbon is prepared by first making a char of organic materials such as almond, coconut, and walnut hulls; other materials including woods, bone and coal have also been used. The char is produced by heating the base material to a red heat (less than about 700°C) in a retort to drive off the hydrocarbons, but with an insufficient supply of oxygen to sustain combustion. The char is then activated by exposure to oxidizing gases such as steam and CO2 at high temperatures, in the range from 800 to 900°C. These gases create a porous structure within the char with pore sizes defined as follows: Macropores >25 nm Mesopores Micropores >1 nm and <25 nm <1 nm

30

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

After activation the carbon can be prepared in different sizes with different adsorption capacity. The two size classifications are powdered activated carbon (PAC), which typically has a particle diameter of less than 0.074 mm, and granular activated (GAG), which has a diameter greater than 0.1 mm. The adsorption process takes place in three steps: macrotransport, microtransport, and sorption. Macrotransport involves the movement of the adsorbate (e.g. organic matter) through the water to the liquid/solid interface by advection and diffusion. Microtransport involves the diffusion of the organic material through the macropore system o f the solid adsorbent to the adsorption sites in the micropores. These porous structures are illustrated in Figure 1.4. Although adsorption also occurs on the surface of the solid adsorbent and in the micropores and mesopores, the surface area of these parts of most solid adsorbents is so extremely small compared with the surface area of the macropores that the amount of material adsorbed there, is usually considered negligible [35]. Experimental results have indicated an efficient removal of pharmaceuticals under real conditions by activated carbon in waterworks [10]. GAG and PAG are effective because carbon can bind a broad range of compounds, and many pharmaceuticals have groups like benzene rings or amino groups that enhance their ability to be taken up by the activated carbon. Nevertheless, sorption efficiencies are always influenced by competition with other occurring organic compounds. Thus, the adsorption capacity for the pharmaceuticals is lower on activated carbon if other compounds such as natural organic substances compete for the adsorption sites [10,41 ].

31

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

Macropore

Mesopore Micropore

Submicropore

Expanded view of internal structure Granular Activated carbon

Figurel.4 Macropore, mesopore, micropore, and submicropore adsorption sites on activated carbon. [35]

32

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

1.9.23 Membrane Filtration Processes Separation or removal o f particulate and colloidal matter from a liquid can be conducted by filtration. In membrane filtration the range of particle sizes removed is extended to include dissolved constituents (typically 0.0001 to 1.0 pm). The membrane works as a selective barrier that will allow the passage of certain constituents but will return other constituents found in the liquid. The influent to the membrane module is known as the feed stream or feed water. The liquid that passes through the membrane is known as the permeate or product stream and the liquid containing the retained constituents is known as the concentrate or waste stream. Membrane processes include microfiltration (0.08-2.0 pm), ultrafiltration (0.0050.2 pm), nanofiltration (0.001-0.01 pm), reverse osmosis (0.0001-0.001 pm), dialysis, and electro dialysis (ED). With evolving health concerns, especially in light of the need to remove resistant organic constituents, the application of membrane teclmologies in the field of environmental engineering has increased within the past 5 years. In this section two types o f membrane filtration processes, which are used most commonly in wastewater treatment are described [35].

1.9.2.3.1 Microfiltration In advanced treatment applications, microfiltration (MF) has been used, most commonly to remove residual suspended material and bacteria to condition the water for effective disinfection [35,42]. In addition it works as a pretreatment step for reverse osmosis. Microfiltration can reduce the amount of treatment chemicals needed for water purification. Reduced labor and smaller space requirements in comparison with

33

R ep rod uced with perm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

conventional plants are other advantages o f using microfiltration. Lack of a reliable lowcost method o f monitoring performance and the requirement to replace membranes about every 3 to 5 years, are disadvantages o f microfiltration treatment [35].

1.9.2.3.2 Reverse Osmosis Reverse osmosis (RO) is used primarily for desalination. In wastewater treatment, RO is used for the removal of dissolved constituents fi'om wastewater remaining after advanced treatment with microfiltration [42,35]. When two solutions having different solute concentrations are separated by a semipermeable membrane, a difference in chemical potential will exit across the membrane. Water will tend to diffuse through the membrane from the lowerconcentration side to the higher-concentration side. In a system having a finite volume, flow continues until the pressure difference balances the chemical potential difference. This balancing pressure difference is termed the osmotic pressure and is a function of the solute characteristics and concentration and temperature. If a pressure gradient opposite in direction and greater than the osmotic pressure is imposed across the membrane, flow from the more concentrated to the less concentrated region will occur and is termed " reverse osmosis". The high efficiency and reliability o f modem purification units applying reverse osmosis has been confirmed by the field trials of the mobile drinking water purification unit WTC 1600 GT [43]. The mechanism of RO and the flow scheme o f this reverse osmosis unit are illustrated in Figure 1.5. The system tested consisted of a prefiltration unit and eight reverse osmosis units.

34

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

Average concentration of selected contaminants in the raw water and in the permeate after RO water purification are given in Table 1.6. While the removal proportions by RO presented in the table are impressive, the method does have some drawbacks. The disadvantages of membrane treatments are 1) they may require residuals handling and disposal of concentrate and 2) capital costs for membrane units are often too high to compete with other processes at high volume [42].

35

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

Applied pressure

Fresh

Saline

Concentrate

Concentrate (outlet)
Raw water Raw

water
Permeate

Raw water Permeate

6 modules 2 modules
Drinking water

Figure 1.5 a) Mechanism o f reverse osmosis and b) flow scheme o f a commercial reverse osmosis unit [35,43].

36

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

Table 1.6 Average concentrations of selected contaminants in the raw water and in permeate and removal rate of reverse osmosis unit [43].

Parameter

Average raw water concentration (ng/1)

Average permeate concentration n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d. n.d.

Removal rate in %

Caffeine Carbamazepine Clofibric acid Diclofenac Naproxen Propyphenazone

430 330 155 329 38 170

>99.8 >99.7 >99.4 >99.7 >95 >99.4

n.d. = not detected (below the limit o f detection)

37

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

1.10 Objective o f this Thesis Studies show that conventional sewage treatment systems have not been entirely effective in removing pharmaceutical compounds from water. The primary goal o f this study is to develop a simple, inexpensive, robust and accurate tool to collect and remove pharmaceuticals from flowing water. That is, to "polish" water at the very last stage of its treatment in a water treatment plant. The device design is based on the ability of polymer supported "molecular buckets", known as cyclodextrins, to remove organic molecules from flowing water. In essence the plan is to immobilize cyclodextrins in the form of polymer (CDps), which can then be packed into a cylindrical housing. This CDp device is placed in a water stream spiked with a known amount o f pharmaceuticals. The flow rate o f the water stream is controlled and monitored. As the water flows over the polymer the pharmaceuticals are adsorbed by CDp. After a period of time the amount of residual material in the solution passing through the column is analyzed and compared to the known initial concentration. The difference between the initial and residual

concentrations reflects the efficiency of the device at trapping the contaminants. The analyses o f pollutants will be carried out using standard analytical techniques. Since complexation is reversible the sampled pollutants can, in principle be washed off the CDp by rinsing with alcohol. The washed polymer can be reused. Experiments are carried out in this study with two different (3CD polymers crosslinked with epichlohydrin (EP) and diisocyanatohexane (ITDI). These have been reported to have different microstructures and one might expect different trapping efficiencies. A second objective is, therefore, to compare these two different CDPs as potential "polishing" devices for treatment plant output. The organic pollutants to be

38

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

trapped in this research are naphthalene (a polyaromatic hydrocarbon, PAH), naproxen (a non-steroidal anti-inflammatoiy drug, NSAID), nabumetone (NSAID), propranolol (Beta-blocker), pyrene (PAH) and 2-naphthol (PAH). This selection is not to imply that PAHs and pharmaceuticals are comparable contaminants. Clearly, they will behave as pollutants in rather different fashions. Nonetheless, naphthalene and its derivatives are good models for pharmaceutical molecules because their size and their molecular structure are comparable to many common drugs as reported in the literature. Further, they are readily analyzed by fluorescence spectroscopy at even quite low concentrations.

39

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

CHAPTER 2
ADSORBENTS CONTAINING CYCLODEXTRINS
2.1 Cyclodextrins: an Overview The discovery and the first work on cyclodextrins (CDs) are attributed to Villiers in 1891, who isolated them as degradation products of starch. In 1904, Schardinger was the first to describe their preparation and properties in details [45,46]. The CD molecules are natural macrocyclic oligosaccharides formed by the action of Bacillus macerans, which produces the cyclodextrin-transglycosylase enzyme, on starch [46]. The CDs are also known as Schardinger dextrins, cycloglucopyranoses, cycloamyloses, cycloglucans and

cyclomaltooligoses [46]. CDs are torus-shaped cyclic oligosaccharides containing six to twelve glucose units. The individual glucose units are held in a C-1 chair conformation and they are joined together by a - 1,4 glycosidic linkages to form a cyclic structure [45-59]. Figure 2.1 schematically represents the molecular structure of cyclodextrin. It shows that as a consequence o f the C-1 conformation o f the glucopyranose units, all secondary hydroxyl groups are situated on one o f the edges of the toroidal ring, while all primary hydroxyl groups are on the other side. The primary hydroxyl groups attached to C- 6 of the glucose units form a smaller opening. Thus, the CD molecule is shaped liked a truncated cone with the secondary hydroxyl side more open than the primary hydroxyl side. While the primary hydroxyl groups can freely rotate to p. rtially block the cavity, the secondary hydroxyl groups are held relatively rigid.

40

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

OH 6 CH:

OH

OH

,o
OH HO OH HO

Apoiar cavity Edge of secondary hydroxyls

Edge of primary hydroxyls

Figure 2.1 a) Molecular structure of cyclodextrin, b) scheme of two glucopyranose units that illustrate the a-(l,4 ) glycosidic linkage and C-1(D) chair conformation and c) position o f primary and secondary hydroxyls on CD [46].

41

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

The interior of the CD cavity is lined by a ring of hydrogen atoms bonded to the C-5 atom, a ring of glycosidic oxygen atoms and another ring of hydrogen atoms at position C-3. As a result, the inside of the cavity is relatively hydrophobic (apoiar cavity) compared to water. Since all the hydroxyl groups are on the outside of the molecule, the external faces are hydrophilic. These features enable CDs to form inclusion complexes with organic molecules, including pharmaceuticals, in aqueous environment [45-68]. The size o f the cavity increases with increasing number of glucose units. CDs, which have fewer than six glucose ring residues cannot be formed for steric reasons and are unknown. Although CDs containing as many as twelve glucose units have been identified, only the first three homologues have been studied in detail [46]. The three smallest CDs, aipha-cyclodextrin (cyclohexaamylose, aCD), beta-cyclodextrin

(cycloheptaamylose, pCD) and gamma-cyclodextrin (cyclooctamylose, yCD), which consist o f six, seven and eight a-l,4-linked D-glucopyranose units, respectively are well known and are available commercially. Higher homologues exist but they are difficult to prepare and purify on an industrial scale. CDs possess well-defined geometry [45-47]. The cavity size differences arise as the diameter o f the cavity opening varies while the cavity depth remains essentially constant at about 7.8 Â. The structure and molecular dimensions of aCD, (3CD and yCD are shown in Figure 2.2. Several important chemical and physical properties of the three most commonly used CDs are listed in Table 2.1.

42

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

o,,<»ûa

3% a
if àA .10* s

a &f

.;? < > x >

N

.

^

%

ciCD

pCD
(a)

yCD

Î3.7 A

15.3 A

16,9 A

9.5 A

7.8

aCD

PCD

yCI)

(b)

Figure 2.2 a) Molecular models o f a , P and y cyclodextrins viewed from the secondaj-y hydroxyl side o f the toms; and b) their dimensions [46, 51J.

43

R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

Table 2.1 Chemical and physical properties of various cyclodextrins [46].

Cyclodextrin Molecular weight Glucose monomers Internal cavity diameter, A Water solubility (g/100ml) Volume of cavity, A^ (aprox.) Crystal forms (from water)

Alpha 972
6

Beta 1135 7 7.8 1.85 262

Gamma 1297
8

5.7 14.2 174

9.5 23.2 427

Hexagonal plates

Monoclinic parallelograms
1 2 .2 0

Quadratic prisms

pKa (25°C) Crystal water wt.% Diffusion constant at 40°C Cl'-04-C4 angle" 0 4 -0 4 ' distance A 02-03 distance A

12.33
1 0 .2

12.08 8.13-17.7 3.000
1 1 2 .6

13.2-14.5 3.223 117.7 4.39
2 .8 6

3.443 119 4.23 3.00

4.48 2.81

44

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

2.2 Inclusion Properties Inclusion complexes are structures consisting of two or more associated molecules in which one of the molecules (host) can admit one or more "guest" components into its cavity, resulting in a stable encapsulation without formation of any covalent bonds [46]. Cyclodextrins are capable of forming inclusion complexes with suitable organic compounds by binding an entire "guest" molecule, or some part of it within the cavity (see Figure 2.3) [46-79]. The guest usually approaches and penetrates in the CD cavity from the more open and accessible side [46,75]. The guest is included m such a manner as to allow its non-polar portion to get maximum contact with the hydrophobic cavity, while its polar portion interacts with the hydrophilic surface o f the CD molecule [46]. Typically, the CD cavity binds the organic guest molecule in a so-called complex (Org:CD) according to the following equilibrium process:
1 :1

Org + CD

(Org:CD)

(2.1)

The stability o f the complex can be described by the equilibrium constant (Kf):

_ [Org : CD]

^

Where [Org:CD] is the concentration of the organic molecule complexed with the CD, [CD] and [Org] represent the free concentrations of the uncomplexed CD and organic molecule, respectively, at equilibrium [71].

45

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

Org

CD

. Inclusion complex

Figure 2.3. Cyclodextrin forming an inclusion "host-guest" complex with an aromatic organic compound [56].

46

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

For molecules with low molecular weights, more than one guest molecule may fit into the cavity. Similarly, for molecules possessing high molecular weight, more than one cyclodextrin molecule may bind to the guest. In principle, only a portion of the molecule need fit into the cavity to form a complex. As a result, one to one molar ratios are not always achieved, especially with high or low molecular weight guests [45,46]. A number o f factois may contribute to complexation. These include: a) hydrophobic effects, which induce the apoiar group of a molecule to enter the CD cavity, b) hydrogen bonding between a guest molecule and the secondary hydroxyl groups at the rim of the cavity (these contribution increase with polar molecules), c) solvent effects, d) steric effect, the inclusion process is also influenced by shape and size of the guest molecule, and e) van der Waals interactions. Of these the size and shape matching between the guest and the CD cavity and the hydrophobic effect appear to be most significant [60]. These guest compounds should have suitable geometry and polarity. Indeed, long alkyl chains and aromatic compounds readily form inclusion complexes with cyclodextrin in water because these compounds are typically quite hydrophobic [46,56,60]. The rate, at which the association complex is formed, is determined in large part by the accessibility o f the guest molecule to the CD cavity and the magnitude of the net thermodynamic driving force. Accessibility may be quantified as a statistical factor determined by the molecular geometry of the guest molecule and its size relative to the cavity volume. Complexes with organic guests usually form quite rapidly. Studies show that the entry rate constants for some organic compounds complexing pCD molecules are 10^ tunes larger than their exit rate constants J&om pCD complexes [81]. Most lipophilic

47

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

compovmds are solvated by water to some extend and these discrete hydrated molecular particles are better able to get past the hydrophilic hydroxyl groups at the entrance to the CD cavity [51]. The hydrating water molecules can actively interact with the hydroxyl groups on the rims of the CD toroid or they may simply shield the hydrophobic organic molecule from being repelled by the hydroxyl groups. Once past the rim hydroxyls, the hydrating molecules o f water are driven from the hydrophobic cavity leaving the guest molecule to find its most stable resting place. Once the molecule has entered the cavity, the "goodness of fit", as determined by the weak interactions taking place in the cavity, will make the final contribution to the association component of the equilibrium process [54-58].

2.3 Application of CDs In the last decade, increasing interest has been devoted to cyclodextrins as hosts because o f their ability to bind a variety of organic and inorganic substrates. This ability of CDs has led to their widespread utilization in the pharmaceutical and food industries [46,60]. In the pharmaceutical industry, CDs have been used either to improve the physical and/or chemical properties o f drugs themselves or to enhance the bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs [50,52,55]. p-cyclodextrin and its derivatives are the most commonly used cyclodextrins in pharmaceutical applications [46,47,50]. For instance, studies have shown that P-cyclodextrin can decrease the photoinduced free-radical production from chlorpromazine, the photodecarboxylation of benoxaprofen, an anti-inflammatory agent, and photodimerization of protriptyline, a tricyclic antidepressant, resulting in the reduction o f phototoxicity from these compounds [54]. Other studies have shown that a

48

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

combination of P-cyclodextrin and oleic acid in propylene glycol enhanced the percutaneous absorption o f isosorbide dinitrate, a vasodilator, and reduced skin reaction such as erythema and edema [54]. In the food, cosmetics and tobacco industries, CDs have been used to reduce flavor loss due to air and moisture, to eliminate undesired tastes and microbial contamination [46]. CDs also find application as chiral discriminating compounds for chromatography as well as in photophysics and analytical chemistry. CDs are a versatile tool in separation science because the polyfunctional character of the CD molecule offers various possibilities for preparing different kinds of CD-based materials'. Studies have indicated that the adsorbents containing CDs have been very useful in all areas o f separation science including the field of chromatography, wastewater treatment, and other separation techniques (extraction, complexation) [46,70-84].

2.4 Cyclodextrin Polymers

The general interest in cyclodextrins lies in their ability to form inclusion complexes with a large range of molecules. However, the complex forming capability of cyclodextrins is rather general and displays in many cases low selectivity. Moreover, cyclodexterins are soluble in water and certain organic solvents. Because of their solubility, cyclodextrins cannot be used directly in separation [71]. To overcome these problems, cyclodextrins are often immobilized on solid particles as a stationary phase for enantiomeric separations [56]. Another approach is to make cyclodextrin polymers.

49

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

Materials containing covalently linked CD units are called cyclodextrin polymers. For systems containing more than one cyclodextrin binding site selectivity towards guest molecules can be greatly improved. If several cyclodextrin binding sites are oriented three dimensionally in a defined rigid polymeric structure, highly stable and selective nanosize binding sites can be engineered. The first cyclodextrin-based resin and its applications were described in 1965 by Solms and Egli [46]. CDs can be polymerized by a reaction between their hydroxyl
6

groups at position 2,3 and

in the glucose unit with a coupling agent to form oligomers

and iong-chain polymers, insoluble crosslinked gels and soluble polymers and copolymers. For example a reaction between one or more o f the 21 hydroxyl groups with a variety of different crosslinking agents polymerizes (3CD. If the degree of polymerization is sufficiently high, the matrix of the pCD polymers becomes insoluble. Some bi or polyfunctional crosslinking agents such as aldehydes, ketones, isocyanates or epoxides (epichlorohydrin) can be used to form water-insoluble crosslinked polymers [46,77].

2.4.1 Epichlorohydrin-Crosslinked p-- Cyclodextrin Polymers (PCDEP) These polymers are prepared by polycondensation of pCDs in the presence of epichlorohydrin (EP) as a crosslinking agent. Epichlorohydrin, containing two reactive functional groups, can react with pCD molecules (crosslinking step) and/or itself (polymerization step) (see Figure 2.4) [70-77].

50

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

vf
21

g 0

K __1

1
0

?
CO.

--o

o -4

1
c/3

c n

I
t

I
c /3

1
--u o -4 %
CO.

ü<

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

Polymerization o f jîCD using epichlorohydrin was catalyzed by sodium hydroxide [70]. Addition o f sodium hydroxide also increases the solubility of (3CD in water, by ionizing pCD-OH into pCD-O ", and cleaves the glycidyl ether rings of EP molecules to produce PCD-O-CH 2 -C H O H -C H 2 CI. This intermediate product further reacts with NaOH producing pCD-ether containing glycidyl groups by liberating water and chloride ion. The glycidyl ether reacts with either pCD or water, forming pCD-dimer or pCD-ether with glyceryl tails. Both soluble as well as insoluble pCD polymers can be obtained using EP by careful control of experimental conditions. Repeated reactions of dimer and pCD or pCD-ether results m two-dimensional pCD polymers that are soluble in water [77]. Further polymerization forms a three-dimensional network of pCD polymer bridged by glyceryl groups, which is insoluble in water. The insoluble pCDEP polymer is highly hydrophilic, swells strongly in aqueous solutions and is insoluble in organic solvents [75]. Whether the final products o f pCD polymerization are water-soluble or insoluble polymer, depends on various parameters, such as the molar ratio o f epichlorohydrin to pCD, temperature, reaction time and the NaOH concentration in the solution. Since this study aimed to use insoluble pCDEP polymer as an adsorbent to remove organic compounds from water, optimization o f reaction conditions to produce water-insoluble polymers was necessary. Conversion o f soluble pCDEP to the insoluble pCDEP requires a high molar ratio o f EP to pCD [46,71]. Figure 2.5 shows a schematic model o f pCD polymer crosslinked by epichlorohydrin. It would energetically be most favorable for the cyclodextrins to have

52

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

head-to-head and tail-to-tail orientation in the polymer network. The reason is that with such an arrangement, in the case o f ^-cyclodextrins, at the wide side up to 14, and at the narrow side up to 7 linkages to epichlorohydrin molecules can be formed. When there is head-to-tail packing of the cyclodextrins in the polymer, at either side of BCD molecules a maximum of 7 linkages to epichlorohydrin are possible [52]

53

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

o o--

OH

HO HO

OH

(a)
OH OH

Figiire 2.5 a) Linkage o f EP to primai y hydroxyl group o f pCD and b) Molecular model o f epichlorohydrin-crcsslinked p-cyclodextrin polymers. [73].

54

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

2.4.2 (î-- Cycïodextrin-Polyurethane Polymers (pCDPU) p-- cyclodextrin-polyxirethane polymers in the form of granular solid s, powders, and films can be synthesized by reacting purified cyclodextrins with diisocyanate compounds (hexamethylene diisocyanate, HDI and toluene 2,6 diisocyanate, TDI) in DMF solution (N,N-dimethylfonnamide) [56]. It is assumed that CD can react with two active isocyanate groups [51,55,56,79-86]. Preparation of the CD polymer with a carbamate linl"er is shown in Figure- 2.6. In this study hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI) was chosen as the bifunctional crosslinking agent. Diisocyanate is generally utilized as a strong crosslinker o f hydroxyl groups since it posses two isocyanate groups (-N =C-0). Isocyanate reacts with hydroxyl groups o f pCD to form a urethane product (-NH-C0-0-) due to the transfer o f a proton fi-om the hydroxyl to the nitrogen atom o f isocyanate. The initial product o f reacting o f the hydroxyl group of pCD with an isocyanate is a urethane dimer. This urethane dimer has a hydroxyl group on one end, and an isocyanate group on the other, so it can react with either a pCD or a diisocyanate to form a trimer. Or it can react with another dimer, trimer, or even higher oligomers. In this way, monomers and oligomers combine until high molecular weight pCD polyurethane is obtained [46,86]. Since no small molecule by-products are produced, it is an addition polymerization. The aim o f using HDI instead of epichlorohydrin is to obtain more rigid cyclodextrin molecular channels. The resulting polymer is very hydrophobic [46,85,86]. This polymer has a very rigid structure that w on't swell in aqueous phase. The molecular structure of [3-cyclodextrin-polyurethane polymers is illustrated in Figure 2.7.

55

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

V O vn in in g
o

A (U

I

C O . C w 0

II
1

< N E
o -4
CO.

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

Figure 2.7 a) Linkage of HDI to primary hydroxyl groups of pCD; b) Molecular model of P-cyclodextrin-polyurethane polymers [55].

57

R eproduced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

2.4.3 Advantages of Using P-Cyciodextrin Polymers P-Cyclodextrin polymers are challenged to compete with conventional water purification processes such as activated carbon and reverse osmosis in performance, cost, and availability. Although activated carbon has some affinity to organic compounds, it fails to remove many of them to a desirable degree such as parts-per-billion (ppb) levels [51,56,71]. Moreover, since activated carbon adsorbs moisture from air, it loses some adsorption effectiveness in water. Activated carbon used in water treatment is usually treated by a heat procedure or steam. Therefore, it is difficult to reclaim the materials adsorbed on the activated carbon [51]. In the case o f removal of pharmaceutical compounds by reverse osmosis, the process needs high pressure, to overcome the higher hydrod>'namic resistance produced by a dense membrane. This approach, therefore, consumes a lot of energy to achieve separation efficiency. It is difficult to clean 100% of the water because the pressure increases as more water is forced through the dense membrane, and it becomes impractical to continue the separation process. Reverse osmosis cannot remove all small molecules from water. A low concentration of small molecules typically leaks into the permeate side because the membrane is not perfectly semipermeable Studies -ve shown that crosslinked pCDps are suitable for trapping some of the

high-priority, highly toxic contaminants that are the focus of current water treatment and environmental research [51,55,56,]. They can remove organic contaminants at concentrations as low as 1-50 ppb [51]. pCD polymers exhibit remarkable binding

affinity to inert small organic guest in water. Since the CD cavity is susceptible to bind drugs, one may expect that cyclodextrin polymers can also be used to adsorb or separate

58

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

pharmaceuticals from water. Therefore, they have a great potential for water purification. Due to their flexibility in processing, pCDps are expected to expand their market from specialty products, such as water treatment polymers, to membrane technology. Thus, they may be useful for a number of applications including semiconductor chip fabrication and manufacturing as well as polishing of STP effluent waters [56,49,51]. Activated carbon does not have a market in these areas because it is almost impossible to fabricate free-standing thin films, membranes, and fibers from carbon powders [51]. The p-cyclodextrin polymer approaches has several advantages. These polymers are reusable [71]. From the experiments conducted on CDps it can be concluded that the formation constant (K) depends strongly on the solvent. In aqueous solvent, the formation of inclusion complexes is strongly favored; whereas, the inclusion reaction is completely reversible in organic solvent (e.g. in methanol). This is because organic guest molecules are hydrophobic; as a result, they are in high-energy state in water and there is a driving force for association with the polymeric cyclodextrin cavities. In organic solvents at room temperature, the binding between polymeric cyclodextrins and organic guest molecules is rather weak so the polymeric cyclodextrin releases its organic guest. Because of its reversibility, the polymers can be washed free of trapped guest and recycled, thereby, dramatically improving cost-effectiveness [71,51,56,55]. Moreover, crosslinked pCDps can readily be used as a column packing to trap organics. These polymers are cheap and biodegradable [53,55,56].

59

R ep rod uced with perm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

CHAPTER 3
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD
3.1 Materials The materials used in this study were primarily developed and tested to quantify the amount o f contaminates adsorbed on p-cyclodextrin polymers. Two types of insoluble Pcyclodextrin polymers were synthesized in the laboratory and used as absorbent materials. These were: (i) p-cyclodextrin-polyurethane and (ii) epichlorohydrin-crosslinked p-cyclodextrin. Materials used to prepare these polymeric adsorbents were pCD (Aldrich; 98%), sodium hydroxide (BDH; 98%), epichlorohydrin (Aldrich; 99%) and hexamethylenediisocyanate (Aldrich; 98%), which were used as received. Ethanol (Aldrich) and methanol (EM Science) were o f the highest quality commercially available and used as received. N,Ndimethylformamide (DMF; Aldrich; Analytical grade) was dried using molecular sieves. The water was conductivity-grade (V 2.04, MilliQ Academic milli-pore). Naphthalene (Fluka; 99%), naproxen (Fluka;98%), 2-naphthol (Fluka; 99%), propranolol (Sigma; 98%), nabumetone (Sigma; 98%), and pyrene (Aldrich; 98%) were the adsorbate materials employed in this study. The molecular structure of these organic compounds are tabulated in Table 3.1. These materials were used without further purification. KBr (98%) used to prepare IR pellets was purchased from Aldrich and used as received. The buffer solutions were prepared using potassium hydrogen phosphate (Aldrich; 99%) and sodium hydroxide (BDH; 98%). They were used as received. 60

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

Table 3.1 Molecular structures o f model pollutants.

Compounds

Molecular structure

Molecule formula

Molecular weight (g/mol)

naphthalene

CioHg

128.18

naproxen

C H j JL y O H

C 14H 14O3

230.27

2-naphthoI

00
o

CioHioO

144.18

nabumetone

C 15H 16O2

228.3

propranolol HCI

C 16H21NO 2 (HCI)

295.8

pyrene

O O x
61

CieHio

202.26

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission o f the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

3.2 Instrumentation Steady-state fluorescence measurements were carried out with a PerkinElmer LS50B luminescence spectrometer. Instrument control, data collection and prelirninary data processing were carried out by a micro-computer interfaced to the fluorimeter. Samples for fluorescence measurements were contained in 1 cm x 1cm standard quartz cuvettes. The band pass was typically 2 nm. The emission spectra were uncorrected. Fluorescence intensities were determined by integrating the emission spectra between 300 and 450 nm. Ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra were recorded with a PerkinElmer Lambda 40 spectrophotometer. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded with a PerkinElmer Spectrum One instrument. Pellets of polymers for FTIR measurements were prepared using a IR pellet press (Loomis Engineering & MFG. Company). Solutions were shaken on an VWR orbital shaker. Products were dried using a Fisher vacuum oven.

3.3 Methodologies for Polymer Preparation 3.3.1 Preparation and Characterization of pCDEP pCDEp was synthesized by condensation polymerization of pCD with epichlorohydrin as was shown in Figure 2.4. It was prepared as follows: a known mass of pCD (4.4pmol) was dissolved in a stirred (500 rpm) aqueous solution of 20% w/w NaOH at 60°C. Once the pCD dissolved, epichlorohydrin (127.52 praol) was added dropwise to the stirred solution over a period of one hour. The molar ratio of pCD to tlie crosslinking agent was 1:29 in all preparations. Once epichlorohydrin was added, the solution was kept at 60°C and stirred. After about two hours, the viscosity of the solution increased and a yellowwhite gel formed. A t this point, water was added to quench the reaction and the reaction

62

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

mixture was vacuum-filtered to collect the solid material. The solid polymer was washed with ethanol and vacuum-dried at 60°C for 24 hours. The resulting product was a yellowwhite solid consisting o f small particles. The polymer was ground to yield particles about 1.0 mm in diameter, which were used in subsequent experiments. To confirm that the epichlorohydrin-crosslinked p-- cyclodextrin polymer has been successfully prepared, the IR spectrum (KBr pellet) of the polymer was measured and compared to the known spectra of pCDEp, pCD and epichlorohydrin reported in the literature [71,74].

3.3.2 Preparation and Characterization of pCDPU The p-cyclodextrin-polyurethane resin material was synthesized by reaction of pCD and hexamethylenediisocyanate in a dried DMF solution as illustrated in Figure 2.6. pCD (4.4 jimol) was dissolved in 40ml of DMF. Then, the appropriate amount of HDI (37.1 pmol) was added dropwise over a period of 45 minutes. The clear solution of pCD and HDI was stirred at 70°C for a period o f 6 hours, white particles were obtained. The polymer was precipitated with excess methanol. The product was recovered by filtration and vacuumdried at 60°C for 24 hours. ITie resulting products were white solid particles, which were ground and used in subsequent experiments. In order to determine the structure of (5CDPU with a carbamate linker, FTIR

spectroscopy was used to record the IR spectrum of the resin and compare it to the known
spectra of pCDPU and BCD reported in the literature [55,86].

63

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission o f the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

3.4 Analysis of Model Pollutants Sample analysis was performed using fluorescence spectroscopy. For example, naproxen stock solutions were prepared by dissolving an appropriate mass o f naproxen in the appropriate phosphate buffer (pH 7). The buffer solution was prepared according to literature methods [91]. Stock solutions of the other model compounds were prepared by weighing an appropriate quantity of the compound into a 1 L volumetric flask, diluting it with Milli-Q water and stirring overnight. The concentrations of stock solutions were determined from their absorption spectra. Different individual working solutions for each organic compound were prepared by pipetting appropriate amounts o f stock solution in 250 ml volumetric flasks and diluting with milli-Q water (in the case o f naproxen with buffer solution). Exposure to light was kept to be rrimimum during all sample preparation and handling. The analytical concentrations of the organic compounds were obtained with steady-state fluorescence measurements. In each case, calibration curves of the fluorescence intensity versus the concentration were prepared. The excitation and emission conditions for each organic compound are given in Table 3.2.

3.5 Experimental Procedures The sorption o f organic compounds from water by insoluble (3-CD polymeric absorbents was investigated by determination of adsorption isotherms. Tests were performed in both batch and column techniques.

64

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

Table 3.2 Excitation and emission wavelengths for model pollutants.

Com pound naphthalene naproxen nabumetone propranolol 2-naphthoI pyrene

Emission (nm) 337 356 358 337 355 371

Excitation (nm) 280 320 320 310 310 320

65

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission o f the cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

Figure 3.1 presents experimental procedures, which were conducted on epichlorohydrincrosslinked p-cyclodextrin polymers (pCDEP) and P-cyclodextrin-polyurethane

polymers (pCDPU). In all experiments, pCD polymers were in large excess compared to the model pollutant.

3.5.1 Batch Experiments One gram o f pCDEP was introduced into 250 ml flasks. Then, 200 ml of solutions of the organic test compound with various concentrations (0-100 pM) were added to the flasks. The flasks were shaken on an orbital shaker (225 rpm) for 24 hours to ensure the system was at equilibrium. A t the end o f 24 hours the solid material was allowed to settle and the residual concentrations of organic compounds in Hie solutions were determined using the fluorimeter. The fluorescence intensity of organic compounds was recorded for each sample and converted into concentration on the basis o f a calibration curve. Adsorption isotherm tests on the pCDPU were conducted in a similar fashion.

3.5.2 Packed Column Experiments Experiments with flowing water samples were performed to evaluate the potential for pCD polymers trapping o f the model pollutants under these conditions. pCDEP particles (lOg) were hydrated in Milli-Q water for one hour. The continuous column treatment tests were done using a 250 ml Pyrex column fitted with a stopcock. Hydrated pCDEP was loaded on the column on a small layer of glass wool and sand. A feed of model influent water with known concentration (approximately 5pM) was then led through the column from a 20 L Nalgene carboy. The total volume of the test solution used in each

66

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n of th e cop yrigh t ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

case was 3 L, and it was gravity-fed into the column. The flow rate was controlled by the manual adjustment o f the stopcock at the bottom of the column. The flow rate was 16 ml/min. The fluorescence intensity of the collected fractions were recorded and converted into concentrations via the calibration curves. Similar experiments were carried out with pCDPU.

3.6 Re-use of p-- Cyclodextrin Polymers pCDp with previously adsorbed pollutants was shaken with ethanol in order to reuse it in subsequent experiments. This procedure was repeated several times to ensure that the pCDp was completely organic free. Then the pCDp was washed with water and vacuumdried at 60°C.

67

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of the copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

J3 (D ID O a c o (D Q . T 3
CD
C/D

o' 3
Polymerization O o "U Preparation of stock solutions of model pollutants UV-VIS Spectrophotometer

CD

3

FTIR Spectrophotometer

U I W

Preparation of working solutions of model pollutants

Determining concentration of stock solutions

3.
CD CD T 3

C

Characterization of polymers

ill
Fluorimeter Calibration curve Adsorption Isotherm Tests

o_

O
c

a O 3

CD

o_
O c " D CD
C/D

3 "

W
o'
3

Analyzing Data Freundlich Isotherm Parameters

Fluorimeter

Batch Experiments

Packed Column Treatments

Fluorimeter

Analyzing Data Trapping Efficiency

Used polymer washed with ethanol

Figure 3.1 Schematic illustration of experimental procedures.

CHAPTER 4 RESULTS
4.1 Epichlorohydrin-C rosslinked P-Cyclodextrin Polym er (PCDEF) 4.1.1 C haracterization o f pCDEP To confirm that the pCDEP has been successfully prepared the IR spectrum o f the reaction product was recorded and compared to the literature spectra o f pCDEP, pCD, and epichlorohydrin [71]. Figure 4.1 represents the FTIR spectrum o f epichlorohydrmcrosslinked-pCD polymer. The IR spectrum of the produced polymer matched the literature spectrum o f pCDEP (3400 cm'*, 0-H stretch; 3000 cm'*, C-H stretch; and 1040 cm'* , C-O-C stretch). Peaks at 1265 cm'* correspond to epichlorohydrin [74]. T' a éré are no peaks appearing at 1265 cm'* in the polymer suggesting that all epichlorohydrin participated in the reaction. Therefore, the synthesis successfully resulted in pCD polymer.

69

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

60 50

8 40
G 30

20
10

0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000

Wavenumber (cm'')

Figure 4.1 IR spectrum o f pCDEP obtained at 1/29 pCD/EP.

70

iR ep rod u ced with p erm issio n o f th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

4.1.2 Adsorption o f Model Pollutants from Water in Batch Experiments

Batch adsorption experiments can provide data relating the amount o f adsorbate adsorbed per unit weight of adsorbent and on the amount o f adsorbate remaining in the solution under adsorption equilibrium conditions. Further, they permit a comparison of the binding affinity of the various adsorbates for the polymer. Figures 4.2 and 4.3 show the fluorescence spectra of 2-naphthol solution at different concentrations, before and after shaking with pCDEP polymer. As was described previously, calibration curves of the fluorescence intensity vs concentration for six organic compounds were prepared (see Appendix A). The detection wavelength for naphthalene fluorescence was 337 nm. The analytical emission wavelengths for the six organic compounds tested in this study are given in Table 3.2. The residual concentrations in the solution were calculated using the calibration curves after 24 hours contact with the polymer. The experimental equilibrium data for the uptake of the six compounds studied in this thesis have been correlated with Freundlich's model of adsorption. The Freundlich isotherm equation [70,85,87-89] has the general form of:

q = K fC c '^

(4.1)

where q is the adsorption capacity (pM/g) and Cg is the equilibrium concentration (pM). Kf is taken as a relative indicator of adsorption capacity (pM^^"'^"^ g"'), while n is an empirical factor

that is indicative of the favorability and capacity of the

adsorbent/adsorbate system. Values of n>l represent favorable adsorption conditions according to the theories in the literature [87-89].

71

iReproduced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

1000

800 ·e-- 17.2 nM S-- 34.53 nM -e-- 51.80 (iM 69.07 nM 86.34 |iM

1
i

600

400

200

350

400

450 Wavelength (nm)

500

550

Figure 4.2 Fluorescence spectra of 2-naphthol solutions at different concentrations before shaking with one g o f pCDEP polymer for 24 hours.

72

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

200

150 e-- 17.26 |iM ·a-- 34.53 |iM -- 51.80 nM 69.07 nM H 86.34 nM

3

s

è
i

100

350

400

450 Wavelength (nm)

500

550

Figure 4.3 Fluorescence spectra of 2-naphthol solutions at different concentrations after shaking with one g of pCDEP polymer for 24 hours.

73

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

For convenience of data presentation and parameter evaluation, equation (4.1) is typically linearized in logarithmic form;

log q = log Kf + 1/n log Ce

(4.2)

By plotting log q as the Y-axis and log Cc as the X-axis, Kf and 1/n were calculated as Freundlich parameters. The experimental equilibrium data have been correlated with the equation (4.2). Figure 4.4 represents the adsorption isotherm result for 2-naphthol. Appendix B presents the graphic presentation of adsorption isotherm results for other compounds tested in this study. Regression equations established from the experimental data and corresponding constants K f and n are presented in Table 4.1. All regression coefficients R are greater than 0.98, while most of them are greater than 0.99. This high degree o f correlation verifies the applicability of the Freundlich adsorption law in the adsorption o f naphthalene, 2 -naphthol, nabumetone, naproxen, propranolol and pyrene on the pCDEP polymer. All isotherm curves possess similar values of 1/n, indicating that each cur/e had similar slope, while K f values were different showing the fact that the adsorption capacity was different with each model pollutant. Pyrene had the highest value for K f. Naphthalene and 2-naphthol were found to have about the same adsorption capacities, which were significantly higher than those for propranolol and naproxen, although there is still a little quantitative difference between K f values for naphthalene and 2-naphthol. Nabumetone had the lowest value for K f.

74

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

2.5

0.4

0.6

0.8

1 log Ce (pM)

1.2

1.4

Figure 4.4 Freundlich adsorption isotherm of 2-naphthol on pCDEP.

75

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

Table 4.1 Regression equations of log q vs. log Cc for Freundlich isotherms on pCDEP polymer as absorbent.

Adsorbate

K/

Regression equation

Kf

n

R

naphthalene

730

log q = 1.059 +0.672 log C,

11.5+0.86

1.48+0.08

0.984

2

-naphthol

699

M "

log q = 1.098 + 0.856 log Ce

12.5+ 0.56

1.17+0.05

0.998

nabumetone

2864

log q = -0.546 + 1.026 log Ce

0.28+ 0.08

0.97± 0.05

0.999

naproxen

475^° M ->

log q = 0.137 + 0.938 log Cg

1.37+0.53

1.06+ 0.08

0.991

propranolol

~ 1 0 ** w'

log q = 0.049 + 0.769 log Cg

1.12+0.32

1.29+0.07

0.999

pyrene

5x10^

log q = 1.367+ 0.984 log Cg

23.3±1.16

1 01

.

+ 0.08

0.999

* Association constant to free pCD. Based on the experimental results in our lab. This is the overall binding constant o f pyrene to pCD (K 1K 2 ), considering that for the pCD: pyrene different stoichiometric host;guest ratios have been proposed; namely 1:1, and 2:1 complexes [66].

76

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

4.1.3 Adsorption o f model pollutants from flowing water

Removal of model pollutants from flowing water was performed at 25°C. Figure 4.5 illustrates fluorescence spectrum of naphthalene influent as well as the spectra of the effluents collected from the pCDEP column. Appendix C presents the fluorescence spectra of influent and effluents of other compounds tested in the pCDEP column experiments. The amount o f naphthalene coming out of the column was measured by the fluorescence intensity of samples taken from the first, second, and third liter of effluent. Concentrations of organic compounds in the effluents of the column were determined with the appropriate calibration curve. Trapping efficiency of each compound was calculated with the following equation;

%Trapping =

^ x 100

(4.3)

where C; is the concentration of the pollutant in the influent and Ce is the concentration in the effluent. The flow rate was 16 mL/min in these experiments. A drop-off can be observed in the trapping efficiency over the 3-L volume collected for each compound. The overall trapping percentage, which was calculated on the basis of the total naphthalene input and the total naphthalene output of the pCDEP column, was 86.2%. The overall trapping efficiency for each model pollutant is given in Table 4.2.

f%'"5iTryGF
77 T u L P ib u fy ü iil'Æ n S iT V L IB R A R Y

Reproduced with p erm ission o f th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .

60

40

3 c d

 S -- -a-- -ô-- -X--

Influent 3rd liter o f effluent 1st liter o f effluent 2nd liter o f effluent

300

350
W avelength (nm)

400

450

Figure 4.5 Fluorescence spectra of naphthalene influent and effluents fi-om the pCDEP column.

78

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

Table 4.2 Efficiencies of trapping of model pollutants by pCDEP in packed column treatment.

Model pollutant

Trapping efficiencies for each liter of effluent (%) a) 97.3 b)91.2 c) 82.7

Overall trapping efficiency (%)

2

-naphthol

90.4

naphthalene

a) 95.3 b) 87.2 c) 76.1

8 6 .2

nabumetone

a) 60.8 b) 42.7 c) 42.6

48.4

naproxen

a) 76.4 b) 46.1 c) 11.4

44.6

propranolol

a) 96.7 b) 68.7 c) 44.4

70.1

pyrene

a) 95.3 b) 95.1 c) 93.5

94.6

a) Trapping efficiency of the first liter of effluent b) Trapping efficiency of the second liter of effluent. c) Trapping efficiency of the third liter of effluent ·

79

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

There seems to be a correlation between the Kf from batch experiment and trapping efficiencies observed for the model pollutants. The overall trapping percentages for model pollutants in the (3CDEP column treatment decreases in the order: Pyrene> 2-naphthol > naphthalene > propranolol >nabumetone> naproxen

4.2 P-cyclodextrm -Polyurethane Polym er (PCDPTJ) 4.2.1 C haracterization of pCDPU Figure 4.6 shows the FTIR spectrum of pCDPU polymer. Absence o f a peak at 2270 cm'' (corresponding to the isocyanate group) shows the completion of reaction. T ie growth o f vibration bands at 3370 and 1715 cm '' correspond to NH and C =0 groups. The NHCO stretching was observed at 1530 cm '. These results indicate that the polymer obtained included the carbamate linkage [51,55,56,
86

].

80

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n of th e cop yrigh t ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

65

60

I

H

I

45 500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

4000

W avenum ber (cm' )

Figure 4.6 IR spectrum o f pCDPU obtained at 1/8 BCD/HDI.

81

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

4.2.2 Adsorption o f M odel Pollutants from W ater in Batch Experiments

Figures 4.7 and 4.8 show the fluorescence spectra of nabumetone solution at different concentrations, before and after shaking with (3CDPU polymer. As was explained previously, equilibrium concentrations for each compound were calculated via calibration curves. The relationship between tlie adsorption capacity and the equilibrium concentration was described with the Freundlich equation (eqn. 4.2). Figure 4.9 shows a typical Freundlich plot for nabumetone. Appendix D presents the graphic presentation of adsorption isotherm results for other compounds tested in this study. From the slopes obtained and intercepts o f these diagrams the values of n and K f , respectively, are obtained. The positive magnitude o f slope in each case indicates that the adsorption capacity increases with increasing initial concentration of adsorbate. Table 4.3 lists the regression equations for the six organic compounds tested in this study along with the Kf, n and the correlation coefficients R. All the regression coefficients are greater than 0.98, while most o f them are greater than 0.99. These results indicated that the adsorption of naphthalene, 2-naphthol, nabumetone, naproxen, propranolol, and pyrene on pCDPU polymer could be very well represented by the Freundlich model. All isotherms had similar values of 1/n, indicating that each curve had a similar slope. The K f values were different and this suggested that the adsorption capacity was different with each model pollutant. Pyrene had the highest value for K f . Naphthalene and
2

-naphthol were found to have about the same adsorption capacities, which were

higher than that for nabumetone, propranolol and naproxen. Propranolol had the lowest value for Kf

82

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

150

100

3 G

340

360

380

400

420

440

Waveisngth (nm)

Figure 4.7 Fluorescence spectra o f nabumetone solutions at different concentrations before shaking with one g of pCDPU for 24 hours.

83

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n o f th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

70 60 e -- -- -- H 12.4 |iM 18.6 nM 24.8 nM 31.24 nM

3
40

§
30 20

340

360

360

400

420

440

Wavelength (nm)

Figure 4.8 Fluorescence spectra of nabumetone solutions at different concentrations after shaking with one g of (3CDPU for 24 hours.

84

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

1.4
1.2

b O

0.8 0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1 logCe (|iM)

1.1

1.2

1.3

Figure 4.9 Frcundlich adsorption isotherm of nabumetone on PCDPU.

85

Reproduced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

Table 4.3 Regression equations of log q vs. log Ce for Freundlich isotherms on pCDPU polymer as absorbent.

Adsorbate

Ka*

Regression equation

Kf

n

R

naphthalene

730"

M-'

log q = 0.398+1.140 log Ce

2.50+0.37

0 88

. + 0 .0 2

0.996

2

-naphthol

699*'w ri

log q = 0.126+1.014 log Ce

1.34+0.3

0.99+ 0.03

0.984

nabumetone

2864*^ M -'

log q = -0.822 + 1.843 log Ce 0.15± 0.04

0.54+ 0.05

0.993

naproxen

475*° M-'

log q = -0.842 + 1.195 log Ce 0.14+0.05

0.84+ 0.04

0.987

propranolol

«10** M"'

log q = -0.990+ 1.907 log Ce 0.10+ 0.01

0.52+ 0.04

0.997

pyrene

5x10*"*

log q = 1.271 + 1.125 log Ce

18.7+0.97

0.89+ 0.06

0.980

' Association constant to free BCD. " Based on the experimental results in our lab. This is the overall binding constant of pyrene to pCD (K1K2 ), considering that for the pCD: pyrene different stoichiometric host:guest ratios have been proposed: namely 1:1, and 2:1 complexes [66].

86

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

4.2.3 Adsorption of Model Pollutants from Flowing W ater

A series of flow experiments with naphthalene,

2

-naphthol, nabumetone, naproxen,

propranolol, and pyrene as model pollutants on pCDPU column were carried out. Figure 4.10 illustrates the fluorescence spectrum of naproxen influent as well as the spectra of the effluents collected from the pCDPU column. Appendix E presents the fluorescence spectra of influent and effluents of the other compounds tested in the pCDPU column experiment. The amount o f model pollutant coming out of the column was measured by the fluorescence intensity of samples taken from the first, second, and third liter of effluent. The detection wavelength for naproxen fluorescence was 356 nm. The trapping efficiency for each compound was calculated using equation (4.3) as previously described. A drop-off can be observed in the trapping efficiency of pCDPU over the 3-L volume collected for each compound. The overall trapping percentage for naproxen was 21.6%. The overall trapping efficiency for each model pollutant is given in Table 4.4. There seems to be a correlation between the K f from batch experiment and trapping efficiencies observed for the model pollutants. The. overall trapping percentages for model pollutants in the (3CDPU column treatment decreases in the order: Pyrene > naphthalene > 2-naphthol > nabumetone> naproxen > propranolol

87

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

600

500

400
3

«-- s-- -0-- ^--

Influent 1st liter o f effluent 2nd liter o f effluent 3rd liter of effluent

ê
~

I

300

200

100

340

360

380 Wavelength (nm)

400

420

Figure 4.10 Fluorescence spectra of naproxen influent and effluents from the pCDPU column.

88

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

Table 4.4 Efficiencies o f trapping of model pollutants by pCDPU in packed column treatment.

Model pollutant

Trapping efficiencies for each liter of effluent (%) a) 50.1 b) 36.6 c) 25.3

Overall trapping efficiency (%)

2

-naphthol

37.3

naphthalene

a) 55.7 b) 46.7 c) 43.2

48.5

nabumetone

a) 28.8 b) 25.7 c) 24.4

26.3

naproxen

a) 35.0 b) 16.3 c) 13.5

21.6

propranolol

a) 14.3 b)5.6 c)4.5

8 .1

pyrene

a) 81.0 b) 80.2 c) 78.7

79.9

a) Trapping efficiency of the first liter of effluent. b) Trapping efficiency of the second liter of effluent. c) Trapping efficiency of the third liter of effluent.

89

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

CHAPTER 5 DISCUSSION

It is evident from the plotted adsorption isotherm curves and K f values in the correlated Freundlich equations and the trapping efficiencies calculated for pCDEP and pCDPU polymers in the previous chapter, that the adsorption properties of the two polymeric absorbents used in this study are quite different. The epichlorohydrin cross-linked pcyclodextrin polymer demonstrates higher adsorption capacity for all compounds than does the pCD-polyurethane polymer. Figure 5.1 compares the adsorption capacities of the pCDEP and pCDPU polymers based on their Freundlich adsorption isotherms. A comparison of trapping efficiencies of both polymers towards organic compounds in the packed column method is given in Figure 5.2. According to Tables 4.1 and 4.3, there seems to be a weak correlation between the binding constants (Ka) to free pCD and K f values for naphthalene, 2-naphthol and pyrene. On the other hand, there is no correlation between the association constants of nabumetone, naproxen, and propranolol to free pCD and their K f values. For instance, nabumetone bonds strongly to free pCD but in the Freundlich adsorption isotherm test had the lowest K f value for both polymers. In order to explain those differences, the effects of the typical properties of adsorbents, as well eis the effect of adsorbates' properties on adsorption, must be considered.

90

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

30 25 -

20

-

m pCDEP  pCDPU

15 -

10

-

naphthalene

2-naphthol

nabumetone

naproxen

propranolol

pyrene

Figure 5.1 Comparison of sorption capacities of model pollutants by pCDEP and pCDPU polymers in Freundlich adsorption tests.

91

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

120 100
^ pCDEP  pCDPU

-

80 CL CL

60 40 -

20

-

2-naphthol

naphthalene

nabumetone

naproxen

propranolol

pyrene

Figure 5.2 Comparison of trapping efficiencies o f pCDEP and pCDPU polymers in packed column treatment.

92

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

Differences in the adsorption capacities of the adsorbents may reflect differences in pCD-content. However, although the pCD-polyurethane polymer had higher pCDcontent* than epichlorohydrin cross-linked p-cyclodextrin polymer, it shows lower adsorption capacities towards the model pollutants. Hence the CD content alone is not the key factor determining adsorption capacity. The different capacities may reflect differences in adsorbent structure. pCDPU polymer, which has been crosslinked by hexamethylenediisocyanate, is nonpolar and very hydrophobic [46,85,86]. This polymer has a very rigid structure that won't swell in water. This means that only a minor part o f the total P-cyclodextrin content is accessible to water soluble compounds. On the contrary, epichlorohydrin cross-linked p-cyclodextrin polymer is hydrophilic and swells strongly in aqueous solutions [46,73,76,77]. This characteristic o f the pCDEP polymer, makes it easier for adsorbates to enter the internal pores of the polymer and gives more accessibility to the p-cyclodextrin cavities. A related structural issue is the number o f CD pore opening per unit surface area o f adsorbent. In pCDPU polymer the CD units are known to be aligned in long channels while in pCDEP polymer the cavities are more-or-less randomly distributed in the polymer network [46,51,56]. While the binding of a given adsorbate molecule to a pCDPU channel is expected to be stronger than that to a single cavity (or short "channel") in pCDEP, the probability o f the adsorbate encountering a CD cavity at the polymer surface is greater with the EP system than with the polyurethane. This is because a large number of CD cavities are forced to be in the

' Based on the (pCD/crosslinking agent) molar ratios in the polymer preparations, which they were 1/29 and 1/8 for pCDEP and pCDPU polymers, respiectively.

93

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

interior o f the non-swsllable polymer network in the pCDPU case because of the formation o f channels. In (3CDEP, the random cavity arrangement means relatively more cavities at th e surface. This analysis assumes the binding interaction o f adsorbates is primarily controlled by the CD cavities o f the polymer. Earlier work from our group [71] suggests that this is the case as poiy epichlorohydrin traps only about 30% of naphthalene in a water stream compared to pCDEP polymer, which traps about 90%. The deduction that adsorbates have better access to the cavities of pCDEP is supported by the relatively constant n in the Freundlich isotherm. Figure 5.3 compares n values for pCDEP and pCDPU polymer. The n value gives an indication of the favorability o f the adsorbent/ adsorbate interaction [87-89]. In nearly every case the value o f n for pCDEP polymer is significantly larger than that o f pCDPU polymer. It is well known that matching o f the pore size o f porous adsorbent and the size of adsorbate molecule is desirable for optimum adsorption [88,89]. If the pore diameter of the adsorbent is too small, diffusion o f the adsorbate from the aqueous phase to the pores o f the adsorbent will be hindered, thus limiting uptake. On the other hand, with too large a pore diameter, binding of the adsorbate may be weak and those adsorbate molecules already adsorbed in the pores will tend to escape. This means desorption occurs at the same as adsorption time and this again will limit up take o f the adsorbate. In effect, it reduces the adsorbing surface area [89].

94

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

1.6

S pCDEP  pCDPU

0.8 0.6
0.4

0.2
naphthalene 2-naphthol nabumetone naproxen propranolol pyrene

Figure 5.3 Comparison o f n values for pCDEP and pCDPU polymers in Freundlich adsorption tests.

95

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission o f th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

Only limited data on the molecular dimensions o f the organic compounds tested in this study are available. Their molecular size can be roughly estimated from bond lengths. Figure 5.4 shows the structure and the carbon-carbon bond lengths in the naphthalene molecule* [89,92]. It is estimated that the molecular size of naphthalene and 2-naphthol is roughly 0.7 nm. (5-cyclodextrin has an average pore diameter o f 0.78 nm in the polymeric absorbents [46,52]. Therefore it is possible for the naphthalene and 2-naphthol to diffuse into the inner pores o f the polymers and be trapped by inclusion m the CD cavities with minimal hinderence. Both adsorbents present higher adsorption capacities for naphthalene and 2-naphthol than for naproxen, propranolol, and nabumetone (see the value o f K f given in figure 5.1). In the case o f propranolol there is a large amino hydroxyl substituent in at position 1 o f the naphthyl group. This compound will therefore present a very wide profile to the opening of the CD cavity. As a result its binding is strongly inhibited and it is poorly adsorbed. Naproxen is also bulkier than naphthalene and 2-naphthol. This compound is also ionized under our conditions (pKa = 4.2) and thus should have a relatively large hydration sphere [50,65]. The requirement that those waters of hydration be lost in order that naproxen be adsorbed may inhibit uptake by CDPs. Nabumetone is a special case. It binds much more strongly to solvated pCD than does naphthalene and yet it is adsorbed very poorly by CDP. Nabumetone should present a "width" profile to the CD cavities that is comparable to that o f naproxen. However the ketyl substituent in position 2 is longer than in the case o f naproxen and it
* Except for pyrene. all the model pollutants tested in present study had the basic molecular structure o f naphthalene.

96

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n o f th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

is not ionizable. It may hydrogen bond to hydroxyl groups at the CD rim when the drug binds to solvated CD. In the polymers there would be less opportunity for nabumetone to hydrogen bond as many of the CD hydroxyls are reacted with the cross linking agent and are no longer available for hydrogen bonding. Polarity characteristics o f the adsorbates and adsorbents may also play a role. There is a significant difference in the adsorption capacities for naphthalene and 2naphthol on PCDPIJ. The observed adsorption capacity of polyurethane cross-linked Pcyclodextrin polymer for 2-naphthol is lower than that for naphthalene. This may reflect the polarity characteristics o f the adsorbates. Besides the appropriate molecular size for adsorbates, the matching o f polarity between adsorbent and adsorbates is also an important factor affecting adsorption. According to the literature, a more polar adsorbent is selective for polar adsorbate compounds [89,90]. 2-Naphthol has a polar hydroxyl group in its structure while the p-- cyclodextrinpolyurethane polymer has a nonpolar network and is very hydrophobic. That maybe why 2-naphthol is less likely to be adsorbed by pCDPU than naphthalene. For the polar and hydrophilic pCDEP adsorbent, the expected order would be reversed. This is in fact what is observed even though the difference in adsorption capacities is not statistically significant. Similar trends can be observed for propranolol, naproxen, and nabumetone. Propranolol and naproxen are relatively polar compared to nabumetone and pCDEP

polymer exhibits more adsorption capacity for propranolol and naproxen than for
nabumetone. This order is reversed for the pCDPU nonpolar polymeric adsorbent.

97

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n of th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

0.136
^ nm

0.142 0.142
run nm

0.140
nm

0.108
nm

Figure 5.4 Bond lengths in naphthalene molecule [89].

98

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

Pyrene shows exceptional behavior. It is most strongly adsorbed of all the test compounds even though it is quite large (0.93 nm) [93]. Since pyrene has a relatively large and flat molecular structure, it may not be able completely penetrate in |3cyclodextrin cavities. In fact, in free solution only part of the pyrene molecule enters the CD cavity and pyrene also readily forms 2:1 CD;pyrene complex [66,67]. The extremely high sorption o f pyrene thus cannot be explained by single adsorption in the (3CD cavities of the polymer [66,69]. Adsorption of pyrene in the polymer network may contribute to the observed adsorption capacities. The fact that the capacity of (3CDEP for pyrene is greater than that of pCDPU, suggesting that penetration of the adsorbate solution into the interior o f the polymer aids adsorption, supports a role for the polymer network. Another factor is that pyrene, being a large flat Tt-electron system, may strongly adhere to the surface o f the resin particles as well. The adsorption results obtained from the packed column treatment follow the same order as the batch experiment, except for naproxen. In the packed column experiment, pCDEP polymer shows the lowest trapping efficiencies toward naproxen. This suggests that naproxen should be treated over a long contact time with Pcyclodextrin polymer. This can be provided by using a large column volume and /or a lower flow rate. According to Tables 4.2 and 4.4, there was a drop-off for the trapping efficiencies in the packed column experiments over the three liters volume collected of each model pollutant. That is a reflection of "breakthrough" behavior. The performance of the polymeric adsorbents for a given flow rate is a trade off between the trapping efficiencies and the loading capacities. High trapping efficiency is observed at low

99

R eproduced with perm ission of th e copvriflht ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout perm ission.

loading levels, and it drops as the loading increases to the point where the adsorbent saturates. The fact that the trapping efficiencies are a function of loading levels can be attributed to the density of active sites in the polymeric adsorbents. Investigations show that the [3CDEP and pCDPU polymers have been used as polymeric adsorbents for recovery of other organics, mostly benzene derivatives [46]. Crini et al. studied the use of insoluble epichlorohydrin-crosslinked-pCD polymer as a sorbent to extract aromatic compounds such as, phenol, nitrophenol, benzoic acid, nitrobenzoic acid, and chlorophenol from water [73]. Adsorption of phthalic acid esters (PAEs) by pCDEP polymer in aqueous solution was also reported with results comparable to those reported in the present study [70]. Some previous studies show a higher degree of column adsorption of small organic compounds(e.g., toluene and nitrophenol) by the pCDPU polymer as compared to compounds tested in present study [51,56]. This may in part be due to the larger size of the adsorbates used in the present study. As well, a very recent paper [86] has reported column trapping efficiencies o f pCDPU for several aromatic amines of environmental interest. The applied influent volume was varied over a very limited range (100ml to 1000ml). The autliors reported very efficient trapping (90 to 100%) of some of the adsorbates in the first 100 ml of influent. This rapidly dropped to just a few percent by 1000 ml. The pCDPU has a very low breakthrough volume (about 100ml) for these compounds. Our study is the first to report binding capacities ( K f ) for pCDPU based on batch experiments. Our K f data allow us to conclude that the lower trapping efficiencies observed with pCDPU as compared to pCDEP reflect not simply a low breakthrough volume for this type o f polymer but also a lower intrinsic adsorption capacity. With such

100

R e o ro d u c e d with D erm lsslon of th e co o v rla h t o w n er. F u rth e r reo ro d u ctio n nrnhihiteri w ithout n e rm isc ln n

low breakthrough, volume it is questionable whether pCDPU could be used in water remediation although it may be useful as a preconcentrator material for analyte sampling.

101

R ep rod uced with perm ission o f the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

C H A PTER 6 CONCLUSIONS
Polymeric adsorbents containing cyclodextrins, the insoluble epichlorohydrin-crosslinked p-cyclodextrin polymer and p-cyclodextrin-polyurethane polymer, were successfully prepared and characterized by FTIR spectra. These polymers have been evaluated for the extraction of model pharmaceutical pollutants from water samples. Experimental results were obtained for the adsorption of pharmaceutical model pollutants an the synthesized polymeric adsorbents in batch and packed column experiments. According to the results of this study, in every case, pCDEP polymer exhibits higher adsorption capacities and trapping efficiencies toward model pharmaceutical pollutants than pCDPU polymer. This leads to the conclusion that a higher surface area and greater availability of p-cyclodextrin cavities due to the sewellability of pCDEP polymer, appropriate pore diameter, and the polarity of the pCDEP polymer network, play a combined role during the adsorption of organic compounds and lead to their significant adsorption ability. It was observed that the values of adsorption capacities were also affected by the adsorbates' properties such as polarity and molecular size matching to CD cavities. It was found that the inclusion complex formation resulting from the presence of p-cyclodextrin cavities and physical adsorption due to the polymer network introduced by the crosslinked agent were combined in the sorption mechanisms. In the case of pyrene there may also be the presence of hydrophobic interactions, which resulted in accumulation of pyrene molecules at the surface of resin particles.

102

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

Considering the adsorption capacities of polymeric adsorbents investigated in the present study towards the model pharmaceutical pollutants, the epichlorohydrincrosslinked p-cyclodextrin polymer seems to be a better candidate for recovery of pharmaceuticals from wastewater, compared to p-- Cyclodextrin-polyurethane polymer. The latter might be useful as a material to preconcentrate very dilute analytes in water for subsequent chemical analysis. To conclude, the p-cyclodextrin polymer approach has several advantages. These polymers are relatively cheap and reusable, and cyclodextrins are biodegradable, p-cyclodextrin polymer columns can also, in principle, be used as a sampling device. This feature coupled with the potential for remediation already noted, makes Pcyclodextrin polymers attractive tools for water treatment.

103

R e D ro d u c e d with D erm ission of t h e coDvriaht o w n er. F u rth e r r e o ro d u ctio n orohibited w ithou t o e rm issio n .

C H APTER 7 RECOMMENDATIONS
The present study indicates that P-cyclodextrin polymers are powerful sorbing agents for pharmaceutical pollutants based on the naphthalene moiety and suggest a role for these adsorbents in water remediation. These polymeric adsorbents are challenged to compete with activated carbon in performance. The pCD polymers can remove model organic contaminants at concentrations as low as 1-50 ppb, in which activated carbon essentially has no capability. Although activated carbon does remove some organic materials from water, it fads to reduce many organic contaminants to parts per billion levels. To fully explore the usefulness of the proposed design other parameters must be evaluated. These can be viewed as the measurable results that can be anticipated. These anticipated measurable results can be formulated as a series of questions such as: · How the presence o f other pollutants might influence the ability of the device to reliably trap a given organic molecule? · What is the maximum and minimum load of pollutant that can be collected by a given CDP? « How does flow rate influence the ability of the CDP device to complex a contaminant? · Can alternate methods of preparation be developed to lower the cost of making the polymers?

104

R e o r o d u c e d with o e r m i s s io n of t h e coo v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n orohibited w ithout o e rm is s io n .

REFERENCES
[1] D. W. Kolpin, E. T. Furlong, M. T. Meyer, F.M. Thurman, S.D. Zaugg, L.B. Barber, H.T. Buxton, "Hormones, and other organic wastewater contaminants in U.S. streams, 1999-2000: A national reconnaissance", Journal o f Environmental Science & Technology, Vol. 36 (6), pp. 1202-1211, 2002. F.M. Christensen, "Pharmaceuticals in the environment-A human risk?", Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology, Vol. 28 (3), pp. 212-221,1998. K. Kummerer, "Pharmaceuticals in the Environment", New York, Springer, pp. 10, 2001 . C. Hignite, D.L. A 2 amoff, "Drug and drug metabolites as environmental contaminants; Chlorophenxoyisobutyrate and salicylic acid in sewage water effluent". Life Sci., Vol. 20, pp. 337-342, 1977. E. Zuccato, D. Calamari, M. Natangelo, R. Fanelli, "Presence of therapeutic drugs in the environment", The Lancet, Vol. 355 (9217), pp. 1789-1790, 2000. C. G. Daughton , T. A. Temes, "Pharmaceuticals and personal care products in the environment: Agents of subtle changes?". Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol. 107, pp. 907-938 , 1999. A.B.A. Boxall, P. Ripley, D. Oakes, C.D. Watts, "The application of predictive models in die environmental risk assessment of Econor", Chemosphere, Vol. 40, pp. 775-781,2000. B. Halling-Serensen, S. Nors Nielsen, P.F. Lanzky, F. Ingerslev, H.C. Holten Luzheft, S.E. Jergensen, "Occurance, fate and effects o f pharmaceutical substances in the environment", Chemosphere, Vol. 36 (2), pp. 357-393, 1998. T. Heberer, "Occurance, fate, and removal of pharmaceutical residues in the aquatic environment". Toxicology Letters, Vol. 131, pp. 5-17,2002. T.T. Temes, M. Meisenheimer, D. Mcdowell, F. Sacher, H-J. Branch, B. HaistGulde, G. Preuss, U. Wilme, and N. Zulei-Seibert, "Removal o f pharmaceuticals during drinking water treatment". Journal of Environmental Science & Technology, Vol. 36 (17), pp. 3855-3863, 2002. J. P. Seiler, Pharmacodynamic activity of dmgs and ecotoxicology-Can the two be connected. Toxicology Letters, Vol. 131, pp. 105-115, 2002. C. G. Daughton, T. L.Jones-Lepp, "Pharmaceuticals and personal care products in the environment: scientific and regulatory issues", Washington DC, American Chemical Society, pp. 39-56, 2001.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11] [12]

105

R e D ro d u c e d with D erm ission of t h e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o r o d u c tio n oroh ibited w itho ut o e r m is s io n .

[13] [14]

H. P. Rang, M.M. Dale, "Pharmacology", London, Churchill Livingstone, 5^^ ed. pp. 955,2003. J. V. Hol, K. Ruggc, P.L. Bjerg, T.H. Christensen, "Occurrence and distribution of pharmaceutical organic compounds in the ground water downgradient of a landfill", Journal o f Environmental Science & Technology, Vol. 29 (5), pp. 14151420,1995. Associated Press, "Wyoming officials considering Yellowstone pollution fines". Las Vegas Review-Joumal, pp. 9B, Oct 31, 1998. T. Backhaus, L.H. Grimme, "The toxicity of antibiotic agents to the luminescent bacterium vibrio-fischeri", Chemosphere, Vol. 38, pp. 3291-3301, 1999. K. Kummerer, A. Al-Ahmad, V. Mersch-Sundermann, "Biodegradability of some antibiotics, elimination o f their genotoxicity and affection o f waste water bacteria in a simple test", Chemosphere, Vol. 40, pp. 701-710, 2000. M. Marinovich, F. Ghilardi, C.L. Galli, "Effects of pesticide mixtures on in vitro nervous cells: Comparison with single pesticides". Toxicology, Vol. 108, pp. 201206, 1996. W.P. Porter, J. W. Jaeger, I. H. Carlson, "Endocrine, immune, and behavioral effects o f aldicarb (carbamate), atrazine (triazine) and nitrate (fertilizer) mixtures at ground water concentrations". Toxicology and Industrial Health, Vol. 15, pp. 133-150, 1999. P. Jacobsen, L. Berglind, "Persistance of oxytetracycline in sediments from fish farms". Aquaculture, Vol. 70, pp. 365-370,1988. T. A. Temes, P. Kreckel, J. Mueller, "Behavior and occurrence of estrogens in municipal sewage treatment plants II: Aerobic batch experiments with activated sludge". Science Total Environment, Vol. 225, pp. 91-99, 1999. C. E. Purdom, P.A. Hardiman, V.J. Bye, N.C. Eno, C.R. Tyler, J.P. Sumpter, "Estrogenic effects o f effluents from sewage treatment work", Chem. EcoL, Vol. 8, pp. 275-285,1994. A. Marci, A.V. Staza, G. Dojimi di Delupis, "Acute toxicity of furazolidone on artemia salina, daphnia magna, and culex pipiens molestus larvae", Ecotoxicol. Environ. Safety, Vol. 16, pp. 90-94, 1988. S. Eichorst, A. Pfeifer, N.G. Magill, M.J. Tischler, "Antibiotic resistance among bacteria isolated from wild populations of resident Canada Geese in a suburban setting", Proceedings o f the American Society for Microbiology 99**' Annual Meeting, Chicago, Illinois, June 1999.

[15]

[1,6]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

106

R e D ro d u c e d with D erm ission of t h e c o o v rio h t o w n e r . F u rth e r re p ro d u c tio n p rohibited w ith out o e r m is s io n .

[25]

M. Overcash, "The evolution of US pollution prevention, 1976-2001 a unique chemical enginnciing contribution to the environment". Journal o f Chemical Technology & Biotechnology, Vol. 77 (11), pp. 1197-1205, 2002. P.L.Bishop, "Pollution Prevention: Fundamentals Mc.Graw-Hül, pp. 356-578, 2000. and Practice", Boston,

[26]

[27]

K.L. Mulholland, J. A. Dyer. "Pollution Prevention, Methodology, Technologies and Practices", New York, American Institute of Chemical Engineers, pp. 54-70, 1999. T.T. Shen, "Industrial Pollution Prevention", New York, Springer, pp. 143-245, 1999. EU Project Poseidon: "Assessment o f Technologies for the Removal of Pharmaceuticals and Personal Care Products in Sewage and Drinking Water", Germany, November 2003. R. S. Rogers, "Skating on thin ice". Chemical & Engineering News, Vol. 30, pp. 11-13, 1998. J. Tolls, "Sorption of veterinary pharmaceuticals in soil". Journal of Environmental Science & Technology, Vol. 35, pp. 3397-3406, 2001. G. Hamscher, S. Abu-quare, S. Sczesnv, H. Hoper, H. Nau, "Determination of tetracyclines in soil and water samples from agricultural areas in lower Saxony", EuroResidue IV, Veldhoven, NL, 2000. T.A. Temes, R. Hirsch, "Occurrence and behavior of X-ray contrast media in sewage facilities and the aquatic environment". Journal o f Environmental Science & Technology, Vol. 34, pp. 2741-2748, 2000. D. R. Dietrich, S.F. Webb, T. Petry, "Hot spot pollutants: pharmaceuticals in the environment". Toxicology Letters, Vol. 131, pp. 1-3, 2002. G. Techobanoglous, F.L. Burton, H.D. Stensel, "Wastewater Engineering, Treatment and Reuse", 4* ed.. New York, Mc.Graw-Hill, pp. 1038-1205, 2003. M. E. Lindsey, M. Meyer, E. M. Thurman, "Analysis of trace levels of sulfonamide and tetracycline antimicrobials in ground water and surface wat / using solid-phase extraction and liquid chromatography/ mass spectrometry". Anal. Chem., Vol. 73, pp. 4640-4646, 2001.

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

107

R e D ro d u c e d with D erm iss io n of t h e c o o v r io h t o w n e r . F u rth e r r e o r o d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e r m i s s io n .

[37]

G. K. Brown, S.D. Zaugg, L.B. Barber," Wastewater analysis by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry", U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources, Investigation Report No. 99-40188, Vol. 2, pp. 431-435,1999. L. B. Barber, G. K. Brown, and S.D. Zaugg, "Analysis o f Environmental Endocrine Disruptors", ACS Symposium Series 747, American Chemistry Society, Washington DC, pp. 97-123,2000. R. Hirsch, T. A. Temes, K. Haberer, A. Mehlich, F. Ballwanz, K.L. Kratz, " Determination o f antibiotics m different water compartments via liquid chromatography-electrospray tandem mass spectrometry", J. Chromatogr. A, Vol. 815, pp. 213-223, 1998. I. A. Balcioglu, M. Otker, "Treatment of pharmaceutical wastewater containing antibiotics by O 3 and O 3 /H 2 O2 processes", Chemosphere, Vol. 50, pp. 85-95, 2003. K. Betts, "Keeping drugs out o f drinking water". Environmental Science and Technology, Vol. 36 (1), pp. 3855-3863, 2002. Peter P.Radecki, John C. Crittenden, David R. Shormard, John L. Bulloch, "Emerging Separation and Separative Reaction Technologies for Process Waste Reduction", N ew York, American Institute o f Chemical Engineers, pp. 165-215, 1999. T. Heberer, D. Feldmann, K. Reddersen, H.J. Altmann, T. Zimmermann, "Production o f drinking water from highly contaminated surface waters: removal o f organic, inorganic, and microbial contaminants applying mobile membrane filtration units", Acta Hydrochim. Hydrobiol. Vol. 30 (1), pp. 24-33,2002. G.L. Patrick," An introduction to medicinal chemistry". New York, Oxford University Press, pp. 54-110, 1995. R.J. Clarke, J.H. Coates, S.F. Lincoln, "Inclusion complexes of cyclomaltooligosaccarides (cyclodextrins)", Advances in Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biochemistry, Vol. 46, pp. 205-249, 1988. G. Crini, M. Morcellet, "Synthesis and applications of adsorbents containing cyclodextrins", J. Sep. Sci. Vol. 25, pp. 789-813, 2002. J. Li, H. Xiao, J. Li, Y. Zhong," Drug carrier systems based on water-soluble cationic P-cyclodextrin polymers". International Journal of Pharmaceutics. Vol. 278, pp. 329-342, 2004. J. Szejtli, " Introduction and general overview of cyclodextrin chemistry", Chem. Rev. Vol. 98, pp. 1743-1753, 1998.

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

108

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n of th e cop yrigh t ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

[49]

G. Crini, L. Janus, M. Morcellet, G. Terri, N. Morin, "Sorption properties toward substituted phenolic derivatives in water using macroporous polyamines containing p-cyclodextrin", J. Applied Polymer Science, Vol. 73, pp. 2903-2910, 1999. M. Fartyka, B.H. An, C. H. Evans, "Cyclodextrins as phototoxicity inhibitors in drug formulation: studies on model systems involving naproxen and Pcyclodextrin". Journal o f Photochemistry and Photobiology A, Vol. 140, pp. 6774,2001. D. Li, M. Ma, "Nanosponges: from inclusion chemistry to water purifying technology", Chemtech, Vol. 29 (5 ), pp. 31-37, 1999. J Szejtli , T Osa (eds), "Comprehensive Supermolecular Chemistry, Volume 3: Cyclodextrins", New York, Pergamon, pp. 334-545 ,1996. T. Loftsson, R. Ofee, "Cyclodextrin-based drug delivery", Pharmatech 2002, Vol. 53, pp. 136-140, 2002. K. Uekama, F. Hirayama, T. Irie, "Cyclodextrin drug carrier systems", Chem. Rev, Vol. 98, pp. 2045-2076, 1998. K. P. Lee, S.H. Choi, E.N. Ryu, J. J. Ryoo, J.H. Park, Y. Kim, M. H. Hyun, "Preparation and characterization of cyclodextrin polymer and its high performance liquid chromatography stationary phase". Analytical Sciences, Vol. 18, pp. 31-34, 2002. M. Ma, D. Li, "New organic nanoporous polymers and their inclusion complexes", Chem. Mater, Vol. 11, pp. 872-874, 1999. T.C. Barros, K. Stefaniak, I.E. Holzwarth, C.Bohne "Complexation of naphthylethanols with p-cyclodextrin" J. Phys. Chem. A, Vol. 102, pp. 56395651, 1998. T. Loftson, M. Masson, "Cyclodextrin in topical drug formulations; Theoiy and practice". International Journal of Pharmaceutics, Vol. 225 (1-2), pp. 15-30, 2001. M.C. Rekharsky, Y. Inoue "Complexation thermodynamics o f cyclodextrins" Chemical Reviews. Vol. 98, pp. 1741-1758, 1998. C.H. Evans, M. Partyka, J. Van Siam, "Naphthalene complexation by pcyclodextrin: influence of added short chain branched and linear alcohols". Journal o f Inclusion Phenomena and Macrocyclic Chemistry,Vol. 38, pp. 381396,2000.

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

109

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

[61]

J. Van Stam, S. De Feyter, F. C. De Schryver, C.H. Evans, "2-Naphthol complexation by p-cyclodextrin: influence o f added short linear alcohols", J. Phys. Chem. Vol. 100, pp. 19959-19966,1996. K.H. Fromming, J. Szejtli, "Cyclodextrins in Pharmacy", Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1994. N. Goyenechea, M. Sanches, I. Velaz, C. Martin, C. Martinez-Oharriz, G. Gonzalez-Gaitano, "Inclusion complexes of nabumetone with P-cyclodextrin; thermodynamics and molecular modeling studies. Influence o f sodium perchlorate". Luminescence, Vol. 16, pp. 117-127, 2001. M. Valero, S.B. Costa, J.R. Ascenso, M.M. Velazquez, L.J. Rodriguez. "Complexation o f the non-steriodal anti-inflammatory drug nabumetone with modified and unmodified cyclodextrins". Journal o f Inclusion Phenomena and Macrocyclic Chemistry, Vol. 35, pp. 663-677, 1999. N. Sadlej-Sosnowska, L. Kozerski, E. Bednarek, J. Sitkowski, "Fluorometric and NMR studies o f the naproxen-cyclodextrin inclusion complexes in aqueous solutions". Journal o f Inclusion Phenomena and Macrocyclic Chemistry, Vol. 37, pp. 383-394, 2000. S. De Feyter, J. Van Stam, N. Boens, F.C. De Schryver, "On the use o f dynamic fluorescence measurements to determine equilibrium and kinetic constants: the inclusion o f pyrene in P-cyclodextrin cavities", Chemical Physical Letters, Vol. 249, pp. 46-52, 1996. C.H. Evans, N. Prud'homme, M. King, J. C. Scaiano. "Calibration of the triplettriplet adsorption o f xanthone as a microenvironment sensor". Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, Vol. 121, pp. 105-110, 1999. M. Fillet, 1. Bechet, P. Chiap, Ph. Hubert, J. Crommen, "Entiomeric purity determination o f propranolol by cyclodextrin-modified capillary electrophoresis". Journal o f Chromatography A, Vol. 717, pp. 203-209, 1995. R. Dabestani, I.N. Ivanov, "A compilation of physical, spectroscopic and photophysical properties o f polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons". Photochemistry and Photobiology, Vol. 70 (1), pp. 10-34, 1999. A. Yudiarto, S. Kashiwabara, Y. Tashho, T. Kokugan, " Separation o f structural isomers using soluble p-cyclodextrin polymer by ultrafiltration", Seperation and Purification Technology, Vol. 24, pp. 243-253, 2001. R. Orprecio, C.H. Evans "Polymer-immobilized cyclodextrin trapping of model organic pollutants in flowing water streams". Journal of Applied Polymer Science, Vol. 90, pp. 2103-2110, 2003.

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

110

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n o f th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

[72]

S. Murai, S. In  Y. Takasu, K. Takahashi, K. Hattori, "Removal of phthalic acid esters from .  . ,;Ous solution by inclusion and absorption on p-cyclodextrin". Environ. Sci. TcclmoL, Vol. 32, pp. 782-787, 1998. G. Crini, S. Bertini, G. Torri, A. Naggi, D. Sforzini, C. Yeechi, L. Janus, Y. Lekchiri, M. Morcellet, "Sorption of aromatic compoimds in water using insoluble cyclodextrin polymers". Journal of Applied Polymer Sciences, Vol. 68, pp. 1973-1978, 1998. Z. Gao, X. Zhao. "Preparation and electrorheological characteristics o f pcyclodextrin-epichlorohydrin-starch polymer suspensions", J. Applied Polymer Science, Vol. 93, pp. 1681-1686,2004. G.Crini, C. Cosentino, S. Bertini, A. Naggi, G. Torri, C. Vecchi, L. Janus, M. Morcellet, "Solid state NM R spectroscopy study of molecular motion in cyclomaltoheptaose (P-cyclodextrin) crosslinked with epichlorohydrin". Carbohydrate Research, Vol. 308 , pp. 37-45, 1998. J.C. Yu, Z. Jiang, H. Liu, J. Yu, L. Zhang, "p-cyclodextrin epichlorohydrin copolymer as a solid-phase extraction adsorbent for aromatic compounds in water samples", Analytica Chemica Acta, Vol. 477, pp. 93-101, 2003. E. Renard, A. Deratani, G. Volet, B. Sebille, "Preparation and characterization of water soluble high molecular weight P-cyclodextrin-epichlorohydrin polymers", Eur. Polym. Journal, Vol. 33 (1), pp. 49-57,1997. C. Hofl, G. Sigl, O. Specht, I. Wurdack, D. Wabner, "Oxidative degradation of aox and cod by different advanced oxidation processes: A comparative study with two samples o f a pharmaceutical wastewater", Wat. Sci. Tech, Vol. 35(4), pp. 257-264, 1997. Y. Mizobuchi, M. Tanaka, T. Shono. "Preparation and sorption behavior of cyclodextrin poly-urethane resins", J. Chromatogr. Vol. 194, pp. 153-161,1980. Y. Mitzobuchi, M. Tanaka, T. Shono, "Separation of aromatic amino acids on pcyclodextrin polyurethane resins", J. Chromatogr. Vol. 208, pp. 35-40, 1981. M. Christoff, L.T.Okano, C. Bohne, "Dynamics of complexation of flavone and chromone to p-cyclodextrin", J. Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, Vol. 134, pp. 169-176, 2000. K. Sreenivasan, "Synthesis and preliminary studies on a p-cyclodextrin-coupled chitosan as a novel adsorbent matrix". Journal of Applied Polymer Science, Vol. 69, pp. 1051-1055, 1998.

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

Ill

R e p r o d u c e d with p e r m i s s i o n of t h e c o p y r ig h t o w n e r . F u rth e r r e p r o d u c tio n p ro h ib ite d w ith o u t p e r m i s s io n .

[83]

P.E. Shaw, B.S. Buslig, "Selective Removal of bitter compounds from grapefruit juice and from aqueous solution with cyclodextrin polymers and with amberlite XAD-4", J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 34, pp. 837-840, 1986. H. Asanuma, M. Kakazu, M. Shibata, T. Hishiya, M. Komiyama, "Synthesis o f a molecularly imprinted polymer o f (3-cyclodextrin for the efficient recognition of cholesterol", Supermolecuh Science, Vol. 5, pp. 417-421, 1998. S. Chiu, T. Chung, R. Giridhar, W. Wu, "Immobilization of P-cyclodextrin in chitosan beads for separation of cholesterol from egg yolk" Food Research International, Vol. 37, pp. 217-223, 2004. M. Bhaskar, P. Aruna, R. Jeevan, G. Radhakrishnan, "P-cyclodextrinpolyurethane polymer as a solid phase extraction material for the analysis of carcinogenic aromatic amines", Analytica Chemica Acta, Vol. 509, pp. 39-45, 2004. T. N. T. Phan, M. Bacquet, M. Morcellet, "The removal of organic pollutants from water using new silica-supported p-cyclodextrin deriviatives", Reactive & Functional Polymers, Vol. 52, pp. 117-125, 2002. Z. Xu, Q. Zhang, C. Wu, L. Wang, "Adsorption o f naphthalene derivatives on different macroporous polymeric adsorbents", Chemosphere, Vol. 35 (10), pp. 2269-2276, 1997. Z. Xu, Q. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Wang, G.K. Anderson, "Adsorption of naphthalene derivatives on different hypercrosslinked polymeric adsorbents" Chemosphere, Vol. 38 (9), pp. 2003-2011,1999. V.V. Azanova, J. Hradil, "Sorption properties o f macroporous and hypercrosslinked copolymers". Reactive & Functional Polymers, Vol. 41, pp. 163-175,1999.

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91] Handbook o f Chemistry and Physics, 63'^'* ed., Boca Raton, CRC Press, 1982. [92] N.G. Clark, "The shape of organic molecules", London, John Murray Ltd, pp. 47, 1977. [93] L.C. Sander, S.A. Wise, "Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon structure index". National Institute o f Standards and Technology, Special Publication 922, 1997.

112

R e p r o d u c e d with p e r m i s s i o n of t h e c o p y r ig h t o w n e r . F u rth e r r e p r o d u c tio n pro h ib ite d w ith o u t p e r m is s io n .

APPENDIX A Calibration Curves for Model Pollutants

R e o ro d u c e d with D erm ission of t h e coDvriaht o w n er. F u rth e r r e o ro d u ctlo n orohiblted w ithout o e r m is s io n .

1000

800

3 -è'
c

f; ^

600 400 200

0

20

40
Concentration (jiM)

100

Figure A .l Calibration curve for 2-naphthol.

114

R e o ro d u c e d with n e rm issin n nf th e cn n u rin h t o w n e r

F u rth e r ren rn d i ir.tinn n ro h ih ited w ith o u t n o rm lceio n

800
700 600 500 400

§

300 200 100
0

0

10

20

30

40

Concentration. (^iM)

Figure A.2 Calibration curve for naphthalene.

115

R a n r r v H l 1/^q H u ; i+ h n a r m i o c i o n /-vt t h c s

C i i i - t h a i - i-Q ni-/-iW i i / ^ t i n n

lA/itW /^i i+ r \ y a » " m i o d / - \ r »

150

100

50

0 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Concentration (pM)

Figure A.3 Calibration curve for nabumetone.

116

R e p r o d u c e d with p e r m i s s io n of t h e cop y rig h t ow ner. F u rth e r re p ro d u c tio n prohibited w ithout p e rm issio n .

1000
800 600

ï
I
C

400 200

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Concentration (pM)

Figure A.4 Calibration curve for naproxen.

117

R e o r o d u c e d with o e r m i s s io n of t h e c o o v ria h t o w n e r. F u rth e r r e o ro d u ctio n orohiblted w ithout o e rm issio n .

1000

800 600

a

400 200

0

5

10
Concentration (jiM)

15

20

Figure A.5 Calibration curve for propranolol.

118

R e o r o d u c e d with o e r m i s s io n of t h e c o o v ria h t o w n e r. F u rth e r r e o ro d u ctio n orohibited w ithout o e rm is s io n .

1000

800 _§ 5 600 400 200

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Concentration (|xM)

Figure A.6 Calibration curve for pyrene.

119

R e D ro d u c e d with o e r m is s io n of t h e c o o v r ia h t o w n e r . F u rth e r r e o r o d u c tio n orohibited w ithout o e rm is s io n .

APPENDIX B
Freundlich Adsorption Isotherm of Model Pollutants on PCDEP Polymer

R eD roduced with D erm ission of th e coDvripht ow ner. Further reoroduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

3

2.5

b O
cr

2
1.5

g»

1
0.4

0.6

0.8

1
log Ce (gM)

1.2

1.4

Figure B .l Freundlich adsorption isotherm o f 2-naphthoI on pCDEP.

121

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

2.2

1.8

S'

1.6
1.4

0.4

0.6

0.8

1
log Ce (pM)

1.2

1.4

1.6

Figure B.2 Freundlich adsorption isotherm o f naphthalene on pCDEP.

122

R ep ro d u c ed with p erm issio n o f th e cop yrigh t ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

0.8

0.7
0.6

0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2
0.1 0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

logCe (nM)

Figure B.3 Freundlich adsorption isotherm of nabumetone on pCDEP.

123

R ep ro d u ced with p erm ission o f th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm issio n .

1.5

I

0.5

0.6

0.8

1

1.2 log Ce (uM)

1.4

1.6

1.8

Figure B.4 Freundlich adsorption isotherm o f naproxen on (3CDEP.

124

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n o f th e copyright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

8 ,6

s

,2 1
0.8

1

1.5
logCe(fiM)

2

2.5

Figure B.5 Freundlich adsorption isotherm of propranolol on pCDEP.

125

R e D r o d u c e d with D e rm iss io n of t h e c o o v r ia h t o w n e r . F u r th e r r e o r o d u c ti o n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e r m i s s io n .

-0.2

-0.3 ^ -0.4 -0.5
·

I

0.6

-0.7
-

2.1

 2

-1.9

-

1.8

-1.7

-

1.6

logCe (nM)

Figure B.5 Freundlich adsoiption isotherm of pyrene on pCDEP.

126

R e D r o d u c e d with D erm iss io n of t h e c o o v r ia h t o w n e r . F u r th e r r e o r o d u c tio n o rohibited w ith o u t o e r m i s s io n .

APPENDIX C
Packed C dumn Treatment of Model Pollutants on pCDEP Polymer

R e o ro d u c ed with o e rm issio n of th e co o u rio h t o w n er. F u rth e r ren rn d ilo tin n n ro h ih ited w ith o u t o e rm is sio n

50

40

 © -- Q-- "6-- ^--

Influent 1st liter of effluent 2nd liter o f effluent 3rd liter o f effluent

3 C O
t

30

I
10

0
320 340 360 380 400 420 440 Wavelength (nm)

Figure C.l Fluorescence spectra of 2-naphthol influent and effluents from the pCDEP packed column

128

R a n r n H li n o H

\A /ith n o r m i c c i n n

rtf

th e r n r v v /r in h t n \A /n e r

P i r r t h e r

r e n r n H i ir* tlr\n

n r r th ih ite H

lA /ithrti it r t e r m i c c i r t n

60

50 s-- G-- -- ^-- Influent 3rd liter of effluent 1st liter of effluent 2nd liter of effluent

40

-è' 20 10 0
300 350 Wavelength (nm) 400 450

Figure C.2 Fluorescence spectra of naphthalene influent and effluents from the pCDEP packed column

129

lA/lfpj r \ a r m ! c c l / - \ n r \ f

/^/^rvvyrli-ilnt /-ttA /n a r

Ci

tA/i+h/ii if K ia rm i,

16 14

12 10 8 6
4

O' " ' Influent  B -- 1st liter of effluent -- 2nd liter o f effluent ^ -- 3rd liter o f effluent

2 0
340 360 380 400 420 440 Wavelength (nm)

Figure C.3 Fluorescence spectra of nabumetone influent and effluents from the pCDEP packed column

130

^-- s-- -- ^--

1st liter o f effluent Influent 2nd liter of effluent 3rd liter o f effilent

·è* S 20

350

400 Wavelength (nm)

450

Figure C.4 Fluorescence spectra of naproxen influent and effluents from the pCDEP packed column

131

40

s-- Influent G-- 1S t liter o f effluent -© -- 2nd liter o f effluent 3rd liter o f effluent

:

I

20

10

320

340

360

380

400

420

440

Wavelength (nm)

Figure C.5 Fluorescence spectra of propranolol influent and effluents from the pCDEP packed column

132

25

20
·6-- G-- -© -- " X-- Influent 1st liter o f effluent 2nd liter o f effluent 3rd liter o f effluent

360

380

400 Wavelength (nm)

420

440

Figure C.6 Fluorescence spectra of pyrene influent and effluents from the pCDEP packed column

133

*âF\+

Cl I

I

APPENDIX D
Freundlich Adsorption Isotherm o f Model Pollutants on PCDPU Polymer

+

t

t^»-»

^ 1 -1

C: i

i

y\

l-i !

iA/l4rl^y-ki i4 - i

1-8

zi.

1.2

0.8

1

1.2 log Ce (pM)

1.4

1.6

Figure D .l Freundlich adsorption isotherm of 2-naphthol on pCDPU.

135

y-kiAfMA*

1.8 1.6
1.4

f
1.2

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.1

1.2

1.3

logCe (|iM)

Figure D.2 Freundlich adsorption isotherm o f naphthalene on pCDPU.

136

Cl : yf l-iAK

i/-*+I/r\»-»

A/4 ia/1+1^a i if i

1.6
1.4 1.2

I
I

1
0.8 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

1
logCe (nM)

l.I

1.2

1.3

Figure D.3 Freundlich adsorption isotherm of nabumetone on pCDPU.

137

0.9

00

0.8 0.7
0.6

0.5
0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95 logCe (nM)

1

1.05

Figure D.4 Freundlich adsorption isotherm o f propranolol on pCDPU.

138

..

M

i

/

i

f

f

0 lyiM

0.9
0.8 0.7

60
cr

0.6
0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2

0.8

0.9

1

1.1 log Ce (fiM )

1.2

1.3

1.4

Figure D.5 Freundlich adsorption isotherm of naproxen on pCDPU.

139

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n o f th e cop yright ow n er. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .

-0.2

-0.25 -0.3 ^ -0.35 -0.4 -0.45 -0.5 -0.55
-

1.6

-1.55

-1.5

-1.45
log Ce (nM)

-1.4

-1.35

-1.3

Figure D.6 Freundlich adsorption isotherm of pyrene on pCDPU.

140

R ep ro d u ced with p erm issio n of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout p erm ission .

APPENDIX E
Packed Column Treatment o f Model Pollutants on pCDPU Polymer

R e p ro d u c e d with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

100

80  e-- B-- -© -- ^-- Influent 1st liter o f effluent 2nd liter o f effluent 3rd liter o f effluent

= 3 &
·t

60

I

40

20

0
300 350 400 450 500 550 Wavelength (ran)

Figure E .l Fluorescence spectra of 2-naphÜiol influent and effluents from the pCDPU packed column.

142

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

160
140

120 100
 Q -- -B-- -0-- ^-- Influent 1st effluent 2nd effluent 3rd effluent

^

3 c d

1 a
40

20

300

350 Wavelength (nm)

400

450

Figure E.2 Fluorescence spectra of naphthalene influent and effluents from the pCDPU packed column.

143

R ep rod uced with perm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

20

15

s-- s-- -ô-- ^--

Influent 1st liter o f effluent 2nd liter of effluent 3rd liter of effluent

5

0
340 360 380  400 420 440

Wavelength (nm)

Figure E.3 Fluorescence spectra of nabumetone influent and effluents from the pCDPU packed column.

144

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

600

500

400

3 &
·t

Influent 1st liter of effluent 2nd liter o f effluent 3rd liter of effluent

u

300

200

100

340

360

380
Wavelength (nm)

400

420

Figure E.4 Fluorescence spectra of naproxen influent and effluents from the pCDPU packed column.

145

R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission.

300

250

200

Influent 3rd liter o f effluent 2nd liter o f effluent 1st liter o f effluent

p
CO

100

50

0
320 340 360 380 400 420 440 Wavelength (nm)

Figure E.5 Fluorescence spectra of propranolol influent and effluents from the pCDPU packed column.

146

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

150

100

3 ta. g a

e-- s-- -© -- ^--

Fnfluent 1st liter o f effluent 2nd liter o f effluent 3rd liter of effluent

3 70

380

390

400

410

420

430

440

450

Wavelength (nm)

Figure E.6 Fluorescence spectra of pyrene influent and effluents from the pCDPU packed column.

147

R ep rod u ced with p erm ission of th e copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without p erm ission .


